Is it the most confusing movie of 2017 or merely the most provocative? Darren Aronofsky, Jennifer Lawrence and Javier Bardem explain the movie.
Jennifer Lawrence was in a bland hotel conference room here, waiting for Darren Aronofsky, the writer-director of her new drama, “Mother!” It was a few hours before the film’s premiere at the Toronto International Film Festival. Mr. Aronofsky, her boyfriend, was running late.
“I really freaked out before this one,” she said. “I thought I’d been miscast.” Her starring role, as the unnamed “mother,” an earthy wife who doesn’t even leave the house, was a departure from the flinty, adventurous heroines that she is known for. “I’ve never felt so insecure,” she said.
The dark lord materialized moments later. It’s not an ill-fitting nickname, at least cinematically. On screen Mr. Aronofsky has conjured up all manner of ghoulish misbehavior and grotesqueries in “Requiem for a Dream” and “Black Swan.” “Mother!,” an ambitious parable hidden in a horror flick, tops them easily. What starts as a home-invasion psychological thriller ends in flaming nightmare surrealism, stuffed with themes that divided, and mystified, critics.
“‘Mother!’ will likely be 2017’s most hated movie,” declared the Verge, while others called it “brilliant” and “an unparalleled achievement.” “It’s a hoot!” A.O. Scott wrote in The New York Times.
With a reported $30 million budget and an artistic sensibility usually reserved for the indie crowd, it’s a wild gamble as a major release for its studio, Paramount, especially on the heels of “It,” Warner Bros.’s more traditional, and decipherable, horror blockbuster. Even with the benefit of two Oscar winners in a usually surefire genre, and the frisson of a romance between the director and the leading lady, “Mother!” underperformed its modest box office estimates after opening Sept. 15. But if it alienates mass audiences, it could also be the slow-burn conversation piece of the year, with high-profile defenders including Anthony Bourdain, the “Star Wars” director Rian Johnson and Chris Rock.
On the surface, it’s about a couple, Ms. Lawrence and Javier Bardem, in a rambling, secluded Victorian house. He’s a poet, with one major hit but troubled by writer’s block; she is renovating their home, forever tidying up. Their placid life is dismantled by hordes of uninvited guests who won’t leave. All the symbolism — packed like a Russian nesting doll, with religious iconography, celebrity culture and military-industrial-state overtones — is in service of one grander idea, the allegory that moved Mr. Aronofsky to write the script in an uncharacteristically prolific five-day stretch. “I just pounded through it, kind of like a fever dream,” he said.
He wasn’t, and so, let’s follow her lead. Thematic spoilers ahead, but rest assured that even if you absorb them, the movie will throw curveballs. “Mother!” is about Mother Earth (Ms. Lawrence) and God (Mr. Bardem), whose poetic hit has the weight of the Old Testament: hence all the visitors clamoring for a piece of Him, as his character is called. The house represents our planet. (Walking the wooden floorboards in bare feet is what finally got the part to click, Ms. Lawrence said.) The movie is about climate change, and humanity’s role in environmental destruction.
The action takes place on the biblical sixth day (the film’s original title was “Day Six,” she said) and follows that timeline. “You have the creation of people, you have the creation of religion itself, people reading the same writing and arguing over its meaning, false idols,” Ms. Lawrence said. She got the religious references immediately. “I was a Bible nerd — Bible study every Sunday,” she said, adding an expletive.
But for Mr. Bardem, the extra time to experiment was a reason to sign on. “From the moment I joined the group, I knew it was going to be a trip where we knew where to begin, and we didn’t know how to finish,” he said.
The script had gone through some revisions. For a time, said Ari Handel, a producer of the movie, they tried to make it more structured, especially in the surreal final act, but “we found that then, everything unraveled,” he said.
“The reaction was, Wow, that was intense, I can’t believe he went that far, and how does this all connect together, and what does it mean?” Mr. Handel recalled. They knew it would be a leap for audiences, but “we wouldn’t not do something because it was polarizing,” he said.
The demands on Ms. Lawrence were substantial: in the two-hour film, she is in close-up for 66 minutes. Even the sounds of the ravaged house — like creaking floorboards — are her voice, digitally manipulated.
“It’s unlike any performance I’ve captured before,” he added. Her breakdown is on screen.
Editing took a grueling 53 weeks. The film was shaped in part by Mr. Aronofsky’s conversations with Susan Griffin, the author of “Woman and Nature,” a 1978 feminist text. It weaves together ideas about men and women and the roles we’ve historically been assigned: man battling nature, woman in tune with it.
Mr. Aronofsky organized a private screening for Ms. Griffin and the writer Rebecca Solnit. “The film doesn’t operate in an intellectual way, it operates emotionally, and that’s its strength,” Ms. Griffin said.
