Cornell University, the Ivy League university in Ithaca, N.Y., has been roiled by two racially charged incidents in recent weeks, with the new school year barely off the ground.
A black student arrived home in the early hours of Friday morning when he found a group of students near his driveway arguing with his housemates, he said. As he was trying to get them to leave, he said, someone called out a racial epithet. He confronted them, and four or five of them turned on him and started punching him in the face.
One person was arrested in the attack, a 19-year-old white man, the Ithaca Police Department said. He was charged on Friday with one count of assault in the third degree. The police said there were several witnesses to the assault, which took place at the edge of the Collegetown area, in a neighborhood dotted with off-campus student housing, restaurants, pizza shops and bars.
A university official said that as part of the school’s investigation, it was trying to determine if some or all of the people involved in the attack were connected to Cornell’s now-defunct chapter of the Psi Upsilon fraternity.
The fraternity had a long list of alleged infractions against the school’s code of conduct. It was suspended in 2016 after the fraternity president was accused of sexual assault. Cornell banned Psi Upsilon when the fraternity gave a party during that suspension. A group of students has been trying to revive the fraternity on campus.
In a statement sent to the student newspaper, The Cornell Daily Sun, the Psi Upsilon alumni group from the Cornell chapter said that the man who had been arrested had not been a member of the fraternity. But in a letter to the school community on Sunday, Cornell’s president, Martha E. Pollack, said that “based on what we know, and pending final investigation,” Cornell would not consider reinstating the group.
The student who was assaulted, a junior and a member of the Kappa Sigma fraternity, has not been identified by the police. He spoke to The New York Times anonymously out of concern for his privacy and the possibility that he would be further targeted.
Traciann Celestin, a junior at Cornell and co-chair of Black Students United, said that even a progressive town like Ithaca offers no real protection from forces as strong as racial animus in America.
“You hear people say, ‘It’s in an Ivy League institution, aren’t people smarter than that? Aren’t people liberal there?’” Ms. Celestin said.
The fact that this vulnerability surprises them, she said, speaks to their privilege. “That speaks to white supremacy,” she said.
