LONDON — On Friday morning, a crude bucket bomb was detonated in the Parsons Green subway station, injuring at least 30 and sowing chaos in London. The Islamic State claimed responsibility for the attack, and by the day’s end, the threat level in Britain had been raised to “critical,” indicating another attack could be “expected imminently.” Meanwhile, from around the world, retailers, editors, journalists and photographers were arriving. It was the first full day of London Fashion Week.
For those who had descended on the city to see several days’ worth of runway shows, the contrast was jarring. Fashion week may represent billions of dollars of business, but it is, on its face, an institutional celebration of fantasy; as intrusions of the real go, few come harder and more frightening than a terrorist attack and the imminent possibility of another. It is an impossible request that fashion shows measure up to the horror, but likewise impossible to ignore the confluence. At the very least, it’s hard to focus on skirt lengths in the midst of an international incident.
Still, in a city on edge, with a shrug and a defiant sigh, London Fashion Week kept calm and carried on.
But when Ms. Goddard’s first model, Edie Campbell, came tramping down the runway in a puff-skirted white cotton frock and motorcycle boots, with glass of Champagne in hand and e-cigarette in mouth, you thought, well, maybe she’s on to something, too. It was noon, after all.
What is there to do in the face of uncertainty but slug back the bubbly and get on with it? Somewhere between despair and willful ignorance is nonchalance, and Ms. Goddard, one of the city’s rising talents, christened with a 2016 British Fashion Award — “A star for today; forget a future star,” Mr. Khan said as he ducked backstage after the show to make her acquaintance — delivered it.
Ms. Goddard made her name in maximalist tutu dresses, the bigger the better: a confectioner in tulle. It was encouraging here to find her stripping off some of the froth and experimenting with plainer stuff like smocked cotton, still rakishly skewed and often inflated to ballooning proportions. “I wanted to slow it down and have a bit of fun with it, I suppose,” she said.
It lent a bit of backbone without sacrificing Ms. Goddard’s cheerful levity. In a time of deadly seriousness, you can go leaden or you can go light. That spirit animated several of the initial London collections, which did more with less.
Jonathan Anderson (J.W. on his label) is one of the city’s thinkiest designers, sometimes to his detriment: He makes merry mashing up disparate elements, which sometimes resolve themselves and sometimes don’t, as he opines for those who arrive to cover his collections on their philosophical underpinnings in paragraph-length soliloquies. But his process is one of wax and wane, and this season, he was in a pared-back mode, one that felt right.
He spoke of keeping the collection grounded, and it literally was — nearly every look was shown with a flat pair of sneaker-boots. But it was grounded, too, in its fabrics and shapes. There were some nods to his customary esotericism, like the stitched bra-cup details on many of the looks, but the loose dresses, flared skirts and baggy trousers had a casual ease and a strength in their simplicity — all the more so given that the reigning trend in fashion is for over-the-top magpie magnificence. Mr. Anderson estimated that 80 percent of the collection came in sweatshirt jersey; the loose pants and tops that bore his J.W. Anderson logo were made at an Irish factory that produces tea towels.
Things had become hysterical at Burberry, the last major show Saturday, which found anti-fur activists outside its doors screaming “Shame!” as staff members greeted guests with rictus grins and durable British politesse. (Actually, with the exception of some shearling pieces, all the fur in the collection was faux.) Christopher Bailey, Burberry’s chief creative officer, had wanted to be “a bit more honest, a bit less polished,” he said, and it seemed, inadvertently, that he had gotten his wish.
“Here We Are” spans classes and eras — Tatlerite society portraits by Dafydd Jones alongside working-class Mancunians by Shirley Baker — and so, too, does Burberry, whose checks have been embraced by chavs and peers alike. That’s a point Mr. Bailey seemed keen to underline.
“I’m trying to put myself in a situation where I’m looking at things fresh,” Mr. Bailey said.
It was a vintage trawl of proportions, styles, crystals and fabrics (including a bit too much plastic). But reduced to essential pieces — great outerwear, especially, like oversized macs and Harrington jackets, shown on men and women interchangeably — that fresh look made Burberry look fresh. It even looked … cool?
Distillation also worked in the favor of Simone Rocha, who had shown earlier in the afternoon. Last season, Ms. Rocha offered sturdy protection: plush coats like suits of armor for women facing down the world. But this season, she stripped the armor away, and homed in on innocence and fragility.
