Dozens of wildfires that have been raging across the Pacific Northwest flared up this week, unfurling a blanket of opaque smoke from the Cascades to the coast and raining ash down on cars, streets and people.
The blazes have forced evacuations and prompted the governor of Washington to declare a state of emergency; the skies have turned a disorienting color of brownish-orange, and the air smells of burned wood.
Meteorologists say it has been an unusually dry summer in a region known for rain. It has not rained significantly in Seattle since June, Mr. Johnson said, and meteorologists say it has been more than 50 days since measurable precipitation fell in Portland, Ore.
Instead, a strong ridge of high pressure has settled over much of the Pacific Northwest, heating the air and blocking storms from entering the area. As a result, trees, grass and other foliage have dried out, creating fuel that officials say is ripe for ignition if lightning strikes or sparks fly.
David Bishop, a meteorologist with the service’s office in Portland, estimated that about 35 fires were active across the region. Gusty winds helped spread several of them on Monday night, sending a layer of smoke and a downpour of ash into cities like Portland and Seattle.
In Oregon, officials say the Chetco Bar Fire has burned more than 175,000 acres of wilderness since July 12. The Eagle Creek Fire, about 40 miles east of Portland, has burned about 30,000 acres since Saturday and forced several nearby communities to evacuate.
The Diamond Creek Fire, meanwhile, has scarred about 105,000 acres of north central Washington and crossed into Canada; the Norse Peak Fire has scorched almost 45,000 acres near Mount Rainier.
Fascinated locals have snapped photos of the strangely colored skies and rubbed their fingers across their vehicles until they turned dark with soot — as if to prove that the bizarre conditions were real.
The National Weather Service has put out air quality alerts warning of unhealthy conditions in Portland and Seattle. But weather officials said that the smoke in Western Washington was expected to dissipate by Wednesday and that some rain was in the forecast for Oregon this week.