During his surprise comedy skit at the Emmys on Sunday, Sean Spicer may have made light of his six-month tenure as the White House press secretary, but a message was also embedded in his performance.
In an interview on Monday morning, Mr. Spicer said he now regrets one of his most infamous moments as press secretary: his decision to charge into the White House briefing room in January and criticize accurate news reports that President Barack Obama’s inauguration crowd was bigger than President Trump’s.
“Of course I do, absolutely,” Mr. Spicer said.
For Mr. Spicer, who resigned this summer after repeated clashes with the news media and a sharp disagreement with Mr. Trump over the appointment of Anthony Scaramucci as communications director, the Emmys were his latest attempt to court the largely liberal coastal entertainment and news elites he so acidly disdained as the president’s alter-ego spokesman. The once-obscure party spokesman has been elevated to a level of celebrity he scarcely dreamed possible a year ago. And, like many before him, he hopes to translate his embattled tenure into something more lasting and lucrative. So the Emmys were also a chance for Mr. Spicer to cultivate a television industry audience that he may need as he seeks speaking engagements and paid television appearances in his post-White House life.
Mr. Spicer’s arrival on the Emmys stage garnered mixed reviews, however — not so much for his star turn with Stephen Colbert of “The Late Show” on CBS, but for Hollywood’s sudden embrace of a man once viewed as a not-so-truthful mouthpiece for a president that much of the town despises.
As Mr. Spicer prepared to return to Washington, he was asked if he was worried that Mr. Trump would take offense over the skit, which many viewers saw as lampooning the president’s preoccupation with the size of his inauguration crowd.
Mr. Spicer made his Emmys appearance at the end of Mr. Colbert’s opening monologue, which included a long riff about Mr. Trump’s uneasy relationship with the entertainment industry and his apparent frustration that his NBC reality series “The Apprentice” never won an Emmy Award.
Mr. Colbert, a frequent critic of both Mr. Trump and Mr. Spicer, went on to say that the president was primarily concerned with TV ratings, but that there was no way to know how large his audience was.
He recited his briefing room statement, nearly word for word. “This will be the largest audience to witness an Emmys, period — both in person and around the world,” he declared with a semi-straight face.
Mr. Spicer said he did not give the president or senior White House staff a heads up about his appearance, which had been in the works for several days.
A person familiar with the planning of the Emmy program said on Monday that Mr. Colbert and his staff regarded Mr. Spicer’s appearance as both a joke at the expense of Mr. Trump and a way to poke fun at Mr. Colbert, too. The person spoke on condition of anonymity to disclose private discussions involving the Emmys and Mr. Colbert.
Just as Mr. Trump had been thin-skinned in employing a spokesman to exaggerate the size of his inaugural crowd, this person said, Mr. Colbert was mocking himself by using Mr. Spicer to overstate the size of his viewership.
Since leaving the White House last month, Mr. Spicer has been on a speaking and television circuit, trying to rehabilitate his image. On Wednesday, he appeared as a guest on the ABC late-night show “Jimmy Kimmel Live,” in an interview that drew criticism for its perceived leniency toward Mr. Spicer.
The next day, Mr. Colbert was a guest on “Jimmy Kimmel Live,” and the two talk show hosts talked about Mr. Spicer.
“I’ve always wanted to talk to that cat,” Mr. Colbert said.
But at least among some people in Hollywood, Mr. Spicer may have been forgiven — or at least worthy of an Instagram.
At the Television Academy’s Emmy after-party in Los Angeles, several gown- and tuxedo-clad revelers stopped to gawk at Mr. Spicer.
Other guests patiently lined up nearby — Mr. Spicer was posing for selfies.