An events manager for the city of Austin, Tex., who is known for overseeing the South by Southwest festival, has been formally reprimanded for refusing to meet with female city employees.
The city opened an investigation in July after a business specialist at the Austin Center for Events complained that the manager, William Manno, had skipped meetings “because he believed a communications consultant in attendance had romantic feelings for him,” according to The Austin American-Statesman, which reported the story on Thursday.
The reprimand was issued last month, and on Wednesday, The American-Statesman reported, Mr. Manno filed a grievance disputing the findings. “Many of the statements included in the reprimand memo are based on misleading and incorrect information,” he wrote.
Mr. Manno did not respond to an email and a voice mail message seeking comment Thursday evening.
Given this, Dr. Kochan said, the city was obligated to act after it became aware of the complaint against Mr. Manno.
“Once it’s brought to the attention of the organization,” he said, “the human resource department or the legal staff or someone has a duty to take action to address it.” If they do not, the organization itself could become liable.
Though Mr. Manno stands out for being penalized, his behavior is not uncommon: It has been documented on Capitol Hill, in the business sector and elsewhere.
In one widely publicized case, an Iowa dentist, Dr. James Knight, fired his assistant because, he said, he feared he would be unable to resist having an affair with her. The assistant, Melissa Nelson, sued, asserting that she had been wrongfully terminated because of her gender. The all-male Iowa Supreme Court ruled against Ms. Nelson in 2012, saying her firing had been based not on her gender but on Dr. Knight’s feelings, and reaffirmed its decision in July 2013.
A yoga instructor in Manhattan, Dilek Edwards, was similarly fired in 2013 from her job at a chiropractor’s office after her boss, Charles Nicolai, told that she was “too cute” and that his wife would be jealous. A judge dismissed her lawsuit in 2016, but an appeals court ruled last month that she could sue after all.
The phenomenon extends to the White House: Vice President Mike Pence is on record as saying he will not eat alone with any woman besides his wife, or even go by himself to an event where alcohol is served. Those remarks did not get much attention in 2002, when Mr. Pence was merely a member of the House of Representatives, but they went viral this year after a profile in The Washington Post mentioned them.
According to a New York Times/Morning Consult poll conducted in May, more than 40 percent of men in the United States considered it inappropriate to get a drink or dinner with a female colleague. An even larger percentage of women — more than 50 percent — said the same of getting a drink or dinner with a male colleague (though, because men are overrepresented in positions of authority, their aversion has more potential to affect women’s careers than women’s aversion has to affect men’s).
But only 25 percent of women and 22 percent of men said a one-on-one work meeting would be inappropriate.
In the long term, Dr. Kochan, the M.I.T. professor, argued that the best ways to challenge behavior like Mr. Manno’s were to train employees to recognize it and intervene, and to actively place them in situations where they have to work together.
