The music producer came to New York for the sleaze and the flea circus. He stayed to make the mixtapes of a city’s imagination.
Hal Willner was new in New York, working as an assistant to a record producer named Joel Dorn, when Mr. Dorn called him aside after a session one night. “You’re not going home yet, baby,” Mr. Willner remembered his boss telling him. It was 1974. Mr. Dorn had produced enormously successful records for Bette Midler and Roberta Flack, and experimental jazz albums that Mr. Willner loved.
We’re going out, Mr. Dorn told Mr. Willner. Do not tell your parents.
Mr. Willner was 18. Mr. Foxx told an off-color joke about elephant poo.
Hal Willner, welcome to New York.
If you see Mikhail Baryshnikov moving to the novelty song “They’re Coming to Take Me Away, Ha-Haaa!” or Conway Twitty sharing a bill with the Kronos Quartet and the cult experimental band the Residents, chances are Mr. Willner was behind it. His best-known albums, “Stay Awake: Various Interpretations of Music From Vintage Disney Films,” from 1988, and “Lost in the Stars: The Music of Kurt Weill,” from 1985, were imaginary mixtapes from another era.
But these days being Hal Willner can take some explanation.
“Weird isn’t in right now,” he said.
Around him, overflowing the studio shelves, were his muses: busts of Laurel and Hardy, dolls of Popeye and Allen Ginsberg; photos of Lenny Bruce; a music box that played Karlheinz Stockhausen, given to him by Frank Zappa. Puppets of Laurie Anderson and David Bowie faced a bobble head of Tiny Tim and a hand puppet of Pookie, the scat-singing lion from Soupy Sales’s TV show. Each, he feared, was an obsession from a world that was slipping away.
Mr. Willner grew up in Philadelphia, listening to ’60s rock music and working in the delicatessen owned by his father, a Holocaust survivor who shared memories of the concentration camps. These filtered into his son’s consciousness, mixing with cartoon characters and comic books.
“He talked about it all the time,” Mr. Willner said. “I was interested. I remember having dreams, and it would be like Yosemite Sam was a guard at the camps.
Through a customer at the delicatessen he got tickets to see the Beatles when he was 8, another touchstone in his education. Even now, he said, he rarely goes more than a week or two without thinking about that concert.
In Philadelphia, Mr. Willner was drawn to the sleazy New York depicted in “Midnight Cowboy.” When he arrived to attend New York University in 1974, punk was just coming together, Studio 54 had not yet opened and Andy Kaufman was inventing a new kind of comedy for a city on the edge of bankruptcy.
“The city was rough,” Mr. Willner said. “It had a smell to it. The first place I went was Hubert’s Museum and Flea Circus on 42nd Street,” which had been immortalized by the photographer Diane Arbus. For an 18-year-old, it was a test of whether New York was really the place he imagined.
Mr. Willner found an apartment on a block with a gay bathhouse on one side and Michael O’Donoghue, the darkest of the “Saturday Night Live” comedy writers — he once wrote a 20-minute skit likening the network’s president to Adolf Hitler — down the block.
For Mr. Willner, it was home.
To engage with Mr. Willner at 61 is to enter a world where freak shows and Soupy Sales are still a salient presence. For nearly four decades, he has worked to consolidate the margins of American culture into his own idiosyncratic mainstream.
His first big idea, at age 24, was to gather a bunch of jazz musicians to reimagine the music from Federico Fellini’s films. It was a screwy idea. It was 1980, and no one was buying jazz records or soundtracks by Nino Rota, Fellini’s composer. Mr. Willner was driving a cab at the time, starting his shift at 5 a.m. at the Paradise Garage or other clubs. The idea did not seem screwy to him. It was the music he heard in his head.
He found money somewhere, and willing participants: Debbie Harry and Chris Stein from Blondie; a very young Wynton Marsalis and youngish Henry Threadgill, among others. Then he went to Rome to ask Fellini for the rights.
“I was speechless when I went to Fellini’s door,” Mr. Willner said. “It was like meeting Dickens. I noticed that he had all these Laurel and Hardy books. So I mentioned it, and he said, ‘Yes, what else is there?’ We were doing Laurel and Hardy with each other.
That first album, “Amarcord Nino Rota,” gave Mr. Willner a taste of what was possible, especially if he did not draw borders between types of music or musicians — between jazz and rock, between punk and mainstream. He could get Todd Rundgren and Dr. John to play the music of Thelonious Monk; he could get Sinead O’Connor or the Replacements to play songs from Disney cartoons. If he combined the right musicians in unfamiliar pairings, the results might be something not heard before, even in the minds of the players.
The music led to spoken-word albums with Allen Ginsberg, which in turn led to Gregory Corso and Mr. Burroughs.
On a Saturday evening in mid-August, Mr. Willner’s methodology was playing out at a Brooklyn recording studio, where he was working on a tribute album to the 1970s glam rock band T. Rex. The cast for the session included a small chamber ensemble and Marc Almond of the British new wave duo Soft Cell, best known for their 1981 hit “Tainted Love.” The song was “Teenage Dream,” with an arrangement by J.G. Thirlwell, who is best known under his string of 1980s identities, most of which included the word Foetus.
Mr. Almond arrived at the studio with no idea what kind of music Mr. Thirlwell had prepared. Maybe it would be heavy metal or screeching industrial noise. Instead it was chamber music with a tango section in the middle. Mr. Almond had only 90 minutes to complete his work.
“I’m kind of worried,” he told Mr. Willner.
Mr. Willner lay down on the floor behind the piano and let the musicians work, then sat cross-legged with his head down, rocking back and forth.
Mr. Almond vamped “yeah yeahs” through the tango section. Mr. Willner was ecstatic. “You were channeling Ronnie Spector,” he told Mr. Almond.
Mr. Almond, reached a week after the session, had a different take on Mr. Willner’s guidance.
His roles have changed over the years. The mentors he found when he moved to New York have mostly died. Once the young guy at “Saturday Night Live,” he is now the link to the past, introducing cast members to the comedy of Lord Buckley or Firesign Theater. Some of the musicians he works with, like Kesha, who performs on the T. Rex album, are half his age.
Two of his lasting partnerships have been with Marianne Faithfull and Lou Reed, both of whom became close friends. He produced Mr. Reed’s last conventional album, “Ecstasy” and subsequent theater works, and the two were hosts of a weekly satellite radio show. He was, he said, Mr. Reed’s Tonto. Since Mr. Reed’s death in 2013, he has worked with Laurie Anderson to organize some of Mr. Reed’s unreleased recordings.
“We were kind of best friends,” Mr. Willner said. “He didn’t like to be alone. There was not a night that he didn’t go out.
Mr. Willner said that New York has not disappointed him. If it has lost some of the sleaze that drew him, it is still a place where he can go to the Museum of Modern Art twice a week, or take his 12-year-old son for Korean barbecue.
“If I miss anything, it’s the amount of eccentrics walking around, and hearing about culture everywhere on the street,” he said. “It’s still there. It just doesn’t mix like it did. Most people I knew were into all of it.
“I was a watcher, not a doer. I still am. I remember walking Rahsaan Roland Kirk around New York when I was 18, and I went from that to producing Lou Reed. It’s crazy. I had a big place at one time, both Anita Pallenberg and Marianne Faithfull were staying there at the same time. How lucky I was to be in the midst of that.
He was finishing the T. Rex album, preparing a memorial for Leonard Cohen in Montreal in November.
