At a political rally in Alabama on Friday, President Trump had clear advice for N.F.L. owners if one of their players followed the lead of Colin Kaepernick, the former Super Bowl quarterback who last season began kneeling during the national anthem to protest police injustice against minorities. 
The reaction was swift and stunning in its breadth — even as Mr. Trump went further on Sunday by calling for fans to boycott games unless the league fires or suspends players who refuse to stand for the national anthem.
The former N.F.L. coach Rex Ryan, who introduced Mr. Trump at a rally during the campaign, was furious and bitter at now being tied to Mr. Trump. “I never signed up for that,” Mr. Ryan said on ESPN’s “Sunday N.F.L. Countdown,” where he is a commentator.
Neither man said it directly, but Mr. Trump’s remarks provide further evidence that he has no concern for the legitimate and deeply felt fears and grievances of minority Americans.
Implying that players give up their right to free speech when they put on a uniform may well strike a responsive chord among many in Mr. Trump’s base, and among faithful acolytes like Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin, who said players should keep their mouths shut in the workplace.
Maybe there are even some callous enough to thrill to another of Mr. Trump’s careless assertions, that the N.F.L. had become too concerned with protecting players from head injuries in the face of mounting evidence of long-term brain damage among retired players.
The New York Times had reported the day before Mr.Trump’s speech that doctors had found that the brain of Aaron Hernandez, the 27-year-old former New England Patriot who committed suicide in April while imprisoned on a murder sentence, showed a level of a degenerative brain disease, chronic traumatic encephalopathy, or C.T.E., usually seen in players in their 60s.
This was of no concern to Mr.Trump, who complained about referees penalizing teams for excessive violence. Demonstrating with his fists colliding, he referred to a “beautiful tackle” that earned a 15-yard penalty. “They’re ruining the game,” he said.
Sunday’s revolt against Mr. Trump was not quite a victory for Mr. Kaepernick; no team has even offered him a backup position despite a striking level of mediocrity among even many starting quarterbacks. Still, it might well have been a huge victory for free speech and the cause of racial justice he has so bravely espoused.
