On three N.F.L. teams, nearly all the football players skipped the national anthem altogether. Dozens of others, from London to Los Angeles, knelt or locked arms on the sidelines, joined by several team owners in a league normally friendly to President Trump. Some of the sport’s biggest stars joined the kind of demonstration they have steadfastly avoided.
It was an unusual, sweeping wave of protest and defiance on the sidelines of the country’s most popular game, generated by Mr. Trump’s stream of calls to fire players who have declined to stand for the national anthem in order to raise awareness of police brutality and racial injustice.
What had been a modest round of anthem demonstrations this season led by a handful of African-American players mushroomed and morphed into a nationwide, diverse rebuke to Mr. Trump, with even some of his staunchest supporters in the N.F.L., including several owners, joining in or condemning Mr. Trump for divisiveness.
Julius Thomas, a Miami Dolphins tight end who had previously stood for the anthem, knelt for it on Sunday with several players.
But the acts of defiance received a far more mixed reception from fans, both in the stadiums and on social media, suggesting that what were promoted as acts of unity might have exacerbated a divide and dragged yet another of the country’s institutions into the turbulent cross currents of race and politics.
At Lincoln Financial Field in Philadelphia, videos posted on social media showed some Eagles fans yelling at anti-Trump protesters holding placards. At MetLife Stadium in East Rutherford, N.J., before the Jets played the Dolphins, many fans, a majority of them white, said they did not support the anthem protests but also did not agree with the president’s view that players should be fired because of them.
Mr. Trump, in a speech on Friday and a weekend-long series of tweets, had all but baited athletes and the league to respond by saying that those who do not stand for the anthem should be fired. He added that the league was in decline for tolerating the protests and for taking steps to reduce brain damage among players.
Still, players and team officials said they had made the gestures, including locking arms, in solidarity with players who had demonstrated during the anthem, not to support Mr. Trump.
There was a variety of protests on the sidelines Sunday. All but one player from the Pittsburgh Steelers, one of the league’s most celebrated teams, refused to go out for the anthem. The lone exception was Alejandro Villanueva, a veteran of the war in Afghanistan.
The Steelers, who were playing the Bears, were booed heavily by fans in Chicago when they ran onto the field after the anthem.
The Steelers, along with the Tennessee Titans and the Seattle Seahawks, who were playing each other and similarly skipped the anthem, broke a league rule requiring athletes to be present for the anthem, though a league executive said they would not be penalized.
Even stars who normally shy from controversy took a stand.
Green Bay Packers quarterback Aaron Rodgers posted a photograph of himself kneeling with three of his teammates during warm-ups before the game, and New England Patriots quarterback Tom Brady, a supporter of the president, “liked” Rodgers’s photo. Later, before the Patriots’ game against the Houston Texans in Foxborough, Mass., Brady locked arms with a teammate on the field and placed his hand over his heart during the anthem. Rodgers stood during the anthem, but three of his teammates sat on the bench.
A dozen or so Patriots knelt during the anthem, prompting some fans at Gillette Stadium to boo.
Still, one of the more surprising reactions came from the Patriots’ owner, Robert K. Kraft, a friend and campaign donor of the president who has invited Mr. Trump to sit with him at home games, as well as from other owners who were considered bedrock supporters of the president.
E. Stanley Kroenke, the owner of the Los Angeles Rams, and Martha Firestone Ford, the owner of the Detroit Lions, both of whom lean to the right politically, also scolded the president.
She and the Atlanta Falcons’ owner, Arthur M. Blank, who donates to many Democratic causes, linked arms with players during the anthem before the Falcons-Lions game in Detroit. The singer Rico LaVelle went down on one knee as he finished singing the anthem.
The demonstrations intensified what was already a divisive debate that began last season when Colin Kaepernick, then a quarterback for the San Francisco 49ers, began kneeling during the playing of the national anthem, to highlight, he has said, police brutality and racial injustice.
He left the team after last season and has not played in the league since, inspiring questions over whether teams are punishing him, while many other players have knelt or made gestures in support of him or other social causes during the anthem.
Kaepernick has not commented, and his social media accounts were largely quiet on the president and the new round of protests.
But the fallout from Mr. Trump’s remarks spilled over into other sports.
In a tweet Friday, Mr. Trump disinvited the Golden State Warriors, the N.B.A. champions, to any traditional White House visit, after members of the team, including its biggest star, Stephen Curry, were critical of him. But on Sunday, the N.H.L. champion Pittsburgh Penguins said they would go to the White House, and declared such visits to be free of politics.
Nascar team owners went a step further, saying they would not tolerate drivers who protested during the anthem.
To promote the idea of the N.F.L. as a unifying force, the league was planning to replay a television ad called “Inside These Lines” on NBC on Sunday night when the Oakland Raiders played the Washington Redskins outside the nation’s capital.
While none of the Jets’ players knelt during the playing of the anthem, they locked arms on the sideline and were joined by some of the team’s administrators. On the other side of the field, four Miami Dolphins players — Maurice Smith, Kenny Stills, Thomas and Laremy Tunsil — knelt, while the team’s owner, Stephen M. Ross, locked arms with two of his players.
Two years ago, Mr. Ross started a nonprofit organization to combat racism and discrimination.
Jesse Melendez, 29, of Dix Hills, N.Y.; Je’anna Pulistar, 29, of Lindenhurst, N.Y.; Roger Guevara, 29, of Yonkers; and Genesis Pineda, 27, of Yonkers, took the opposing view by supporting the N.F.L. players’ right to protest during the anthem.
