At the moment I type this: “Lincoln in the Bardo,” by George Saunders; “The Essex Serpent,” by Sarah Perry; “Marlena,” by Julie Buntin. I have a bad habit of reading more than one book simultaneously! Two books of folktales I saved from childhood (the Illustrated Junior Library edition of Grimms’ Fairy Tales and “Favourite Folktales of China,” translated by John Minford), because my son has been asking me to tell him stories at bedtime, and I needed to brush up. Oh, and the 1974 “Dreamer’s Dictionary,” by Stearn Robinson and Tom Corbett, because the odd specificity of the dreams listed are good sparks for stories, and because it’s fun.
I keep finding new great books, but since you asked for the last one: “The Tsar of Love and Techno,” by Anthony Marra. They’re interconnected stories about the Chechen-Russian wars, but really they’re about all the ways we try to reclaim the things and people we love after they’re gone. I got a galley of it ages ago, and only read it recently, and was blown away.
What influences your decisions about which books to read? Word of mouth, reviews, a trusted friend?
Friends. Taste is idiosyncratic, so I don’t love everything people recommend me, and I don’t love everything my friends love. But if a friend adores a book or thinks I will, there’s always something in there that’s interesting and worth thinking about and discussing.
I was reading about life in the Soviet Union, looking for information about samizdat for novel research, and learned that people shared banned music by cutting old X-ray film into circles and making records out of them. They called them “ribs” or “bones.” I’m fascinated by the ways people under repressive regimes still manage to share information — and joy.
“The Age of Innocence,” by Edith Wharton. I’d read “Ethan Frome” in high school, but somehow missed this one. It’s a masterpiece. Despite being almost a hundred years old, it still speaks powerfully on the assumptions we make about each other, and our human failures to communicate our needs and desires.
Whose writing today most inspires you?
Rebecca Solnit is a clarion voice of reason. Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie’s work — both fiction and nonfiction. The poets Jane Hirshfield and Maggie Smith. And Heather Havrilesky’s “Ask Polly” column in New York magazine’s The Cut should be required reading for all humans.
What kinds of books bring you the most reading pleasure these days?
I read with my 6-year-old son every night, and frankly, with the state of the world, it’s a relief to turn to children’s literature. We’ve been enjoying some classics like “The BFG” and some new books like Abby Hanlon’s “Dory Fantasmagory” and Shannon and Dean Hale’s “The Princess in Black” series, which make both of us laugh. And picture books — especially really thoughtful, beautiful ones like Aaron Becker’s “Journey” trilogy, Carson Ellis’s “Du Iz Tak?” and everything by Mac Barnett and Jon Klassen — are a balm for the soul. They give me hope for the next generation.
Which genres do you avoid?
I try to read omnivorously, because I never know what’s going to spark a new idea. Often the things that I least expect to seize my imagination end up being the most productive. So I’ll read anything regardless of where it’s shelved in the library, from science writing to history to poetry to Agatha Christie and Dorothy Sayers to Octavia Butler. I read literary fiction most often because it’s my own field, but the borders of what’s considered “literary” are blurring a lot, which I’m thrilled about.
How do you like to read? Paper or electronic? One book at a time or several simultaneously? Morning or night?
I prefer paper for reading books, because I like to feel the weight of the book shifting as I turn pages, and because I like to be able to flip back and look at earlier pages and chapters as I make connections. But I read a lot onscreen as well, between news articles and blog posts and longform content online.
I used to be a serial reader and now I’m a simultaneous reader: one book on my desk that I read in short bits throughout the day as I have time, and a stack more on the nightstand that I read in longer bursts before bed. As for time of day — it’s pretty much all the time, in all the gaps around everyday living. When I’m reading I don’t really notice or care what time it is.
I don’t know how to answer this. Surprise means I didn’t conform to your preconceived notion of me, and I’ve always prided myself on subverting other people’s expectations.
Here are some of the things on my bookshelves: the 1924 “Vogue’s Book of Etiquette”; a program from “Sleep No More” in New York City; a catalog of Sir John Soane’s Museum, which I visited last time I was in London; “Any Woman Can!*,” a 1971 self-help guide by David Reuben that purports to be a guide to female empowerment but is actually a treatise on how to catch a husband; Randall Munroe’s “Thing Explainer,” which explains complicated concepts using only the 100 most commonly used words; a history of Sesame Street called “Sesame Street Unpaved”; a half-dozen Terry Pratchett Discworld novels; Lin Yutang’s 1934 essay collection, “With Love and Irony”; the German translation of “Harry Potter and the Sorcerer’s Stone”; a reprint of a U.S. Army Field Survival Manual; three books of math and logic puzzles by Martin Gardner; the King James Bible.
People who don’t know me will likely be surprised at most of it. People who do know me likely won’t be surprised by any of it.
After I wrote “Everything I Never Told You,” in which my mom’s Betty Crocker cookbook plays an important cameo, she gave me her copy — the same copy I remembered from my childhood, which has food spatters here and there from use as well as a crease in the spine at the cookie section.
More recently, my son wrote, illustrated and taped together two books for me: “The Fish Book: The Most About Fish” and “The Talking Dog,” which is apparently going to be part of a nine-volume series.
Vesper Holly is the heroine of Lloyd Alexander’s “The Illyrian Adventure” and multiple sequels: she’s smart, feisty, thoughtful and resourceful, and in each book she saves herself and her companions using her own wits and know-how. I loved her when I first read her at 11, and still wouldn’t mind growing up to be her.
And I guess the Count of Monte Cristo is an antihero — he’s not a villain, but he’s not a role model either. He works a very, very long con to exact revenge on the men who betrayed him, but by the end he realizes the perils of trying to play god and the limitations of his own morality. My interpretation of that novel has changed as I’ve read it at different stages of my life, and right now, I see it as an exploration of the complexities of good and evil and how easily one shifts into the other.
Voracious and escapist. I read everywhere; my parents often let me read at the dinner table because it was the only way I’d eat. I left books all over the house, and sometimes we’d find them in the cushions of the couch months later. I’ve kept most of my favorites, and they’re all problematic, but I still love them. A short sampling of those that influenced me most: the “Little House” series by Laura Ingalls Wilder; “The Great Brain” series by John D. Fitzgerald; “From the Mixed-Up Files of Mrs. Basil E. Frankweiler,” by E. L. Konigsburg; “Howl’s Moving Castle,” by Diana Wynne Jones; the “Wolves Chronicles” series, by Joan Aiken; “Harriet the Spy,” by Louise Fitzhugh; the Wizard of Oz series by L. Frank Baum (and the sequels by Ruth Plumly Thompson); pretty much every book written by Zilpha Keatley Snyder; “A Little Princess” and “The Secret Garden,” by Frances Hodgson Burnett; Katherine Paterson’s books — which were almost traumatizing to me as a kid, but which I appreciate now for challenging me and my worldview. I’ve probably read each of the books I just mentioned at least 20 or 30 times apiece.
And then, of course, Bill Watterson’s “Calvin and Hobbes,” whose run almost exactly matched my childhood. I firmly believe there’s a relevant “Calvin and Hobbes” strip for every moment, and I’m irrationally proud that I can usually think of one offhand.
I’m not wholly confident in the president’s reading ability, let alone his desire to read anything, but okay: “Have You Filled a Bucket Today?,” a picture book my son’s preschool class read, in which the concept of morality is illustrated by a literal bucket of good feelings that each person carries around. When you do good things for people, it fills their bucket and yours too, but when you’re unkind to people, it empties both buckets. It is so clear that even 3-, 4-, and 5-year-olds understand it right away.
My favorite parties are those where I sit quietly and listen to funny, interesting, brilliant people banter with each other. So I’d invite three people who would carry the conversation, and I’d pour the drinks and enjoy.
I’ve been a fan of Mary Roach’s books on science’s unusual and curious applications since “Stiff” — she’d ask offbeat questions and tell hilarious yet informative stories. Shakespeare, because who would pass up the opportunity to have dinner with Shakespeare? Plus, he’d be funny and also probably quite bawdy. And to round out the group, Lin-Manuel Miranda, whose brain I adore and whom I long to meet. We can sing “Les Misérables” together and then become best friends.
I have never been able to get into Knausgaard, though many, many people whose opinions I trust adore his work. It’s just not for me. I’m usually a diehard book finisher, so I almost never put down a book without finishing it — I’m just choosy about what I pick up.
And I’m eagerly awaiting the debut collection by a grad school–mate who’s become a good friend: “Back Talk,” by Danielle Lazarin, which is coming out in February. I read it in draft form and can’t wait to see it in print. Stories about women flexing their desires in the face of a world that often stifles them? Yes please.