WASHINGTON — President Trump lashed out at the mayor of San Juan on Saturday for criticizing his administration’s efforts to help Puerto Rico after Hurricane Maria, accusing her of “poor leadership” and implying that the people of the devastated island were not doing enough to help themselves.
His attack on Ms. Cruz on Saturday was amplified by a top aide, who retweeted a message she had written during last year’s campaign endorsing Hillary Clinton over Mr. Trump. “@realDonaldTrump hater, the Mayor of San Juan — is the perfect example of an opportunistic politician,” wrote Dan Scavino Jr., the president’s social media director.
Lady Gaga, who has twice as many Twitter followers as the president, said that “it’s clear where the ‘poor leadership’ lies @realDonaldTrump” and added that he was “not helping PR because of the electoral votes u need to be re-elected.” As an American territory, Puerto Rico does not have votes in the Electoral College, which determines the presidency every four years.
Russel L. Honoré, the retired lieutenant general who took over the response to Hurricane Katrina in 2005 after an initially inadequate federal effort, also noted the president’s weekend retreat. “The mayor’s living on a cot, and I hope the president has a good day at golf,” he said on CNN.
The president was out of sight on Saturday, secluded at his club in Bedminster, N.J., miles away from the pool of journalists who follow him. Aides would not say whether he went golfing, although they said he had telephone calls scheduled with Puerto Rico’s governor and the head of the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
General Buchanan, who arrived in Puerto Rico on Thursday to take over the hurricane response, said on Friday that he needed more personnel and resources. “The answer is no, it’s not enough and we’re bringing more in,” he said on CNN.
At least 16 people have died in Puerto Rico in the aftermath of Maria, which came soon after Hurricane Irma, although that number could rise. The island has a population of 3.4 million people, roughly the same as Connecticut. In addition to appointing General Buchanan, the Trump administration has waived the Jones Act, a maritime commerce statute that was seen as a hindrance to relief efforts.
Mr. Trump plans to travel to Puerto Rico with his wife, Melania, on Tuesday, nearly two weeks after the hurricane slammed into the island but the earliest he said he could get there without diverting resources from the rescue and recovery efforts. He said on Saturday that he would also “hopefully be able to stop at the U.S. Virgin Islands,” where 100,000 American citizens are also struggling to recover from storm devastation.
