Artists and museums are often in the thick of free speech debates — think of Rudolph W. Giuliani’s battle with the Brooklyn Museum over a Virgin Mary artwork with elephant dung and more recently a fight over an exhibit that evoked Emmett Till’s mutilated corpse. Typically the art world holds its ground, emerging bruised but resolute.
But in two recent controversies, the protesters seem to be winning.
On Monday, the Guggenheim decided to pull three major works from a highly anticipated exhibition after pressure from animal-rights supporters and others over the show “Art and China After 1989: Theater of the World.” This, together with the Walker Art Center’s recent move to dismantle Sam Durant’s sculpture “Scaffold” in response to protests, has art leaders concerned that museums are setting worrisome precedents when threatened with organized pressure tactics.
The three works in the Guggenheim show, which opens Oct. 6, were created between 1993 and 2003 and were intended to symbolically depict oppression in China. One video, “Dogs That Cannot Touch Each Other,” shows four pairs of pit bulls on nonmotorized treadmills, trying to fight even as they struggle to touch. Another video, “A Case Study of Transference,” shows two pigs mating in front of an audience. And an installation — “Theater of the World,” a central work of the show — features hundreds of live crickets, lizards, beetles, snakes, and other insects and reptiles under an overhead lamp.
The Guggenheim has also been a target of protesters in recent years over its decision to build a museum in Abu Dhabi despite widespread concerns about labor conditions there. The Guggenheim has not withdrawn those plans.
For many artists and museum professionals, the latest moves at the Guggenheim and the Walker amount to an artistic capitulation in the face of heightened political sensitivities that have been amplified by social media.
Others say the Guggenheim should have used the controversy as a moment to engage the public about difficult art.
In the case of the Walker, Dakota Indian leaders argued that Mr. Durant’s two-story structure in the Minneapolis Sculpture Garden — which aimed to evoke gallows throughout United States history — brought back painful memories and trivialized the executions of the United States-Dakota war in 1862.
More often in the past, museums have resisted such pressure. In March, a small group of protesters blocked Dana Schutz’s painting in the Whitney Biennial based on open-coffin photographs of the mutilated body of Till, the teenager who was lynched by two white men in Mississippi in 1955. They objected to a white artist’s using — and potentially profiting from — an image of violence against a black person and urged that the painting not only be removed from the show but also destroyed. The Whitney kept the painting on view.
Some applauded the Guggenheim’s decision.
“China has no laws protecting animals, so withdrawing these pieces may help the country and its artists recognize that animals are not props and that they deserve respect,” she said.
Controversial art installations and even some paintings regularly prompt an outcry. The Brooklyn Museum faced off against Mayor Giuliani over Chris Ofili’s Virgin Mary. In the current Venice Biennale, some have objected to the use of Amazonian Huni Kuin tribe members in the artist Ernesto Neto’s tent and to the artist Olafur Eliasson’s use of Venice’s migrants in his workshop installation. In both cases, the artwork remained in place.
The Dobermans used by Anne Imhof in the German Pavilion at the Venice Biennale did not provoke high-profile objections; she won this year’s top prize.
But Sarah Cohen, an art historian at the University at Albany whose research focuses on artistic representations of animals, questioned why the Guggenheim included the works at all.
