ST. LOUIS — After a third night of protests following the acquittal of a white former St. Louis police officer in the fatal shooting of a black man, city officials early Monday were striking a more aggressive tone, with the acting police chief telling reporters that the police had “owned” the night.
The police said they had arrested 80 people overnight after demonstrators knocked over concrete flower pots, trash cans and newspaper stands and threw rocks through windows of downtown businesses.
Shortly after the arrests, police officers were heard by reporters chanting “Whose streets? Our streets,” commandeering a common refrain used by protesters, the St. Louis Post-Dispatch reported.
The demonstrations — largely peaceful during the days, then more volatile at night — continued Monday morning as a group of protesters marched through downtown. A day earlier, hundreds of demonstrators gathered outside the city’s police headquarters and stood silent for six minutes — one for every year that has passed since the death of Anthony Lamar Smith, who was fatally shot in 2011 by Jason Stockley, then a St. Louis police officer.
The shooting has been a matter of intense debate in St. Louis, but before this weekend it had drawn little attention elsewhere and the details of the case are not widely known outside the St. Louis region.
Here are answers to some essential questions about the case, which was conducted without a jury.
Why was the former officer put on trial?
Prosecutors also suggested that Mr. Stockley had planted a gun inside Mr. Smith’s car after the chase ended and Mr. Smith lay dead, shot five times. Video showed that Mr. Stockley returned to his own police S.U.V. immediately after shooting Mr. Smith, and only later found a handgun tucked inside Mr. Smith’s car. Mr. Stockley’s DNA was later found on that gun, but Mr. Smith’s DNA was not.
What was the officer’s defense?
The defense team said Mr. Stockley had plenty of reasons to know that Mr. Smith had a gun. Mr. Stockley testified that he had seen a gun in Mr. Smith’s hand inside the Buick after he initially approached Mr. Smith over a suspected drug deal in a parking lot, before the high-speed chase began. Mr. Stockley said that his partner also had yelled “Gun!” to signal that Mr. Smith had a weapon.
When the fatal confrontation occurred a short time later, after the high-speed chase, Mr. Stockley said, Mr. Smith was reaching for something as the officers stood at his driver’s side window, and he assumed it was a gun.
The defense rejected suggestions that the officer had planted anything. After the shooting, Mr. Stockley went back to the police vehicle to get a medical dressing that slows bleeding, they said, not to get an extra gun. An expert testified that someone can hold a gun and not leave DNA on it, so the absence of Mr. Smith’s DNA on the gun was not proof that he had not held it.
What happened in St. Louis when the verdict was announced?
Protesters gathered within minutes of the verdict, and they have marched each day since then, in downtown streets, entertainment districts and a suburban mall. The marchers have included people of a wide range of ages and of different races, and their numbers and makeup have shifted significantly at various points during the weekend.
Most demonstrators have been peaceful, but there have been violent incidents after dark each night. At least 11 law enforcement officers have been injured, the mayor’s house was vandalized and windows were broken at several businesses and a public library.
The rock band U2 and the singer Ed Sheeran canceled concerts that were scheduled for downtown St. Louis, citing security concerns, and many school districts in the region canceled weekend activities.
What makes St. Louis different?
Elected leaders, protesters and other residents of this region are deeply aware of the area’s early role in the current national debate over how police officers treat black people. The region became the focal point of that debate in 2014 following the death of Michael Brown, an unarmed black man who was shot by police in Ferguson, one of the many small municipalities that surround St. Louis.
The region’s top elected offices — governor of Missouri and mayor of St. Louis — have both changed hands since the events in Ferguson.
The mayor of St. Louis, Lyda Krewson, a Democrat, has taken a less confrontational approach, even though her own house was vandalized during the demonstrations on Friday.
Ms. Krewson, who is white, leads a city with nearly equal numbers of black and white residents and a long history of racial division. She outpolled several well-known African-American candidates in the mayoral election in the spring.
