Our guide to stand-up, improv and variety sHOWS.
‘FUNNY AS TECH’ at the Peoples Improv Theater (Sept. 29, 7:30 p.m.). In this live show, comedy and tech come together at last. Each month, the tech ethicist David Ryan Polgar and the comedian Joe Leonardo invite a wide range of guests to pick apart and laugh about such matters as algorithms and artificial intelligence. This time, the founder of x.ai, Dennis Mortensen, joins the design researcher Pamela Pavliscak and the tech humanist Kate O’Neill to discuss the future of conversation.
JIM GAFFIGAN at the Beacon Theater (Sept. 29, 7:30 and 10 p.m., Sept. 30, 7:30 p.m.). It seems impossible that Jim Gaffigan will ever run out of foods to rhapsodize about. A comic perhaps best known for his dissertations on dessert and unmitigated meditations on the Hot Pocket, Jim Gaffigan loves food so much that he memorialized it in his 2014 book, “Food: A Love Story.” Now Mr. Gaffigan is in the midst of his extensive “Noble Ape Tour,” which will take him all over the United States through the end of the year and then abroad in 2018.
JANEANE GAROFALO AND TODD BARRY at EastVille Comedy Club (Sept. 29-30, 8 p.m. and 10 p.m.). The comedians Janeane Garofalo and Todd Barry are perfect foils — Ms. Garofalo’s comedy tends to veer toward the unabashedly personal, unapologetically outspoken side of the spectrum, while Mr. Barry tends to deliver his set in a calm and measured deadpan. There is one topic, however, that unites them (and most of humanity): a love of pizza.
‘SETH MEYERS WRITERS: CRATE NIGHT W/ SET FIRES’ at Upright Citizens Brigade Theater Chelsea (Oct. 5, 9:30 p.m.). See the Emmy-nominated writing staff of “Late Night With Seth Meyers” take a break from writing in lieu of a night of improvised comedy. The writers Sal Gentile, Mike Scollins, Seth Reiss and Ben Warheit will take the stage along with Amber Ruffin, whose regular “Amber Says What” segment on the show hilariously mirrors our own incredulous reactions to the endless onslaught of headline news.
‘POSTMEN: AN HOUR OF SKETCH COMEDY’ at Union Hall (Sept. 30, 10 p.m.). The comedians Matt Barats, Carmen Christopher and Anthony Oberbeck, no strangers to performing together as part of a long-running show at the now-defunct Annoyance Theater, bring an hour of their sketch material to Union Hall. Stand-up comedy is also on the bill, from Aparna Nancherla, whose credits are truly too numerous to list here.
‘WANDERFEST!’ at the Bell House (Sept. 29, 8 p.m.). This event is billed as a “full-fledged festival experience” that takes place at a different venue every month. This installment, at the Bell House, welcomes the musical guests Tor and Lisa alongside the stand-up of the lovably flustered comedian Jo Firestone; the restrained yet unpredictable comedy of Joe Pera; the self-assured sauciness of Jacqueline Novak; and many other delights.
