When it comes to finding a trainer for Fido, beware of dog ... trainer.
The world of dog training can be a bit like the “wild west of professions,” where anyone can advertise being a trainer without necessarily having gone through proper education or licensing, said Jean Donaldson, director of California’s Academy for Dog Trainers.
So how do dog owners, when seeking a trainer, make sure that they get the real deal?
Owners should look out for the handful of reputable certifications dog trainers can earn.
“It’s kind of like doing a background check,” Mr. Bekoff said. Certified Pet Dog Trainer, International Association of Animal Behavior Consultants and Certified Dog Behavior Consultants are three that experts point to. Accolades from the American Veterinary Society of Animal Behavior and the American Animal Hospital Association are also promising signs.
Certifications, however, are not a guarantee, said Dr. Ian Dunbar, an animal behaviorist in California who runs seminars for dog trainers. It is not unheard of that such credentials might be faked. Moreover, these programs tend to focus more on theory than practice.
To verify such certifications, “check with the body the trainer claims certifications from,” Ms. Donaldson said.
It is obvious that trainers should be good with dogs, but they should be equally competent with humans, too.
“If the owner comes away feeling, ‘Oh my god, the trainer is this natural genius with dogs, but I have no idea what to do at home,’ and they come away feeling inadequate, that’s a flag,” Ms. Donaldson said.
“The trainer has to be someone who’s good with people, who understands people psychology and motivation,” Dr. Dunbar said. “In addition to being able to tell people what to do, they have to motivate people to do it.” You want a trainer that “you click with,” he said.
Person-to-person communication is key with trainers, but words matter only so far as they can be translated into action. “Any kind of woo-woo language, about ‘energy,’ ‘packs,’ ‘leadership;’ anything that sounds very non-concrete, where you come away thinking, ‘O.K., but what’s actually going to physically happen with my dog here?’; any attempt to obfuscate — that is a huge red flag,” Ms. Donaldson said.
The best dog trainers will want to know about the bond you have with your dog, Mr. Bekoff said.
Personal trainers should also be willing to operate remotely, adds Dr. Dunbar, and venture into the real world to an area where a dog is misbehaving: adog park, for instance, or along a regular walking route.
A rewards-based approach is always better than fear-based, and across breeds, too.
Dog Emotion and Cognition course, a free online class from Duke University taught by Dr. Brian Hare, an associate professor of evolutionary anthropology with a specialty in dogs.