LONDON — At the Roundhouse, a legendary music venue that has played host to everyone from David Bowie and Jimi Hendrix to the Rolling Stones and The Doors, a very different kind of show took place Tuesday night: a bombastic rock circus of a fashion extravaganza hosted by Tommy Hilfiger that brought London Fashion Week to a close.
Having staged its last two see-now, buy-now blowouts in New York and Los Angeles, the #TommyNow world tour moved across the Atlantic for its third season: It was Mr. Hilfiger’s first show in the British capital in 20 years.
“When it comes to fashion and music, London really is the epicenter,” a grinning Mr. Hilfiger said backstage before the show. “It has been that way ever since my first visit back in the 1970s, when I became in awe of the cool British rock 'n roll lifestyle.” The bespectacled designer, wearing a black leather jacket, reminisced about his shopping trips down King’s Road, once a haunt of the likes of Led Zeppelin, The Who and The Beatles (and now the stomping ground of choice for hedge funders and oligarchs).
Nearby sat his collaborator in chief, Gigi Hadid. As well as designing a capsule collection for the event (found for sale at multiple merchandise points dotted around the venue), Ms. Hadid — in denim hot pants — opened the eye-popping show of 64 looks for men and women, closely followed by her younger siblings, Bella and Anwar.
Some in the audience of 1,500 probably had more fun than others. Jammed with excited attendees who had won their tickets in a competition, the circular arena had been transformed into an all-Tommy all-the-time fantasia.
A giant “Tommy” sign blinked in bright lights, flanked by roadie cases, hot-dog and doughnut stands, bars and a sea of red cups. The Formula One champion Lewis Hamilton and Poppy Delevingne, in head-to-toe Tommy gear, made their way through a sea of smartphone flashlights and adoring teenagers to their spots in the front row.
Screams erupted from the crowd when the clothes finally arrived to an energetic soundtrack of classic ’90s hip-hop: a procession of beanies, branded hoodies with silver studs, voluminous puffa jackets, tartan mini kilts, shearling biker jackets and track suits. Available for online purchase, pieces like Ms. Hadid’s hot pants began to sell almost immediately.
The last model had barely stepped off the runway when a troupe of acrobats and contortionists came spinning down ropes from high above the crowd, turning attention from the collection to the grand finale: an energetic performance by the band The Chainsmokers.
Most designers might have mixed feelings about their clothes becoming a footnote in a bigger event. But for Mr. Hilfiger, a showman as much as a designer, it appeared to suit him just fine.