Every September for much of the past decade, Sir Peter Ogden of Britain has competed at the Maxi Yacht Rolex Cup in the emerald waters off Porto Cervo, Sardinia. This year, he will be racing Jethou, his 72-foot Mini Maxi.
A co-founder of Computacenter, one of Britain’s largest computer businesses, he has placed a top priority on one thing: fun. A win is nice, he said, but sailing is all about having a good time.
 Why do you keep coming back to sailing big boats?
It’s just an affinity for water and sailing. It’s a personal thing. I love the people I sail with. And I’m getting older. You can’t play football when you’re 70. But you can still sail a big boat.
Do you have any rules on board Jethou?
No shouting. When we were young, it seemed everyone would be screaming. Nowadays, it’s pretty calm. We don’t go for shouting or screaming. Everyone knows the job they have to do. I’ve probably only sailed once with someone who was annoyingly objectionable by shouting at other people. In that case, he didn’t come back.
These races are about one mistake, and you’re screwed. Sometimes we screw up. Sometimes I screw up. But when I screw up, I don’t get chastised because I paid for the boat. But on balance, sailors are peaceful people. There’s no need for screaming.
Running a yacht like this is serious business, yet you seem to have a good time. How do you maintain that on board?
Sailing is about having fun. It’s not my life. It’s a hobby. It’s just something I do, and I enjoy it. I also enjoy the people I sail with. We’re not professional people. We are amateur sailors. We have some professionals we sail with, but this is about having fun and enjoying yourself. It’s just good fun.
Yet you still take racing seriously.
When we are on the water, it’s serious. We like to win. But if we don’t, we won’t cry. To win or lose a yacht race is not a matter of life or death. This is about older men who had a lot of fun sailing dinghies and are now sailing big boats. It’s about enjoying the great atmosphere.
If you lose, you feel a bit bad for 10 minutes. But it’s not going to change your life. At the end of the day I have a nice boat, a lovely crew and we all go out to dinner. We laugh and tell jokes. We tell a lot of stories. Every sailor has got stories. It’s tremendous camaraderie, like a lot of sports.
You’ve built a few boats over the years. Do you enjoy those projects?
I enjoy the projects as much as I do sailing. The whole fun of the project is building the boat, thinking about the design, talking to the experts and trying to optimize the boat. Projects and building boats are good fun.
Then you race it. And then after a while you have to make changes — change the sails, keel and the boom. It’s an ongoing project development. There are always adjustments. These boats are very evenly matched. This is all about seconds between winning and losing. My current boat Jethou is a pleasure to sail. And she’s very pretty.