Ghada Tafesh at her graduation from Wilson College in May 2016. For support, Wilson paired Tafesh with Pat and Bob Keffer.
Before Ghada Tafesh left the Gaza Strip for college in the United States, her family gave her a necklace with two pendants. One was in the shape of historic Palestine. The other was an olive tree. “They wanted me to have something that would remind me of home, and to never be ashamed of where I come from,” she told me.
Ms. Tafesh has much to be proud of as she begins the final year of her master’s program in humanities at Wilson College in Chambersburg, Pa., this fall. But the trade-off was painful: getting her education meant not returning home for six years.
In 2012, she faced one of the toughest decisions a Gazan teenager can make. With the help of a scholarship, she could attend college in the United States. It would afford her significantly more opportunity than she would ever have in her hometown. Gaza’s few universities provide only basic academic offerings, with very limited master’s and doctoral programs. Then there’s the city’s youth unemployment rate: 60 percent, by most estimates. But by opting to go abroad, Ms. Tafesh would be choosing a kind of exile, since returning at all would mean the risk of getting stuck back inside the blockade.
Eager for more, Ms. Tafesh contacted the Hope Fund, a program that secures scholarships from American colleges for talented Palestinian youth predominately from disadvantaged backgrounds. She applied to Wilson College and was accepted with a full scholarship. After she received her United States visa in July 2012, she was worried that she wouldn’t be able to get an Israeli exit permit to leave Gaza.
Her worry was understandable. In 2008, the State Department withdrew Fulbright grants awarded to Palestinian students in Gaza after they were denied permission to leave by Israel. According to Gisha, only 295 students traveled from Gaza to academic institutions abroad in 2015. Last year, the Palestinian Civil Affairs Committee received more than 400 applications from students for exit permits for the purpose of higher education, but only 37 applications were approved by Israel. Permit requests must be submitted to Israeli authorities at least three weeks before the travel date, and up to 50 days in advance, along with all supporting documents (like approved visas and acceptance letters). In the first half of 2017, the number of exits by Palestinians dropped by 55 percent, compared with the same period in 2016.
But Ms. Tafesh got her permit and became one of the first students from the Middle East to attend Wilson College. Her freshman-year roommate hadn’t heard of Gaza until meeting her.
As she began to find a community, Ms. Tafesh made it her mission to educate her peers about her part of the world. She’s given presentations on air pollution from bombings in the Gaza valley and the destruction of natural resources. She taught her roommate some Arabic, and together they would Skype with Ms. Tafesh’s parents overseas, when internet connection in Gaza was available.
But Ms. Tafesh was often homesick, especially during wars (two have occurred so far in her time abroad) and when, during her sophomore year, she had to undergo open-heart surgery for a congenital heart condition. “Back home in Gaza, I would probably be dead by now,” she said. Operation Protective Edge, Gaza’s longest and bloodiest war, broke out in July 2014, during the summer before her junior year. Beyond the fear of her own family members turning up among the names of the dead, guilt consumed her. In Pennsylvania, she had constant access to both water and electricity. Back home, her family could have one or the other, with four to five hours of access per day.
