ALBUQUERQUE — Employees at Motel 6 locations in Arizona regularly handed over to the government information that led to its hotel guests being detained and deported, the company has acknowledged.
The revelation of this practice in a report on Wednesday by The Phoenix New Times drew sharp rebukes from human rights groups and an array of calls to boycott Motel 6, one of the largest hotel chains in the country.
Referring to the sharing of customer information in Arizona with Immigration and Customs Enforcement officers, Raiza Rehkoff, a spokeswoman for G6 Hospitality, the Texas-based parent company of Motel 6, said in an email that “this was implemented at the local level without the knowledge of senior management.” G6 Hospitality is controlled by Blackstone, one of the world’s largest private equity firms.
Ms. Rehkoff said that senior executives became aware of the practice only in recent days, and when they did, they moved to end it.
“To help ensure that this does not occur again, we will be issuing a directive to every one of our more than 1,400 locations nationwide, making clear that they are prohibited from voluntarily providing daily guest lists to ICE,” she added. Ms. Rehkoff also said that Motel 6 apologized for the episode.
Immigration lawyers representing people who were detained while they were staying at Motel 6 locations and were later deported from the United States said that they had collected evidence showing that the practice was widespread, and not limited to one state. Juan Rocha, an immigration lawyer in Arizona, said that an employee at a Motel 6 in Washington State told him of the same practice there.
Yasmeen Pitts O’Keefe, a spokeswoman for ICE in Phoenix, declined to comment directly on the matter, saying in a statement that the organization does not usually disclose or discuss information related to the sources of its enforcement leads. She acknowledged that some leads come from private citizens, but said the agency did not pay any bounty or reward for such information.
One of the rights groups criticizing Motel 6 over the practice on Thursday was the American Civil Liberties Union. “What policies are you putting into place to ensure that your staff don’t report guests to ICE in the future?” the A.C.L.U. said in a message on Twitter.
Ray Ybarra Maldonado, a Phoenix lawyer, said that he, too, had a client who was picked up while staying at Motel 6 and then deported.
