CoCo Vandeweghe hopes it is over: the exhausting routine of entering every tournament, of scrambling for qualifying wins, of scrounging for points as she clambered up the slippery rungs of the professional tennis ladder. So many matches. So much potential for burnout.
But now, at 25, Vandeweghe is beginning to see the rewards. She is playing the finest tennis of her career, and she proved as much with a 6-4, 7-6 (2) victory against Lucie Safarova on Monday afternoon in the fourth round of the United States Open. Vandeweghe said her formula, especially during some of the match’s “stickier” moments, was simple.
“I had to show her that I was going to hustle down a few more extra balls,” she said.
Vandeweghe, seeded 20th, became the third American to reach the quarterfinals, joining Venus Williams and Sloane Stephens. Another American, 15th-seeded Madison Keys, joined them by defeating Elina Svitolina, 7-6 (2), 1-6, 6-4, on Monday night. So that is four American women among the final eight in a tournament without Serena Williams, who gave birth to a daughter last week. That is the most American women in the U.S. Open quarterfinals since 2002.
Vandeweghe said she was glad to see so many Americans advance, but her focus remained singular.
In eight previous appearances at the Open, Vandeweghe had never advanced past the second round. By this late stage of the tour schedule, she said, she is usually gassed — mentally as much as physically.
But she has learned to manage the grind of the tour, she said. This year, Vandeweghe reached the semifinals at the Australian Open and the quarterfinals at Wimbledon.
Now, she is a quarterfinalist at the U.S. Open, where she will face top-seeded Karolina Pliskova on Wednesday.
Vandeweghe, who is known for playing with emotion, sometimes to her detriment, looked almost impassive against Safarova: no obvious highs, no perilous lows.
“I gave my best out there today and I fought, and she was just a bit better than me,” Safarova said.
Not so long ago, Safarova seemed on the cusp of taking up residence near the top of the sport. She advanced to the finals at the 2015 French Open before losing to Serena Williams, and her ranking climbed to as high as No. 5 by the end of the year.
But just when Safarova was excelling, a bacterial infection sidelined her for about six months. There were moments, she said in recent interviews, when she feared that she would never walk again, let alone return to competitive tennis.
She did return, though, albeit with mixed results. An outstanding doubles player, Safarova teamed up with Bethanie Mattek-Sands to collect three more Grand Slam titles, bringing her total to five. But Safarova’s progress in singles has been more halting, her game less precise, and she arrived at the Open unseeded.
Her run to the fourth round was an achievement, but one that also left her wanting more. She had defeated Vandeweghe in their previous three meetings, including a three-set tussle at Indian Wells in March. On Monday, Safarova said, Vandeweghe’s approach was more refined.
“She wasn’t doing as many mistakes,” Safarova said.
Another American was not as fortunate. Jennifer Brady, 22, whose first appearance in a main draw at the Open had been such a rousing success, fizzled in the fourth round with a 6-1, 6-0 loss to Pliskova at Arthur Ashe Stadium.
The match took only 46 minutes, and Brady won a total of 22 points.
Pliskova, on the other hand, was thrilled that she made little more than a cameo Monday after her second- and third-round matches each went three sets.
Kaia Kanepi, 32, became the first qualifier since 1981 to advance to the women’s quarterfinals with a 6-4, 6-4 victory against Daria Kasatkina. Kanepi, an Estonian who was a U.S. Open quarterfinalist in 2010, has been plagued by injuries and illness in recent years and entered the tournament ranked No. 418. She will play Keys in the next round.