Like most Brooklyn renters, Robert Collignon never expected to buy a snow shovel, let alone a Subaru Forester.
But a career change and a six-month road trip in a Volkswagen Westfalia camper van a few years ago meant subletting his apartment in Williamsburg — and eventually led him to a new home in the Catskills.
A year and a half later, he has no intention of returning to the city. Hence, last winter’s purchase of a snow shovel and “the requisite Subaru,” with four-wheel drive and heated seats.
 It’s surrounded by a large lawn — he devotes about an hour each week to mowing it — which slopes down to a marshy pond.
Part of the desire to stay is professional. Quitting his job in advertising and embarking on a road trip led Mr. Collignon to his new venture, an artisanal food business. He ate a lot of freeze-dried “astronaut” ice cream while he was on the road, and discovered that the ingredients in his favorite treat were somewhat alarming. He now makes organic, freeze-dried ice cream bars out of a commercial space that he rents for $450 a month in nearby Margaretville. “Try finding that in Brooklyn,” he said. He hopes to start selling his Cosmik Ice Cream bars this fall.
But like his two cats, who were once confined to his Brooklyn one-bedroom but now prowl indoors and out — catching, by his estimate, two mice a day, in addition to the occasional rabbit and snake — Mr. Collignon has come to love the rural life.
The cabin is small, about 600 square feet, with one bedroom downstairs and a low-ceilinged loft, reached by a ladderlike staircase, that runs the length of the building. It is unusual for the area, he said, both in its size and aesthetic. The space has modern, airy feel — large windows offer expansive views of the surrounding mountains — and the walls and wood floors have been painted white.
Even so, it took a little while to get used to some aspects of country life, like hearing strange rustlings in the bushes at night and seeing people with shotguns walking on the side of the road in the morning when he was driving to work. “Hunters,” he’d remind himself. The closest movie theater is an hour away, and most of the area restaurants are closed Monday through Wednesday.
Perhaps the biggest stumbling block, however, has been the lack of internet service. The cabin gets only satellite service, which means no streaming movies or binge-watching television shows. “I have to get Netflix DVDs in the mail. That’s basically the evening entertainment. That and cooking. It’s lonely at times, for sure,” said Mr. Collignon, adding that he does his best to entice friends to visit, an easier task in summer than winter.
One frequent visitor has been his girlfriend, a film editor who lives in Greenpoint, Brooklyn. The two met at a Williamsburg bowling alley. Mr. Collignon, wearing an astronaut suit, was there to shoot the video for Cosmik Ice Cream’s Kickstarter campaign.
