MINNEAPOLIS — When the Los Angeles Sparks are at home during the W.N.B.A. season, guard Alana Beard starts almost every morning with coffee at The Cow’s End Café, a Bohemian spot a few steps from Venice Beach, sipping cortados and mingling with surfers who have become like family to her.
When Beard was picked second over all in the 2004 draft out of Duke, she would have never thought to engage guys like Jay and Jim, the longhaired, flannel-wearing locals who taught her how to surf last year. Beard was reclusive socially, consumed by basketball to the point where it strained her body and her personal relationships.
Beard’s own tale is continually being refined. At 30, she returned to the W.N.B.A. after missing two seasons with injuries. At 34, she became enamored with surfing. This season, at 35, she was named defensive player of the year and helped lead the defending champion Sparks back to the W.N.B.A. finals.
The best-of-five series against the Minnesota Lynx is tied, 1-1, entering Game 3 in Los Angeles on Friday.
If the Sparks win their second straight title, Beard’s first stop will not be Disneyland, but to the waters off Venice.
Beard has never had trouble bouncing back after getting knocked down. But her limits were tested in 2010 and 2011, when she missed two full seasons with ankle and foot injuries.
Already a four-time All-Star, Beard was told by doctors that she might never play again.
“I didn’t know how to stop,” she said. “It was kind of an obsession with the game, wanting to get better. I wasn’t where I wanted to be as a player so I kept going. Nothing stopped. I was just doing a workout with my coaches in the off-season and went for a sprint and felt a sharp, sharp pain and knew it was something.
Beard returned in 2012, signing as a free agent with the Sparks after six seasons with the Washington Mystics. She became more aware of her body’s signals and refined her diet, avoiding carbohydrates.
Defense had always been a priority in Beard’s career, and in Los Angeles she became the maestro of the Sparks’ reinvention as a defense-first team, a characteristic further defined when Brian Agler became coach before the 2015 season.
Forwards and centers have traditionally dominated the W.N.B.A.’s defensive player of the year award. An overreliance on statistics and the lack of defensive stats tailored to guards makes it harder for players like Beard to be recognized for awards, Agler said.
But Beard’s effect on the Sparks has been hard to ignore.
Beard has an innate sense of presence within the rectangular confines of a basketball court. Not only does she cause chaos blocking shots and swiping for steals, but she finishes the sequence. Rarely does the ball go out of bounds after Beard causes a turnover; she corrals the ball while always being cognizant to keep her feet within the boundaries, like a wide receiver staying inbounds by his tiptoes.
As much as Agler has relished watching Beard stimulate the Sparks, he tries to place limits on her favorite extracurricular activity.
When Agler first learned Beard was surfing, he sent her an article about how, during the 1996 season, Chicago Bulls center Luc Longley separated his shoulder surfing near where Beard was hanging ten.
