The Blue Jays’ Ryan Goins tagging out the Yankees’ Todd Frazier, who fell for the hidden ball trick.Credit...Frank Gunn/The Canadian Press, via Associated Press..
TORONTO — The Yankees began their final road trip of the season with a small chance of clinching a wild-card playoff berth by the end of their first night here in Toronto. It would have required a Yankees victory and the right outcomes in two other games, but the Blue Jays and Ryan Goins thwarted any possibility of a celebration with a combination of power and guile.
The Blue Jays came into Friday’s game in last place in the American League East, but they played as if they were the team fighting for postseason glory. In Toronto’s 8-1 win, Goins hit a grand slam and pulled off a hidden-ball trick to embarrass Todd Frazier. Marco Estrada and three relief pitchers allowed only three Yankee hits. And Jose Bautista, who turns 37 next month, played like a 22-year-old in right field.
Yankees starter Masahiro Tanaka gave up three home runs, including Goins’s slam, and the team also played uncharacteristically sloppy baseball. In addition to Frazier’s uncomfortable moment on the basepaths, Starlin Castro made an error that cost a run.
“Those are mental mistakes, and those do bother me,” said Joe Girardi, the Yankees’ manager.
The only power generated by the Yankees came on another Aaron Judge home run. After thrilling the fans here with a typical display of raw power in batting practice, Judge hit his 46th homer of the year and his third in the last four games. But shortly after it, Goins caught Frazier off guard.
With one out in the third inning, Frazier was on second base after a double. Jacoby Ellsbury lined a ball into right field, and Bautista made one of three fine plays in the game — a leaping grab of the ball over his head. As Frazier scrambled back to the bag, Bautista threw the ball back in to Goins, the second baseman.
Goins pretended to casually throw back to Estrada, but actually placed the ball in his glove as Frazier stood on the base, looking toward the outfield.
When Frazier stepped of the base by just inches, Goins tagged him for the final out. Frazier blamed his lack of concentration for the play.
Castro also took the blame for his mistake — failing to catch Frazier’s throw in the first inning with a runner coming into second base. Castro said he had rushed to turn the double play, and missed the ball. The runner, Teoscar Hernandez, ended up at third and scored on a groundout by Bautista.
Perhaps both of those mistakes could have been overcome if Tanaka had pitched better. But he gave up a bases-empty homer to Hernandez in the third and a two-run shot by the former Yankee Russell Martin in the fourth, and the Blue Jays led, 4-1.
Then in the sixth, Tanaka walked Bautista as the leadoff batter, just as he had done before Martin’s homer in the fourth. Kevin Pillar singled, but Tanaka struck out Martin and Miguel Montero, hinting that he still had the stuff to get safely out of the inning.
The Yankees’ Aaron Judge (99) and Didi Gregorius celebrated Judge’s home run in the first inning against the Toronto Blue Jays on Friday.Credit...Nick Turchiaro/USA Today Sports, via Reuters..
But he walked pinch-hitter Kendrys Morales (he said he was not pitching around him to face Goins) to load the bases. Goins was 0 for 20 against Tanaka coming into the game and had made two outs already, which is why Girardi left Tanaka in to face him. But this time was different.
Goins rocketed a high slider over Judge’s head and into the seats beyond right field for his eighth homer of the season. The only other grand slam of his career came in May.
Tanaka has had a difficult season, and the Yankees have been unable to determine the reason. Tanaka said that it was a mechanical problem and that he would have to analyze videotape of Friday’s outing to determine what flaw had doomed him. Girardi attributed Tanaka’s troubles to inconsistency throughout the season with his split-fingered fastball and his slider.
Tanaka is 12-12, and his E.R.A. is 4.94. He has surrendered seven earned runs in two of his last three starts, and should the Yankees make it to the divisional round of the playoffs, his spot in the rotation could be in doubt.
The Yankees will have more shots to clinch a playoff berth, but their chances to win the American League East grew smaller as the Red Sox beat the Cincinnati Reds, 5-4, increasing their lead over the Yankees to four games with nine to play.
