Americans Are Confronting an Alarming Question: Are Many of Our Fellow Citizens ‘Nazis’?
Credit...Illustration by Derek Brahney. Left: Wally McNamee/Getty Images. Right: Central Press/Getty Images.
One morning in mid-August, Americans woke up in what felt, to some, like an altered country. The week’s most notable political event had begun with hundreds of Americans carrying torches while chanting “Sieg heil” and “Jews will not replace us.” White supremacist radicals like these had been active and energized throughout the presidential campaign, but much of their energy had been restricted to the internet. The rally in Charlottesville was markedly different. It confronted America with an unlikely question: Was it possible the nation was seeing a burgeoning political faction of ... actual Nazis? People we should actually call Nazis?
“Nazi” is a remarkable example of the very different routes a word can take through the world. In this case, that word is the Latin name “Ignatius.” In Spanish, it followed a noble path: It became Ignacio, and then the nickname Nacho, and then — after a Mexican cook named Ignacio Anaya had a moment of inspiration — it became delicious, beloved nachos. In Bavaria, a much darker transformation took place. Ignatius became the common name Ignatz, or in its abbreviated form, Nazi. In the early 20th century, Bavarian peasants were frequent subjects of German mockery, and “Nazi” became the archetypal name for a comic figure: a bumbling, dimwitted yokel. “Just as Irish jokes always involve a man called Paddy,” the etymologist Mark Forsyth writes in his 2011 book “The Etymologicon,” “so Bavarian jokes always involved a peasant called Nazi.” When Adolf Hitler’s party emerged from Bavaria with a philosophy called “Nationalsozialismus,” two of that word’s syllables were quickly repurposed by Hitler’s cosmopolitan opponents. They started calling the new party Nazis — implying, to the Nazis’ great displeasure, that they were all backward rubes.
But if “Nazi” isn’t quite the right word for the fringe groups now attempting a takeover of national politics — if it’s sloppy and inexact and papers over just how widespread some of these bigotries are — then “Nazi” will, in a way, have returned to its roots. It began as a broad, imprecise and patronizing slur. Then it became a precise historical classification. (One that, you might argue, “conveniently erased” widespread anti-Semitism throughout Europe and America.) Now we find ourselves arguing over whether it can serve as a general epithet again — a name for a whole assortment of distasteful ideologies. Nearly 80 years after Kristallnacht, we are not exactly sure what a Nazi is, or should be.
Not so long ago, it seemed as though “Nazi” had lost much of its frightening power. A person with an abiding fervor for flawless syntax could quite casually be labeled a “grammar Nazi.” A comically exacting chef on “Seinfeld” could be called a “soup Nazi.” On right-wing radio, any woman with a challenging opinion could be called a “feminazi.” Some of these were jokes, others pointed accusations. But in each case, what the word described was a kind of outsize zealotry — a person who was too stern, too demanding, like an order-barking villain in a World War II movie.
This tradition has unexpected roots, too: It begins with surfers. Shortly after World War II, some surfers started toying with Nazi regalia, mainly out of a desire to offend. By the early ’60s, some young California surfers had begun wearing a Nazi-themed pendant called the Surfer’s Cross. (One teenager told Time magazine he liked it because “it really upsets your parents.”) Despite condemnations from the surfing press, this strange association eventually resulted in the term “surf Nazi” — which, oddly, didn’t describe beachside fascists but cultishly single-minded surfing fanatics.
Actual Nazism remained in circulation, becoming one of various extremist ideologies on the international fringes. In that sense, a Nazi was a very concrete entity. A Nazi was a believer in a very specific mythos.  At the same time, the word was also a frivolous way of comparing decidedly nongenocidal behavior — like using “whom” correctly or being persnickety about etiquette — to the best-known example of human wickedness. This double life was possible, in part, because professed Nazis had very little public voice; identifying as one disqualified you from mainstream conversation, a reality racist communities remain well aware of. As Wired’s Ashley Feinberg discovered, some members of the white supremacist forum Stormfront were concerned by the symbols used by marchers in Charlottesville: “Some were carrying swastikas and that isn’t good for our image, because of the propogabda [sic] embedded into everyone’s minds,” wrote one.
Hence one rhetorical strategy of the alt-right, which constantly gestures toward Nazism without actually assuming the designation. Just after the election, Richard Spencer told a crowd, “Hail Trump, hail our people, hail our victory,” and was saluted with outstretched arms in reply. Online forums have concocted an imaginary alt-right country called Kekistan, whose flag is basically a Nazi flag, only green, with a cluster of Ks instead of a swastika. This winking take on fascism has helped mainstream the alt-right, bringing us to a point at which President Trump might say that there were “many fine people” among the demonstrators in Charlottesville. (It has also brought us to the point at which there can be earnest argument over whether we should consider a sitting president a Nazi sympathizer.) This is one of the most remarkable results of the alt-right’s emergence into the national dialogue: Talking seriously about Nazis is part of the new normal.
One problem with calling American extremists Nazis is that the word carries an inevitable outlandishness.  Applying that label to the alt-right runs the risk of making them seem like exotic cartoon villains. But the men and women marching in Charlottesville weren’t exotic; they were people’s neighbors, colleagues and study buddies. The racism of the Nazis wasn’t particularly exotic, either: The uncomfortable truth is that Nazi policy was itself influenced by American white supremacy, a heritage well documented in James Q. Whitman’s recent book “Hitler’s American Model.” The Germans admired, and borrowed from, the “distinctive legal techniques that Americans had developed to combat the menace of race mixing” — like the anti-miscegenation laws of Maryland, which mandated up to 10 years in prison for interracial marriage. At the time, no other country had such specific laws; they were an American innovation.
What term, then, is the right one? None — fascists, white nationalists, extremists — fully encompass the men and women in this mass. Watchdog groups like the Southern Poverty Law Center have spent decades tracing the intricate ideological differences among various fringe sects: neo-Confederates, neo-Nazis, Klansmen and so on. Yet when these impulses collect into one group, it’s impossible to arrive at a simple, low-syllable explanation of their particular ugliness.
But that’s precisely why “Nazi” was, originally, such a useful word. It was never intended as an incisive diagnosis. It was a snappy, crude, unfussy insult, repurposed and wielded by people the Nazis intended to dominate, expel or kill. It contains a larger lesson, which is that we do not have to engage in linguistic diplomacy with people who want to destroy us. We don’t have to refer to them with their labels of choice. There is a time for splitting hairs over the philosophies of hateful extremists, but there’s also great value in unambiguously rejecting all of them at once with our most melodious, satisfying terminology. “Nazi” is not careful description. But careful description is a form of courtesy. “Nazi,” on the other hand, has always been a form of disrespect.