BARCELONA — Catalonia’s independence referendum is no longer about whether Catalans want statehood but whether they will be able to vote on Sunday at all.
Far from the orderly vote that separatists wanted to stage, the referendum has instead turned into a covert operation to avoid a Madrid-ordered shutdown.
The government of the conservative Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy has called on residents to stay home. With the help of Spanish courts and the police, it has confiscated paper ballots and closed referendum-related websites.
The moves are an attempt to thwart the turnout and to deny any legitimacy to a referendum that Spain’s constitutional court has formally suspended. Nevertheless, Catalan officials and many residents say they will find a way to vote.
In Barcelona and elsewhere in the region, some residents began occupying schools and other potential polling stations to thwart any attempt by the police to shut them down.
One of the unknowns on Sunday will be the role of the Catalan autonomous police, which has paid lip service to Madrid’s orders to shut polling stations, but has made clear that its priority is to avoid violence.
Any clampdown could help nullify Sunday’s result, but it could also backfire and prompt frustrated voters to take to the streets. Many now fear violent clashes.
After each police intervention so far, the Catalan separatist government has defiantly announced that it had contingency plans for the referendum, and accused Madrid of returning Catalonia to the days of a dictatorship that ended in the 1970s.
“This isn’t a cat-and-mouse game. It’s a big cat against normal people who just want to vote,” said Marta Rosique, a student and spokeswoman for an association called Universities for a Republic, which was set up to help organize the referendum.
The referendum has even become the latest electoral battle ground for online activists, triggering a new round of allegations of meddling by Russia.
Two weeks ago, Julian Assange, the founder of WikiLeaks, posted a message on Twitter supporting the Catalan vote, which threatens to sunder an important European Union member.
Carles Puigdemont, the leader of Catalonia, said in an interview this week that Mr. Assange and others could voice their support, but that no one had sought their help.
Voting will be a particular challenge for older Catalans, who are less inclined to use the internet and social media platforms, which have so far kept people updated on fast-shifting voting preparations.
Outside one of the main buildings of Barcelona University, people were lining up all week to receive instructions from student volunteers on how to vote, having never received their normal voting papers at home.
Some walked off discreetly, but others made clear that Madrid’s referendum ban had galvanized them.
Madrid has said that the police sent from other parts of Spain are in Catalonia to ensure order, but the central government is also clearly fearful that the Catalan police will not heed its calls to block polling stations.
Some police from outside the region have been billeted on cruise liners moored outside the Port of Barcelona — and turned into objects of separatist derision because the ships are decorated with Looney Tunes characters.
The labor union representing Barcelona’s 1,000 dockworkers has refused to help supply the police ships.
“A political conflict has to be solved by politicians and not policemen, so that’s why we’re just not going to work with these ships,” said Josep Maria Deop, secretary of the dockworkers’ union.
Catalonia held a nonbinding vote in 2014 on independence that was declared illegal by the constitutional court, but which the central government and the police did not prevent. The pro-independence result was dismissed by Madrid as unlawful, but also because just 2.2 million of 5.4 million eligible voters had taken part.
This month, however, Catalonia’s regional Parliament, in which separatists have a majority, passed its own laws to make any referendum result binding, which could lead to a unilateral declaration of independence within 48 hours.
Mr. Rajoy is treating that threat as an act of insurgency, worthy of a forceful police response.
“Madrid has made things very complicated, but there is an important part of the logistics of the referendum that hasn’t been disarticulated,” said Jordi Sànchez, the head of the Catalan National Assembly, a citizens’ association that has spearheaded secessionism in Catalonia.
“They may have seized more than nine million ballot papers, but everybody knows that can be replaced easily,” he added.
Still, the reliance on home-printed voting papers may add to the legitimacy shortfall for a referendum that could instead turn into a broader separatist show of force on Sunday, particularly if frustrated citizens, unable to vote, take to the streets.
The website of the Catalan National Assembly was shut down on Monday. Mr. Sànchez denied reports that the separatists were relying on Russian hackers to build proxy websites with electoral information to circumvent any information blackout.
“This story that part of our support and help now comes from Assange or Russia is part of the post-truth that some are building to discredit the referendum,” Mr. Sànchez said.
Despite the extra police sent to Catalonia, separatists argue it will still take more officers to prevent any voting across the whole region, home to 7.5 million people.
They also warn that any police reprisal on Sunday, far from intimidating people, is likely to draw larger crowds to the streets.
Mr. Puigdemont, the Catalan leader, has repeatedly assured voters that they will vote, even in adverse conditions.
But he also acknowledged in an interview this week that Madrid could create more logistical disruption on Sunday, perhaps forcing a manual rather than electronic count of the votes, which would push back any announcement of results.
Across Catalonia, volunteers have offered to reprint confiscated ballot papers and helped start proxy websites with electoral information. “We’re doing everything possible to keep things normal, changing websites whenever needed,” Luca Reventós, 21, said.
Students staged a two-day strike that started Thursday and said they were prepared to step up their protests if Sunday’s referendum was blocked.
