Business|Will Bill O’Reilly’s Latest ‘Killing’ Book Climb the Charts?
Will Bill O’Reilly’s Latest ‘Killing’ Book Climb the Charts?
Every fall for the last six years, Bill O’Reilly, the former Fox News host, published a new book in his blockbuster “Killing” series. And every year without fail, the books shot to the top of the nonfiction best-seller list.
This year could prove the exception, and might spell the end to Mr. O’Reilly’s run as the author of one of the industry’s most popular and lucrative nonfiction franchises.
The e-book version of “Killing England” was even more obscure, appearing at No. 864 on Amazon’s Kindle best-seller list. With lackluster Amazon rankings, Mr. O’Reilly’s latest release seems unlikely to gain enough momentum in its first week on sale to become an instant No. 1 best-seller like his earlier works.
There are multiple reasons for these listless preorder sales, including perhaps the erosion of Mr. O’Reilly’s fan base after The New York Times disclosed in the spring that he had settled claims by five women who accused him of sexual harassment or verbal abuse.
Preorders put “Killing England,” which is due out on Tuesday, on Amazon’s print best-seller list, but its ranking was not high.
The scandal and the ensuing advertising boycotts cost him his job at Fox, stripping him of a platform that he used to promote his books to a nightly audience of around four million viewers.
But Mr. O’Reilly’s publishing career isn’t over by any stretch. His publisher, Henry Holt, stood by him after Fox fired him. Major book retailers like Amazon and Barnes & Noble continue to carry his books. A spokeswoman for Barnes & Noble said that the chain would display “Killing England” prominently in its stores, and that the company was “treating it like all best-selling books.” A spokeswoman for Holt said the company had a national media and advertising strategy for the title.
“We are just as excited and supportive of Bill O’Reilly’s newest book, ‘Killing England,’ as we have been about the other best-selling titles we’ve published by him,” the spokeswoman, Patricia Eisemann, the director of publicity for Henry Holt, said in an email.
But Mr. O’Reilly’s “Killing” books, which he writes with Mr. Dugard, succeeded in large part because they were a piece of his larger media empire. The books have typically sold more than a million hardcover copies in the first few months — a staggering figure for nonfiction.
Previous books in the series, all instant No. 1 New York Times best sellers, were “Killing Lincoln,” “Killing Kennedy,” “Killing Jesus,” “Killing Patton,” “Killing Reagan” and “Killing the Rising Sun.” Collectively, more than 17 million copies of those titles are in circulation in all formats, including digital books, audiobooks and young readers’ editions.
In its first week on sale last year, “Killing the Rising Sun” sold more than 250,000 copies, according to a news release from Holt. The book went on to be the best-selling adult book of 2016, selling 1,104,389 copies, according to Publishers Weekly.
Even though Holt has remained committed to Mr. O’Reilly since the scandal, other partnerships have frayed. Not long after Fox fired Mr. O’Reilly, National Geographic canceled its planned adaptation of “Killing Patton,” which explores the death of Gen. George S. Patton. Four of the earlier “Killing” books were adapted into documentaries for National Geographic. According to Variety, the documentaries drew in an average of 3.1 million viewers in Nielsen live-plus-same-day numbers, giving the books another wave of exposure.
After the documentary about Patton was canceled, the network told The Hollywood Reporter that it was a creative decision.
It’s still unclear how severely Mr. O’Reilly’s sales will be affected by the fallout from the harassment scandal. Sales for his 2016 best seller, “Killing the Rising Sun,” fell off after his firing, but sales of previous books in the series often dipped in the spring and summer. An analysis by NPD BookScan of the first 52 weeks of sales in his “Killing” series found the recent drop to be consistent with previous years.
“Given the polarization of the cultural climate and the dogmatic tendencies of the far right in the current moment, it’s possible that his fans will support him no matter what, and he has a significant social media following,” said Kristen McLean, executive director of business development at NPD BookScan.
Mr. O’Reilly has been promoting “Killing England” on Twitter, where he has more than two million followers. In a tweet last week, he urged followers to become a “Premium Member” of his website to get a free copy of the book.