As New York City crimes go, the shooting in September 2015 outside a CTown supermarket in the Bronx ranked as a minor event, yet another flash of violence between warring crews of neighborhood youths: The 15-year-old victim, Shaun Nardoni, was hit in the left ankle by a slug that ricocheted off the pavement. He survived, and, as often happens in street conflicts, told the police he did not see who pulled the trigger.
Ten months later, another teenager, Pedro Hernandez, was arrested in connection with the shooting and jailed for a year on Rikers Island on a high bail of $250,000. Then the case took an unusual turn: Mr. Hernandez refused to accept a plea bargain that would have kept him out of prison. Instead, his family hired a private investigator, who has found evidence he says proves that investigators in the 42nd Precinct and a Bronx prosecutor coerced other young men to sign false complaints against Mr. Hernandez.
As the case goes to trial on Wednesday, Mr. Hernandez has become a cause célèbre for some critics of New York City’s criminal justice system. He has been likened to Kalief Browder, the teenager who committed suicide after being held for three years at Rikers on a robbery charge before the case was dismissed.
In July, the Robert F. Kennedy Human Rights organization put up bail to free Mr. Hernandez, saying he exemplified the unfairness of the cash bail system. Alex Spiro, a prominent lawyer who often represents well-heeled clients, including N.B.A. players, has taken over the case from a public defender. Shaun King, a civil rights activist and writer, has published articles suggesting Mr. Hernandez was framed.
Mr. Hernandez, 17, has sued the two detectives and the city, alleging he was the victim of a campaign of false arrests. One of the detectives, David Terrell, has been put on desk duty by the Police Department in connection with an unrelated domestic violence accusation. A spokeswoman for the Bronx district attorney, Darcel D. Clark, said prosecutors were investigating Detective Terrell’s role in several criminal cases.
To his defenders, Mr. Hernandez is an innocent teenager who has been harassed and jailed by detectives from the 42nd Precinct. His lawyers maintain that the police were determined to connect him to the shooting of Mr. Nardoni and other crimes on him even if it meant coercing false testimony from other young men in the area.
But the police and Bronx prosecutors say they have evidence Mr. Hernandez is an active member of the Hilltop Boys, a violent gang operating around East 168th Street and Boston Road in the Morrisania neighborhood. They say he orchestrated the shooting of Mr. Nardoni through Facebook, calling on his crew to go after a rival gang, the B-Road crew.
In just a few short years, investigators say, Mr. Hernandez, 17, has turned up at the center of several investigations of violence in the neighborhood. Seven times since 2014, he has been arrested on felony charges, including gun possession, attempted murder and armed robbery. Four of those cases later fell apart for a lack of evidence, and the charges were dismissed.
On Wednesday, Mr. Hernandez is scheduled to go to trial on gun possession and assault charges in the shooting of Mr. Nardoni. But that case also appears to be unraveling. The private investigator for the defense, Manuel Gomez, has found at least five witnesses who say another man pulled the trigger. One of them has spoken to the Bronx District Attorney’s office, a prosecutor said in court.
At the same time, another young man from the neighborhood, William Stevens, has made explosive allegations that Detective Terrell repeatedly beat him and coerced him to swear out false accusations against Mr. Hernandez. Specifically, he said, he was forced to identify Mr. Hernandez as the man who shot Mr. Nardoni.
In affidavits and, later, in an interview with a WNBC reporter, Mr. Stevens said the detectives also pressured him to accuse Mr. Hernandez of shooting at him on one occasion and of robbing him on another. Those charges, in two separate indictments, were dropped after Mr. Gomez unearthed surveillance video and a witness who gave Mr. Hernandez solid alibis for both.
Mr. Stevens also claimed to have been forced by Detective Terrell to make similarly false accusations against a score of other defendants, raising questions about other prosecutions in the Bronx.
James M. Moschella, a lawyer for Detective Terrell, said the suits were baseless vendettas by people he had arrested and their parents, built on lies. Detective Terrell was removed from active duty a year ago, after being accused of domestic violence, not because of the lawsuits, he said.
It is unclear if prosecutors ever intended to rely on Mr. Stevens as a witness at trial. The lead prosecutor, David A. Slott, said in court last year that the state has come to believe that Mr. Hernandez was not the gunman, but instead handed the gun to a second man, who pulled the trigger.
So far, though, the Bronx district attorney’s office has said it still intends to prosecute Mr. Hernandez. Investigators say he has been a focus in a continuing investigation into the Hilltop Boys.
At a bail hearing, Mr. Slott said prosecutors are also investigating Mr. Hernandez as a suspect in a check-cashing scam. He has posted pictures of himself with stacks of hundred dollar bills on Facebook, Mr. Slott said.
In court, prosecutors have revealed little about the evidence they have, except to say an eyewitness identified Mr. Hernandez as a culprit. Defense lawyers concede a security camera at the grocery store filmed Mr. Hernandez just before the shooting, around 9:30 p.m., but did not record the shooting itself. They deny Mr. Hernandez had a gun.
Whether Mr. Hernandez is exonerated or convicted, his defenders say his case highlights the unfairness of state bail laws: he was held in jail for 12 months on $250,000 bail, a very high sum set by Justice Steven Barrett after hearing the prosecution suspected he had access to large amounts of money from a check-cashing scheme. No proof was offered. Two other Bronx judges upheld Justice Barrett’s decision.
 It accuses Detective Terrell and another detective, Daniel Brady, of systematically arresting young men on bogus charges, then using violence and threats to force them to make false statements about crimes they did not witness.
A dozen other young men have filed similar lawsuits or notices of claim against Detective Terrell, alleging they too were beaten and pressured to sign fictitious complaints against Mr. Hernandez and others. One of them is Tyrese Revels, who was shot in June 2015. Mr. Hernandez was arrested in connection with that shooting but never indicted. Three of the suits also accuse Mr. Slott of witness coercion.
Even Mr. Nardoni, the shooting victim, has accused Detective Terrell of misconduct. In a lawsuit, Mr. Nardoni said the detective interrogated him for more than three hours at the station house, threatening to punch him in the head in a failed attempt to make him name Mr. Hernandez as the gunman.
Asked about the allegations against Detective Brady and Detective Terrell, Meryl Holt, a spokeswoman for the city Law Department, declined to comment on the lawsuits. Patrice O’Shaughnessy, the spokeswoman for the Bronx district attorney’s office, said: “We do not comment on allegations made in a civil suit.” Mr. Slott did not respond to a call and an email from a reporter.