In a sentencing memo, the government asked a judge to give Mr. Weiner, 53, a prison term of 21 to 27 months in a case that enmeshed him in an F.B.I. investigation of Hillary Clinton last year before the presidential election.
Mr. Weiner, who is to be sentenced on Monday, could receive up to 10 years in prison on one count of transferring obscene material to a minor, a 15-year-old girl with whom he exchanged lewd texts over several months in early 2016.
In asking for leniency, Mr. Weiner’s lawyers argued that although his conduct was inexcusable, he had been remorseful and made “remarkable progress” in therapy over the past year.
“Notwithstanding that he obviously grasped the importance of protecting minors from predatory conduct on the internet,” the prosecutors wrote, Mr. Weiner “readily engaged in extensive, inappropriate communications” with the girl. Such conduct, the prosecutors said, “suggests a dangerous level of denial and lack of self-control,” warranting a prison sentence.
In May, when Mr. Weiner made a surprise court appearance and pleaded guilty, he admitted that he had engaged in “obscene communications” with the teenager, “including sharing explicit images and encouraging her to engage in sexually explicit conduct,” just as he said he had done with women.
“I knew this was as morally wrong as it was unlawful,” he said.
Mr. Weiner’s lawyers, Arlo Devlin-Brown and Erin Monju, had also raised questions about the motivation and credibility of the victim, whose story was first told in a DailyMail.com expose in September 2016 for which she was paid $30,000, they wrote.
The lawyers asserted that the girl had been looking for material for a book, which she was now “shopping to publishers,” and that she had also hoped to influence the presidential election.
The prosecutors, in their memo on Wednesday, noted that Mr. Weiner was not blaming the victim or disclaiming responsibility for his crime. But, the government said, “Weiner should be sentenced for what he did — not what motivated” the victim.
Mr. Devlin-Brown declined to comment on the government request.
It was after publication of the DailyMail.com story that reports surfaced of an investigation into Mr. Weiner’s lewd communications with the teenager. The F.B.I., during that inquiry, seized Mr. Weiner’s laptop and found emails belonging to Ms. Abedin, a top aide to Mrs. Clinton.
That discovery led to the announcement in late October by James B. Comey, then the F.B.I. director, that the bureau had begun a new inquiry into Mrs. Clinton’s handling of official email, an investigation that ended two days before the election. Mrs. Clinton has blamed Mr. Comey in part for her loss to President Trump.