NORTON, Mass. — In a holiday finish that was harder than the final margin suggested, Justin Thomas kept his patience when Jordan Spieth briefly shot out to the lead and Marc Leishman subsequently built a two-shot lead at the turn. Keeping his mistakes to a minimum, Thomas outlasted them both by closing with a five-under-par 66 for a three-shot victory Monday in the Dell Technologies Championship.
He started the PGA Tour season at No. 34 in the world, with all of one tour victory.
Thomas’s victory on Monday at TPC Boston was his fifth of the season; his previous titles include his first major, three weeks ago at the P.G.A. Championship. He moved up to No. 4 in the world. And unless Spieth runs the tables for the rest of the FedEx Cup playoffs, Thomas, 24, seems to be a lock to be voted PGA Tour player of the year.
Thomas made only two bogeys all week, the final one putting him in a three-way tie with seven holes to play. He won on the back nine with a sand wedge he gouged out of the rough to 6 feet on No. 13, a gap wedge to 4 feet on No. 15 for another birdie, and a 6-foot par save that kept him two shots in the clear.
Spieth wasted a start that riled up the New England crowd — birdie-eagle-birdie-birdie — by missing the 14th green with a 5-iron for a bogey. Needing an eagle to stay in the game on the par-5 18th, Spieth pushed a 4-iron into a tough lie in the bunker, blasted over the green and made bogey for a 67.
Spieth was runner-up for the second straight week in the FedEx Cup playoffs. He lost a three-shot lead to Dustin Johnson on Long Island. There was not much he could have done to stop Thomas, his best friend in golf since they were teenagers.
Spieth still moved to No. 1 in the FedEx Cup standings with one event, the BMW Championship outside Chicago in two weeks, remaining before the $10 million prize is decided at the Tour Championship.
Johnson, the No. 1 player in the world coming off his fourth victory of the season last week, started the final round three shots behind. But he took two to get out of a fairway bunker, made bogey on the par-5 second hole and closed with a 73 to finish 10 behind.
Spieth was simply dynamic at the start. He did not need to make a putt longer than 12 feet as he went five under for the opening four holes and briefly took the lead. Leishman, who won at Bay Hill in March, kept stride with six birdies on the front nine to match Spieth’s 30 and move in front.
Stewart Cink closed with a 68 to finish 12th, more than enough for him to advance to the BMW Championship for the first time in seven years. Emiliano Grillo and Rafa Cabrera Bello also moved into the top 70 to advance.