John McCain never had any intention of voting for this Bill, which his Governor loves. He campaigned on Repeal & Replace. Let Arizona down!
Mr. Trump’s latest weekend Twitter fusillade came the morning after Mr. McCain surprised the president and his top aides by abruptly announcing that he could not “in good conscience” support the health care proposal by Mr. Graham and Senator Bill Cassidy of Louisiana, saying it was a partisan plan whose costs and impacts on the health care of millions of Americans were unknown.
The move by Mr. McCain, whose “no” vote against an earlier iteration of a health care repeal bill killed that effort in July, dealt yet another setback to Mr. Trump’s effort to fulfill his promise to do away with Barack Obama’s signature health care law. Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky, had already come out in opposition to his party’s last-ditch health care effort, and Senate leaders can afford to lose only two of their members in a chamber that is divided 52 to 48.
White House officials were working to determine whether there was a way to salvage the bill and win over critics and fence-sitters, but a spokeswoman offered no immediate explanation for Mr. Trump’s tweet that appeared to suggest Ms. Murkowski was already a convert.
Before Mr. McCain’s announcement, Republican leaders had planned to move forward with a vote next week, though the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office has yet to complete a full analysis of the Graham-Cassidy legislation. The budget office is expected to provide a preliminary fiscal assessment early in the week, but it indicated that it would not be able to complete an analysis of the bill’s effects on health insurance coverage or premiums by Sept. 30.
Mr. Trump seemed to have given up all hope of persuading Mr. McCain to back the measure, returning to Twitter on Saturday evening, 12 hours after he initially ripped into the Arizona senator, to hammer him again and invoke the premium increases that people in his state have experienced under the current health law.
