The State of New York has agreed to pay $22 million to a boxer who sustained severe brain damage during a heavyweight bout at Madison Square Garden nearly four years ago, in a case that raised serious questions about the postfight care given to athletes who have just exchanged repeated blows to the head.
The settlement, awarded to the former boxer Magomed Abdusalamov and his family, was approved Friday by Judge Jeanette Rodriguez-Morick in New York City Civil Court. It was first reported by ESPN. A separate lawsuit filed against the three ringside physicians is pending in state Supreme Court.
A spokesman for the New York State Attorney General’s office, which agreed to the settlement, declined to comment Monday. Edelstein said that it is the largest payment ever made by the state of New York to a single personal-injury victim.
Abdusalamov was an up-and-coming Russian heavyweight when he entered the ring against Mike Perez at Madison Square Garden in November 2013. But in the first round, he took an errant forearm to the cheek, after which he told his handlers that he thought it might be broken.
The fight continued, reaching its brutal 10-round conclusion, leaving Perez the winner and Abdusalamov with a badly swollen face.
Subsequent investigations by the New York Office of the Inspector General and several news media outlets, including The New York Times, raised critical questions about the medical care that Abdusalamov received after the fight — even as he exhibited signs of head trauma — as well as about the protocols of the New York State Athletic Commission.
For example, Abdusalamov and his team of handlers were not given proper interpretive services that might have led to faster medical care for the boxer. They were not made aware of two ambulances parked just outside the Garden, and when they asked about getting to a hospital, a boxing inspector directed them to the corner of Eighth Avenue and 33rd street, where they could find a taxi.
Surveillance footage of that street corner shows the boxer falling to a knee and vomiting, while his aides scramble in panic to find a taxi. They finally manage to hail one, and Abdusalamov was rushed to St. Luke’s-Roosevelt Hospital, where he underwent emergency surgery — but the damage to his brain had been done.
Edelstein said that the Abdusalamov family is pursuing its lawsuit against the three ringside physicians: Dr. Anthony Curreri, Dr. Osric King, and Dr. Gerard Varlotta. He also said that Abdusalamov has slightly improved since a New York Times reporter visited his bedside in Connecticut in the spring of 2015.
