Entire islands have been reduced to rubble, streets have turned to rivers, cranes have buckled and more than 30 people have died. But the six-toed Hemingway cats are fine.
The 54 cats, many of them descendants of a white polydactyl cat owned by Ernest Hemingway, live at the writer’s house in Key West, Fla., which was hit hard by Hurricane Irma.
As the storm approached last week, officials ordered a full evacuation of the Florida Keys. But Jacque Sands, the general manager of the Ernest Hemingway Home and Museum, refused to leave. She had an obligation, she said, to see the property and the cats through the hurricane.
“Get in the car with the cats and take off,” Ms. Hemingway pleaded.
Ms. Sands did not. The cats, she said, would come inside when the barometric pressure dropped, and they and their human attendants would be safe within the 18-inch-thick limestone walls of the house.
It appears she was right: The house’s curator, Dave Gonzales, confirmed Monday that the cats, many of which have six or seven toes, were unharmed.
It was a welcome piece of good news amid the destruction stretching from Barbuda to Tampa.
Mr. Gonzales told NBC that 10 employees had stayed on site with the cats and had made it through the storm just fine. He said that the limestone had retained the air-conditioning that made the building so comfortable, and that the staff would probably accompany the cats in the house overnight once more.
Live, updated maps showing where the storm has made landfall and how much of the state has been hit by tropical-storm- and hurricane-force winds.
But now that the storm has passed and all the denizens of the house are safe, she said in an interview on Monday, “I think it’s great that they cared enough to try to really protect all things Hemingway.
Mr. Gonzales indicated that he, the staff and the cats were not experiencing similar luxury after the storm, as they were without electricity, water and internet service. But he said that power generators had allowed staff members to preserve their food supply and that medical supplies were on hand.
And, in a fulfillment of Ms. Sands’s prediction, he said the cats, which have become as much of a draw for some tourists as the house’s history, had seemed preternaturally attuned to the storm.
