With “Junk,” the Pulitzer-winning playwright Ayad Akhtar examines financial chicanery in the 1980s — and how it shaped the blind worship of affluence today.
What followed was an astounding creative explosion, both in its volume and quality. Over the course of four years, he produced a well-reviewed novel, “American Dervish,” a comic retelling of his own childhood, narrated by a boy from a secular Muslim household who turns deeply religious. His play “Disgraced,” an emotionally raw drama focused on a culturally conflicted Pakistani-American lawyer, was awarded the 2013 Pulitzer Prize for drama. Mr. Akhtar’s subject has been the tension between the sacred and the secular — how to honor one’s culture, including its ancient religion, without being imprisoned by it.
In October, at the Vivian Beaumont Theater at Lincoln Center, he returns to Broadway for the first time since “Disgraced,” and his new play, “Junk,” marks yet another creative turn. The setting is Wall Street in the 1980s and the battle between an entitled old-money establishment and a new wave of aggressive corporate raiders. Like his other work, “Junk” is intensely interested in the issue of identity, but with a twist: There are no Muslim characters.
This latest work is a progression rather than a departure for Mr. Akhtar. He once again mercilessly examines a faith and culture — in this case, money and Wall Street — and his characters are subject to the pull of a powerful orthodoxy. An idealistic journalist in the story sets out to “torpedo every piety of this new faux-religion of finance” but edges too close and is compromised and subsumed. The drama is not an overt comment on the current political moment, but it is a kind of parable. It implies we have all been co-opted, having traded our healthy suspicion of people with vast wealth for something more like worship.
Mr. Akhtar’s first reader and informal dramaturge on everything he writes is Steve Klein, a close friend, financier and jack-of-all-trades who has written screenplays and produced movies. The two of them are engaged in a long-running back and forth about the morality of capitalism and meaning of various arcane events that have taken place on Wall Street. I had lunch with them one day as they jousted about “QE,” which they somewhat helpfully explained stands for “quantitative easing,” and Mr. Akhtar insisted to his friend, “I’ve read the Fed minutes!” — by which he meant the minutes of a meeting of the Federal Reserve from 1979.
We were at BBar in the East Village, an informal place, and Mr. Akhtar was dressed in jeans and a white V-neck T-shirt. He often augments this look with an unbuttoned flannel shirt, which I’d heard referred to as his “uniform.” He has a shaved head, what usually appears to be a day or two of stubble and such an intense gaze that in a children’s cartoon he’d be depicted with gears spinning rapidly inside his brain.
His interest in finance is longstanding. When Mr. Akhtar set off for New York to become a writer, his father, who founded a cardiology practice in Wisconsin, made him promise to read The Wall Street Journal every day. He helped support himself by trading stocks, using as seed money annual stipends of $12,000 or so sent by his parents. “American Dervish” earned an $850,000 advance, huge for a first novel, and made him more comfortable. Still, I never got the sense that Mr. Akhtar is enamored of money — he lives modestly and works constantly — but he is fascinated by the game, its rules and its sleight of hand.
He had long wanted to write “a very big play about finance,” but his choice of subject can be taken as a statement: He is not going to be solely defined as an ethnic playwright. Having been a decoder of a strain of Muslim-American life — middle-class, educated, assimilated, though less comfortably so after 2001 — he has, for now, moved on.
“Junk” has had one full production, at the La Jolla Playhouse in California. The Los Angeles Times declared it “thrilling,” “suspenseful” and “dramatically enthralling.” The La Jolla’s artistic director, Christopher Ashley, got to know Mr. Akhtar in 2014, when the playhouse staged “The Who & the What,” his play about a young woman who undertakes a novel on “women and Islam,” to the consternation of her father.
At our lunch that afternoon, Mr. Klein said that his notes to Mr. Akhtar are usually intended to keep the pace barreling forward. “If something gets in the way, I tend to see it,” he said.
Mr. Akhtar was married at 25 to a French student he met in Paris his junior year of college and divorced in his mid-30s. She is an art curator. He described the end of their marriage as “like a death” but also noted that his best work came in the years after. They did not have children. For many years he was unattached, but he now lives with his girlfriend, an actress, in an apartment near Lincoln Center. He has close friends but he can go months without seeing them as he sinks monk-like into his work.
He is circumspect in talking about his family and relationships, and I had to push him some. I wanted to probe how someone who can give the impression of living in his head became a writer who drills so close to the bone that he makes theatergoers gasp.
The broad outlines of his upbringing are seemingly idyllic. His parents emigrated from the Punjab region of Pakistan in their late 20s, as part of a program to attract foreign doctors and scientists, and raised him and his younger brother in the generous-spirited Upper Midwest. Islam had not yet been politicized, and as far as he could tell, the mosque he attended was at most a source of mild curiosity in the neighborhood, perhaps a little exotic, like the first Thai restaurant on a block. The family home was big enough to have bedrooms for both sets of grandparents, who visited frequently from Pakistan, and he spent part of his summers traveling to see them.
For reasons that are unsurprising, Mr. Akhtar’s work has angered some Muslims. As the dinner party in “Disgraced” unravels, the character of Amir, the lawyer, offers up his opinion that the Quran is “one long hate-mail to humanity.” You could, of course, say the same of the Old Testament, but there is a more established tradition in the Judeo-Christian world of artists critiquing religious dogma and sacred texts.
In “American Dervish,” the characters inside the mosque express a great deal of virulent anti-Semitism. The novel is in no way admiring of it. One of its most sympathetic characters is a Jewish doctor who falls into an ill-fated relationship with the young Muslim narrator’s aunt.
Though there are no Muslim characters in “Junk,” there are lots of Jewish characters — many of them engaged in behaviors other Jews file into the category “bad for the Jews.” The ethnic mix in Mr. Akhtar’s work and dead-on portrayals are the product of a writer who has dwelled in several different worlds. His mother (like the mother in “American Dervish”) believed that American Jews were the model immigrants, assimilated enough to make it in the new land but respectful of their traditions. “I don’t think it’s a coincidence that when I got to college all my closest friends were Jewish,” Mr. Akhtar said.
He described himself to me as comfortable being an outsider. “I was on the outside in my own family, and I don’t mean that in a bad way,” he said. He has close friends, but they are not writers. If he has a tribe it is among other intellectual obsessives — types who would get interested in finance and plow through minutes of Fed meetings.
I didn’t but went back and looked — the young boy at the center of the story, an Orthodox Jew whose paintings are considered sacrilege, becomes celebrated for his work but is ultimately cast out of his family and religious community.
Mr. Akhtar and the cast of “Junk” gathered in mid-July for a weeklong workshop in a basement space at Lincoln Center where several folding tables had been set up in a rectangle. It was a hot stretch of the summer, and most everyone came dressed in shorts or sundresses, but he was sporting his unbuttoned-flannel-shirt look over a T-shirt and jeans. He sat next to the play’s director, Doug Hughes, with a thermos of coffee and a bottle of some kind of green juice in front of him, looking straight on at the actors as they read their lines.
The stage and TV actor Steven Pasquale, whose character is a Michael Milken-like junk bond king named Robert Merkin, carried his script along with homework he had assigned himself — James B. Stewart’s “Den of Thieves” and Connie Bruck’s “The Predators’ Ball,” books chronicling 1980s Wall Street.
From “The Merchant of Venice” to “Glengarry Glen Ross” to “The Big Short,” writers have told stories involving money and commerce. (Mr. Akhtar’s “The Invisible Hand” depicted an American financier kidnapped in the Middle East for his investing expertise.) The more complex the machinations, the more difficult the storytelling. “Junk” is a fictional retelling of an era on Wall Street when junk bonds, or high-risk debt, were used by corporate raiders to take over companies. Some of the players, including Mr. Milken, ended up in jail.
When “Junk” played last summer in La Jolla, Mr. Akhtar sat through each performance of the monthlong run, in different parts of the theater, watching the expressions of audience members and listening to their responses so he could know which of his lines fell flat. Mr. Ashley, La Jolla’s artistic director, told me that it was common for playwrights to stay through previews as they continue to revise but “very rare” for one to stay from beginning to end.
At the workshop, Mr. Akhtar wanted to hear his post-La Jolla rewrites out loud. He had tweaked numerous lines. A whole scene had been cut — one of his favorites, but it did not move the story forward. Only three cast members had been in the previous production, so he also needed to hear how actors new to the play delivered his lines. “That’s actually better!” he said more than once when a cast member stumbled over the written words but ended up saying something that sounded more natural.
Mr. Akhtar urged the cast to pay attention to a line from one of the characters near the end of the play, an older financier named Leo Tresler who is trying to keep up with the accelerated churning of money on Wall Street. “A man is what he has,” Tresler, who will be played by Michael Siberry, says.
In the three weeks between the workshop for “Junk” and the beginning of full rehearsals, Mr. Akhtar went away — to an ashram in the Bahamas. He was exhausted. His mother’s death, after decades of illness, had rocked him more than he ever anticipated, he said. He was in Wisconsin at the end, but for most of the last five years, as his plays were being staged and he was traveling the world, he had not been physically present.
He is still a spiritual seeker, but the kind who cannot be contained by one faith. He has studied with Jason Shulman, a teacher and healer who incorporates ideas from the kabbalah and Buddhism. He’ll still occasionally worship at a mosque.
The question now is what Mr. Akhtar will do next. If he were just a novelist, his next book, following the promise of “American Dervish,” would be eagerly anticipated. He has notes and outlines for new novels, plays and screenplays. But he has spent most of the last two years writing for TV, first for a project that did not go forward at HBO after the executives backing it left the network. He is now developing a series for FX set in 1980s Hollywood. If it is picked up, he would presumably be the showrunner.
