WASHINGTON — A bipartisan bloc of House Judiciary Committee leaders have agreed to demand new limits on the National Security Agency’s warrantless surveillance program as a condition of temporarily extending its authorization, setting up a fight with the Trump administration.
As part of an extension, they also have agreed to push for restrictions on surveillance. Among them is a requirement that F.B.I. agents obtain warrants before searching the program’s repository of intercepted messages for information about American criminal suspects. And they want to ban a disputed form of internet surveillance in which the agency collected emails that were about a foreign target of surveillance but neither to nor from that person; the N.S.A. voluntarily ceased that form of surveillance this year but wants to retain the flexibility to turn it back on again.
But the intelligence community and the Trump administration oppose key details of the agreement, which is not yet public and is being drafted into a bill by House Judiciary Committee staffers. On Monday, Dan Coats, the director of national intelligence, and Attorney General Jeff Sessions sent a letter to Congress asking lawmakers to instead make the surveillance law permanent without any changes.
“We look forward to working with you to ensure the speedy enactment of legislation reauthorizing” the law, “without amendment beyond removing the sunset provision, to avoid any interruption in our use of these authorities to protect the American people,” Mr. Coats and Mr. Sessions wrote.
The National Security Agency has declassified documents providing new details about a 2011 case before the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, involving problems with "upstream" internet surveillance under the FISA Amendments Act.
But Mr. Goodlatte, whose committee has primary jurisdiction over the matter, said in a statement on Tuesday that a reauthorization of the warrantless surveillance law without changes lacks the votes to pass the House.
“Congress must reauthorize this critical national security tool but not without reforms,” he said.
Enacted in 2008, the FISA Amendments Act legalized a form of the warrantless surveillance program the Bush administration secretly created after the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. It permits the government, without individual court orders, to collect from American internet and phone companies the emails and phone calls of foreigners abroad, even when they communicate with Americans.
The law made the practice legal for four and a half years, and in late 2012, Congress extended it for another five years without changes. But the political debate over surveillance changed after the 2013 leaks by the intelligence contractor Edward J. Snowden and subsequent revelations about N.S.A. activities, prompting calls for closer oversight of the intelligence agencies and more protections for Americans’ privacy.
The deadline for Congress to extend the law again is nearing as lawmakers grapple with a crowded agenda. And some Republican supporters of the Trump administration have expressed alarm over leaks of surveillance targeting Russians that uncovered contacts with Mr. Trump’s associates.
While the leaks about Trump-Russia matters apparently came from a different kind of surveillance, the Judiciary Committee bill is likely to include a response to those concerns, the people familiar with the legislative deliberations said.
The panel is expected to insert a requirement that executive branch officials asking the N.S.A. to unmask the names of Americans in intelligence reports, which are hidden to minimize intrusions into their privacy, sign certifications that they are seeking the information for legitimate purposes.
At least two related disputes are adding to the turbulence around the fate of the surveillance law.
Privacy-minded lawmakers are demanding that the N.S.A. estimate the volume of communications involving an American that it incidentally intercepts while targeting foreigners. The lawmakers want the information to better inform public debate over the rules governing access to such intercepts.
During the Obama administration, the Office of the Director of National Intelligence said the government would work on an estimate. But in June, Mr. Coats told Congress that the N.S.A. had decided that such a study was infeasible.
But a newly declassified document shows that in 2011, the agency scrutinized 45,359 intercepts gathered by the program in just 48 hours to determine whether any were messages both to and from Americans that had been collected by the warrantless surveillance program for technical reasons. The document was obtained by The New York Times through a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit.
A United States intelligence official, speaking on condition of anonymity to discuss sensitive surveillance matters, said the fact that the N.S.A. had been able to swiftly carry out that study did not mean that it would be as simple to do the study that Congress now wants. The official said the N.S.A. had studied three potential methodologies and decided none would work.
The difference, the official said, is that the 2011 study was looking for wholly domestic communications. That was a simpler task because as soon as analysts identified any sender or recipient as a foreigner abroad, they could move on to the next message.
By contrast, the official said, the study that lawmakers want would require determining the location of all recipients of every message, and because the N.S.A. often has no information about who is using a particular email account, it would be impossible to come up with an accurate estimate.
Several lawmakers who pushed for a study have expressed dissatisfaction with that answer. Mr. Goodlatte and Mr. Conyers demanded more information this summer about the N.S.A.’s analysis, and Senator Ron Wyden, Democrat of Oregon, has said he does not believe that it is impossible to produce an estimate.
Mr. Wyden and Mr. Coats are also embroiled in a separate dispute centering on a question Mr. Wyden asked the intelligence director during a hearing in June: whether the government could use the FISA Amendments Act to collect communications entirely between Americans.
Mr. Coats replied that it could not legally do so, but his office later issued a statement that answered the question in a narrower way. Since then, Mr. Wyden has repeatedly pressed Mr. Coats to clarify or say more in public.
Mr. Wyden, a member of the Senate Intelligence Committee, has a history of asking questions that hint at classified surveillance matters he considers problematic and thinks should be made public. This month, Mr. Coats sent Mr. Wyden a letter, obtained by The Times, stating that Mr. Wyden already knows the information he is asking about but that it involves classified details that cannot be made public.
In a statement, Mr. Wyden criticized the executive branch for declining to estimate how many Americans’ communications are swept up by the program or to publicly discuss the details of the answer to his question.
“The Trump administration appears to have calculated that hiding from Americans basic information relevant to their privacy is the easiest way to renew this expansive surveillance authority,” he said.