Target fired the first salvo of this year’s holiday hiring wars on Monday, saying that it would raise its minimum hourly wage to $11 next month and then to $15 an hour by the end of 2020.
Target said that the increase from the current base of $10 an hour would apply to the 100,000 seasonal workers it plans to hire for the fall and winter. The bump will also affect thousands of Target’s 323,000 regular employees, the company said.
Target and its competitors are contending with a nationwide unemployment rate that dropped to 4.3 percent in May and July — the lowest level in 16 years — before ticking up slightly in August. With a shallow pool of job seekers, they must compete harder for workers to handle the holiday shopping crush.
Retailers are closing thousands of stores this year as they try to cut costs and compete with online retailers, most notably Amazon. But come the Christmas season — the busiest period of the year for the industry — malls are still swamped and stores need all the help they can get.
Turnover, though, has been a persistent problem, saddling many stores with heavy recruitment and training costs. And increased demand for labor intensifies their efforts to poach talent, with companies dangling better pay and juicy perks to woo candidates.
In recent years, Walmart has gotten the jump on Target by being the first to announce a series of base pay hikes. In February 2015, Walmart said it would raise base wages for 500,000 workers to at least $9 an hour, with an increase to $10 an hour in 2016. That year, Walmart also gave raises to more than 1.2 million hourly workers, which pushed the average hourly full-time store employee up to $13.38 an hour.
Target followed suit with its own wage increases in 2015 and 2016, promising a $10-an-hour base last year.
On Monday, a Walmart spokesman said the company is always reviewing where its stands in terms of pay.
“We’re committed to providing pay and training for our associates that is competitive in the market,” said the spokesman, Kory Lundberg.
Target’s $11-an-hour base pay exceeds the minimum wage in 48 states and matches the pay floor set by Massachusetts and Washington State, two of the 19 states that raised their minimum wages at the start of the year. It far exceeds the federal base, which has remained at $7.25 an hour since 2009.
Retail is the largest private-sector employer in the United States, according to the National Retail Federation. Cashiers receive a median hourly wage of $9.40, while sales associates receive $9.77 and store managers are paid $14.86, according to compensation tracker PayScale.
But Target, like many retailers, is struggling to adapt to e-commerce and pricing pressures. Earlier this month, the company said it would cut prices on thousands of products, stoking concerns from investors. The Minneapolis-based chain, which has been trying to clean up after a data breach in 2013 that compromised the data of millions of customers, agreed in May to pay $18.5 million to 47 states and the District of Columbia in a settlement. Target’s stock price is down 16 percent this year.
Target is probably responding in part to ever-present “Help Wanted” signs as it tries to recruit and retain workers, said John W. Budd, a professor at the University of Minnesota’s Carlson School of Management. But the company could also be trying to convince consumers that it is a good corporate citizen before lawmakers try to push up the timeline for minimum wage increases.
