Tennis|Bag? Check. Racket? Check. Dog? Of Course.
Bag? Check. Racket? Check. Dog? Of Course.
Svetlana Kuznetsova and her American Bully, Dolce, in a photo from her Instagram account. Kuznetsova had Dolce certified as her emotional support dog, but sometimes the support goes both ways.
When Svetlana Kuznetsova had to leave her dog, Dolce, at home in Russia this spring when she left for a tournament in California, she cried.
She cried in the airport. She cried on the plane. And she cried again in her hotel room, a place that can be lonely for Kuznetsova, a former United States Open champion who spends as many as eight months of every year on the road.
“I cried and cried, for three days I cried,” she told me last week.
Kuznetsova, a two-time Grand Slam champion, went on to detail for me a dark side of professional tennis virtually invisible to the average fan. It’s the part tinged with isolation and sometimes depression, brought on by months on the road away from friends and family. It’s weeks and months and years on end sacrificing real life for a tennis life, without a real home: constantly parachuting into different cities and setting up camp in strange hotels.
This is the bargain pros make, the sacrifice that is paid back with prestige and prize money — more than $23 million to date for Kuznetsova. But she is still a human being, susceptible to personal disappointments and professional failings, and when one views her life through that lens, it’s clearer to see how a dog like Dolce can be as vital to her as the right racket or a good hitting partner.
Sam Querrey and his girlfriend, Abby Dixon, travel with a French bulldog named Lou, above. Like Kuznetsova and Venus Williams, Querrey posts photos of their travels on Instagram.
Dolce is a 55-pound American Bully, a breed similar to a pit bull, and when Kuznetsova, 32, told me she needed him, it wasn’t hyperbole. Dolce is her certified emotional support dog, a role that probably doesn’t get the notice it deserves. Getting Dolce certified was easy, Kuznetsova said. She spoke to a therapist over the phone three or four times, and told him that she needed companionship because she traveled a lot and often was depressed about being away from home.
Emotional support dogs like Dolce do not qualify as service dogs under the Americans With Disabilities Act because they aren’t specifically trained to work or accomplish a task that would directly help someone with a disability. But they do get some preferential treatment on planes and in some hotels and restaurants, and here’s the key for pro tennis players: Emotional support animals can often go to tournaments that otherwise bar pets. And for more than a few players, that is priceless.
Dogs on tour are nothing new, of course. More than a decade ago, Martina Navratilova sometimes had three with her at once, including a toy fox terrier, K.D., for Killer Dog. But not every tournament rolls out the welcome mat anymore. Dogs aren’t allowed anywhere at the French Open, and others prohibit them in the name of fan safety or sanitary rules.
About 12 years ago, officials at the United States Open announced a policy barring pets on its courts and in the stands. The ban extended to the tournament’s locker rooms, training rooms and player dining rooms. Officials I asked said they couldn’t remember why they made the rule, although it’s an open secret that it is often broken.
Sam Querrey and his girlfriend, Abby Dixon, travel with a French bulldog named Lou, and Querrey said that no one had opposed Lou’s hanging around the players’ lounge or on the grounds “because Lou’s so cute.” (Lou, like Dolce Kuznetsova, is an official emotional support dog, certified to help Dixon. That was why Lou was allowed in the players’ lounge at the Memphis Open this year, but only after officials there checked her paperwork.) Also in Queens last week was Alexander and Mischa Zverev’s family dog, a poodle named Lovik who sometimes even gets his own official credential.
Venus Williams and her dog, Harry. The United States Open has a policy barring dogs, but Williams said no one ever gave her a hard time because Harry was such a gentleman.
Williams often doesn’t share much of her personal life with reporters, but when I inquired about Harry — an impulse buy when she was in New York in 2007 — she talked and talked. She explained how he does a little dance after his walks because he wants her to feed him; how he sleeps in bed with her, but only way on the other side of the mattress; and how he visits her in the locker room and always makes her smile. She especially likes that Harry doesn’t understand tennis and isn’t a fan of balls. He seems, in fact, to be totally uninterested in what she does for a living.
That’s the whole point: finding a bit of normalcy in a life that is totally not normal.
Kuznetsova, who comes from a family of cycling champions, was only 13 when she left Russia to attend a tennis academy in Barcelona, Spain. There, it was all about winning and rising in the rankings, she said. She began traveling without her mother when she was 16, leaving her with just her coach and her trainer — two people with a direct stake in her success.
Kuznetsova and Dolce reunited at a cafe in Russia after her first-week elimination from the United States Open.
Dolce makes life better, she said, and that’s why his certification as an emotional support dog makes sense. But sometimes the emotional support is a two-way street.
“I said, ‘No, I cannot do this to him,’” she said.
So when Kuznetsova lost in the second round of the Open last week, she was disappointed, of course. But her heart still leapt for a brief moment, too, at the thought of heading home.
Days later, the first photo she posted on Instagram upon her return to Russia was of her seated at an outdoor cafe on Sunday. Dolce was perched on the chair next to her.
“Our time off,” she wrote.