ST. LOUIS — After hours of mostly peaceful protests over a white former police officer’s acquittal in the fatal shooting of a black man, a crowd of demonstrators gathered in St. Louis Friday night outside the new mayor’s house. Soon, rocks were flying.
Four windows broke and red paint was splattered on the outside of the house. Mayor Lyda Krewson was at Police Headquarters watching a protester’s online video of the demonstration, knowing that her family was inside the brick house.
No one was hurt, but the episode was a reminder of the immediate and direct challenges Ms. Krewson faces as she leads a city struggling with a high murder rate, diminished by decades of population loss, deeply divided along racial lines and facing day after day of protests.
Large groups of protesters have marched repeatedly in the days since the verdict, holding “Black Lives Matter” signs and calling for systemic changes to policing here. Ms. Krewson said she was taking those messages seriously. But she was criticized by some for postponing three town hall meetings that had been scheduled for this week. “Is avoiding personal interactions with her constituents the new definition of ‘listening’?” one woman wrote on Twitter.
Ms. Krewson, who is white and a Democrat, staked her campaign for mayor this year on a promise to curb the violence and heal divisions in St. Louis, a city of 311,000 that has roughly even numbers of black and white residents. She is now engaged in a precarious political balancing act: straining to reassure protesters that she wants to hear and solve their concerns while also condemning lawlessness and standing in support of the police.
That approach, however, has drawn criticism both from police supporters and protesters. Each group sees Ms. Krewson as frustratingly equivocal and insufficiently supportive.
“She doesn’t have the political capital to bring to a problem like this,” said Mike Jones, a longtime figure in St. Louis politics and a Democrat who serves on the Missouri State Board of Education.
The region’s racial tensions were laid bare in 2014, when a white police officer in nearby Ferguson fatally shot an unarmed black 18-year-old, leading to months of tense demonstrations that included a few nights of looting and arson. Ahead of the verdict here on Friday, activists had pledged a new round of protests if the judge acquitted Jason Stockley, a former St. Louis officer who fatally shot Anthony Lamar Smith, 24, after a high-speed chase in 2011. Those protests, which on three nights ended with property damage and arrests, have drawn hundreds of demonstrators and prompted the cancellation of major concerts and high school sporting events.
Such a stance further alienates protesters, said Ms. Jones, who finished second to Ms. Krewson in this year’s Democratic mayoral primary in March.
Ms. Jones was one of several well-known African-Americans in the mayoral race, and some political analysts have theorized that those candidates split the black vote and allowed Ms. Krewson, the only prominent white candidate, to sweep into office with 32 percent of the primary vote. A St. Louis Post-Dispatch analysis found that Ms. Krewson had deep support in parts of the city, but polled below 5 percent in some wards on the mostly black North Side.
Ms. Krewson, 64, a certified public accountant and the first woman to serve as mayor of St. Louis, took an unlikely path to City Hall. She was elected to the St. Louis board of aldermen in 1997, two years after her husband was killed in an attempted carjacking outside her home.
Heather Navarro, who assumed Ms. Krewson’s seat on the board this year, said that the mayor was regarded as a responsive straight-shooter in the ward she represented, a majority-white area west of downtown.
Ms. Krewson replaced Francis Slay as mayor, whose 16-year tenure was the longest in city history. “These are very difficult challenges for any mayor or law enforcement agency,” Mr. Slay said. “There is no easy way or surefire, textbook approach to addressing them.” He declined to comment further.
Ms. Krewson’s approach in recent weeks — she released a video statement before the verdict urging calm, and has said she was “appalled” by what happened to Mr. Smith — earned her praise from some who hope for more concrete action in the months ahead.
Others have noted that Ms. Krewson has been in office only five months, and is overseeing fallout from a judge’s ruling on a shooting that occurred six years ago. “We do not think the mayor is responsible for the Stockley verdict in any way,” said an editorial in The St. Louis American, a newspaper serving the city’s African-American community, which went on to encourage her to “pay attention to the message” of protesters.
Ms. Krewson has been noticeably more measured in her statements than Missouri’s governor, Eric Greitens, a Republican, who put the National Guard on standby and wrote on Facebook that if “you break a window, you’re going to be behind bars.” But she appeared alongside her acting police chief, Lawrence O’Toole, when he asserted that his officers “owned tonight” after making dozens of arrests when windows were broken downtown.
Jeff Roorda, business manager of the St. Louis Police Officers Association, which endorsed Ms. Krewson and represents rank-and-file officers, said his members were “colossally disappointed” in the mayor’s rhetoric about the acquittal. “I think she’s been overly sympathetic to a misguided cause,” Mr. Roorda said.
Ms. Krewson suggested that her approach — one embraced neither by protesters nor police officers — was in fact an asset in these fractious times. “I do understand both sides of this road,” she said.