Parul Sehgal joined The New York Times’s team of daily book critics in late July. She was previously a senior editor for The New York Times Book Review; she also wrote a column, “Roving Eye,” focused on international literature. Her latest review is on “Difficult Women,” by David Plante. What follows is a lightly edited Q. and A.
Q. You recently transitioned from editor and columnist to critic. What has changed about your approach to covering books?
A. My relationship with the reader — the reader I have in my mind when I write — is a bit different. There’s more of a responsibility to convey what’s happening in the world of literature, and to do it in a timely manner, and to explain why it matters. I can’t direct myself purely by my own idiosyncrasies, or my own temptations.
The challenge for me is remembering that, in spite of the weekly pressures, my reviews can never be formulaic, that they always have to be full of pleasure, that they have to be full of delight — and that I have to stay fresh, and stay excited.
Can you walk me through the process of reviewing a book?
I read a lot of pre-publication material: Publishers Weekly, Kirkus Reviews, book catalogs. I’m always roving and pecking to see what’s coming out, what looks enticing.
I make a decision about what to review based on a number of factors: Is the book newsworthy? Is it a book that I think our readers should know about? Is it a novel that’s doing something new, or a nonfiction book that has an interesting argument? Is the author important? Then, of course, there are my own tastes — what’s exciting and enticing to me.
After I have a sense that something is important, and I have something to say about it, I tell my editor, John Williams. And then I just read as much as I can — by the author, around the book. I try to be as scrupulous as possible. I’m also just nosy! I want to know who else has written about this book, or this person.
At what point does your opinion about a given book begin to consolidate?
It all comes together in the writing for me. The writing is the moment of sifting, of thinking.  It’s only when I sit down at the computer that I start to tweeze out actual thoughts, and an argument.
The New York Times is the last daily newspaper in America with a free-standing books section. How does reviewing for a newspaper influence or inform your work?
It adds certain constraints: You have to move quickly, and often with less space, and you have to consider newsworthiness. Sometimes it means that I can’t take advantage of complex interpretations or tie in controversies that might arise later in the life span of a book.
There’s also the matter of writing for a general readership. It’s much more interesting to me to write something that has to speak to so many different kinds of people — from experts to amateurs — than it is to write a piece that’s going to be read by people who are already in love with the topic.
Your reviews are often imbued with a rich sense of literary and historical traditions. (You’ve paired Jesmyn Ward with William Faulkner; your latest review quotes Dylan Thomas and references the work of Harold Pinter.) What does the role of tradition play in your criticism?
I love being part of both a tradition of literature and this fantastic, fractious, quarrelsome thing known as criticism, which is part of literature, and on top of it, and alongside it.
Criticism can be a way of adding to a bank of knowledge, a bank of understanding, a way of refreshing and renewing and protecting language.
In scientific fields, there’s this established idea that you’re always standing on the shoulders of giants — that every discovery pushes the whole enterprise forward. When it comes to the arts, though, we don’t talk about things that way. We tend not to say that, because of some novel, we now know X or Y. But I’ve always felt that to be true. Because of the modernists, for example, we have a greater sense of subjectivity.
I like to think of literature and criticism as an act of pushing something forward, of mapping new terrains, internal and external, of doing things with language that reveal something about what it means to read and to live.
So I think that’s partly why I tend to go back, to tie things together. But I’m also someone who looks for patterns, someone who looks for how something hooks into something else.
I’m also interested in how and where writers get their style. Part of it comes from trying to understand them, to understand what they’re trying to do, what they’re trying to answer, and where their questions came from.
I don’t like when book reviews feel hermetic. I always want to open things up — to say that this is a book, but it’s also just a stage for certain ideas. So, what else is happening in the culture that’s related to it? What other books does it speak to from the past? What other debates does it recall? I want to prove that books aren’t enclosed, immured objects.