If it seems like traffic in New York City might be a bit worse than before, there may be an unexpected factor: city workers.
New York City’s sprawling municipal work force is driving more than it used to, city statistics reveal. City vehicles logged 102 million miles on the road in the last fiscal year, which ended in June, 25 percent more miles than in 2014, Mayor Bill de Blasio’s first year in office.
Accidents are also up: Workers driving city-owned cars for the Department of Buildings were involved in 98 crashes last fiscal year, an increase from 22 crashes four years ago. Department of Correction vehicles were involved in 116 crashes, nearly double the number four years ago. The Department of Transportation and Parks Department fared no better.
The city’s fleet — everything from take-home cars to garbage trucks — now exceeds 30,000 vehicles, 10 percent larger than when Mr. de Blasio took office.
The growth of the fleet coincides with the sharp expansion of the city’s work force under Mr. de Blasio, a surge in head count that the mayor has proudly defended as necessary for serving the population of a growing city. There are more than 294,000 full-time employees of New York City and the equivalent of 25,000 more who work part time.
But transportation advocates have expressed concern that the attendant rise in driving, which has outpaced the growth in head count and has not been previously reported, could undercut some of Mr. de Blasio’s signature goals. More driving makes it harder to reduce the number of traffic fatalities, which Mr. de Blasio has vowed to reduce to zero, and to address the pollution that contributes to climate change.
In recent days, Mr. de Blasio has announced his intention to mandate energy efficiency from large buildings across the city, and unveiled new electric vehicle charging stations that will eventually arrive in each of the five boroughs to encourage New Yorkers to buy zero-emission vehicles.
“This is nothing less than an existential threat and every person, every state, every city has to be a part of the solution,” Mr. de Blasio said on Wednesday of climate change.
On that score, the city government is heading in the other direction.
Under Mr. de Blasio, the city has doubled the number of electric vehicles in its fleet to 1,500, and nearly one in five of city vehicles are hybrids, according to statistics provided by City Hall. Even so, city vehicles consumed 29.6 million gallons of gasoline in the last fiscal year, according to the most recent mayor’s management report, up from 28.8 million gallons the previous fiscal year.
“While it will take our city government significant time to get there, we are working toward the once unthought-of goal of an all-electric car fleet,” Freddi Goldstein, a spokeswoman for the mayor, said in a statement.
When it comes to crashes, the city began tracking all manner of collisions — from “scratches and mirror issues” to those in which an injury or death occurred — in the 2014 fiscal year as part of Mr. de Blasio’s traffic safety initiative, city officials said.
The crash and mileage figures do not include the Police Department, which lists only a rate of crashes per 100,000 miles traveled. The department’s crash rate increased in the last fiscal year to 4.6 per 100,000 miles, from 3.9. Four years ago, it was 5.3 per 100,000 miles.
The increase in crashes, City Hall officials said, could be attributed to the new system’s improved accounting of minor crashes, rather than an increase in unsafe driving.
The number of workers driving city-owned vehicles who were hurt in crashes last year also increased, to 727 injuries, from 510 the year before, according to the mayor’s report. But that jump came after three straight years of declines. And because of the steep rise in the number of miles driven by city workers, the rate of injury per 100,000 miles of driving has actually declined.
Moreover, fewer people have been killed in crashes — a key goal of the mayor’s Vision Zero plan. The city recorded one fatality in each of the last two years in crashes involving city vehicles, down from eight in the 2014 fiscal year.
That sort of parsing of the data did not satisfy some transit advocates who called on the city to curb its driving.
“There are three paths for reducing crashes: design safer streets, stop/prevent dangerous driving and reduce the number of vehicles,” said Charles Komanoff, an energy-policy analyst and environmental activist who has criticized Mr. de Blasio for his daily routine of driving from Gracie Mansion to a gym in Park Slope, Brooklyn, and then to City Hall, a detour that adds more than a dozen miles to his commute.
