On the bench during a recent Cleveland Indians game, the pitching coach Mickey Callaway thought of a thoroughly incongruous comparison: Corey Kluber and Michael Jordan.
Kluber, the Indians’ All-Star right-handed pitcher, is robotic on the mound and subdued off it. He does not court attention, and he rarely seems to smile. He is probably not the best choice to sell your company’s sneakers, cereal or sports drink.
But to Callaway, something about Kluber reminded him of the most dominant and charismatic team-sport athlete in recent memory.
When the Indians ran their winning streak to 15 on Thursday, Kluber got the victory. The win was his 15th of the season, and it lowered his earned run average to 2.56 and his WHIP (walks plus hits per inning pitched) to 0.882. He held or shared the American League lead in all three categories before Saturday, and had 235 strikeouts — or 12 per nine innings. The Indians extended their streak to 17, the longest in the majors in 15 years, with a 4-2 victory over the Baltimore Orioles on Saturday.
As the Indians have surged, so has Kluber’s case for the Cy Young Award. He won it in 2014 and finished third last season, and he just might be hot enough to steal it from Boston’s Chris Sale this year.
Sale has four top-five finishes in Cy Young voting but has never won the award. He pitched six scoreless innings on Saturday against Tampa Bay for his league-leading 16th win, against seven losses, lowering his E.R.A. to 2.76; he also leads the majors in strikeouts (278) and innings pitched (195 ⅔). He has more starts than Kluber, who missed four weeks in May with a lower back strain, but otherwise the pitchers have been remarkably similar.
It was a reasonable response from a pitcher who won twice in the World Series last fall before tiring in Game 7, which the Indians lost to the Chicago Cubs in extra innings. The Indians are all but assured of another October chance, with their No. 2 starter, Carlos Carrasco, healthy this time.
As dry as Kluber is off the mound, his pitches all but sizzle as they zig and zag from his hand. Kluber throws a two-seam fastball that runs away from left-handed batters, a cutter that moves in on them, a looping curveball at roughly slider speed (around 84 miles an hour) and, more often than he has since 2013, a changeup, too.
Kluber generates his movement with a delivery that “uses every ounce of energy he can possibly use,” Callaway said. Kluber, a seven-year veteran, said it was simply a matter of learning from experience and growing more comfortable with his pitches.
As for the Jordan comparison, at least one other element applies: Kluber, like Jordan, flashes his tongue quite a bit while playing. Before every pitch, Kluber grabs his tongue with his pitching hand, then wipes the saliva on his pants leg before gripping the ball. It is a legal maneuver he uses for a better grip, not a spitball.
It might not be sanitary, but it works for Kluber, an ace at the top of his game.
When the Arizona Diamondbacks’ J. D. Martinez bashed four home runs on Monday at Dodger Stadium, the setting was fitting. Martinez became just the 18th player ever to accomplish the feat — and the second this season, after Cincinnati’s Scooter Gennett — and he did it near the scene of his career transformation.
In 2013, Martinez hit .250 with a meager .378 slugging percentage for the Houston Astros. While nursing a wrist injury that summer, he had studied video of better hitters — notably Milwaukee’s Ryan Braun, who had worked with a hitting instructor in Southern California named Craig Wallenbrock.
Martinez contacted Wallenbrock through a teammate who had also worked with him, Jason Castro. He wasted no time in starting his makeover.
Van Scoyoc said Martinez seemed to be chopping wood with his swing, giving the ball just a glancing blow. They worked on creating tilt in his swing and keeping his bat in the hitting zone longer. Now, Martinez has told him, he stays through the ball so long that it feels as if he hits it twice. He tries to hit fly balls, not line drives.
Van Scoyoc said he was convinced Martinez’s adjustments would work when Martinez sent him video of his work at home in Florida after their sessions.
With a glut of outfielders in their 2014 spring training, the Astros released Martinez, who quickly signed with Detroit and improved his slugging percentage to .554 that season. He became an All-Star in 2015 and was traded in July to the Diamondbacks, who won 13 straight games before losses on Friday and Saturday and hold a comfortable lead in the race for the top National League wild card.
With 19 homers in his first 44 games for Arizona, Martinez should command a lucrative free-agent contract this winter. But first he could return to the scene of his big night: If the standings stay the same and the Diamondbacks win the wild-card game, they will open their division series at Dodger Stadium.
With a 19-game lead through Saturday, the Washington Nationals are poised to clinch the N.L. East title soon. It would be their fourth division crown in six seasons, but it would represent something rare for the first baseman and outfielder Adam Lind.
The Nationals’ Adam Lind, 34, has played more games without reaching the postseason than any other active player in the majors, but his team is poised to clinch the National League East title.Credit...Benny Sieu/USA Today Sports, via Reuters..
Lind, 34, has played more games without reaching the postseason than any other active player in the majors — more than 1,300 across 12 seasons. He spent his first nine years with Toronto, and has since bounced to Milwaukee, Seattle and Washington.
Seattle’s Felix Hernandez, it should be noted, made his debut the year before Lind, but has appeared in fewer games because he is a pitcher. They were teammates last season, when the Mariners were eliminated from contention on the second-to-last day of the regular season.
Yet the Mariners lost, and Lind, who was making $8 million, finished with a .239 average and struggled to reach base. With no job offers as spring training approached, he feared his career would be over.
Mike Rizzo, the Nationals’ general manager, found a bargain in Lind, who signed for $1 million and has thrived in a part-time role, hitting .303 with 11 homers and an .887 on-base plus slugging percentage against right-handers through Friday.
Lind, who lives in Florida, said he usually would not watch night games in the postseason, because they finish too late on the East Coast. But this year, for a change, he can expect to be working in October. He did not have a choice in teams, but he is thrilled with where he landed.
Paul O’Neill played 14 full seasons in the major leagues, and his worst batting average and home run total came in 1992, when he hit .246 with 14 homers for the Cincinnati Reds. That is when Gene Michael, the Yankees’ general manager, acquired him for Roberto Kelly.
Michael, who died of a heart attack Thursday at age 79, always looked deeper. He saw that O’Neill’s on-base percentage was .346, better than that of nine of the 10 players who had come to bat most often for the Yankees that season. And he knew, from many years as a Yankees player and executive, the type of hitter needed in the Bronx. Sacrificing the multitalented Kelly, a right-handed hitter with less plate discipline, was worth it.
O’Neill thrived as a Yankee, of course, helping the team win four championships. In nine seasons as a Yankee, he had a .377 on-base percentage. His signature moment at the plate, perhaps, was a pivotal 10-pitch walk off the Mets’ Armando Benitez to ignite a comeback victory in Game 1 of the 2000 World Series.
By then, Michael was a vice president for scouting for the Yankees, a role that suited him better than a desk job. By the time “Moneyball” was published in 2003, chronicling the Oakland Athletics’ knack for using on-base percentage to find undervalued assets, Michael had already used the same principles to set a foundation for a Yankees dynasty.
Think of how many disciplined left-handed or switch-hitters dotted the lineups of those great Yankee teams: O’Neill, Bernie Williams, Tino Martinez, Jorge Posada, Chili Davis, Darryl Strawberry, David Justice. Michael’s influence was profound.
For that, the Yankees should honor him, posthumously, with a plaque in Monument Park. There are seven monuments there, plus 37 plaques, including one for O’Neill and others for the homegrown Williams, Posada, Andy Pettitte, Mariano Rivera and Derek Jeter — all players Michael kept, rather than trade for veterans, as he patiently rebuilt the Yankees while George Steinbrenner served a suspension in the early 1990s.
Michael later became a mentor to Brian Cashman, who has been the Yankees’ general manager since 1998. In an interview this spring, Michael shared a lesson that he had given to Cashman.
Objectively, Michael understood that O’Neill’s strengths would serve the Yankees better than those of Kelly, even though Kelly was younger and had grown up in the organization. The Yankees have not had a losing season since that trade.