Not every bride would be thrilled with the idea of being upstaged by a wedding guest. But Habiba Shebita would have welcomed the chance to share the spotlight with Omar Malek, a friend of her fiancé, Mohamed Soltan.
Mr. Malek, 31, and Mr. Soltan, 29, were inmates in a Cairo prison two years ago after being arrested in a widespread government crackdown on political protesters. Mr. Malek, upon being sentenced to death, made a pact with Mr. Soltan.
That promise never came to fruition. Although Mr. Malek was freed from prison this year and had secured a visa to come to the United States in early August, before Mr. Soltan and Ms. Shebita’s Aug. 19 wedding celebration in Reston, Va., his lawyers ultimately advised him against leaving Egypt. There were concerns that he might be arrested at the airport.
Mr. Malek’s absence wasn’t the only one deeply felt by the couple and their families. Mr. Soltan’s father, Salah Soltan, a prominent Islamic scholar who was also arrested in the continuing political crackdown, is still in an Egyptian prison. He is serving a five-year sentence in a maximum-security prison after his death sentence was overturned by an appellate court.
The couple remain committed to exposing human-rights injustices. In fact, this shared mission was what brought them together.
“It all started in the summer of 2013, when I had just finished high school and started to become politically aware,” said Ms. Shebita, 22, who grew up in Colonia, N.J. She recently moved to Falls Church, Va., to be with Mr. Soltan, a human rights advocate and the founder of the nonprofit theFreedomi.org, which aims to draw attention to the suffering of political prisoners.
Before she was cleared to speak by protest organizers, she was required to go backstage and have the content of her message screened for offensive material by another American protester. That screener was Mr. Soltan, then 25. “I like to think it was fate,” Ms. Shebita said.
If it was fate, however, it took its time, and some harrowing turns, before uniting them as a couple.
In August 2013, as Ms. Shebita was preparing to fly back to New Jersey for her first semester at Rutgers University, chaos descended on Mr. Soltan, an Ohio State University graduate who moved to the United States as a child and was then living in Egypt with family.
Police began a violent raid on the protest camp, outside the Rabaa al-Adawiya Mosque, where he was volunteering. Amid the turmoil, he was shot in the arm, while his family dispersed. Mr. Soltan’s mother and teenage sister fled to the United States, moving in with Hanaa Soltan, an older sister, in Falls Church. His father went into hiding but was apprehended a month later.
On the day of Ms. Shebita’s return flight to the United States, Mr. Soltan was arrested on terrorism- and conspiracy-related charges when police raided his family’s Cairo home. He was thrown into a crowded cell with about 20 other political prisoners and left to contemplate a future that was uncertain but likely, he assumed, to involve indefinite imprisonment or execution.
“It was an underground dungeon, with no access to sunlight or anything humane,” Mr. Soltan said. “I had basically no access to the outside world.” Mr. Soltan did, however, have a smuggled cellphone, which he used to let family members know he was still alive, and to hatch a plan to stage a hunger strike.
His hunger strike lasted 16 months, during which he lost 160 pounds, and developed a pulmonary embolism in his right lung that nearly killed him. His physical frailty was compounded by psychological distress. Mr. Soltan spent the last five months of his nearly two years in prison in solitary confinement.
He said guards encouraged him to kill himself with razors and tortured him with reports of abuse being inflicted on his father. An especially gruesome incident came near the end, when guards abandoned a dying man in his cell and left him with the man’s body for half a day.
But family and friends, including Ms. Shebita, had not given up on Mr. Soltan. Just after he was arrested, Hanaa Soltan began a social media campaign, #FreeSoltan, that quickly gained momentum in the United States and elsewhere. Ms. Shebita was among the early supporters.
That Facebook page has since evolved into a page about his current life and work.
When Mr. Soltan was finally released in May 2015 — a month after being sentenced to life in prison — his supporters, including his sister Hanaa, were ebullient. Ms. Soltan picked up her brother at Washington Dulles International Airport after receiving a call the night before advising her that he was on a plane bound for Virginia. Mr. Soltan was emaciated on arrival, entering the airport in a wheelchair.
Within a week, he was receiving visitors at his sister’s house, including members of the #FreeSoltan movement. “We had been waiting to celebrate this moment for two years, but basically one of the first things he said to us when we got to Falls Church was, ‘There are still people languishing in prison in Egypt. We have to help them,’” Ms. Shebita said.
In 2016, during Ms. Shebita’s junior year at Rutgers, Mr. Soltan picked up the phone in Falls Church and asked her if she was “talking to anyone else” — meaning other men. She said she wasn’t.
“After that we were basically engaged,” Ms. Shebita said.
A few months of long-distance dating ensued, with the couple’s first “I love you’s” exchanged on a day trip to the Jersey Shore that spring. In June, Mr. Soltan drove to New Jersey with Ghanim Aljumaily, a friend of his father’s.
“He’s like a surrogate father to me, and I needed to let her family know my intentions were serious,” Mr. Soltan said. With Mr. Aljumaily by his side, he asked Ms. Shebita’s father, Amr Shebita, for permission to marry her. On June 19, with Ms. Shebita’s family’s blessings, they made the engagement public.
Before they exchanged vows, though, Ms. Shebita needed to finish her studies. In May, after she received a degree in political science, the couple began planning.
On Aug. 19 at the Hyatt Regency in Reston, Va., before more than 350 guests the couple had a second celebration.
As they made their way through the ballroom, loved ones whispered blessings in Arabic. Mr. Soltan’s mother, Asmaa Elnaggar, broke down in tears. “It’s between sad and happy,” she said through a translator, adding that the sadness was that her husband could not be there to see their son get married.
The family played a recording, more than five minutes long, that Salah Soltan made for the wedding. As it was translated from Arabic to English, the attendees, including some of the hotel staff serving dinner, wiped away tears.
