Good morning on this spectacular Friday.
The U.S. Open finals take place this weekend in Queens.
When the two-time U.S. Open champion (2010 and 2013) isn’t playing tennis, he tries to get out and take in all that is New York.
We recently sat down with him at the Lotte New York Palace in Midtown and asked him what he liked most about the city.
The vibe. “New York is a very energetic city, which I especially enjoy when I’m on the court because I have a very special connection with the crowd,” Mr. Nadal said. When he’s not playing tennis, he likes to take walks around the city, but mostly during the day, because he has to be up early. “I have no time for parties,” he said.
The food. “You find the best restaurants here,” he said. He likes Greek, Spanish and Asian, particularly Japanese. Mr. Nadal said that he hopes to open an outpost here of Tatel, an upscale Spanish restaurant that has locations in Madrid, Ibiza and Miami. He is one of several partners, along with the singer Enrique Iglesias.
When he travels to New York, he packs light: a computer, phone and his rackets.
You can follow The Times’s coverage of the tournament here.
Tennis fans will be pleased, sunshine and a gentle breeze will grace the courts today.
Today’s high is 74.
The weekend is serving up comfy weather as well: Lots of sun and highs in the low 70s.
• For a global look at what’s happening, see Your Morning Briefing.
• Mets host Reds, 7:10 p.m. (SNY). Yankees at Rangers, 8:05 p.m. (YES).
• Alternate-side parking remains in effect until Sept. 21.
• Events and exhibitions of the ceramic arts continue at the three-day Brooklyn Clay Tour at locations around Brooklyn. Various times and prices.
• The Coney Island Film Festival continues with screenings at Sideshows By The Seashore and the Coney Island Museum. Various times and prices.
• Yankees at Rangers, 1:05 p.m. (FOX). New York Red Bulls at Chicago, 4 p.m. (UniMas). New York City F.C. host Portland Timbers, 5:30 p.m. (YES). Mets host Reds, 7:10 p.m. (WPIX).
New Yorkers love their dogs.
Not only did they get their own art show in Lower Manhattan this summer, but this weekend they’ll be walking down the runway during New York Fashion Week.
Anthony Rubio, a native New Yorker, has been designing “canine couture” for 14 years. We spoke with him ahead of his show tomorrow on the Lower East Side, where he will present his latest collection for pooches (and humans).
How is making clothing for animals different than for humans?
What’s the price range of your designs?
How do you choose the dog models?

You can watch a live stream of the show here beginning at 7:30 p.m. tomorrow.
New York Today is a morning roundup that is published weekdays at 6 a.m. If you don’t get it in your inbox already, you can sign up to receive it by email here.