When Ali Cobby Eckermann met her biological mother for the first time at age 34, she did not think her life could be enlarged further, she said. Four years later, in 2001, Ms. Cobby Eckermann was reunited with her son, then 18, who had been taken from her at birth.
The trauma of being removed from her birth mother and being separated from her son as part of Australia’s so-called stolen generation of Indigenous Australian children has rippled through decades of her life. It led to abuse and isolation, alcohol and drugs, and a profound sense of grief.
It also led to poetry. After leaving rehab and recovering from her lowest point, Ms. Cobby Eckermann, now 54, started writing as a way to heal and to tell her family’s story. In the coming week, she will be at Yale University to receive a Windham-Campbell writing prize, one of eight recipients this year selected from around the world. The secretive award, which accepts confidential nominations and does not inform writers they are being considered, comes with a prize of $165,000.
“Coming out of Maralinga, South Australia, my family always knew their story was important,” Ms. Cobby Eckermann said. But the recognition the prize has brought has been overwhelming, she said in an interview. It is only in recent weeks that she has been able to say, without crying, that she is the first Aboriginal Australian to receive the prize.
Ms. Cobby Eckermann grew up with an adoptive family on the farming plains of Hart, on the edge of the Clare Valley in South Australia. She had been taken at birth from an Aboriginal mother who had in turn been taken from her mother. Ms. Cobby Eckermann did not meet other Indigenous Australian people until high school, and it was not until decades later that she learned that she had been sent to live with a white family even though her Indigenous relatives had wanted to keep her.
At 18, having just left an abusive relationship and while wrestling with a drinking problem, Ms. Cobby Eckermann discovered she was pregnant. Feeling lost, and judged by people in the small town where she lived, she agreed to put her son up for adoption. She saw Jonnie once after giving birth, and was not legally allowed to look for him until he was 18.
The family was a part of the stolen generation of Indigenous Australians, 100,000 of whom were forcibly removed from their parents through government policies between 1910 and 1970. But she said the official story was wrong: the 60-year nightmare for Indigenous Australians did not end there.
Ms. Cobby Eckermann said the trauma of the stolen generation was still being repeated in Indigenous communities, long after the Australian government had apologized and supposedly ended the policies. In fact, she said, more Indigenous Australian children were in foster care than ever before. The number placed in the care of other Indigenous families had also declined.
Ms. Cobby Eckermann now lives with, and cares for, her adoptive mother, whom she calls Mum Frieda, near Adelaide, Australia. She said they had found a friendship and peace together, decades after Ms. Cobby Eckermann ran away from home as a teenager.
At school, she said, it seemed as if Aboriginal children were always in trouble.
“It seemed only angry thoughts could thaw my brain,” she wrote.
Healing came through time spent in rehabilitation from the drug addiction she had battled since her teenage years and the traditional methods of the “senior women” elders in the Australian desert.
Slowly, Ms. Cobby Eckermann said, she started to understand who she was.
“The trauma had been sitting in my body for a long time,” she said.
Ms. Cobby Eckermann traveled to the Australian desert ahead of her trip to Yale to tell her traditional family, the Yankunytjatjara/Kokatha people, about the Windham-Campbell prize and what it meant. She wanted to explain, with the help of translators, that it was for all of them.
She will be accompanied on the trip to the United States by Jonnie and by her daughter, Audrey, who was given to Ms. Cobby Eckermann when she reunited with her family, in keeping with cultural practices. She said her winnings would go toward purchasing a place where her family could spend time together, after decades spent apart.
The organizers of the Windham-Campbell Festival had been thoughtful and respectful of her work, she said. But she also wanted to use the spotlight to highlight the suffering of Native Americans, visiting some during her stay.
“The U.S. might be honoring my story, but they’re ignoring one at their back door,” she said.
Since her first collections of poetry were published in 2010, writing has brought Ms. Cobby Eckermann fellowships, literary festival appearances and the publication of seven books. But above all, she has treasured the sense of healing it has brought and the release of guilt she felt over the adoption of her son.
But she said most Indigenous Australians had not had the same chance to express themselves, with Aboriginal families scared to have arguments at home for fear of social services being called and their children being taken away.
“These are the insults we live with on a day-to-day basis,” she said.
Much was made, when the prize was announced, of the fact that a fairly unknown Australian poet who was unemployed and lived in a trailer was among the winners. But Ms. Cobby Eckermann said the unconventional paths she had chosen, avoiding the pressure to conform to a society she felt had treated her so cruelly, had been essential to her healing and recovery.
