The 25-year-old black man accused of a deadly shooting at a church near Nashville had a note in his car that made reference to revenge for the church massacre carried out by a white supremacist in Charleston, S.C., according to a report by The Associated Press.
The note could help investigators better understand the state of mind of the gunman, identified as Emanuel Kidega Samson, when he fatally shot a woman and left half a dozen wounded as services were ending last Sunday at the Burnette Chapel Church of Christ in the Nashville area. The note also suggests a possible motive for the attack.
Mr. Samson of La Vergne, Tenn., was charged with murder and is being held without bond. The police said they expected additional charges to be filed.
The Associated Press said that its reporters had not seen the note but learned of its contents from two law enforcement officials who read from it. A law enforcement report said that “in sum and in no way verbatim,” the note made reference to retaliation for the actions of Dylann S. Roof, the white supremacist responsible for the 2015 murders at the Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church in Charleston, according to The A.P.
The killings by Mr. Roof, who was convicted last year and later sentenced to death, shocked the country. Mr. Roof, then 21 and lacking any direct ties to white supremacist groups, had become radicalized online and carefully planned the assault, which he carried out after participating in the church’s Wednesday night Bible study. Nine people were killed. Mr. Roof never demonstrated any public remorse for the attack.
After the Charleston massacre, some political and law enforcement officials worried about possible retaliation. But one former federal prosecutor said on Friday that he had been more concerned about imitators.
Although the church that Mr. Roof targeted was predominantly black, the church in last Sunday’s attack had a mixed congregation.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation and the United States attorney’s office in Nashville have opened a civil rights investigation into the shooting in Antioch.
The United States attorney’s office and the Nashville police declined to comment on the note.
Mr. Samson, a legal resident of the United States who immigrated from Sudan in the 1990s, had attended the church in years past but had not been seen there more recently. Police said that four firearms believed to be Mr. Samson’s had been recovered: two pistols from the church and one pistol and one rifle from his vehicle.
Investigators have been trying to figure out what prompted the shooting, exploring the history of any anger or resentments on Mr. Samson’s part, as well as any mental illness.
In June, Mr. Samson sent a text to his father in which he seemed to be threatening suicide. “Your phone is off, I have a gun to my head,” the text, sent shortly after midnight, said, according to a police report made by the father. Using an expletive, he texted his father to “have a nice” life.
On the Friday before the shooting, Mr. Samson was one of about 30 students who attended a class for unarmed security officers at the Academy of Personal Protection and Security in Nashville. The class was about eight hours long. According to the owner of the academy, Buford Tune, who is also an instructor, Mr. Samson received his license and was affable and polite during his time there.
Around 10 a.m. the next day, the company, she said, received a text from Mr. Samson stating that he was not going to return to work there. “Crimson Security Service terminated his employment upon receipt of his message,” Ms. Hemenway said, adding that was the last time Crimson Security communicated with Mr. Samson.