Quiet may well be the new loud in the world of show tunes. Unexpectedly, one of last season’s most acclaimed new musicals, “The Band’s Visit,” did not feature flashy choreography or cathartic 11 o’clock belters. Based on the 2007 art house film of the same title, the show, which played Off Broadway at the Atlantic Theater, is a low-key charmer in which looking at someone in silence carries as much emotional weight as delivering one of David Yazbek’s insidiously catchy songs.
Mastering both was Katrina Lenk, as the sultry owner of the lone cafe in a dead-end Israeli town, who has a brief encounter with a group of marooned Egyptian musicians, led by Tony Shalhoub. Fortunately, Ms. Lenk is now getting ready to reprise her performance at the Ethel Barrymore Theater, where the show starts Broadway previews on Oct. 7.
Being mentioned in the same social media breath as Patti LuPone is no small feat, especially for a relative unknown whose musical focus as a child was the viola.
Ms. Lenk, who grew up in Illinois in a family of Eastern European stock, did not limit herself to that one instrument, or even to a single activity. She picked up the piano and the oboe, participated in school plays and did summer community theater; while she enrolled at Northwestern University to focus on the viola, she also explored facets of musical theater.
Actually, Ms. Lenk, who gives her age as “adult,” started taking dance lessons when she was 3. She eventually got good enough to play Velma Kelly in a Los Angeles production of “Chicago.” It was also there, in 2008, that she landed the title role in the bio-musical “Lovelace: A Rock Opera,” about the troubled former porn star Linda Lovelace. Critical acclaim and awards encouraged Ms. Lenk to try her luck in New York, where she was cast in the 2010 Broadway revival of “The Miracle Worker,” understudying both Alison Pill’s Annie Sullivan and Jennifer Morrison’s Kate Keller.
She never went on.
Ms. Lenk fared better in “Spider-Man” and then in “Once,” where she played the violin-wielding Réza for a year and a half. (Around that time, she also settled in the tellingly down-home neighborhood of Sunnyside, Queens.) “Indecent,” which she joined for its 2015 premiere at Yale Repertory Theater, allowed her to draw on her many skills: Ms. Lenk smoothly navigated Yiddish dialogue, a song in German and occasional violin action, in addition to acting in emotionally intense scenes. Poking around the internet unearths more illustrations of this actress’s versatility, from the pop-rock stylings of her band, Moxy Phinx, to a haunting solo cover of Rufus Wainwright’s “Pretty Things.” Ms. Lenk also names the avant-garde director Robert Wilson as someone she would want to work with.
Hard work and extensive research go into making those performances look intuitive. Ms. Lenk creates back stories for her characters (she imagines Dina to be a former dancer), and for this show, she immersed herself in the music of the Egyptian superstar Oum Kalthoum, and in Israeli films and literature.
