The 15,000-ton armored cruiser U.S.S. San Diego, the only major United States Navy warship lost by the United States during World War I, lies in a watery grave about 10 miles off Fire Island, N.Y., where for nearly a century the corroding hulk has kept the secret of why it sunk.
Six sailors died when the ship capsized and came to a rest 110 feet below the surface of the Atlantic Ocean about 28 minutes after an explosion ripped a hole in its hull well below the water line.
Along with the liner Oregon, which was lost in a collision in 1886, the wreck of the San Diego is among the most popular sites for recreational divers on Long Island because of its proximity to the shore, its tallest parts are only 66 feet deep and, although the ship is upside down, its guns and other distinguishing features are largely intact.
“It’s a nice piece of history,” said Tom McCarthy of East Coast Wreck Diving in Freeport, N.Y., who estimates he has visited the wreck several hundred times.
The San Diego was engaged in guarding European-bound convoys through submarine-infested waters during the first leg of their voyage from the East Coast. The 503-foot-long cruiser was en route from Portsmouth, N.H., to New York when it was sunk, it is assumed, by a floating German mine or a torpedo fired from a U-boat.
Now the Navy hopes to determine the cause and the condition of the wreck in time for the 100th anniversary of the July 19, 1918 tragedy.
Why does it matter more than 99 years later?
“Although ships and weapons are much different now than they were 100 years ago, studying the wreck may still teach us something we didn’t know about anti-submarine warfare,” said Paul Taylor, the head of the communications at the Naval History and Heritage Command, a branch of the Navy tasked with the preservation of naval history.
“This information,” he said, “may prove useful to modern ship designers, naval tactician, and people who develop shipboard damage control techniques” — a particularly relevant resource in light of recent fatal collisions involving naval vessels.
The goals of a research survey being conducted beginning this week, weather permitting, by the Heritage Command’s underwater archaeology branch also include preserving the site, which the Navy considers a war grave, since the six victims of the blast are presumably still entombed in the vessel.
“It’s an added bonus that solving this mystery more fully accounts for the ship’s story, which is a way for us to honor the service and sacrifice of six American sailors who lost their lives in defense of the nation,” Mr. Taylor said.
Robert Neyland, who heads the underwater archaeology branch, said that researchers also hope to determine whether the wreck presents any enduring environmental hazard from leaking fuel or live armaments or other dangers to mariners.
More people have died diving to explore the wreck, the Navy said than in the sinking itself. Recreational diving is allowed — the site is nicknamed the “Lobster Hotel,” but salvaging artifacts or disturbing the site is illegal under the Sunken Military Craft Act of 2004.
Before that, recreational and professional divers retrieved dinnerware, bullets, a two-foot-long artillery shell, lanterns and other objects, some donated to museums. Divers were unsuccessful in raising a 37,000-pound bronze propeller.
Some mariners maintain that the wreck is a potential hazard to navigation and that any money spent preserving it is a waste.
The Navy’s survey will be conducted in collaboration with the University of Delaware’s College of Earth, Ocean and Environment, the Naval Surface Warfare Center and the Fire Island station of the United States Coast Guard.
Underwater robotics and sensors will be used to explore the battle damage to the ship to determine what type of weapon caused the explosion at 11:05 a.m. on July 19, 1918, as the San Diego was zigzagging at 15 knots on its way to New York Harbor to escort a convoy to France.
The explosion on the port side warped the bulkhead, preventing the crew from closing a watertight door, crippled both engines and disabled radio communication, preventing a distress call.
Two enlisted men died instantly in the explosion, another was trapped inside the crow’s nest, a fourth was killed by a collapsing smokestack and another by a falling lifeboat. The sixth, who had been oiling a propeller shaft, was never seen again and presumably drowned.
Capt. Harley H. Christy was the last to abandon ship. From their lifeboats, the nearly 1,200 survivors sang the national anthem and “My Country, ’Tis of Thee”as the San Diego sank.
Two hours later, a gunnery officer reached Point O’ Woods on Fire Island in a lifeboat and summoned rescue ships.
The ship’s captain figured the San Diego had been struck by a torpedo. The Naval Air Service was alerted and bombed what pilots thought was a submerged submarine; it turned out to be the San Diego.
A Naval Court of Inquiry concluded that the culprit was a German mine, one of several laid by the submarine U-156 along the South Shore of Long Island. The History Center contested a more recent claim that a German spy had planted explosives aboard the ship.
The San Diego was launched in 1904 as the U.S.S. California. It was renamed in 1914 to comply with the Navy’s policy of reserving state names for battleships.
Originally assigned to the Pacific, in 1917 it briefly became the flagship of the commander of the Navy’s Atlantic Fleet’s cruiser force. The ship was based in Tompkinsville on Staten Island and Halifax, Nova Scotia.
The San Diego is among more than 2,500 shipwrecks and 14,000 aircraft wrecks around the world that are managed by the Naval History and Heritage Command.