Atlantic Theater Company at the Linda Gross Theater, 336 W. 20th St.
If you think you’ve heard it all before, then you need to listen more closely.
Watching Simon Stephens’s “On the Shore of the Wide World,” the stealth heartbreaker that opened on Tuesday night at the Linda Gross Theater, you may at first feel a tug of impatience. Surely you’ve already met every one of the characters here, in domestic dramas, novels, even television series: those discontented husbands and wives, parents and children, all mired in stagnant lives.
You know more or less where they’re headed, too, which would be nowhere. And it’s not as if the dead-end road they travel is paved with sparkling dialogue or fiery confrontation. The three generations of a working-class family portrayed in this British work, which won the 2006 Olivier Award for Best Play, are mostly quiet-spoken and liable to reach for the closest cliché to fill a silence.
Yet by the end of the Atlantic Theater Company production – directed with gentle care by Neil Pepe — you’ve discovered that this dribbling, homespun prose has shaped itself into patterns of profound poetry, as if words in invisible ink had been held up to a flame. You may also experience the sense that something rich and strange, even cosmic, defines these unexceptional lives. That you can’t find the words for what that something is – and who can? – makes you one with Mr. Stephens’s characters.
Mr. Stephens is best known here for his Tony-winning adaptation of Mark Haddon’s novel, “The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time,” which opened on Broadway in 2014. In that work, he provided a more than serviceable framework for the director Marianne Elliott’s stage wizardry, which conveyed the novel’s distinctive perspective of a teenage boy with an autism spectrum disorder.
While he has also collaborated effectively with boldly experimental directors like Ivo van Hove (in “Song From Far Away”), Mr. Stephens mostly leans toward more self-effacing stagecraft. His plots, at least in outline, seem to have been pulled from a bin of recyclables – tales of restless runaway wives (“Harper Regan,” staged by the Atlantic in 2012), and odd couples gambling on improbable relationships (“Heisenberg,” seen on Broadway last year in a Manhattan Theater Club production).
“On the Shore of the Wide World” is, on the surface, a classic family drama, and rather less dramatic than most. Or so it would seem, judging by the restrained tones, whether fond or quarrelsome, in which people converse. There is so little conspicuous display of emotion that it takes awhile to learn that a tragedy has taken place. And when a character cries (quietly), it has the impact of a dam bursting.
The family, in this case, is named Holmes and has long resided in Stockport, a suburb of Manchester and a frequent setting for Mr. Stephens’s work. Peter (C.J. Wilson), a house restorer, lives with his wife, Alice (Mary McCann) and their two teenage sons, Alex (Ben Rosenfield, very fine) and Christopher (Wesley Zurick).
Peter’s parents, Ellen (a wonderful Blair Brown) and Charlie (Peter Maloney), live nearby. Their overlapping existences are routine-driven and cozy to the point of claustrophobia. Small wonder that each of them talks about fantasies of going elsewhere, of moving to a different town, or even occupying a different bed. Most of them seem destined, though, to stay only on the shore of the wide world that looms beyond.
Scott Pask’s single, multipurpose set has a look of oppressive solidity, with its heavy doors and sturdy central staircase. Christopher Akerlind’s discreet lighting transforms the stage into a place of different homes and rooms, of city buses and bridges.
There is also the abandoned hotel where the Holmes brothers meet up with Alex’s new girlfriend, Sarah Black (Tedra Millan), who pops anti-depressants as if they were candy. The hotel is the favorite hangout of Christopher, the more verbal and flamboyant of the siblings, who develops an instant crush on Sarah.
You wouldn’t thank me if I told you much more of the plot. The story unfolds over months, and the life-altering events that occur are revealed slowly and by indirection, sometimes as if they were conversational afterthoughts. People are opaque to one another in Mr. Stephens’s world, and they are never sure how much they can discuss with others, even (or especially) those closest to them.
Yet you infer an astonishing amount about all the characters, who also include a pregnant book editor (Amelia Workman), who is a client of Peter’s and quotes the Keats ode that gives the play its title; a big-talking, London-based chum of Alex’s (Odiseas Georgiadis); and a well-spoken man (Leroy McClain) who strikes up an unexpected – and initially unwelcome – friendship with Alice.
Certain words and phrases crop up in different contexts, accumulating and shedding weight. “Coward” recurs frequently, appropriate to a work in which people are often paralyzed by ambivalence.
“Batter,” as a verb, is used both frivolously and seriously. (There is one truly shocking scene of physical abuse, though it happens so quickly and subtly that you might miss it, if not for subsequent references.) And note the deployment of matches and cigarettes throughout.
The assumed Mancunian accents, which don’t come naturally to most of the cast, are initially off-putting. But by the end, every cast member has created a detailed and intimate portrait. And the final scene between Ms. McCann (so memorable as Mr. Stephens’s Harper Regan) and Mr. Wilson is beautiful – and devastating.
If you at first feel that some of the performances are too tentative, you come to realize that this hesitancy belongs to characters who are forever hovering on the brink of decisive gestures. “Don’t leave,” they are forever saying to one another, though sometimes you gather they are feeling just the opposite.
They’re all full of such contradictions, and you can tell they are enigmas to themselves. Which makes it all the more uncanny that by the end, you feel you understand them perfectly.