In the first National Hockey League preseason game played in China, the Los Angeles Kings used a third-period scoring spurt to put away the Vancouver Canucks, 5-2, in Shanghai on Thursday.
The teams gave a raucous crowd a fast-paced, physical introduction to the N.H.L., combining for 17 penalties and several power-play opportunities. Tanner Pearson scored twice for the Kings, and Alec Martinez and Jeff Carter each had a goal and an assist.
China has little experience with winter sports and few hockey rinks or players, and the N.H.L. offered a pregame primer that featured team mascots. An announcer came onto the ice to explain the finer points of the game as Fin (Vancouver’s killer whale) and Bailey (Los Angeles’s lion) mimicked infractions like charging, crosschecking, tripping and hooking.
The N.H.L. has a contract to bring two preseason games to China for six of the next eight years. The Kings and Canucks play a second game in Beijing on Saturday.
Andre Ward announced that he is retiring from boxing because he no longer has the desire to fight, leaving the sport at age 33 with an undefeated record and the light heavyweight championship.
Ward released on his website a statement titled “Mission Accomplished,” thanking those who had helped him throughout his career and explaining his reasons for retiring. “I want to be clear — I am leaving because my body can no longer put up with the rigors of the sport and therefore my desire to fight is no longer there,” he wrote.
Ward has won all 32 of his fights, with 16 knockouts, and won the Olympic gold medal as a light heavyweight in 2004.
HBO said Ward will work for it as a boxing analyst.
Atlético Madrid and Chelsea have reached an agreement for the transfer of striker Diego Costa to the Spanish club. Atlético said Chelsea was allowing Costa, who was born in Brazil but had played for Spain’s national team, to travel to Madrid in the coming days to take his medical and complete their contract.
Costa, 28, joined Chelsea from Atlético in July 2014 for 32 million pounds ($41.2 million at the time) on a five-year deal. He helped the club win two Premier League titles in three years, scoring 59 goals in 120 appearances in all competitions. But he was at odds with its current manager, Antonio Conte.
Pinch-hitter Andre Ethier and Curtis Granderson hit home runs as the Los Angeles Dodgers clinched a tie for the National League West title, ending a four-game losing streak by beating the host Philadelphia Phillies, 5-4.
The Dodgers can lock up a fifth straight division crown Friday night with either a victory at home over San Francisco or a loss by second-place Arizona to Miami.
THE PROVIDENCE GRAYS? A home run by shortstop Francisco Lindor led the Indians to a 4-1 road victory over the Los Angeles Angels, Cleveland’s 27th win in its last 28 games. The record for most victories with only one loss is 29, set by the 1884 Providence Grays.
MONDESI SENTENCED The former Los Angeles Dodgers star Raul Mondesi, 46, has been sentenced to eight years in prison for embezzling $6.3 million from 2010 to 2016 when he was mayor of his hometown in the Dominican Republic. He was also ordered to pay a $1.3 million fine.
Nebraska has fired Athletic Director Shawn Eichorst, Chancellor Ronnie Green announced, citing his failure to improve “on-field performance” by the Cornhuskers.
Eichorst has about $1.7 million remaining on a contract that runs through June 2019. He and Mike Riley, the football coach he hired in 2014, had been under increased scrutiny. Riley is just 16-13 at Nebraska, a school that has won five national championships and went to bowl games every year from 1969 to 2003. The Huskers are off to a 1-2 start.
N.B.A. referees will be able to call flagrant or technical fouls on defenders who close in on jump shooters without allowing them space to land, said the senior vice president of replay and referee operations, Joe Borgia.
After calling a foul, officials will be able to look at replay to determine if the defender recklessly positioned his foot in an unnatural way, which could trigger an upgrade to a flagrant, or a technical if there was no contact but an apparent attempt to injure.