New York|Driver of Charter Bus in Fatal Queens Crash Was Fired by M.T.A.
Driver of Charter Bus in Fatal Queens Crash Was Fired by M.T.A.
A charter bus driven by a man who had been fired two years ago by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority barreled through an intersection in Queens early Monday and collided with a New York City bus, killing the charter bus driver and two other people and injuring 16 others, the authorities said.
The driver, Raymond D. Mong, lost his job operating buses for the city in 2015 after he slammed his sedan into two other cars on Interstate 95 in New Haven and then fled the accident scene, according to the police and the M.T.A. He received a suspended jail sentence and was placed on probation for 18 months after being convicted of driving under the influence and evading arrest.
A video posted to social media on Monday showed the charter bus plowing through an intersection in Flushing and slamming into the city bus that had just turned onto Northern Boulevard.
Henry Wdowiak, 68, a pedestrian who was trapped underneath one of the buses, died at the scene. Gregory Liljefors, 55, a passenger on the city bus, and Mr. Mong, 49, died after being taken to separate hospitals, according to the New York City Police Department.
The city bus, a Q20, and the charter bus, which is run by Dahlia Travel and Tours, crashed around 6:15 a.m. at Main Street and Northern Boulevard, said Lee Jones, a Police Department spokesman.
While the left side of the charter bus slammed into the city bus, the other side careered into a Kennedy Fried Chicken restaurant, igniting a small fire that was put out by firefighters shortly after. The police said there were no passengers on the charter bus.
Tammy Yew, 77, was waiting in the median at Northern Boulevard on her way to her housekeeping job when she saw the charter bus zooming down the street.
“The bus came barreling down the street so fast, so fast, it was like an airplane,” she said in Mandarin, waving her hands as she described what she saw.
Mr. Mong and those who were critically injured were taken to NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital/Queens, where four patients were in critical condition late Monday evening; noncritical patients were being treated at Elmhurst Hospital Center, where Mr. Liljefors was taken, and Flushing Hospital Medical Center, according to Michael Fitton, the assistant chief of emergency medical services.
On Monday evening, Mr. Liljefors’s family gathered in his fourth-floor apartment in Flushing, struggling to process what happened earlier in the day. “We’re grieving,” said Chazen Rivera, 34, a stepson, adding that Mr. Liljefors used to work in the ticket booth at the Queens Zoo.
Marcin Kurpiewski was driving on Monday when the police called and told him that his stepfather, Mr. Wdowiak, died in the bus crash. “I pulled over, got out of the car and just fell to my knees,” Mr. Kurpiewski, 37, said in an interview.
He said that his stepfather was a pilot in Poland before moving to the United States and someone who helped anyone in need. “It still feels like he’s coming home,” Mr. Kurpiewski said.
On Monday afternoon, Yong Jun Kim, a passenger on the Metropolitan Transportation Authority bus, limped out of the emergency room at NewYork-Presbyterian with a plastic bag on one foot. Somewhere in the chaos of the bus accident and the aftermath, Mr. Kim, 57, who delivers dry cleaning, had lost a sneaker.
Mr. Kim felt, but did not see, the vehicle that rammed his bus. He said he was thrown from his seat a few rows from the front of the bus and knocked unconscious. When he came to, he said, he saw passengers splayed on the bus floor. It took more than an hour to remove injured passengers from the city bus, the Fire Department said in a statement.
He lifted his sweatshirt and pointed to three ribs covered with medical tape. “Broke, broke, broke,” he said.
Mr. Kim said he was leaving the hospital against doctors’ advice because he needed to catch another bus to visit an uncle. He planned to return later, he said, as he limped away.
A person answering the phone for Dahlia in Flushing confirmed that one of the company’s buses had been involved in the crash but declined to give his name or to answer any questions. Last year, a bus owned by the company and operated by a company called VMC East Coast overturned during snowy weather en route to a Connecticut casino, injuring 30 people.
Mr. Mong’s family could not be reached for comment on Monday.
The bus in Monday’s crash was one of just five operated by Flushing-based Dahlia Group, according to the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration. The company has been cited for enough serious violations to put it in the bottom 20 percent of its peers when ranked on unsafe driving. In the last two years, Dahlia buses have been ticketed for speeding at least four times, including two instances when one of its buses was exceeding the speed limit by at least 15 miles per hour, federal records show.
The only previous citation involving the bus that crashed on Monday was for lights — not its headlights — that were not sufficiently visible.
