So far this year, the lawyer Douglas Wigdor, a conservative Republican, has filed 11 suits against Fox News for defamation, sexual harassment and racial discrimination.
It was late in April, not long after he had filed his first three lawsuits against Fox News and was gearing up to file three more that the lawyer Douglas Wigdor decided he needed a flow chart. His legal barrage against the network was getting confusing. Litigation was flying everywhere. It was leaping off his desk.
And so one day he sat down with some lawyers at his law firm in Manhattan, Wigdor L.L.P., and put together an Excel spreadsheet titled “Chart All Fox Litigation.” There were columns for the captions of the cases, for the names of the various plaintiffs, for motion deadlines and hearing dates. Five months later, after suing Fox again and again (then again and again and again), what started as a simple tool to organize his casework now looks more like a tactical battle plan.
In less than a year, Mr. Wigdor, a self-described conservative Republican, has filed 11 actions against Fox News, in three different courts in New York City, making claims of defamation, sexual harassment and racial discrimination on behalf of 24 individual plaintiffs. His efforts have amounted to a Normandy-like assault against the network that has threatened Fox News and its parent company, 21st Century Fox, with damages in excess of $100 million. While other lawyers have handled more salacious cases against Fox — among them, those that led to the scandal-plagued departures of Roger Ailes, Fox’s founder, and Bill O’Reilly, its most successful host — Mr. Wigdor’s serial suits are surely the broadest and most sustained juridical attack on Fox to be mounted by a single private lawyer.
“My view of 21st Century Fox and Fox News is that from top to bottom there is a systemic culture of not only discriminating against people based on their gender and color, but also of retaliating against them when they stand up to voice complaints,” Mr. Wigdor said the other day, reaffirming the harsh assessment of the network he has made in his suits.
Fox declined to comment on most of Mr. Wigdor’s rhetorical barbs, but last week it issued a statement needling him about the sort of skirmish he was waging.
Television viewers have long been familiar with Fox’s public product, but for more than a decade, there have also been persistent glimpses of its private culture as numerous women have come forward accusing men like Mr. Ailes — or the host Eric Bolling, who was ousted this month after sending lewd text messages to female colleagues — of predatory sexual misconduct. As Mr. Ailes did before he died in May, Mr. Bolling has denied the allegations.
The accusations by Mr. Wigdor’s clients — former news anchors, former news analysts, former accounting department employees — have only deepened the portrait of a toxic culture. One of the people he represents, a regular guest political commentator, says the network retaliated against her after she lodged a rape claim against a Fox Business host. Another, a Bangladeshi payroll worker, says a colleague once referred to him as a “terrorist.” In lawsuits that run to nearly 300 pages, there are charges that the network demoted a freelance reporter at Fox 5 News, its New York affiliate, after she became pregnant; that Fox’s former comptroller repeatedly ridiculed black and Hispanic colleagues; and that some Fox journalists conspired with the White House to produce fake news.
The network has denied these charges and in each of the cases has promised to “vigorously defend” itself. On Monday night, it filed a motion to dismiss the fake news suit, calling it “without merit and legally insufficient.” Two days later, one of the defendants in the suit asked a court to professionally sanction Mr. Wigdor for having whipped up a media frenzy over what he claimed was a “false narrative.” Using the media is one of his favorite tactics, and he has on occasion included details in his complaints — about his defendants’ sex lives, for example — that are sensational and embarrassing but not necessarily legally relevant.
At 48, Mr. Wigdor has found himself as the courtroom general leading an army of Fox complainants largely because of his reputation as one of New York City’s most aggressive employment lawyers. During his career, he has filed gender discrimination suits against Deutsche Bank and Citigroup (both of which, like many of his lawsuits, were settled without a claim of liability), and an age and racial bias suit against The New York Times. In June, he sued Uber, alleging that officials at the company illegally sought the medical records of a woman who claimed she was raped by an Uber driver in India. (An Uber spokesman has apologized that the plaintiff had to “relive” the experience.) And in 2013, after he sued SoulCycle, charging that the indoor cycling studio had cheated an instructor out of his wages, the company banned him from all of its locations. So he sued over that, too, and lost.
The threats have not just come from Fox itself. This spring, Mr. Wigdor held a televised news conference in which he announced additional plaintiffs in an expanding racial bias suit against Fox. Minutes after the event was aired, the police said a man called his office threatening to blow it up. When the man called back, Mr. Wigdor got on the phone with him. Mr. Wigdor said the man called him a “nigger lover,” adding he was going to kill him and his family. Mr. Wigdor called the police, who eventually identified the caller as Joseph Amico, a computer repairman from Las Vegas.
Within three weeks, two New York detectives had traveled to Las Vegas to arrest Mr. Amico, but a standoff ensued when he refused to leave his home. After several hours, a local SWAT team broke into the house and found Mr. Amico in the attic.
Slim and sinewy, with a disarmingly focused gaze, Mr. Wigdor says he has always had a passion for competition. He is a regular tennis player (and claims that while in law school he gave lessons to Alan Greenspan, a future chairman of the Federal Reserve). He bikes each day from his home in Forest Hills, Queens, to his law firm on lower Fifth Avenue. While working on a master’s degree at Oxford University, where he met his wife Catherine, he played starting point guard on its 1995 national champion basketball team.
After working for the Suffolk County district attorney’s office and clerking for a federal judge, Mr. Wigdor joined the New York law firm Morgan, Lewis & Bockius, where he mainly defended corporations accused of workplace discrimination. He didn’t like protecting big companies against their own employees; nor did one of his colleagues at the firm, a young man named Ken Thompson, who became his friend — and, eventually, the Brooklyn district attorney. And so in 2003, well before Mr. Thompson ran for office, the two men formed the firm that still exists today.
One of their biggest cases came in May 2011 when they were hired by Nafissatou Diallo, an African-born hotel maid who accused the French politician Dominique Strauss-Kahn of sexually assaulting her while he was visiting Manhattan. Though the criminal proceeding was a disaster — the charges against Mr. Strauss-Kahn were dropped within months and Ms. Diallo was dragged through a particularly nasty patch of New York media mud — Mr. Wigdor later settled a civil suit against Mr. Strauss-Kahn, the terms of which were not disclosed. It stood as an important moment in Mr. Wigdor’s education in the politics of gender litigation.
Mr. Wigdor’s Fox News suits started in December when Lidija Ujkic, a reporter for the local affiliate Fox 5, came to see him after hearing about a settlement he had reached between Goldman Sachs and a female employee who claimed she had been demoted after getting pregnant. Ms. Ujkic said that much the same had happened to her at Fox.
But his biggest lawsuit arguably came in August. Rod Wheeler, the private detective at the center of Fox News’ questionable coverage of the death of Seth Rich, a young Democratic aide, retained him after reading about his battles with the network. Mr. Wheeler had a bombshell claim: a Fox reporter working in conjunction with a wealthy Trump supporter — and, he said, with the knowledge of the White House — had fabricated quotations from him in an article as part of a scheme to blunt speculation about the president’s ties to Russia.
If all of this sounds personal, it is. While Mr. Wigdor stands to make a fortune if his lawsuits are successful, he seems less interested in collecting contingency fees — he is already a wealthy man — than in pursuing what amounts to a crusade.
While his backing of the president has raised a few eyebrows in his social circle — Lisa Bloom described it coyly as his “one big flaw” — Mr. Wigdor has not been shy about declaring his support for Mr. Trump. During the campaign, he gave Mr. Trump $40,000 and voted for him in both the primary and general elections. A photograph of him and Mr. Trump in South Carolina hangs on his office wall — not far from another of him and Hillary Clinton.
Nonetheless, some of Mr. Wigdor’s friends and colleagues do not quite understand how a man with his conservative bent can spend so much time and energy attacking the nation’s pre-eminent conservative media outlet. Mr. Wigdor countered that his legal war with Fox has not emerged in spite of his conservatism, but because of it.
Mr. Wigdor is trying to change that dynamic. Like most lawsuits, his are seeking monetary damages, but he also said he wants to win structural concessions from the network. He would like 21st Century Fox to fire the top executives who, in his mind, have allowed a culture of discrimination to persist. He added that the network should establish policies requiring managers to be graded on promoting diversity, install an ombudsperson to keep the company compliant with anti-discrimination laws and add more minorities to its board of directors. Currently, the board has 13 members — 10 are white men; one is a woman.
But he is not the first — nor the most powerful — agent to try to reform Fox News. In 2005, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission brought an action against the network settled by a consent decree, the terms of which required Fox to give its employees anti-discrimination training and to put in place anti-harassment and anti-retaliation policies.
Fox says that in recent months it has brought in new female executives and revamped its human resources department, hiring mostly women.
Could Mr. Wigdor bring further changes?
He wasn’t sure. He said that in the early months of his campaign, he gave Fox “the benefit of the doubt that it could change,” but he added he was disillusioned when Mr. Ailes left the network with a $40 million payout and Mr. O’Reilly followed with as much as $25 million.
