When he returns home from the stadium, Philadelphia Phillies shortstop Freddy Galvis often gets into bed and watches reruns of “Friends.” Even though Galvis, 27, is from Venezuela and grasped English late in life, he is so addicted to the sitcom that he has watched every episode of the 10-season run at least five times — and counting — to the exasperation of his wife.
Yankees pitcher Luis Severino, 23, who is from the Dominican Republic, can relate. So can Arizona Diamondbacks outfielder David Peralta, 30, who is Venezuelan, and Miguel Gonzalez, 33, the Texas Rangers pitcher who was born in Mexico, as well as other Latino players throughout Major League Baseball.
Flores, Peralta and Galvis built a rudimentary command of English in school in Venezuela. “But I always got bad grades because I didn’t like that way of learning,” Galvis said.
Gonzalez, who was surrounded by Spanish, his first language, at home, also had English classes in school when he moved to Southern California. Some players also received English instruction after signing with a team.
But these players said that they learned more when they arrived in the United States and fully plunged into English. In terms of immersion, few things compare to landing in a small minor-league town with few Spanish speakers — and needing to order food.
Popular culture, especially “Friends,” was education through entertainment.
Flores said he cannot remember exactly when he first watched “Friends,” but it was sometime early in his minor league career in the United States, perhaps when he was in Class A as a teenager and far from home. Although he said he understood enough English then, he was too unsure to respond in conversation. As he grew more comfortable, he soaked up words from teammates and bought the DVD’s for all 10 seasons of “Friends,” which ran from 1994 to 2004, so he could watch it again at home in the off-season.
Now he is surely baseball’s biggest “Friends” fanatic. He has visited the studio in Burbank, Calif. where the show was filmed , and has chosen the show’s theme song to be played on the stadium public-address system when it’s his turn to bat during home games.
Flores said he still watches it almost every day, and that he had seen every episode at least seven times. “My mom thinks I watch it too much,” he said.
Gonzalez speaks perhaps the best English of this bunch because he was exposed to it at a young age growing up in San Fernando, Calif. Yet he still had help from movies and television shows, including “Saved by the Bell” — and “Friends,” which he watched with an uncle.
“That’s what he watched, so we’d sit there and watch TV with him,” Gonzalez said.
And if Severino did not understand a word from the show, he would ask teammates or friends for help.
Peralta said that listening to music in English and marrying an American woman were also beneficial. He does not need subtitles anymore to watch “Friends,” and still watches it daily despite having already seen every episode.
“When we’re in Arizona, it starts at 11 p.m. on Nick at Nite, so I watch until 1 a.m. and then I go to sleep,” he said.
Most of the players said Joey, the floundering actor played by Matt LeBlanc, was their favorite character. The show’s comedy appealed to them even though — or perhaps because — the lives of six white Americans in the West Village hardly resembled their own.
The New York that Flores has come to know playing for the Mets is not like the one represented in “Friends.” “In photos, it all looks the same, but the traffic and driving around is way different,” he said.
