What does a dance company do when its sole choreographer and leader, a figure as charismatic and intense as Pina Bausch, dies, leaving her dancers without a clear path forward? This was the situation faced by Tanztheater Wuppertal Pina Bausch in the summer of 2009, when Bausch succumbed to cancer, just days after her diagnosis.
The dancers, on tour in Poland, made the decision to perform that night, and the next, and then another week, another year. Eight years and three artistic directors later, they’re still at it. For the next two weeks, they will be at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, performing a double bill of archetypal Bausch’s works from the 1970s, “Café Müller” (1978) and “The Rite of Spring” (1975). These were included in the company’s first season at the Brooklyn Academy, their introduction to the New York audience, back in 1984.
Part of that future is a product of continuity. There aren’t many dance troupes whose performers range in age from their 20s to 60s, but that is the situation in the company today. Many veterans are still there to pass on the knowledge embedded in their bodies and memories. But a new generation has begun to fill the company’s ranks: Fifteen of its 36 dancers never knew Pina, as she is universally known.
And, for the first time, a director has been brought in from outside the Bausch fold. Adolphe Binder, a former director of the GöteborgsOperans Danskompani and the Berlin Ballet, took the reins earlier this year. Ms. Binder has plans not only to keep the Bausch repertory alive — “It is the company’s DNA,” she said — but also to expand it with new works tailor-made for the dancers by outside choreographers.
On the eve of the company’s visit to Brooklyn, I spoke with three dancers, from three distinct phases of the company’s 44-year history. All three spoke via Skype from Wuppertal, Germany.
Nazareth Panadero, 62, has been with the company since 1979. She joined, she said, out of curiosity. She had started as a ballet student in Spain, then moved to Paris, where she discovered the contemporary and experimental dance scene. There, she saw Bausch’s company perform “Blaubart” (1977). She found that she wanted to discover “the woman hidden behind this work.” She joined the company, unsure that she would stay, and has remained, with one short hiatus, until today.
At the Brooklyn Academy, she will appear in a role she has performed for over 30 years: a nervous-looking woman in “Café Müller,” mincing around a chair-strewn room in high heels, looking as lost as if she’d misplaced her keys. At one point she tries, ineffectually, to help a couple trapped in a violent struggle. “She keeps her emotions locked in,” Ms. Panadero said, “so she lives a little bit through the lives of others. She worries about them and projects herself through them.” It’s a typical Bauschian question: Who are we in relation to others?
“Rite” ended up being the first piece she performed with the company, and it is the one in which she will appear in Brooklyn. She dances the role of a woman selected for immolation by a tribe of half-dressed, terrified, sometimes violent humans. In the final minutes she launches into a harrowing dance of death, filled with thrashing, convulsive movements.
Ms. O’Mara, a tall, redheaded dancer who graduated from Juilliard in 2011, is from a Detroit suburb, “just a public-school kid who went to a local dance studio,” she said. When she arrived in New York, she had never heard of Pina Bausch or Tanztheater. Her moment of discovery came at a performance of “Bamboo Blues” in 2008 at the Brooklyn Academy.
When Ms. O’Mara graduated from Juilliard, the company’s future seemed uncertain. But she moved to Germany anyway and spent two years at the Staatstheater Kassel before auditioning for Bausch’s company. She joined 2014.
Gradually, though, she feels things have opened up. And soon, there will be new works to embark on.
