WUHAN, China — Throughout much of China’s economic rise over the past three decades, one Chinese official quietly played a pivotal role in pushing an embrace of free markets.
That official, an urbane central bank official named Zhou Xiaochuan, is widely expected to retire soon. His replacement may be unwilling or unable to follow in his footsteps, leaving uncertain whether China will tackle problems that could threaten its growth.
That transition, which could take place amid a broad reshuffling of senior Chinese leaders in the coming months, would have implications inside and outside China. Mr. Zhou’s successor will play a central role in managing the financial system of the world’s second-largest economy — a system that experts say is still plagued with heavy debt and onerous government control. The next governor of China’s central bank will also have a say in how China manages its currency, a lingering political issue for President Trump and other leaders of China’s major trading partners.
Potential candidates so far include a provincial leader who is a Communist Party stalwart, a top banking regulator, and Mr. Zhou’s top deputy, among others. But any successor will face challenges working for Xi Jinping, China’s president, who appears determined to reassert control in a financial sector that Mr. Xi’s allies see as needing more government control, not less.
“No matter who is eventually chosen for the post, he or she will face a very challenging task of striking the delicate balance on financial reform and preventing systematic financial risks,” said Zhu Ning, a prominent economist at Tsinghua University who is an advocate of a more market-based financial system.
Mr. Zhou’s expected retirement would be part of a broader reshuffle of the country’s leadership pegged to the Communist Party Congress, a twice-a-decade event that officials announced on Thursday would begin Oct. 18. Mr. Xi — who has emerged as the strongest Chinese leader since the death of Deng Xiaoping 20 years ago — is widely expected to use the shuffle to cement his control over the party hierarchy and military. That will give him a strong hand to shape the next government lineup and its financial priorities.
China’s financial system long provided the fuel for the country’s powerful growth engine. But today it is plagued with debt and inefficiencies. Smaller businesses often cannot borrow the money they need to grow, while state-run banks steer vast sums of wasteful loans to bloated state-run companies. Economists worry that it could hold back China’s economic growth in coming years.
Mr. Zhou, a longtime regulator and bank official, has worked to change that. The governor of the People’s Bank of China since 2002, he helped private companies get more loans from government-controlled banks. He temporarily loosened Beijing’s hold over the value of China’s currency. He reached a deal with the International Monetary Fund that brought the currency, the renminbi, into the I.M.F.’s club of global currencies, a step that could help the renminbi someday join the American dollar and the euro as one of the world’s most widely used currencies.
Today, that effort appears to be ebbing.
China has put severe restrictions on the use of China’s currency for international transactions, a move that has crippled for now his dream of making it more globally accepted. The government has also begun discouraging banks from lending heavily to big, deeply indebted private conglomerates even as chronically unprofitable government-run enterprises appear to enjoy unrestricted access to loans.
Now 69, Mr. Zhou is well past the usual mandatory retirement age for someone of his ministerial rank.
Mr. Jiang quietly made a few market-oriented changes during the four years that he ran the Bank of Communications, one of the larger state-run banks, where he led an initial public offering of shares on the Hong Kong stock market. But some advocates of a more market-based financial system have been discouraged by Mr. Jiang’s emergence as a leading candidate.
“If you don’t have a passion for financial reform, you can’t make that happen, and I don’t think Jiang Chaoliang has that passion,” said Gary Liu, the president of the China Financial Reform Institute, based in Shanghai.
Guo Shuqing, the newly appointed head of the China Banking Regulatory Commission, is another possible successor. Others include Pan Gongsheng, the director of the State Administration of Foreign Exchange; Liu Shiyu, a former central bank vice governor who is now the chairman of the China Securities Regulatory Commission; and Yi Gang, currently Mr. Zhou’s deputy.
Another possibility is that the central bank’s power could be sharply diminished. Mr. Xi set up an interagency committee in July to coordinate financial regulation that some experts say could expand to oversee all financial regulation.
Should Mr. Jiang get the nod, it would signal a shift away from Mr. Zhou, an English-speaking familiar face for many foreign leaders. By contrast, Mr. Jiang is perceived overseas as a bit of a mystery.
Mr. Jiang has worked in inland provinces that depend on steel and other heavy industries that have struggled to stay competitive and have required large loans from state-controlled banks to stay in business.
Officials did not respond to requests to interview Mr. Jiang. The People’s Bank of China declined to comment.
Residents in Wuhan, Hubei’s capital, said that they were not especially aware of Mr. Jiang, who unlike some provincial leaders has not pursued a propaganda campaign to burnish his personal image. Recent appearances in the state-controlled news media included meetings with leading tycoons including Jack Ma of Alibaba, the Chinese e-commerce giant.
Experts say he appears to enjoy a strong relationship with Mr. Xi.
