You graduated from Harvard and worked in politics, then management consulting, then Hollywood. What is the through line with those jobs? It has probably been advocacy for people whose stories have historically been excluded or overlooked. I had pretty much every advantage growing up — my father’s a doctor, my mom was a teacher — but when you grow up a black nerd in the Deep South while Steve Urkel is on television, you learn to identify with those on the outside.
 Oh, yeah, very much so. People get confused because of the hair.
After all this, you created “The Black List,” an annual anonymous survey of Hollywood executives about the year’s most well loved but unproduced screenplays. You’ve said one reason executives make movies without much attention to diversity is that their own lives and backgrounds are themselves not very diverse. It’s important that people who are in this system recognize that there is a viable, profitable business in making films that are representative of the diversity that exists in the country and the world. The assumptions that Hollywood makes about what is commercially viable aren’t always accurate.
How so? Conventional wisdom has said for years that you can’t make movies with black people and expect those movies to be commercially successful abroad, so as the foreign box office becomes more and more important to recouping investments, people think that there should be as many white characters as possible. But there’s tons of counterevidence to that claim. “Coming to America” did $160 million foreign in the ’80s. Even “Big Momma’s House 2” made $68 million foreign in 2006. Everywhere in the world you have people projecting themselves onto black athletes; hip-hop is arguably the most important cultural form of the last 30 years around the world. And with gender: Before, let’s say, “The Hunger Games,” there was an assumption that female-driven action movies do not work. In the last 10 years, we’ve certainly seen a number of female-driven action movies make hundreds of millions, if not a billion dollars at the box office. “Titanic” is, in many ways, a female-driven action movie!
Is there a film that you have been proved wrong about? I remember being pitched “Slumdog Millionaire” and thinking, Good luck.
Do you worry that the increase in films with diverse casting will give people a false sense of “wokeness”? Well, it depends on how they internalize that experience, right? If they’re patting themselves on the back and saying, “I saw ‘Moonlight,’ therefore, like, I’ve accomplished something,” no. If you see “Moonlight” and your experience with the black queer community changes or you can recognize their common humanity better because of “Moonlight,” then yeah, I think it’s a good thing.
We’re at a time in our culture when the project of writing characters who are not like you is held up to really high scrutiny. The cliché is to write what you know, right? I think that should be amended to “write what you’ve rigorously researched.” I’m never going to begrudge a writer the opportunity to write and create a story however they so choose. At the same time, I think it’s important to recognize that television and film are a high-resource art form and that they are also a business. I don’t believe that a white man can’t write about a black woman, or a black woman can’t write about an Asian man, but I think that the people who are doing that have an extraordinary responsibility to make sure that those stories are being presented in as authentic a light as possible. You have to do research, and that should really be the burden that artists carry: to do it right, not to not do it.