He remembers hiding out in the jungle as Myanmar’s military fired round after round at the jackfruit trees he and his friends were hiding behind. When the gunfire finally stopped, Min Zaw Oo peeked out at the tree in front of him and counted six bullets that had been directed at his skull.
Years before Mr. Min earned a Ph.D. from George Mason University, or advised the United States military in Afghanistan, or became one of Myanmar’s leading peace negotiators, he spent his early 20s in the thick and humid Burmese jungle, a grunt in a student militia trying to overthrow the country’s military regime.
He remembers once being too weak from typhoid to stand up during a gunfight, toppling into a freshly harvested rice paddy while government troops rained fire from above. “What I’m trying to say is, there were a lot of close calls,” Mr. Min said.
Today, after years of brokering talks between ethnic rebels and the central government to end a decades-long civil war, Mr. Min, 43, looks more like a banker than a former guerrilla fighter from a country that remains stricken by conflict (most recently involving the Rohingya, a predominantly Muslim ethnic group).
Sitting in his office in a crisp button-down shirt, gravelly voiced and impassive, he reflected on how he went from nearly dying in the rain forest to becoming one of the leading intellectuals trying to carry forward the stuttering peace efforts in Myanmar, formerly Burma.
Myanmar’s civil war is one of the most intractable conflicts in the world today, up there with the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. It dates from Burmese independence in 1948, when militias representing ethnic minorities, disappointed by the lack of regional autonomy in Myanmar’s founding Constitution, took up arms against the Bamar-dominated government.
The fighting has been compounded by the iron grip of Myanmar’s military, which formally ruled the country from 1962 to 2010. In late 2015, the National League for Democracy, the political party of the Nobel laureate Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, won an electoral landslide. But fighting continues in various parts of the country, dashing hopes of a change to civilian leadership bringing peace.
Since returning to Myanmar in 2012 after 21 years in exile, Mr. Min has spent his time shuttling between rebel positions and government compounds and seeking common ground. He and his colleagues at the Myanmar Peace Center achieved a major breakthrough in 2015, when eight rebel militias agreed to a cease-fire on the eve of the elections, the country’s first relatively free and fair vote in decades.
The Myanmar Peace Center closed in 2016, and since then Mr. Min has led a task force monitoring the 2015 cease-fire.
Mr. Min said he was able to succeed in negotiations like this because of his combination of military and academic training. “It was being book smart and street smart,” he said. His recounting of a relatively insignificant incident shed light on his unusual and, some say, ingenious methods of resolving disputes.
Having heard “there was some issue” between the Shan State Progressive Party, an ethnic political party with an armed wing, and the military, he said, he invited representatives of both sides on an excursion to a local waterfall.
“On the way to the waterfall, we had a chance to talk,” Mr. Min explained. “It’s just informal chitchat, but informal chitchat is very important to prevent life from being lost.” Later, after a formal meeting on the matter, the generals and rebel leaders exchanged phone numbers, providing a channel for defusing future tension.
The life experiences that built Mr. Min into that effective negotiator began in adolescence. His father, a prosperous Chinese-Malay businessman and immigrant, had always encouraged his bookish son to avoid politics. But when Mr. Min was a teenager he defied his family and joined the student protest movement, concerned that the Burmese military government was strangling the country.
After the military violently suppressed mass protests in 1988, Mr. Min joined other idealistic Burmese students in fleeing to remote jungles on Myanmar’s borders. He spent four years with the All Burma Students Democratic Front fighting the government alongside ethnic rebel groups.
He decided it was time to go back to school.
As it happened, his timing was excellent. In the mid-1990s, the United States offered scholarships to Burmese exiles. “I literally wrote the application essay in a trench,” Mr. Min said.
He aced the required tests and was whisked from his jungle hide-out to Indiana University to begin the pursuit of a degree in government. But he began suffering from depression and undiagnosed post-traumatic stress disorder, plagued by nightmares of soldiers chasing him.
“In the jungle, even though there’s nothing there, I felt I am a revolutionary fighting for a good cause,” he said, explaining his plight. “In the U.S., people around you don’t even know where you’re from.” He began seeing a psychologist.
After transferring to three other universities, he eventually settled in at George Mason and its department of conflict analysis and resolution, where he built a database to analyze democratic transitions in 86 countries over the previous half-century.
Insights from his research led him to break with the Burmese exile movement in the mid-2000s. He realized at that point that even if the ragtag collection of rebel groups were somehow to defeat the military, that would only lead to more fighting. So Mr. Min became an advocate of engagement with the government, arguing that it offered the best chance for a gradual transition to democracy. Other exiles considered him a traitor. “It was 99 versus one,” he said.
In 2012, he accepted the military government’s invitation to return and assist in negotiating the peace process. He says he has since developed working relationships with both the military and Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi, though is not affiliated with any political faction.
A few weeks ago, he stepped down from his current job to establish a think tank for research on political solutions to impasses in the peace process.
