Auto Racing|Kyle Busch Knows He’s a Villain. The Black Hat Fits Just Fine.
Kyle Busch Knows He’s a Villain. The Black Hat Fits Just Fine.
Kyle Busch, the cantankerous and profane stock-car driver whose fan base calls itself Rowdy Nation, wears his Nascar championship ring from 2015 on his middle finger. He laughed when he was asked if the ring placement was a statement.
“It was just the one that it fit,” he said, looking down at his finger.
Busch, 32, got off to a rough start in the opener of the 10-race, 16-driver playoffs last Sunday, finishing 15th at Chicagoland Speedway after he was hampered by an unscheduled pit stop and a pit-road penalty. He is fifth in the standings, 41 points behind the leader, Martin Truex Jr., entering Sunday’s race in Loudon, N.H.
He vowed after Sunday’s race to move on, but that is not so simple for Busch, who draws the loudest boos — by far — during driver introductions.
The only other driver who can generate even half as much animosity in the grandstands is Jimmie Johnson, who can win his eighth championship, breaking the record he shares with two beloved stock-car legends: Richard Petty and Dale Earnhardt Sr.
Busch was simply declaring a fact, and he seems to like being disliked. Nascar racing is not quite the running soap opera it used to be, with designated good guys and bad guys. Young drivers are polished in public relations, friendly but bland. Busch, whose older brother Kurt also qualified for the playoffs, is defiant and different.
“People love to hate him; he doesn’t care,” said Chase Elliott, 21, another playoff driver, who is the son of the retired champion Bill Elliott.
As a driver for the powerful team owned by Joe Gibbs, Busch figures he will have a car strong enough to contend for victory every week. The difference between Busch and most other drivers is that he has a swashbuckling attitude for an entire race.
Races are now divided into stages, with bonus points awarded for leading a stage, and Busch has 12 stage victories. Truex leads with 18, but no other driver in the series has more than four.
At 64 days from first race to last, the Nascar playoffs are even longer than the Stanley Cup playoffs in hockey. The four drivers who qualify for the championship weekend Nov. 19 in Homestead, Fla., will already have been racing against one another for 35 weekends.
Tempers shorten. Remarks, either tweeted or spoken, become fuses.
And there is plenty of spillover between Keselowski and Busch, who have turned into adversaries.
Busch has turned his villainy into high camp. After he swept three races last month in Bristol, Tenn., he climbed on top of his car, took a broom that was handed to him and animatedly swept off the hood. He was merely celebrating a rare feat, but it irked many fans.
“The attributes that is takes to be a good racecar driver don’t necessarily line up with what it takes to be a good person,” Keselowski said.
He was referring to drivers in general, but he and Busch apparently do not speak to each other, instead delivering their taunts through the news media and social media.
The cars driven by Keselowski and Busch tangled during a race last month in Watkins Glen, N.Y., with Busch vowing to his crew that he “will kill” Keselowski if he sees him. It was the third time in a one-year span that the two drivers had made contact.
Busch cooled off, but then Keselowski tweeted last Friday after a practice session that drivers in Toyotas, like Busch, have a clear advantage over Chevrolet and Ford drivers. Keselowski, who drives a Ford, suggested that Nascar should balance the playing field.

Before his latest clash with Keselowski, Busch had extolled the virtues of a little tension.
Busch and Keselowski were among the six drivers brought to New York for a media luncheon two weeks ago. Placed at adjacent tables, Busch and Keselowski barely acknowledged each other’s presence. The same thing happened during a pre-race driver parade on Sunday.
“You’re not going to be mad-dogging each other,” Busch said, meaning hunting down a driver during a race.
