WASHINGTON — The head of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Brock Long, has received widespread praise for his handling of the federal response to Hurricane Harvey, the first major natural disaster faced by the Trump administration.
But now Mr. Long faces an even bigger test: FEMA is burning through money as it continues its recovery efforts in storm-battered Texas and ramps up assistance for the anticipated damage from Hurricane Irma, which expected to hit South Florida on Saturday.
Even before Hurricane Harvey barreled into Texas and Louisiana, the agency was already responding to natural disasters in 20 states, from wildfires in the West to severe storms in Michigan and West Virginia. And more is likely to come: The hurricane season runs through the end of November.
Nevertheless, Mr. Long, a former director of the Alabama Emergency Management Agency, said he is confident that the agency will be able to handle whatever damage is caused by Irma.
“We’re not going to let paperwork and money get in the way of saving lives,” Mr. Long said in an interview on Friday, though he said staffing could be strained while the agency confronts both hurricanes.
Mr. Long had deployed hundreds of people as of Thursday to Florida, where they will coordinate with the state’s emergency management officials. Other FEMA workers are staged in Georgia and South Carolina waiting to provide assistance to storm victims as Irma moves up the East Coast.
He said teams from the agency were also sent to Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands to help with recovery from Irma, which was a Category 5 hurricane as it moved through the Caribbean.
In a rare bipartisan effort, the House overwhelmingly approved $7.9 billion in disaster relief funding on Wednesday to help victims of Harvey in Texas and Louisiana. The measure passed 419-3.
The Senate followed suit on Thursday, passing a $15.2 billion hurricane relief package by a vote of 80 to 17 that would also increase the nation’s debt ceiling and keeps the government running through the end of the year. Senators added an additional $7.4 billion in Community Development Block Grant funding for areas affected by disasters.
The House approved the combined bill on Friday, and Mr. Trump signed it into law.
Still, federal and state officials point out that the money was requested for Harvey recovery; it is difficult to say how much more funding the agency will need to deal with damage from Irma until after the storm passes through.
Mr. Long said FEMA maintains large supplies of food, bottled water, medical supplies, cots and tarps for roofs, all of which were put in place ahead of Hurricane Irma. FEMA also has nearly 11 million liters of water and nearly 7.5 million meals staged in Alabama.
Mr. Long said the agency also has generators and other equipment ready to bring in to areas damaged by the storm after Irma passes through.
FEMA’s preparedness measures are the result of the now-infamous response to Hurricane Katrina during the George W. Bush administration, widely seen as inadequate and an example of government incompetence.
The Obama administration also made several overhauls to the agency, which focused on increasing preparedness.
In addition to prepositioning supplies in anticipation of natural disasters, other changes require officials responsible for responding to natural disasters or terrorist attacks to meet regularly to conduct drills and design and update plans for responding to worst-case scenarios.
Even when a storm is less disastrous than predicted, the government has to spend time and money getting ready, experts say.
“An emergency response is an operation with lots of moving pieces that need to be practiced over and over again,” said Paul M. Rosen, former chief of staff at the Department of Homeland Security under President Barack Obama.
That includes responding to unexpected earthquakes, a conflict with North Korea, or even how to deal with hurricanes that strike the United States within a matter of days, Mr. Long said.
And though FEMA is stretched thin as it responds to disasters across the country, Mr. Long said he remains confident.
“Despite everything that’s going on, this is what we train for,” he said.