Policing groups argue that it’s an essential tool in combating drug trafficking.
Critics say it’s been misused to generate revenue, in some cases from suspects never convicted of wrongdoing.
That was part of the reason for a California law that went into effect this year tightening civil forfeiture rules.
The money, she explained, is needed as evidence.
That rationale drew skepticism from some criminal justice experts.
“If the hot dog vendor is operating without a permit, the proper mechanism is to give him a ticket,” said Lee McGrath, senior legislative counsel at the Institute for Justice, a public-interest law firm that has been critical of civil forfeiture practices.
“The idea that certain serial numbers on certain bills are evidence is an absurd concept,” he added.
By Monday, the clamor over the case was so intense that the university opened an investigation.
An online fund-raiser to help the vendor, identified in reports as Beto Matias, has raised nearly $70,000.
Martin Flores, who recorded the video and initiated the campaign, said some of the money would be used to buy Mr. Matias a proper food truck.
At an event in Cupertino on Tuesday, Apple unveiled the iPhone X, a $999 luxury model with an edge-to-edge screen that you unlock with your face.
The company also announced a new iPhone 8, 8 Plus, Apple TV and Apple watch.
Our tech columnist reflected on 10 years of the iPhone: It distracted us, gave us Uber and made selfies a thing.
The pika, a tiny, round-eared cousin of the rabbit, doesn’t handle heat well.
So climate change has posed a problem.
New research says the mountain-dwelling animals have vanished from part of the northern Sierra Nevada where they once roamed.
In the area of study, about 64 square miles in the north Lake Tahoe area, the average temperature rose more than 3 degrees Fahrenheit between 1910 and 2015.
The shift may seem subtle, but in the mountains, habitat changes rapidly with elevation.
“So relatively small increases in temperature take away a huge amount of these high-elevation species’ range,” said Joseph Stewart, an ecologist at U.C. Santa Cruz and lead author of the study.
The pika likely succumbed to a combination of threats introduced by the warmer climate, among them overheating, lack of food and increasing vulnerability to disease and predators, he said.
Pikas are not yet considered endangered. Mr. Stewart said you can still spot them at higher elevations within the Tahoe area.
But perhaps not indefinitely.
Current climate projections suggest suitable pika habitat in the region could disappear almost completely by 2050.
The California Today columnist, Mike McPhate, is a third-generation Californian — born outside Sacramento and raised in San Juan Capistrano. He lives in Los Osos.