Q. I grew up in the northeast Bronx, and I remember my father and neighbors mentioning that back in the 1920s an airport was planned in the marsh. According to legend, a biplane came in for a landing and ended up in a cherry tree, destroying any chance of further developing the project. Is there any truth to this?
That was a minor bit of turbulence, however, as plans for a major airport in the Bronx ran up against a much more difficult foe: the Great Depression.
Discussion of a large airport in the New York area dates to 1925, but little was done until 1927, when Charles Lindbergh’s solo trans-Atlantic flight kicked the effort into high gear. By the end of the year, the Commerce Department, led by future president Herbert Hoover, had identified six potential locations: four in New York City, two in New Jersey.
One of the New Jersey sites, in the Newark area, and now known as Newark Liberty International Airport, opened on Oct. 1, 1928. Plans for a New York counterpart would be complicated by a private company’s foray into the scramble.
That company was the Curtiss-Wright Corporation, at the time the nation’s largest aviation firm, which was formed in 1929 by the merger of several aeronautics companies.
With more than $35 million in cash on hand, Curtiss-Wright set out to expand its business from simply manufacturing aircraft to creating a system of airports across the nation. New York was a natural fit, and the marshland of the eastern Bronx provided good value.
Residents of the neighboring Village of Pelham Manor, understandably, did not like the idea of an airport in their backyard; although the village was located in Westchester County, local officials attempted to alter zoning laws to prevent the airport’s construction.
The airport appeared inevitable, but in October 1929, the stock market crashed. By 1936, Curtiss-Wright was more than a half- million dollar in arrears on its property taxes on this one site, and soon liquidated its airport subsidiary.
By that point, Mayor Fiorello H. La Guardia, unsatisfied with the travel time from Brooklyn’s Floyd Bennett Field to Manhattan, had shifted his sights to northern Queens. That airport, which now bears his name, opened in 1939.
Freedomland U.S.A., a theme park intended to rival Disneyland, would open on the Bronx airport site in 1960. Although it was extremely popular, it closed for good in 1964 to make way for the construction of the housing development Co-Op City.
The Bronx can still claim one aviation distinction: the former Morris Park racetrack was converted to the world’s first established airfield in 1908. It was torn down for development a few years later.