Some claim the three essential books in Texas history are the Bible, the Warren Commission report and Larry McMurtry’s “Lonesome Dove,” his Pulitzer Prize-winning novel about 19th-century cattle drives. This last August, as I watched Hurricane Harvey intensify on my TV screen, the 50 inches of rain in Houston breaking national records, I stayed clear of the Book of Revelation and Oswald and instead hunkered down in safe-haven Austin reading McMurtry. Not, however, his western-themed “Lonesome Dove” — set in the Great Plains and Big Sky country — but his underappreciated Houston trilogy of “Moving On” (1970), “All My Friends Are Going to Be Strangers” (1972), and “Terms of Endearment” (1975), the best novels ever set in America’s fourth largest city. Additionally, his nonfiction essay collection, “In a Narrow Grave” (1968), remains the gold standard for understanding Houston’s brash rootlessness and civic insecurities.
Back in the early 1980s I was the night manager of Second Story Books in Washington, D.C. At the time I was working on my Ph.D. in American history at Georgetown University and moonlighted at this job for rent money. Almost like clockwork, 30 minutes before closing time, McMurtry would enter with leashed dogs and purchase dozens of used and rare books. Booked Up, his own shop, was then just a few blocks away. We became friendly and I soon collected his first editions.
Nowadays, I teach American history at Rice, McMurtry’s old stamping grounds, and during Harvey I decided to revisit his Houston trilogy to see if the books still sparkled; they do. By using recognizable landmarks like high-spouting Mecom Fountain and ostentatious River Oaks, by drawing upon the social conditions of the metro area, by bringing slapstick to Houston’s six historic wards, McMurtry has bestowed lasting honor on the flood-prone city. In the Republic of Letters he has made Houston matter.
“Moving On,” the first volume, a sprawling 794-page chronicle and sociological study of urban life, incongruously captures both Houston’s honky-tonk rodeo milieu and the high-learning culture of Rice. Strange clouds belonging “as much to the earth as to the sky,” constantly “smeared and befogged with heat waves,” provides the narrative with a sultry feel. The protagonist is Patsy Carpenter, a 24-year-old quick-tongued married woman full of adulterous longing. The Times critic Janet Maslin once praised McMurtry for writing so lovably about women, and “Moving On” could be Exhibit A. Somewhat controversially, McMurtry, in fact, maintains that open-armed Houston is “the most female city in Texas,” the Mother for the entire Gulf South, because it takes so many searching souls into her welcoming bosom.
Although the conflicted hero of “All My Friends,” the second installment, is Danny Deck, an eccentric Beat-styled alter ego to McMurtry, the narrative’s intrepid female characters sizzle with personality. When McMurtry wrote this novel Houston was already a fast-changing transitional hub. Much of the human influx in the 1960s and 1970s arrived from the range and oil fields of rural Texas. “There were parts of Houston so obscure that even the cops didn’t know they were there,” he wrote, “pocket ghettos and old forgotten neighborhoods that had been cut off by the freeways.” Today, Houston’s tradition of “transition” consists of arriving immigrants from places like Mexico, Vietnam and Nigeria, all striving for fresh starts, forced to negotiate new identities, believing that all whimsical fantasies are within grasp.
Traditionally, most visiting writers, particularly those from the Northeast and Europe, raked raw Houston’s spongy flatness, subtropical humidity and pirate mentality. These hard-and-fast critics forfeited the opportunity to explore such dynamic neighborhoods as the Tre’ and Montrose. Back in 1928 H.L. Mencken arrived to cover the Democratic convention, whining about having to “endure” the “unpleasantness” of Houston and left it “at last with a considerable distaste for it.” Not to be outdone, Simone de Beauvoir, in “America Day by Day” (1948), declared Houston as “gloomy as Buffalo.” In “Of a Fire on the Moon” (1970), Norman Mailer lacerated the Space City for being a white-power “superstructure” of one-dimensional technocrats, slide-rule engineers and phony art patrons.
Contrary to these conventional raps, McMurtry understands that Houston isn’t a one-industry Big Oil town, but a fast-paced dance spread over a vast 600 square miles, an entrepreneurial haven that routinely takes two brazen steps forward, only to be slapped back a hard notch. Donald Barthelme fans may disagree, but I think Houston’s literary high-water mark is embedded in McMurtry’s underrated novel “Some Can Whistle” (1989), a sequel to “All My Friends,” but not part of the trilogy. Deck is all grown up now, a Hollywood producer, and driving from Dallas to Houston to commune with his estranged daughter. Zipping past the waffle houses and strip malls along the Interstate, he is seized by a mounting excitement. Anything is possible in Houston. As he approaches Buffalo Bayou he spots a “big, raunchy-looking girl with long hair flying,” who’s “rocketing” like a banshee down the freeway heading into the belly of downtown. To Deck’s astonishment she is applying makeup with one hand while tapping out musical rhythms with the other. Looking over at Deck she honks as if to say, “Let’s go,” and then jets away into the can-do night.
