His husband, David Kermani, confirmed his death.
Mr. Ashbery’s early work was mostly known in avant-garde circles, but his arrival as a major figure in American literature was signaled in 1976, when he became the only writer to win the Pulitzer Prize, the National Book Award and the National Book Critics Circle Award in the same year, for his collection “Self-Portrait in a Convex Mirror.” The title poem of the volume is a 15-page meditation on the painting of the same name by Parmigianino, the Italian Renaissance artist.
Mr. Ashbery was originally associated with the New York school of poetry of the 1950s and ’60s, joining Kenneth Koch, James Schuyler, Frank O’Hara and others as they reveled in the currents of modernism, surrealism and Abstract Expressionism then animating creative life in the city, drawing from and befriending artists like Jackson Pollock, Willem de Kooning and Jane Freilicher.
That poetry is by turns playful and elegiac, absurd and exquisite — but more than anything else, it is immediately recognizable. If some poets remind us of the richness of American poetry by blending seamlessly into one of its many traditions, Mr. Ashbery has frequently seemed like a tradition unto himself. It is a cliché to praise a writer by saying no one has ever sounded quite like him, and yet: No one has ever sounded quite like him.
Not that they have not tried. Charles McGrath, the editor of The New York Times Book Review from 1995 to 2004, recalled that a large portion of new poetry titles during his tenure could be (and often were) tossed into a pile labeled “Ashbery impersonations.” And Mr. Ashbery remains far and away the most imitated American poet.
And the names which stem from them branch out to other referents.
The railing as the tulips yawn and crack open and fall apart.
Scalloped corn, stewed tomatoes, rice pudding and milk.
And now it is time to wait again.
It is often easier to say what an Ashbery poem feels like than what it is about, and Mr. Ashbery relished that uncertainty.
for as many days as it pleases it to cover you.
and the dead-letter office dissolves in the blue acquiescence of spring.
The inclusion of the cliché “get a handle” is typical of Mr. Ashbery. He enjoyed mixing elements of everyday speech with self-consciously elevated language, allowing the demotic and the literary to build on each other’s unique energies and occasionally deflate them.
Some poets resemble oysters, taking years to yield a single pearl, but Mr. Ashbery was a more like a fountain: He produced 28 individual collections of poetry, and his poems ranged from a handful of lines to more than 200 pages.
He was proficient in an abundance of poetic techniques, and often enjoyed highlighting the artificiality of the traditions in which he worked. For example, “Farm Implements and Rutabagas in a Landscape” is one of the best-known modern examples of the sestina form, which originated in 12th-century Provence, yet the poem is centered on characters from the Popeye comic strip, like Swee’Pea and the Sea Hag.
He once wrote poems in French and then translated them back into English in order to avoid customary word associations. (The poems are called, of course, “French Poems.”) Every line of his lengthy poem “Into the Dusk-Charged Air” includes the name of a river.
Given the idiosyncratic nature of his talent, it is perhaps unsurprising that Mr. Ashbery had his share of bad reviews from critics who found his work either willfully inscrutable or devoted to aesthetics at the expense of political engagement.
John Ashbery was born on July 28, 1927, in Rochester, the first of two sons of Chester F. Ashbery and the former Helen Lawrence. He grew up in Sodus, N.Y., in Wayne County, where his father was a fruit farmer.
One of his most meaningful early relationships was with his maternal grandfather, Henry Lawrence, who was a well-known physicist and professor at the University of Rochester. Mr. Ashbery spent long periods in his grandfather’s large, dark Victorian house, where he discovered Dickens, Eliot and Thackeray.
In 1945, he was admitted to Harvard, where his fellow students included a host of future literary eminences, including Harold Brodkey, Robert Bly, Donald Hall, Kenneth Koch, Robert Creeley, John Hawkes, Adrienne Rich and Barbara Zimmerman, later Barbara Epstein, the founding co-editor of The New York Review of Books.
Mr. Ashbery received an M.A. from Columbia in English, and then got a job writing advertising copy for Oxford University Press and McGraw-Hill. In New York, he discovered the work of John Cage, whose atonal compositions had a lasting influence on him.
In general, the group favored indirection, spontaneity and casual wit, and most members were strongly influenced by the visual arts and French Surrealism (as is often the case with poetic circles, however, the connections among members were as much personal as technical).
In 1955, Mr. Ashbery won the Yale Younger Poets prize for his first collection, “Some Trees.” While on a Fulbright scholarship to Paris, he began writing art criticism and editing small journals. In Paris, he also met Pierre Martory, a writer with whom he lived for nine years, and whose poems he would later translate to critical praise.
After roughly a decade in France, Mr. Ashbery returned to New York, where he became executive editor of ARTnews and continued to work as an arts journalist. He met Mr. Kermani, then a graduate student in Middle Eastern studies at Columbia, who would later become director of the Tibor de Nagy Gallery. Mr. Ashbery dedicated both “Flow Chart” and “Self-Portrait in a Convex Mirror” to Mr. Kermani.
After ARTnews was sold in 1972, Mr. Ashbery supported himself by teaching and writing art criticism, though he found the latter endeavor exhausting. Years later he recalled his tenure as the art critic for Newsweek as an especially anxious period, because he was constantly afraid that a famous artist would die, requiring Mr. Ashbery to go to the magazine’s offices in the middle of the night to write an obituary.
A MacArthur Foundation grant in 1985 ultimately saved him from the need for full time employment. In 1992, he won another large prize, the Antonio Feltrinelli International Prize for Poetry, and in 1993, the French government made him a Chevalier de L’Ordre des Arts et des Lettres.
Mr. Ashbery taught at Brooklyn College in the 1970s. Beginning in 1990, he taught at Bard College in Annandale-on-Hudson, spending much of his time at the house he shared with Mr. Kermani. The weathered stone structure overlooked the city courthouse and, he once told The Times, reminded him of his beloved grandfather’s home.
In his later years, Mr. Ashbery was a revered figure for many poets — indeed, his eminence has been one of the few things the often contentious world of American poetry could generally agree upon. And he was increasingly visible in the broader culture.
Mr. Ashbery was the first poet laureate of MtvU, the subsidiary of MTV broadcast only on college campuses, and his lifelong devotion to film, and his influence on it, was celebrated by the Harvard Film Archive. Yet despite his literary celebrity, he remained for many readers enigmatic.
On a distant hill, or else lets the whole picture slip into foam.
