The curtain is about to come down on the eight weeks of emergency track repairs at Pennsylvania Station that inspired that warning from Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York. And by the accounts of some of Amtrak’s harshest critics, the months went more smoothly than anticipated for the many thousands of commuters who travel through Penn Station on the Long Island Rail Road and New Jersey Transit.
Service is scheduled to revert to normal on Tuesday, but regular commuters are hoping things will not return to the way they were. Before Amtrak, which owns Penn Station, decided to take drastic action at the rail hub, derailments and other transit disruptions had begun to seem routine. Commuters were constantly bracing for the next cascade of delays.
Now, Joseph J. Lhota, whom Mr. Cuomo appointed chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, promises a “new normal” of improved service. He said on Wednesday that the Long Island Rail Road had posted its best on-time performance of the year in July, despite having had to cancel some trains and divert others to accommodate Amtrak’s repairs.
“We’re proud to say that we achieved our goal of minimal disruption for Long Island Rail Road customers,” Mr. Lhota said. He attributed the uneventful summer to coordinated planning and thorough communication. “It’s all about focused management,” Mr. Lhota said.
At least one of those customers does not have unpleasant feelings about having to alter her daily commute for several weeks: Karen M. Roth, a paralegal who commutes from Rockaway, N.J., to Midtown Manhattan.
“It’s been surprisingly OK,” Ms. Roth said, while riding home on the Morris & Essex line Wednesday evening.
She took the PATH system to Hoboken Terminal to catch that train, as she has done since New Jersey Transit started diverting Morris & Essex trains there on July 10. But rather than ruing the complication, Ms. Roth found a bright side.
She did not have to endure the nightly scrum at Penn Station while waiting to learn which platform to dash toward. At Hoboken, her train home was always ready and waiting on the same track, she said.
And, Ms. Roth added, when the weather was especially nice, she took advantage of the temporarily free ferry rides from Hoboken to Midtown. With no charge for transferring to the PATH or ferry during the service disruption, and the temporary discount on her usual $451 monthly train pass, Ms. Roth said she saved more than $500 on commuting costs.
She said she would return to her old routine when her train resumes going to Penn Station next week. “The difference is I’m no longer averse to just getting on the train to Hoboken to get to work,” she said.
Ms. Roth said she had not had a train canceled the entire summer, but in his testimony Mr. Santoro acknowledged that a shortage of crews had caused an unacceptable number of cancellations. “There is little patience or understanding when delays or disruptions occur because not enough crews are available,” Mr. Santoro said.
He told the lawmakers that he expected to resolve that problem this fall. But they may have been more interested in his response to the startling testimony of Todd Barretta, whom Mr. Santoro had fired just six months after hiring him as the agency’s chief compliance officer.
Mr. Barretta described New Jersey Transit as “one giant runaway train” fueled by “ignorance, arrogance, hypocrisy, incompetence, patronage, covering up and corruption.” He said he had been reprimanded and shunned by Mr. Santoro for criticizing the “culture of secrecy” that pervaded the agency. Most importantly, he said the public was in peril and declined to say that he would feel safe riding on New Jersey Transit.
In a rebuttal, Mr. Santoro said that Mr. Barretta had known him for only a few months, “so how he can make that allegation is certainly interesting.” He said Mr. Barretta had been suspended for misusing his company car and ultimately terminated.
Mr. Santoro said his best estimate of the cost of adjusting schedules and paying for riders’ PATH and ferry fares was about $25 million. He said his agency would talk to Amtrak about reimbursement for some or all of that expense. But he reassured the lawmakers that New Jersey Transit would not raise fares in this fiscal year.
Mr. Cuomo has called for Amtrak to cover New York’s additional costs this summer, including the costs of buses and ferries that drew fewer riders than the transportation authority anticipated. In July, the agency estimated those costs at $58 million.