WALLER, Tex. — In late July, when dates were announced for a series of concerts featuring the enigmatic singer-songwriter Daniel Johnston performing with members of bands including Wilco, Built to Spill and Fugazi as part of his rotating cast of backing musicians, the shows were billed as Mr. Johnston’s final tour. But sitting in his home on a rural cul-de-sac in this farming community 45 miles from Houston on Monday, Mr. Johnston seemed surprised at this news.
“Why would it be?” he asked, between drags on a Marlboro and ravenous gulps of orange drink from a large plastic cup.
Mr. Johnston is only 56, but the idea of him quitting the road isn’t unreasonable. He has battled manic depression and schizophrenia most of his adult life, and in recent years endured multiple physical ailments, including diabetes, a kidney infection and hydrocephalus, a condition in which fluid on his brain caused him to frequently lose his balance. In the last year, his mental health also worsened.
“We had to call the police twice in the last three months and forcibly take him into a clinic to adjust his medications,” said his older brother, Dick, a genial former computer consultant who also manages Mr. Johnston’s career. “He’s doing pretty good now,” Dick added.
Mr. Johnston first emerged as a songwriting savant from Austin’s proudly left-field music scene in the 1980s. His early cassettes, decorated with his warm, cartoonish drawings, overflowed with winsome, guileless pop songs recorded on a boombox. Taking musical cues from the Beatles and Bob Dylan, his songs narrated with precision and humor Mr. Johnston’s shaky path through the world, documenting his struggles with his own sanity and his dogged pursuit of love.
The sheer volume of his work suggested a mania or compulsion, but he harbored a naked ambition for mainstream success. He talked his way onto MTV in 1985 and reveled in the praise of famous fans like Sonic Youth and Kurt Cobain. But a brief stint on a major label notwithstanding, Mr. Johnston’s high-pitched, off-kilter singing voice, uncomfortably intimate lyrics and erratic behavior fated him to be alternative rock’s eccentric mascot, not its shining star.
On a trip to New York in 1988, he assaulted the Sonic Youth drummer Steve Shelley, landed in Bellevue Hospital Center and upon his release went straight to the punk dive CBGB to perform. Two years later, while his father, Bill, was flying him from Austin to West Virginia in a private plane, Mr. Johnston had a psychotic episode and caused the plane to crash land. Amazingly, he and his father survived, largely unharmed. At several points, Mr. Johnston’s psychiatric treatment has required extended stays at inpatient facilities, and although he now lives with some degree of independence, he requires considerable assistance.
On the day I visited him, he and his family had suffered a new blow: Only hours earlier, Mr. Johnston’s father, who lived next door, had died. He was 94 and in poor health; when I arrived, the sheets and blankets were still on the bed in the father’s living room where he died.
Mr. Johnston’s house is a shrine to his enthusiasms. The walls are lined with comic books, album covers, posters and shelves of movies and music, most on VHS tapes and vinyl. The kitchen cabinets are jammed with action figures and other collectibles. Above Mr. Johnston’s bed are dozens of photos of naked women, clipped from magazines. He passes his days here living both an indulgently creative existence and a surreal arrested adolescence. He writes songs and draws nearly every day — his visual art has been featured in multiple galleries including a show at the Whitney Museum of American Art in 2006 — often while watching movies, listening to music, smoking cigarettes, eating and drinking copious amounts of sugary drinks.
Doug Martsch of Built to Spill, who will be playing multiple shows in the northwest, said learning Mr. Johnston’s songs has been a lesson in the value of simplicity. “The amazing thing is half these songs are the same three chords,” he said.
Mr. Johnston’s backing bands, who were arranged by the tour’s booking agent, will choose their own set lists of Mr. Johnston’s songs. In most cases, Mr. Johnston doesn’t know the musicians personally and isn’t familiar with their music. Dick will prepare a binder of lyrics for him based on each set list, but Mr. Johnston is unlikely to be in contact before the day of their first show together.
Mr. Johnston, for his part, seems most comfortable at home, writing and drawing. Dick estimated that he has around 1,500 unreleased tapes of his brother’s songs, though he hasn’t come close to listening to them all. Mr. Johnston’s most recent sessions spawned four albums worth of material, though the next release is likely to be drawn from older recordings being pieced together by the producer Brian Beattie, who has worked with Mr. Johnston in the past.
Mr. Johnston occasionally shows flashes of the ambition of his younger years — “Hopefully, I could have a big hit someday, a real hit,” he said — but mostly his nonstop creative regimen seems compelled by deeper impulses.
