Over the weekend, Aleta Clark, an anti-violence activist in Chicago, walked into two police stations and asked the officers inside to kneel with her for a photo.
In the first station, the officers said no. In the second station, on Chicago’s South Side, they said yes.
In television interview clips that she posted on Instagram, Ms. Clark praised the officers for kneeling despite the risk to their jobs.
In an email, Mr. Guglielmi said the punishment was consistent with that in “other cases in which officers engaged in potential political activity while on duty and in uniform.” This year an officer was reprimanded for displaying a “Make America Great Again” hat in a squad car, he said.
The photo was particularly resonant in Chicago, a city where the Justice Department found in January that the police had frequently violated civil rights; where civil rights groups filed a lawsuit in June alleging police abuses; where protests erupted over the police shooting of 17-year-old Laquan McDonald; where an officer was convicted in August for shooting two black teenagers in a car that was driving away from him. The city’s police and politicians have been trying in various ways to gain residents’ trust.
Mayor Rahm Emanuel told reporters on Tuesday that he supported the decision to reprimand the officers, and that the Police Department’s policy was consistent. But he acknowledged that the officers “were somewhat betwixt, between two different aspirations”: the desire to follow department rules and the desire to improve relations between the police and the public, The Sun-Times reported.
Kneeling took on popular significance as a form of protest in 2016, when the National Football League player Colin Kaepernick did it during the national anthem. But when President Trump denounced it last week, what had been isolated actions exploded into a national display of defiance, with players from New York to Indianapolis to Los Angeles dropping to their knees on the sidelines of their Sunday games.
In their photo, Ms. Clark and the two officers paired kneeling with another symbol of protest, made famous by the American runners John Carlos and Tommie Smith on the medal podium at the 1968 Summer Olympics: raised fists and, from Ms. Clark, a downward gaze.
