Good morning on this crystal clear Thursday.
Our city is home to 700,000 Puerto Ricans.
And since Hurricane Maria made landfall in Puerto Rico last week, killing at least 10 people and leaving the area on the verge of a humanitarian crisis, New York has ramped up its relief efforts.
Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo announced the launch of the Empire State Relief and Recovery Effort for Puerto Rico, and Mayor Bill de Blasio sent emergency workers to the island to provide aid.
There are now more than 140 city personnel on the ground in Puerto Rico.
Among them: New York Task Force One, our urban search and rescue team; workers from the city’s Buildings Department who have expertise in inspections; members of our Police and Fire Departments who specialize in structural collapses and water rescues; and members of both departments’ Hispanic societies.
We spoke on Wednesday to Henry Jackson, deputy commissioner of technology for the New York City Emergency Management Department, who was at the Roberto Clemente Coliseum in San Juan, which is being turned into a distribution center for supplies.
New York City opened donation sites in firehouses in every borough to collect donations — such as diapers, baby food, batteries and first-aid supplies — and the first batch of those supplies arrived Wednesday in San Juan, via a Delta flight from Kennedy Airport, according to Nancy Silvestri, press secretary for the emergency management department.
On the agenda for the rest of the week, she said: distributing supplies, helping move people to safety and assisting hospitals with backup power.
You can continue donating relief items at those locations from 7 a.m. to 9 p.m. And here are more tips on how to help Puerto Rico and other islands devastated by the hurricane, including a list of charities.
The sun is up, the sky is blue, it’s beautiful, and so are you.

• Looking ahead: In one week, Anthony Bourdain and Danny Bowien join TimesTalks for a conversation on global food waste, at the New School in downtown Manhattan.
• Alternate-side parking remains in effect until Saturday.
This year marks the 100th anniversary of our country’s entry into World War I.
The World War One Centennial Committee for New York City, dedicated to preserving and sharing the war’s legacy in New York, has organized a series of events to honor the milestone.
