DUBLIN — It was a true Irish honeymoon — short and judgmental.
The Irish did not waste any time basking in the wonder of the world, that this small country had leapt into modernity with its first openly gay and half-Indian prime minister, at 38 the youngest taoiseach in history. This, even as America and Britain are getting borne back into a crimped, parochial past by unpopular elders riding a wave of white-privilege nostalgia and anti-immigrant fever.
It only took three months for Leo Varadkar, a 6-foot-3 physician who is the youngest child of a Hindu Indian doctor and a Catholic Irish nurse, to be sliced down to size, which, along with hurling, is a beloved Gaelic sport.
“If we could export wing-clippers, we could solve the national debt,” Ryan Tubridy, the country’s most popular TV host, dryly told me.
The tall new Irish prime minister has run afoul of the Irish tall poppy syndrome, the need to cut down all perceived peacocking.
It might surprise Irish-Americans, who tend to cling to the thatched-hut, Catholic Church-dominated, fighting-and-drinking image of Eire popularized by John Ford, John Wayne and Maureen O’Hara in “The Quiet Man,” that the complaints have nothing to do with Varadkar’s sexuality or mixed heritage.
They’re mostly about Leo, as he’s called in Irish newspaper headlines, “swanning” around, a mortal sin here. That he has a new communications office denounced in the press as a “vanity propaganda project.” That his love of rom-coms spilled out on a visit to 10 Downing Street to see Theresa May, when he said he “was reminded of that famous scene in ‘Love Actually’ where Hugh Grant does his dance down the stairs.” That he has been pictured in Lycra competing in a triathlon. That he attended the Montreal gay pride parade with his partner, Matthew Barrett, a handsome Irish cardiologist, and the terminally cute Justin Trudeau sporting tight white jeans. That he was seen eating avocado mash and crumbled feta on sourdough with a side portion of chorizo.
Varadkar might see himself in lofty terms as part of a fresh vanguard of young, attractive world leaders, along with Trudeau and France’s Emmanuel Macron, but The Irish Times dismissively refers to them as “avocado lads.” His critics want to see substance on the homeless and housing crises, not sizzle, or the “Cult of Varadkar,” as it’s dubbed.
“I don’t care whether his partner is man, woman or vegetable,” declared George Hook, a radio host, after Varadkar’s visit to Canada.
Varadkar was chosen by members of his Fine Gael center-right party, and will likely call a general election within the next 18 months.
He has the delicate tasks of leading Ireland out of the shadow of Britain, as Britain breaks from the European Union and Ireland cleaves to the E.U., and trying to keep relations with Northern Ireland on an even keel as the bitter Brexit divorce grinds on. But as Ireland looks toward Europe, its young leader is also wary of cultural homogenization, making a point of going back to school to perfect his Irish language skills.
He said his grandfather, a farmer from Waterford, was O.K. with an Indian son-in-law. “He went to the sister in town and asked for advice,” Varadkar recounted. “And bizarrely enough, the sister advised him that if he was a Hindu, it’d be O.K. and if he was a Muslim to be very careful.” His father had to agree to learn Catholicism and bring up the kids Catholic.
Even though Donald Trump got a good chunk of the Irish-American vote, Ireland has not succumbed to the nationalist, far-right, politics of grievance sweeping many Western nations.
I wonder if Varadkar agrees that these politics are driven by a desire by some white people to keep down brown people.
Will he talk to President Trump about that when he brings shamrocks for St. Patrick’s Day?
While Varadkar mostly wants to explain some facts about Ireland and trade to Trump, he said that if he had a chance, he would like to get into some issues they disagree on, “whether it’s migration or climate change and rights of women, rights of people from L.G.B.T. backgrounds.” Ireland’s feminists say he needs to pay more attention to women’s rights here, and appoint many more women to his cabinet.
Varadkar laid the groundwork for his ascension two years ago when he was the minister for health by coming out on Irish radio in an interview with Miriam O’Callaghan, surprising some family and friends. Homosexuality was decriminalized in Ireland only in 1993.
“I always thought I’d be alone,” he told O’Callaghan.
Varadkar, who has a reputation as a straight talker with a distaste for glad-handing, said he wanted to level with the Irish people so they would not think he had a hidden agenda when he supported an upcoming same-sex marriage referendum (which passed, making Ireland the first country to legalize same-sex marriage by popular vote). After coming out, the shy Varadkar had a bit of a makeover, slimming down and getting up earlier to exercise. He looks fit, sitting across from me, wearing a dark Canali suit, beneath a sketch drawn by his partner’s brother.
I ask about his mother being afraid that when he came out he would be beaten up on the street or lose his seat or get roughed up by opponents.
“Yeah, yeah, she was,” he said. “And I suppose, like most Irish moms, and I imagine American moms as well, she’d be very protective. I think, at that point, she would have preferred that I kept it to myself and kept it as something private. But I was very conscious that a referendum was coming up on marriage equality. That was really the catalyst for me. And as a government minister, you know, I couldn’t go out there advocating a change in the Constitution and somehow pretend that it didn’t really affect me or that it wasn’t something that I wasn’t taking personally.
His partner is doing medical training in Chicago.  “Also, he’s somebody who I can confide in and somebody who can say things to me that I need to hear, if I’ve made a mistake or if I’m way out of order, and he’ll say that to me. And I’ll know he’s right, even if I didn’t like to hear it.
The prime minister’s progressive policy on gay marriage does not mean he’s liberal on every issue. “He is liberal enough to campaign for gay marriage but conservative enough to tackle alleged welfare cheaters, a campaign that positioned him as hard right in the eyes of many critics,” said Niall O’Dowd, the founder of Irishcentral.com, the largest Irish diaspora website.
Varadkar plans to go forward with a referendum to remove the constitutional ban on abortion. But he regards gay marriage and abortion as very different issues.
In February, Varadkar became the first minister to say he “wouldn’t be keen” on Donald Trump’s coming to Ireland. But now he says that it would be rude not to invite him, given that’s he’s going to the White House in March.
Varadkar said he had read “Profiles in Courage” on the beach over the summer. So I ask how he will deal with Mike Pence when he goes to the traditional St. Patrick’s Day breakfast at the vice president’s residence. I note that Pence is regarded as enemy No. 1 by the L.G.B.T. community and that while Pence was governor of Indiana, Varadkar might not have been able to get a birthday cake if the shop owner objected to his sexuality.
Would he try to talk to Pence on the subject?
