Those were some of the ways prosecution witnesses on Thursday described the actions taken by Senator Robert Menendez and his aides on behalf of a wealthy friend and political donor.
Federal prosecutors say that in exchange for Mr. Menendez’s help, the friend, Dr. Salomon Melgen, an ophthalmologist in Florida, provided Mr. Menendez with lavish gifts, including rides on his private planes, rooms in luxury hotels and hundreds of thousands of dollars in contributions to the senator’s campaign efforts.
Senator Menendez, a Democrat from New Jersey, and Dr. Melgen are on trial here on corruption charges. Both men have denied any wrongdoing.
Prosecutors have sought to portray the senator as abusing his position to intervene when Dr. Melgen had concerns he needed addressed.
In one instance, Mr. Menendez, according to testimony, met with two former high-ranking Democratic senators — Tom Harkin of Iowa and Harry Reid of Nevada — to discuss a Medicare billing dispute that would have cost Dr. Melgen millions of dollars. In a second, prosecution witnesses said he pressured the State Department and Customs and Border Protection officials to help Dr. Melgen, who owned a cargo-scanning equipment company, maintain his business’s presence at ports in the Dominican Republic.
In particular, prosecutors said, Mr. Menendez urged Customs and Border Protection to stop a donation of cargo-scanning equipment from the United States government that would have cut into Dr. Melgen’s profits.
Prosecutors on Thursday frequently returned to Mr. Menendez’s membership on various Senate committees. In questioning Todd Robinson, the current United States ambassador to Guatemala, who worked under the ambassador to the Dominican Republic at the time Dr. Melgen was involved in the port dispute, prosecutors highlighted Mr. Menendez’s seat on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, which Mr. Robinson said held sway over the State Department.
Mr. Menendez warned that he would convene a Senate hearing, Mr. Robinson testified, if the State Department did not help Dr. Melgen resolve a contract dispute between the Dominican government and Dr. Melgen’s company.
“The senator noted displeasure very clearly with the current state of affairs and threatened to hold a hearing on the matter if we don’t meet his deadline,” a State Department official wrote in an email to Mr. Robinson.
The government’s questions framed Mr. Menendez’s actions as not merely acts of friendship, or typical work on behalf of constituents, as defense lawyers have argued. Instead, they seemed carefully calibrated to show that the meetings and conversations the senator arranged were “official acts,” the bar that the United States Supreme Court has recently established must be met for actions by elected officials to rise to the level of corruption.
Lawyers for Mr. Menendez focused on the semantics of the request from his aide, pointing out words like “please” and “consider” as proof that the senator had not intended to give any sort of command.
But Amanda Vaughn, a federal prosecutor, pressed Ms. Talton to explain why an entreaty from Mr. Menendez, also a member of the Senate Finance Committee, might hold more weight than a request from other senators.
“When something like that comes from a staffer for a member that sits on a committee as powerful to us as the Senate Finance Committee, it’s just a polite way of telling us what to do,” Ms. Talton said, explaining that the committee has oversight of her agency.
Another witness, Jenelle Krishnamoorthy, also alluded to actions by Mr. Menendez involving Dr. Melgen’s Medicare dispute. Mr. Menendez had met with Dr. Melgen and Mr. Harkin, the former senator from Iowa, to discuss millions of dollars Dr. Melgen had been accused of overbilling Medicare. Ms. Krishnamoorthy, a former aide to Mr. Harkin, said she could think of only one other time in her 10 years of working for Mr. Harkin that another senator had asked to meet with her boss on behalf of someone who did not live in his state.
The other instance, Ms. Krishnamoorthy said, was when another senator asked Mr. Harkin to discuss research on a rare disease that the senator’s grandchild had been found to have.
“But in that instance, it was the senator’s grandchild,” the prosecutor repeated.
“Correct,” Ms. Krishnamoorthy replied.
After court Thursday, Mr. Menendez held a news conference at Newark Liberty International Airport, where he planned to board a flight to travel to Puerto Rico to survey the damage wrought by Hurricanes Irma and Maria. He would return Friday evening or Saturday morning, his spokesman said.
The presiding judge, William H. Walls, had previously denied Mr. Menendez’s lawyers’ requests to delay the trial so that he could go to Congress to cast votes.
Mr. Menendez called on President Trump to deploy more resources to the island, where his brother lives.
“I hope that I will be able to go back to the Senate, since we’re having a short week here in Newark, and in doing so press some of this with my colleagues, as I have been doing on the phone,” he said.