Rick Stevens, a vocalist for the funk-soul band Tower of Power who, after leaving the group, was convicted of killing three men in a drug-addicted haze and served 36 years in prison, died on Tuesday in Antioch, Calif., where he lived with a son. He was 77.
The cause was liver cancer, the son, Clarence C. Maloney, said.
Mr. Stevens was known especially for the Tower of Power song “You’re Still a Young Man,” on which he sang lead. The song, about a relationship between an older woman and a younger man, was a track on the band’s 1972 album, “Bump City.” Released as a single, it reached No. 29 on the Billboard Hot 100.
Mr. Stevens joined Tower of Power, a horn-heavy group based in Oakland, Calif., in 1969, but “Bump City” proved to be his peak with the group: Within a few years he had left it and was in the grip of heroin and other narcotics.
In February 1976 he traveled to the Santa Cruz Mountains to meet with two brothers, Andrew and Harry Austin, who, he later said, had been pressuring him over a drug debt and threatening his family. Both brothers were shot dead. A day and a half later, the authorities said, Mr. Stevens killed Elliot Wickliffe, who he said had pulled a gun on him.
Mr. Stevens was convicted of murder in the first two killings and manslaughter in the third and found eligible for the death penalty. But soon afterward California declared capital punishment unconstitutional, and he was sentenced to life.
In a 2015 interview, Mr. Stevens, whose surname was actually Stevenson, recalled the admonition given to him by Judge John S. McInerney.
The judge urged him to become an evangelist about the dangers of drugs, and, having committed to Christianity partway into his incarceration, he did. In prison he counseled and mentored other inmates and formed bands as a part of inmate music programs.
He was paroled in 2012 and resumed performing and recording. In January 2013 his old band brought him onstage at the Oakland club Yoshi’s to sing his signature song.
Donald Charles Stevenson was born on Feb. 23, 1940, in Port Arthur, Tex. His mother, Jewell Hunter Derouen, was the sister of the rhythm-and-blues singer Ivory Joe Hunter. He grew up first in Texas and then in Reno, Nev. When Mr. Stevens was a teenager, the family moved to Oakland, where he began singing in bands, among them Rick and the Ravens and Four of a Kind.
After leaving Tower of Power, he spent time in another Bay Area band, Brass Horizon, but his drug use had taken over his life.
He remained remorseful for the deadly events of 1976, which he said occurred during a time in his life when he was going from one drug high to another and not thinking clearly — “a jackass in a jumpsuit,” he would describe himself years later. When he began performing again after his release from prison he was realistic about his past.
Mr. Stevens was married five times, twice to the same woman, and fathered a number of children; Mr. Maloney said his survivors include two daughters, Dawn Renee Stevenson and Doreen Stevenson; two other sons, Ricky and Derrick, and numerous grandchildren and great-grandchildren.
Since his release from prison, Mr. Stevens had recorded the four-song EP “Back on the Streets Again Vol. 1.” Mr. Maloney said he had planned another record.
Georgina Hansen-Stevenson, Mr. Stevens’s most recent wife, from 1993 to 2000, said in an email that his time performing with Tower of Power in the 1970s, with big crowds in front of him and the band’s overwhelming sound behind, remained a treasured memory.
