The sensual and the spiritual have always been at play in the vocalist Lizz Wright’s music. On her new album, “Grace,” she adds to the scrum, mixing the sanctified with the political, the sexual with the social.
Cortez Franklin’s classic “Seems I’m Never Tired of Loving You,” taken at a slow, end-of-the-workday tromp, becomes a testimony of wearied patriotism. The title track, written by Rose Cousins as a torch song, is rendered here as a plea for collective ablution.
Ms. Wright recorded the album soon after last year’s presidential election. What had been planned as an ode to the American South became a declaration of redoubled faith, haunted by disappointment but not disillusion. “Grace” seems to draw its energy straight from the soil, with acoustic and electric guitars, organ and piano locked in an earthy symbiosis.
As on her five prior albums, the guiding force is her effortlessly capacious voice, both whispery and resounding. Ms. Wright conveys a bird’s-eye command, hitting her notes precisely and illuminating even the space around them with a ruby glow. This brand of wisdom-singing almost borders on the mythic, but there’s some physical need in her voice that brings things home — a foreboding in even the warmest songs (“Southern Nights,” “All the Way Here”). It suggests not only something mercurial about the human spirit, or the enervating slowness of progress, but also a haze of deep vulnerability.
Ms. Wright, 37 — who will celebrate the album’s release on Sept. 15 with a concert at the Highline Ballroom in New York — hails from a small town in Georgia, where her father was the musical director at their church. She splits her time between Chicago and the Blue Ridge Mountains of North Carolina. Her house there is on a quiet road, peopled by older, mostly white neighbors whose politics run far more conservative than hers. But upon moving there a few years ago, she developed close relationships with many of them, often through gardening and shared stories. She dedicated “Grace” to her next-door neighbor, who is 92.
