U.S.|Corporations Have Rights. Why Shouldn’t Rivers?
DENVER — Does a river — or a plant, or a forest — have rights?
This is the essential question in what attorneys are calling a first-of-its-kind federal lawsuit, in which a Denver lawyer and a far-left environmental group are asking a judge to recognize the Colorado River as a person.
If successful, it could upend environmental law, possibly allowing the redwood forests, the Rocky Mountains or the deserts of Nevada to sue individuals, corporations and governments over resource pollution or depletion. Future lawsuits in its mold might seek to block pipelines, golf courses or housing developments and force everyone from agriculture executives to mayors to rethink how they treat the environment.
Jody Freeman, director of Harvard’s environmental law program, said Mr. Flores would face an uphill battle.
Mr. Stone had hoped to influence a Supreme Court case in which the Sierra Club wanted to block a ski resort in the Sierras. The environmental group lost.
That view has never attracted support in the court. But it has had some success abroad.
In Ecuador, the constitution now declares that nature “has the right to exist, persist, maintain and regenerate its vital cycles.” In New Zealand, officials declared in March that a river used by the Maori tribe of Whanganui in the North Island to be a legal person that can sue if it is harmed. A court in the northern Indian state of Uttarakhand has called the Ganges and its main tributary, the Yamuna, to be living human entities.
The Colorado River cuts through or along seven Western states and supplies water to approximately 36 million people, including residents of Denver, Salt Lake City, Las Vegas, Phoenix, Tucson, San Diego and Los Angeles. It also feeds millions of acres of farmland.
It is as famous for its power and beauty as it is for overuse. Scientists expect that increased temperatures brought on by climate change will cause it to shrink further, leaving many people anxious about its future.
Mr. Flores-Williams responded to criticism that his argument, if successful, would allow pebbles to sue the people who step on them.
