The main work was Janacek’s mystical suite “On the Overgrown Path.” But Mr. Greilsammer has been experimenting in recent years with programs that daringly juxtapose music spanning centuries. “Labyrinth” took that concept to a new level.
Interspersed between the six movements of Janacek’s suite, Mr. Greilsammer played works by Mozart, C.P.E. Bach, the early Baroque composers Johann Jakob Froberger and Jean-Féry Rebel and the contemporary composer Ofer Pelz. On one level he wanted to demonstrate commonalities among composers from different eras, who emerged here not just as fellow travelers, but also as fellow progressives.
A deeper goal was personal. Mr. Greilsammer said that musicians honorably devote much of their time trying to understand and convey a composer’s original intentions. Yet, he added, too often in doing so “we take ourselves out of the equation.” With this program he claimed the right to be idiosyncratic, to juxtapose seemingly far-removed composers in order to highlight, even amplify, the exploratory elements that course through the various pieces.
Why not? I came away, to cite one impression, with newfound respect for the audacious inventiveness of C. P. E. Bach.
The concert on Wednesday, part of the popular Crypt Sessions series at the Church of the Intercession, accommodated only 50 people — a perfect space for such an intimate program. Mr. Greilsammer began with the first movement of the Janacek suite, which emerged in hazy rolled harmonies and nervously jabbing repeated notes. When the music broke into a wistful melody, like some Moravian folk song, in this context and setting it sounded like a consoling hymn drifting from the church sanctuary.
Mr. Greilsammer segued into the first part of Froberger’s “Tombstone,” a solemn elegy with a long, winding melody that spins out over daringly wayward chords. In the reverberant acoustics of the crypt, the first part of Mozart’s familiar Fantasy in C minor sounded newly ominous, especially given the way Mr. Greilsammer dug into roiling figures in the piano’s low register.
He played another gripping movement of the Janacek before plunging into C. P. E. Bach’s astonishing Fantasy in F-sharp minor — dark, impetuous music full of harmonic daring and unhinged drama.
And so it continued, with Mr. Pelz’s “Repetition Blindness,” a restless new piece that shifts from dreamily descending arpeggios to bouts of pummeling chords, at the center of the program, which wound back through the other halves of the pieces by Mozart, Bach and Froberger, and the rest of the Janacek.
Mr. Greilsammer, who also plays standard fare like the complete Mozart piano concertos and sonatas splendidly, is hardly asserting that all recital programs should follow this model. Still, it was inspiring to join him on this search.