These days Rihanna is a designer. So is Kanye. So is Pharrell. So is Selena. Musicians have gone from fashion muses to fashion makers in the turn of a few seasons, one-upping style heroes of yesteryear like Mick Jagger and David Bowie — who nevertheless are routinely name-checked as inspiration in show notes.
Yet few words, if any, are devoted to the sartorial legacy of a man whose influence has done as much (if not more) to shape what we see on runways today: Marc Bolan, a wild child who once had all of Britain groveling at his shiny heels.
Forty years after his death in a car crash just days before his 30th birthday, it is time the rock ‘n’ roller was given his fashion due.
Add to the list Slash (whose signature look owes much to Mr. Bolan’s portrait on the cover of the 1972 album “The Slider”), St. Vincent, James Bagshaw of the rock outfit Temples (a spit and image), and Johnny Depp in the “Alice” films. Generally speaking, though, the man behind glam rock is largely shrouded in obscurity, while Bowie is hailed as its poster boy.
Born Mark Feld into a Jewish family in London, Mr. Bolan always knew he wanted to be famous. First, he did it with solely with style, appearing in Mod outfits in magazine spreads and cardboard cutouts in department stores; later on, in the early ’70s, he did it with his band T. Rex. Widely credited with pioneering the glam rock movement, Mr. Bolan, with his corkscrew hair, sparkly makeup and flamboyant outfits, defined an era of glitter and gobbledygook, though he never broke through in America.
And Gucci’s current interstellar ad campaign, featuring ornate, shimmering jackets à la Bolan with wide lapels and sequins, has the T. Rex song “Ballrooms of Mars” written all over it.
The most overt example of Mr. Bolan’s continued influence in fashion, however, can be seen in the designs of John Varvatos. A self-described “big fan” of the rocker, Mr. Varvatos’s T-shirts often have displayed Mr. Bolan’s image, and the designer has “definitely” hung posters of the rocker in his studio.
All of us whose wardrobes are in his debt should remember.