Then EasyMile could seriously consider other Asian markets, he said.
The EZ10, with a top speed of 25 m.p.h., achieves “Level 4” automation under the standards of the global engineering association S.A.E. International, meaning its route is chosen by humans but there is no one behind the wheel and it can avoid obstacles on its own. Tesla’s Autopilot system is considered Level 2, although Elon Musk, the company’s chief executive, said this year that Tesla was only two years away from Level 5: complete autonomy.
For any level of vehicle autonomy to work, urban infrastructure must be updated. Traffic lights, for example, would require special signals to direct autonomous vehicles.
Then there is the issue of creating three-dimensional maps, and developing the computing power needed to use them for detection and navigation. In a dense, urban area like Taipei, they must account for the way tall buildings can distort GPS signals.
He added that processing all of the data would require cloud computing and a high-speed wireless connection.
Technological hurdles aside, national lawmakers in Taiwan have more important priorities than autonomous vehicles, including a contentious infrastructure package. And political concerns make many lawmakers cautious about embracing even an experimental system, knowing that any accident could derail long-term plans. Nonetheless, the administration of President Tsai Ing-wen has made creating “smart cities,” which include technological innovations like autonomous vehicles, a national priority.
“It is time to use our strength in information and communication technology to bolster domestic development,” Ms. Tsai said at a smart city forum in Taipei in February.
Jason Hsu, a legislator who visited Silicon Valley with Mr. Ting, said that Taiwan could set itself apart, especially in Asia, by focusing on public transportation with Level 4 vehicles. Many countries in the region, including China, are involved in autonomous vehicle research and development, he noted.
Mr. Hsu said he planned to introduce an alliance for smart mobility and autonomous vehicles this month that would help push the central government on the issue.
Unlike California, where dozens of companies have obtained permits to put autonomous vehicles on the road, Mr. Hsu said that Taiwan had not licensed any companies, including 7StarLake.
“The cars are available but we cannot collect data, which is very dangerous as the vehicles need data and experience to fine tune their algorithms and minimize the chance of accident,” he said.
Mr. Lee of Taipei’s Department of Information Technology said he hoped that Taiwan could turn driverless vehicles into a local industry. That might be enough to keep talented young Taiwanese from heading to China, where there are more opportunities at the moment, he said.
