BRUSSELS — A major opera house opened its season with a contemporary work on Wednesday. And when the lights went up, the stormiest ovations weren’t for an eminent maestro or famous diva, but for the 81-year-old composer. It’s undeniable: Philippe Boesmans’ “Pinocchio,” which inaugurated the newly renovated La Monnaie theater here, is a hit.
With a libretto and stage direction by Joël Pommerat, this adaptation of Carlo Collodi’s tale of a marionette’s path to truth and redemption is a darkly entertaining piece of music theater. Deftly probing the nature of honesty, accountability and freedom with a blend of magic, comedy and an ethical quest, it’s a “Magic Flute” for our times.
Mr. Boesman’s score is an exuberant, slippery mix of styles, full of onomatopoeic effects and witty allusions. Buzzing brass render the sound of a wood carver’s saw; an upward howling siren, used in Varèse’s pathbreaking “Amériques,” measures the sudden, lie-induced growth of Pinocchio’s nose. The most unexpectedly delightful feature is the three-member band of stage musicians — playing a saxophone, an accordion and a tangy violin — that adds vibrant improvised interjections in different folkloric idioms.
Commissioned with the Aix-en-Provence Festival in France and first performed there in July, “Pinocchio” marks the Brussels company’s return to its graceful Neo-Baroque theater. In the summer of 2015, it closed its doors for what was meant to be a single season of renovations. But successive delays made the company homeless for a second year, and at too short notice to rent other spaces.
It was forced to set up tent on the outskirts of town. (Literally.) During this peripatetic phase, the company lost 20 percent of its subscribers, though a spokesperson said it had regained most for the coming season. In a statement, Peter de Caluwe, the general director of La Monnaie, insisted the experience had brought benefits: The organization learned to think on its feet; the temporary performance space, with a single cafeteria in an out-of-the-way neighborhood, created the kind of close bond between performers and technical crews otherwise known only on tour; and opera, as an art form, had to assert itself without the attraction of a glamorous, gilded theater.
Mr. Pommerat’s adaptation condenses the Pinocchio story to a handful of episodes and frames it as a play put on by a ragtag theater troupe. The troupe’s director becomes the narrator, guiding the audience through the tale of a destitute wood carver who fashions a puppet out of the trunk of a tree struck by lightning. The puppet comes to life as Pinocchio, a headstrong and hedonistic creature who skips school to ogle a cabaret singer; falls victim to the get-rich scheme of two crooks; is himself thrown into prison; and is roughed up and exploited by a series of unscrupulous characters.
There’s nothing droll about this Pinocchio, and until he learns to be fully human, there’s something of an undead zombie about him, too. It’s a starkly alienating touch, but one that underscores the extraordinary process of identification and compassion that the viewer undergoes watching him stumble from one mistake to the next. His suffering doesn’t just humanize him, it makes the audience more human, too.
Among the fine cast, the soprano Marie-Eve Munger stood out as the fairy, who expresses herself in glassy-clear coloratura. As a cabaret singer and a bad student, Julie Boulianne revealed a multihued, complex mezzo.
The baritone Stéphane Degout is superb as the theater director, who also slips into the roles of a crook, a murderer and the circus ringleader. The role requires extensive speaking as well as lyrical and dramatic sung passages, which Mr. Degout delivered in a rich, jammy tone. His face, too, was painted white. There was a direct lineage from Pinocchio (who needs to learn not to tell lies) to the narrator, who defends the importance of stories that — however fantastical — are true.