Now he is leading the effort to pass a bill that does not seem to meet this standard. Mr. Kimmel spent a full seven minutes excoriating Mr. Cassidy, of Louisiana, accusing him of going back on his word.
Credit...CreditVideo by Jimmy Kimmel Live!
Mr. Kimmel ended by asking Mr. Cassidy to stop referring to the Jimmy Kimmel test, unless he addressed certain key points that Mr. Cassidy had emphasized in his own public statements: coverage for all, no discrimination against patients based on pre-existing conditions, lower premiums and a ban on lifetime coverage caps.
Breaking Up With the U.N.
Late-night hosts reacted to President Trump’s aggressive speech at the United Nations with a mix of bafflement and amusement.
Trevor Noah pointed out the section of Mr. Trump’s speech in which he encouraged the governments of United Nations countries to look after their own interests before those of the rest of the world. “If we are to embrace the opportunities of the future and overcome the present dangers together, there can be no substitute for strong, sovereign and independent nations,” Mr. Trump had said.
Hillary Clinton appeared on “The Late Show” to discuss her new book, “What Happened.” In it, she denounces the influence of purported Russian meddling in the United States election. Stephen Colbert asked whether her gender had something to do with President Vladimir Putin’s distaste for her.
Mrs. Clinton said it was likely. Then she leveled another devastating accusation against Mr. Putin.
COLBERT: Did he ever say anything to you personally that demonstrated his misogyny?
CLINTON: And every time I met with him, it would be [flails her limbs out].
Mrs. Clinton then told an anecdote about discussing Russia’s conservation efforts with Mr. Putin during a diplomatic visit to Russia.
Mr. Colbert imagines an insult-off of Elton John puns between Mr. Trump and North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un.
When this couple’s engagement ring fell into a creek, Mr. Kimmel surprised them with a second chance.
The CNN anchor Anderson Cooper will sit down with Seth Meyers on “Late Night” on Wednesday — and the latest developments in the fast-moving Russia investigation are likely to come up.
