Suppose you’re the kind of thoughtful liberal who concluded from Donald Trump’s election that you’ve been living in a bubble and need to better understand the causes of America’s distemper. Suppose, too, that you have friends who voted for Trump — and who you know for a fact are neither bigots nor buffoons.
Why are they so angry? How could they feel so desperate, politically speaking, to cast their ballots for him?
For a sense of the answer, look no further than Education Secretary Betsy DeVos’s announcement Thursday that her department would revisit the Obama administration’s Title IX guidelines on campus sexual assault. The guidelines, she said, had “failed too many students” by radically curtailing due process. She’s right.
Campus administrators got the message. Henceforth, the accused would be judged on a “preponderance of evidence” basis to determine guilt, sometimes known as the “50 percent plus a feather” standard. Accusers would be able to appeal “not guilty” verdicts. Efforts would be made to spare the accuser from being faced with direct cross-examination by the accused.
One way to think about the 2011 letter is as an effort to combat the scourge of campus rape. That’s a laudable goal, even if evidence of its epidemic proportions is sketchy and good numbers are all but impossible to come by. In 2015, 89 percent of colleges and universities reported zero incidents of rape.
But another way to think about the letter is as Exhibit A in the overreach of an administrative state pursuing a narrow ideological agenda through methods both lawless and aggressive.
Kimberly Lau, an attorney at Warshaw Burstein, has represented over 100 defendants in campus sexual-assault cases. She described to me sitting with a client in a campus tribunal where she was forbidden from speaking. The accuser appeared via Skype but did not face the accused.
The travesties of justice carried out under the new Title IX guidelines have been the subject of some excellent books and superb journalism, none better than Emily Yoffe’s in The Atlantic. And yet the response of the progressive left has been indifferent or worse.
Siskind’s activism revolves mainly around pointing out the Trump administration’s creeping authoritarianism. Yet Trump’s election was itself a response to the creeping authoritarianism of his predecessor. Liberals trying to grasp what happened last November would be well served revisiting this ugly saga, and perhaps even murmuring a word of thanks that Secretary DeVos means to bring it to a close.