Another Labor Day has come and gone, another summer met its unofficial end. That’s bad news for beach going, but good news for TV watching. With the exception of “Twin Peaks” and some show about dragons, this summer was slow.
September means a slew of new shows and the return of some heavyweight favorites. New BoJack? New David Simon? An emphatic yes to both. Add a “Will and Grace” comeback and a “Star Trek” prequel, and there’s a lot going on. Here’s what we’ll be talking about.
When last we saw the morose, middle-aged actor (and horse) BoJack Horseman, he was driving off into the middle of nowhere, depressed again by how little satisfaction he’d derived from a successful Hollywood comeback. Season 4 will cover what’s happened in the months since the Season 3 finale, as the horse hero journeys across America and his friends and acquaintances back in California explore new career and life opportunities in his absence.
(who wrote for “The Wire” and for another Simon creation for HBO, “Treme”) reunite for a journey through the seedy side of 1970s New York City, with James Franco playing mob-connected twin entrepreneurs and Maggie Gyllenhaal playing a prostitute anxious to stop working the corners of Times Square. The show is ostensibly about the rise of the pornography business, but given the people involved, expect a detail-oriented drama filled with memorable characters, more focused on the social fabric of its place and time than on sensationalism.
The time-traveling 20th-century nurse Claire Randall and her 18th century husband, Jamie Fraser, spent the first half of “Outlander” Season 2 stuck in a dreary story line in France; but by the finale, this literary romance had found its groove again, ramping up the action, fantasy and melodrama before ending with a cliffhanger. If the series continues to follow the arc of the best-selling books by Diana Gabaldon, then Season 3 should be the wildest season yet, involving an impossible reunion and yet another long odyssey into the unknown.
It’s been a good TV year for the “Mad Men” star Elisabeth Moss, who anchored (and earned an Emmy nomination for) Hulu’s buzzed-about dystopian drama, “The Handmaid’s Tale,” and now returns as the Australian detective Robin Griffin in the sequel to the vivid mystery series “Top of the Lake.” Nicole Kidman and Gwendoline Christie join the cast for a new story about another missing girl, whose disappearance forces the detective to take a closer look at her own life.
The first season of this comedy from Pamela Adlon (a frequent collaborator with Louis C.K.) was one of last year’s best new shows, converting the veteran actress’s real everyday experiences — as a divorced working mother with three difficult daughters — into frank, funny vignettes. For Season 2, Adlon will be sharpening her personal perspective, stepping behind the camera to direct all 10 episodes.
Ken Burns’s latest docu-series (directed with his longtime collaborator Lynn Novick) spends 18 hours on one of the most tumultuous chapters in American history, when the Cold War fight against communism led to a protracted, costly conflict far overseas. In typical Burns fashion, this film will venture beyond the front lines, dealing with the protest movement on American campuses, the horrors faced by the Vietnamese and the larger machinations of the global superpowers behind the fight.
Season 3 of this Emmy-winning dramedy from Amazon lacked the unifying structure and theme of the sprawling Season 2, but it was more tuned-in to the personal growth of the Pfefferman family, as its matriarch, Maura, keeps pushing her children to take more chances with their lives. Season 4 will get back to the second season’s deeper dive into the Pfeffermans’ roots while also confronting the new political realities of an America that has become more hostile to transgender men and women over the past year.
Set a decade before the adventures of the Enterprise in the original “Star Trek,” this new prequel series takes a different approach than other entries in the TV franchise, telling a serialized story centered on an upper-level Federation starship crew member (played by Sonequa Martin-Green of “The Walking Dead”) rather than a captain or an admiral. CBS has a lot riding on this show, which is meant to drive Trekkies to sign up for the broadcaster’s All Access subscription streaming service.
Jumping on the “American Crime Story” and “Manhunt: Unabomber” bandwagon, the producer Dick Wolf’s “Law & Order” franchise gives nonfiction a go, dramatizing the story of Lyle and Erik Menendez, two rich brothers who were accused of murdering their parents over 25 years ago. Edie Falco plays their defense attorney, who looks for any aspect of her clients’ past that she can find to try to get them acquitted.
A lot has changed in popular culture since “Will & Grace” left NBC back in 2006 — let alone since it debuted, in 1998, in an era when TV barely acknowledged gayness. This revival (which has already been renewed for another season) brings back the core four characters and cast: a button-down gay lawyer (Eric McCormack), his neurotic best friend (Debra Messing), his libertine pal (Sean Hayes) and their self-absorbed socialite acquaintance (Megan Mullally). In an age when sexual frankness and L.G.B.T. issues are more front-and-center, this return should be both more challenging and more exciting, for the show’s creators and its fans.
