SEOUL, South Korea — North Korea said on Friday that American-led international sanctions were causing “colossal” damage in the impoverished country, but added that it would be foolish for Washington to think the sanctions would stop the country’s nuclear weapons programs.
North Korean officials recently set up a committee to investigate the damage that the sanctions have caused on the country’s economy and the well-being of the population. The committee’s work was designed to draw international sympathy by highlighting the suffering of North Korean children, women and elderly people, analysts said.
The North Korean statement came after President Trump’s executive order last week, which strengthened his administration’s authority to target foreign banks that facilitate trade with North Korea. On Tuesday, the United States added eight North Korean banks to its sanctions blacklist.
On Thursday, China said it would close business joint ventures with North Korea within 120 days, in accordance with the latest United Nations sanctions.
North Korea has endured sanctions for decades, devising ways to circumvent them.
The unidentified North Korean spokesman said on Friday that it was “a foolish dream to hope that the sanctions could work” on North Korea after they had failed to stop it from becoming a nuclear weapons state.
After North Korea’s recent nuclear and intercontinental ballistic missile tests, the Trump administration is strengthening its campaign to squeeze North Korea financially while warning that military action is also on the table.
“We call on all countries to join us in cutting all trade and financial ties with North Korea,” acting Assistant Secretary Susan A. Thornton told a Senate committee on Thursday.
Ms. Thornton said the United States had “no desire to inflict harm on the long-suffering North Korean people, whom we view as distinct from the hostile regime in Pyongyang.” But she said sanctions were working and urged the world to rigorously enforce them.
In its two recent rounds of sanctions adopted on Aug. 5 and Sept. 11, respectively, the United Nations Security Council sought to ban critical North Korean exports, like textiles, coal, iron and seafood.
In keeping with the sanctions, Kuwait, Qatar, Malaysia and Malta have stopped issuing visas to North Korean workers and are phasing out the use of these workers, whose wages helped finance the North Korean government and its nuclear and missile programs, Ms. Thornton said.
Poland is the only country in Europe still hosting significant numbers of North Korean workers, she said, while the vast majority of North Korean laborers remaining outside of North Korea are in either China or Russia.
