FOREST DARK, by Nicole Krauss. (Harper/HarperCollins, $27.99.) Tracing the lives of two Americans in Israel, one a celebrated novelist and the other a successful older lawyer, this restless novel explores the mysteries of disconnection and the divided self, of feeling oneself in two places at once. Israel, impossible and messy as it is, becomes a conduit for new possibilities.
UNBELIEVABLE: My Front-Row Seat to the Craziest Campaign in American History, by Katy Tur. (Dey St./William Morrow, $26.99.) This breezy memoir by the NBC News correspondent who covered Donald Trump’s campaign for the presidency is really the story of one woman’s endurance. Trump singled Tur out for particularly harsh insults at his political rallies, but she soldiered on, sometimes through dangerous situations. In her book, she richly examines the outrageous sexism of Trump and many of his supporters.
THE CRISIS OF MULTICULTURALISM IN EUROPE: A History, by Rita Chin. (Princeton, $35.) An associate professor of history at the University of Michigan analyzes the current debates in Europe over immigration and Western values to create a vivid picture of a continent consumed by social tensions. The questions Chin poses have never seemed more urgent, as Europeans (and Americans) attempt to come to terms with diversity.
THE WORLD OF TOMORROW, by Brendan Mathews. (Little, Brown, $28.) Mathews’s admirably fearless debut novel, about Irish brothers on the run in 1930s New York, is long and full of digression, which is no knock; for what is a good novel — or a good life — but a long series of digressions? Mathews attempts to combine a serious story with a great lark, as the brothers get embroiled in a wild assassination plot at the 1939 World’s Fair.
A RIFT IN THE EARTH: Art, Memory, and the Fight for a Vietnam War Memorial, by James Reston Jr. (Arcade, $24.99.) The arguments over the construction of a Vietnam memorial were angrier even than the current disputes over Confederate monuments, and Reston’s definitive history of it is insightful and unexpectedly affecting. One curiosity of this intense “art war,” in his account: it left a more united country in its wake.
AMONG THE LIVING AND THE DEAD: A Tale of Exile and Homecoming on the War Roads of Europe, by Inara Verzemnieks. (Norton, $26.95.) Verzemnieks’s family history weaves together stories of the grandparents who left Latvia and raised her in Tacoma, Wash., and of her great-aunt who stayed behind. She also confronts Latvians’ fraught participation in World War II.
DINNER AT THE CENTER OF THE EARTH, by Nathan Englander. (Knopf, $26.95.) In a novel that gleefully blends thriller elements with sociohistorical considerations, a disgraced Israeli agent offers tragicomic reflections on the broken promises of the Promised Land. Just when you think you’ve been swept into a Jason Bourne installment, Englander broadens the perspective to the real and present depredations of history.
ONE DAY WE’LL ALL BE DEAD AND NONE OF THIS WILL MATTER, by Scaachi Koul. (Picador, paper, $16.) Koul’s funny essays explore the binds of being the child of immigrants, shuttling between Canada and India, between love and resentment. Koul often cites David Sedaris as an inspiration, and his influence can be felt in the way she relates dark family dynamics as punchlines.
THE GOLDEN HOUSE, by Salman Rushdie. (Random House, $28.99.) The Obama years form the backdrop of this novel about a septuagenarian billionaire, Nero Golden, and his enigmatic family after they arrive in New York. Avoiding spoilers is tricky, but suffice it to say the body count is high — and yes, Nero does indeed whip out a violin at the requisite moments.