WASHINGTON — Senator Charles E. Grassley, facing what he sees as Justice Department stonewalling, is considering subpoenas to compel several witnesses to appear before the Senate Judiciary Committee and divulge what they know about President Trump’s connections to Russia and his firing of James B. Comey as F.B.I. director.
Mr. Grassley and the committee’s top Democrat, Senator Dianne Feinstein of California, have agreed that the witnesses are key to the committee’s investigation and could compel them to appear despite apparent objections by the Justice Department and the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III.
The witnesses include two top F.B.I. officials who worked alongside Mr. Comey, James Rybicki and Carl Ghattas, as well as Paul Manafort, Mr. Trump’s former campaign chairman. Committee rules require Ms. Feinstein to sign off on subpoenas, and she has not made her position clear. But she has expressed her frustration with the delays.
The Justice Department said this week it would not let the two F.B.I. officials voluntarily testify before the committee in deference to Mr. Mueller’s work. And lawyers for Mr. Manafort, who has come under intense scrutiny by Mr. Mueller’s team, had apparently stopped returning the committee’s calls — even after reaching a deal to testify earlier in the summer.
The holdups have not entirely prevented the committee’s investigators from proceeding with their work. Investigators continue to pore over thousands of pages of documents, as well as transcripts from interviews with Donald Trump Jr. and Glenn Simpson, the founder of the firm that produced a dossier of sensational claims about President Trump and Russia. But Judiciary committee members are growing more frustrated, since they see Mr. Comey’s tenure and firing as squarely under the committee’s oversight jurisdiction.
“There’s no reason to make exceptions for these Justice Department witnesses,” Mr. Hartmann added.
Beyond subpoena power, the pair has other powerful levers at its disposal, from offers of immunity for witnesses to holding up Justice Department nominees in need of the panel’s approval.
Mr. Grassley and Ms. Feinstein have worked closely to push the investigation forward, agreeing to pursue matters as broad as the Obama Justice Department’s handling of the Hillary Clinton email case last year and the Trump campaign’s interactions with Russia to better understand Mr. Comey’s abrupt removal.
Part of the problem for committee investigators is that the effort only began in earnest this summer, months after the appointment of Mr. Mueller and decisions by Congress’s two intelligence committees to investigate Russia-related matters. In many cases, the investigative teams are jockeying for the same witnesses and documentary evidence. And though they are in frequent consultation to minimize conflicts, there have been challenges.
Judiciary Committee investigators think that Mr. Rybicki and Mr. Ghattas, for example, could provide key insight into Mr. Comey’s handling of the Clinton email case, his interactions with Mr. Trump and his ultimate firing. Mr. Ghattas is particularly close to Andrew G. McCabe, the deputy director of the F.B.I., who had come under fire from Mr. Grassley.
But Mr. Mueller apparently shares that view. In rejecting the committee’s request to speak to the two F.B.I. officials, the Justice Department wrote this week that it was acting to “protect the integrity” of the special counsel’s investigation.
Mr. Hartmann said that explanation came as a surprise to the committee, which had consulted with Mr. Mueller’s team to satisfy their concerns about talking to the men.
“The committee has engaged in multiple rounds of deconfliction talks, and Special Counsel Mueller’s office has not articulated any legitimate reasons that the Chairman and Ranking Member have not already agreed to address with respect to interviews of Mr. Ghattas and Mr. Rybicki,” he said.
Mr. Grassley and Ms. Feinstein issued a subpoena for Mr. Manafort to appear before the body in July, only to recall it hours later when the former campaign chairman agreed to comply with committee requests. But the next day, Mr. Mueller’s team raided Mr. Manafort’s home, and he essentially ceased cooperating.
“All I can tell you is I’m not very satisfied with the fact that his lawyers aren’t returning our calls,” Mr. Grassley said on Thursday morning, referring to Mr. Manafort. A call between investigators and the lawyers later in the day did not yield any progress, a committee official said.
A lawyer for Mr. Manafort could not immediately be reached for comment.
Though it does not consider him a witness, the committee is also waiting to hear from Attorney General Jeff Sessions, who has not spoken to the committee since his confirmation hearing in January. After failing at his confirmation hearing to disclose his meetings with the Russian ambassador, which were made public weeks after he had been confirmed as attorney general, Mr. Sessions recused himself from the Justice Department’s Russia investigation. He said he recused himself not because of wrongdoing but to comport with Justice Department regulations regarding his role in the Trump campaign.
Mr. Grassley wrote to Mr. Sessions in late August suggesting three dates in late September or early October for a regular oversight hearing. A hearing date has yet to be announced, and while Mr. Grassley said the attorney general can have time to set up his team, the committee is eager to question him.
Committee members have said it is crucial to their investigation to question Mr. Sessions not only about those contacts but his role in Mr. Comey’s firing. The New York Times reported on Thursday that Mr. Sessions had offered his resignation to Mr. Trump, who despite withering criticism, declined to accept.
For Democrats, who have tried to prod the committee into a more active stance, efforts to compel witnesses could not come soon enough.
Senator Sheldon Whitehouse, Democrat of Rhode Island, said he was encouraged that the committee had “roused itself” to begin staff interviews and document gathering, but said on balance he wish it was proceeding in a more energetic way.
