Now the media-savvy former federal prosecutor is leaping into a new realm: cable news.
CNN has signed Mr. Bharara as a senior legal analyst, meaning he will be a frequent presence on the network’s programming, the network said on Wednesday.
The arrangement allows Mr. Bharara — already a fixture in political and media circles in New York — to expand his audience into millions of living rooms. And CNN will offer a national forum for Mr. Bharara’s at-times blistering critiques of the Trump administration on a network that — the president’s criticism of it notwithstanding — is regarded as less partisan than cable competitors like Fox News and MSNBC.
Rumors that Mr. Bharara may be considering a political career have also persisted, and his decision to take a role at CNN is likely to reignite speculation about his plans.
He is not the only Trump critic whom CNN is adding to its lineup: Walter M. Shaub Jr., who resigned as director of the Office of Government Ethics in July and has called the Trump administration’s approach to ethics “close to a laughingstock,” is also joining as a contributor, the network said. The appointments were first reported by Politico.
Mr. Bharara is no stranger to television, and his appearances in recent months seemed intended to showcase his versatility on the air. In June, he sat with George Stephanopoulos to offer a sober assessment of the Trump administration for ABC’s Sunday morning show “This Week.” Later in the month, he appeared on Comedy Central’s “The Daily Show” for an extended segment with the show’s wisecracking correspondent Hasan Minhaj.
His new role at CNN adds to Mr. Bharara’s growing and diverse portfolio of postprosecutorial responsibilities. He is a distinguished scholar in residence at the New York University School of Law and an executive vice president at Some Spider Studios, a media company run by his brother that publishes Cafe, a news and entertainment website.
Mr. Trump did indeed call Mr. Bharara on multiple occasions — the last time leaving a voice mail message that was never returned because of Mr. Bharara’s concerns about the appearance of impropriety. He was fired shortly thereafter, one of dozens of United States attorneys let go by the Trump administration.
On the podcast, Mr. Bharara said that given what he now knew about Mr. Trump, he would not have been long for his job even if he had not been fired.
“Can’t live by 140-character quips alone,” he added.