Representatives of the commonwealth government stationed outside the capital have taken to driving to San Juan in person to present their progress reports. On Friday, Gov. Ricardo A. Rosselló said that the government would begin commandeering and giving away at least 3,000 containers of cargo stuck at the Port of San Juan, much of it meant for the island’s supermarkets, if the stores themselves could not move the merchandise.
But hundreds of supermarkets remained closed because of a lack of diesel fuel to run their generators, and the high demand for diesel has now created a black market for it. The local and federal governments have been unable to come up with a solution, said Manuel Reyes Alfonso, executive vice president of MIDA, the island’s food industry association.
Omar Marrero, the ports director in Puerto Rico, said the government had a right to expropriate shipments.
Nelson O. Vázquez, president of the Selectos supermarket chain, said FEMA had done a poor job of managing the acute diesel shortage, which was crippling the food supply and leaving store shelves bare.
By Friday, the Trump administration appeared to have awakened to the risks in offering an overly sunny assessment, sending a number of top military and other officials to the island in advance of the president’s trip here next Tuesday, a show of its commitment and focus.
In interviews aboard an Air Force flight to Puerto Rico, administration officials did their best to downplay Ms. Duke’s comments, while highlighting the administration’s efforts to distribute fuel, clean water, ice and other basic supplies that are running critically short on the entire island of 3.4 million people, who remained without electricity.
“I don’t think you can ever be satisfied when you have people who are in need,” said Lt. Gen. Todd T. Semonite, commanding general of the Army Corps of Engineers.
Vice Adm. Karl Shultz, the commander of the Coast Guard’s Atlantic Area, agreed.
And Ms. Duke sought to clarify her remarks during a short news conference at the San Juan airport before taking off on a helicopter tour of the damage to the island.
“The end of my statement about good news was that it was good news that the people of Puerto Rico, the many public servants of the United States and the government of Puerto Rico were working together,” she said.
White House officials said the response was robust even before the storm made landfall. By the day after, 3,500 federal workers were on the ground with 500 generators, distributing 274,000 meals. Within days, federal officials had a million liters of water in Puerto Rico and military officials were transporting 124,000 gallons of fuel. By Friday, FEMA had 10,000 people on the island, including 17 chainsaw teams clearing debris.
The federal effort has come in for praise from some, including Jenniffer González-Colón, Puerto Rico’s resident commissioner and the island’s representative in Congress. She said workers from FEMA, the Coast Guard, and other agencies had begun the massive logistical challenge of restoring roads and communications almost as soon as the storm had passed.
“We’ve never before got this kind of communications with the federal government,” said Ms. González-Colón.
Ms. González-Colón, who was traveling with Ms. Duke’s delegation, said the federal and Puerto Rican governments’ recovery efforts had been hampered by the unique challenges of trying to restore power and distribute supplies on an island where the infrastructure has largely been destroyed.
The distinction was lost on a number of island residents on Friday. In a stretch of Ocean Park, a middle-class San Juan neighborhood that seemed to be just as badly damaged as Barriada Figueroa, David Wittig, a chiropractor, lamented the fact that he had seen no one from FEMA on his block, a virtual war zone of vile, thigh-high water, felled trees and flood-rotted furniture.
José Alvarez, 53, a school security guard in the southern city of Ponce, said people were growing frustrated at the shortages.
