GUSTAVIA, St. Barthélemy — The pace is frantic. Residents with shovels clean the streets. Dump trucks laden with the stumps of storm-ravaged trees rumble back and forth along narrow streets. Construction crews clear downed telephone poles and debris from houses and businesses in a race to restore the lifeblood of this small Caribbean island — tourism.
Those who live on St. Barthélemy — working in its restaurants, building its homes, fishing its seas — know there is nothing without it. And Hurricane Irma, which plowed through this part of the Caribbean, killing more than two dozen people and seriously damaging or destroying the majority of structures on some islands, also struck a devastating blow to the industry so many rely on.
The storm leveled hotels, eroded beaches and turned marinas into graveyards for scuttled yachts. Islands that were hit are still trying to assess the hurricane’s economic impact, wondering how and even if they will be able to restore the islands to the former magnets they were before Irma.
There’s a lot at stake. Travel and tourism accounts for a higher share of the Caribbean region’s gross domestic product than it does in any other region in the world, according to the World Travel & Tourism Council, supporting more than 2.3 million jobs.
The areas of greatest concern, industry officials said, included Anguilla, the British and United States Virgin Islands, and St. Martin, all of which have robust tourism economies and suffered extensive damage.
It will be a long road for some, even years. An estimated 95 percent of the structures on the island of Barbuda were seriously damaged or destroyed. Entire stretches of St. Martin and Anguilla are practically uninhabitable, not only because of the roofs peeled back like tin cans and porches smashed to splinters, but because of shortages of food and water.
An estimated 90 percent of the St. Martin economy depends either directly or indirectly on tourism, said Jénovéfa Eche, who works in the St. Martin tourism office in Paris. The destruction, she said, is estimated at $1.43 billion.
“This will take months, years, before we are at all close to our normal appearance,” she said.
But before the rebuilding of the tourism industry could begin, officials said, there were many immediate emergencies to attend to, like restoring telephone and electricity service, providing safe drinking water and medical treatment, and reopening the port and the airport.
Barbuda, with about 100 hotel rooms, has been a small contributor to the region’s overall tourism economy. But the businesspeople and workers who have depended on that trickle of tourists now face an uncertain future.
In Cuba, the long-term implications could be even worse. The hardest-hit parts of the islands contain a significant share of its tourist infrastructure and bring in precious foreign currency for the communist nation. Without that, the country loses one of its primary sources of income to purchase items on the global market, including the construction materials it will need to repair the damaged infrastructure.
The storm badly damaged dozens of hotels on Cayo Coco and Cayo Romero, small islands off the north coast of Cuba. The airport that served these islands was destroyed.
On Monday, President Raúl Castro recognized the importance of resorts to the Cuban economy and promised they would be rebuilt before the start of the peak season, which runs from December to April. The target is ambitious, but with Venezuela, the island’s main economic partner, racked by its own crises, Cuba can’t afford to miss it. The Cuban government announced on Monday that 10 people had died as a result of the storm, bringing the death toll in the Caribbean to at least 37.
The hurricane’s impact was felt broadly across all economic sectors. While the Bahamas generally avoided the worst of the destruction, the Morton Salt company, on Inagua, suffered significant damage to its production plant, where it employs 145 workers and is the main economic driver.
Theresa Lewis, 50, who has worked as a security guard at the plant for more than a decade, fled Inagua last week with her entire family and holed up in a shelter in Nassau. She fears she may be out of work for months.
Frank J. Comito, chief executive officer of the Caribbean Hotel and Tourism Association, said the region would need “sustained participation” by both the public and private sector to ensure a complete recovery. His group has partnered with Tourism Cares, a nonprofit, to raise relief and rebuilding assistance from the hotel chains, credit card companies and any other enterprises involved in the Caribbean tourism industry.
The well-being of employees whose livelihoods are now threatened is of particular concern.
Giles Cadman, a businessman who divides his time between Canada and the British Virgin Islands, said people were doing what they could to bring aid to the affected communities in Tortola, the largest island in the British territory. While the islands are known as playgrounds for the wealthy, he said, there are many residents who survive there on modest incomes from cleaning boats, serving food and working in shops.
Bruno Magras, the president of the local government, said the largest impact was on private homes and public infrastructure, like the fire station and government offices. Hotel capacity also has been hit.
The president has asked every hotel and villa on the island to give him a timeline for repairing their facilities. By Tuesday, he expects the island’s steep and winding roads to be fully cleared of debris, and trash collection to begin once more.