A parks worker alerted the police to the defacement of the 1892 bronze, which stands north of the 65th Street transverse, at 7 a.m., according to the New York Police Department. On the pedestal, the words “Hate will not be tolerated” had also been written in white spray paint.
Depictions of Columbus have been swept into a national conversation about the public veneration of historical figures with controversial pasts. That debate erupted in violence last month when white supremacists protested the removal of a statue of the Confederacy’s top general, Robert E. Lee, from Charlottesville, Va., a riot that resulted in one woman’s death.
Following the removals of such statues nationwide in the aftermath, Mayor Bill de Blasio convened a commission to review of the city’s iconography for possible removal, including images of Columbus, whose 1492 voyage to the Caribbean, historians say, was at the grave cost of the indigenous people there. Mr. de Blasio has since said that the commission may decide that some images, perhaps including those of Columbus, be retrofitted with plaques that explain issues surrounding them rather than be taken down.
The police said they were seeking any surveillance video that may exist, and that no arrests had been made in continuing investigation.
On Tuesday morning, a worker from the Central Park Conservancy’s conservation team stood atop a ladder, methodically rubbing a solvent-soaked rag on Columbus’s right hand, which was stained bright red, a bronze flag in its grasp. A worker had draped a drop cloth over the statue’s base to keep drops of red paint from staining it.
Robrecht Cornelis, 50, a cargo ship captain visiting from Belgium, looked on with his family as the workers cleaned the 15-foot-tall statue.
The Central Park statue is about half a mile north of the more famous depiction of Columbus that towers over Columbus Circle at 59th Street. It was commissioned by the New York Genealogical and Biographical Society to commemorate the 400th anniversary of Columbus’s 1492 voyage across the Atlantic from Spain and sculpted by Jeronimo Sunol, a Spanish sculptor.
