Mayor Bill de Blasio strode north between the grasses and the sumac, his sleeves rolled up, his head visible above the crowds streaming along the High Line, the popular park on a former rail line in Chelsea.
Tuesday marked a milestone of sorts for a mayor more comfortable in the confines of his old Brooklyn brownstone neighborhood than in Manhattan: Mr. de Blasio’s first visit to the High Line as mayor. In fact, it was his first trip ever to the park, which opened in 2009.
So what did he think of the experience, one shared by about seven million visitors a year? Mr. de Blasio was not saying.
The mayor’s trip to the High Line, after nearly four years of taking flak from reporters and some incredulous city residents for avoiding the venue, did not include mayoral reflection on the views or the horticulture. Nor did it include an announcement of a new policy, or a statement about the role of the parks in the community, their importance for tourism in the city or the High Line’s impact on the hyperdevelopment of the Far West Side.
Instead, it was one of several outings this week steeped in personal experience and anecdote, and devoid of policy. The sort of events Mr. de Blasio has mostly avoided as mayor.
But with an election in November, and with his top commissioners in Upper Manhattan for their fourth stop on a tour around the city called “City Hall in Your Borough,” it appeared to be as good a time as ever to check a few boxes off the New York City bucket list.
Mr. de Blasio started with the opening night gala at the Metropolitan Opera on Monday night, where “Norma” had been performed. It was his first visit to that event, as well.
While Mr. de Blasio did not take questions from reporters while posing for photographs on Tuesday, he gave some inkling of his feeling in a running conversation with third graders from local Public School 33 who walked with him up the High Line, hand in hand.
“When you’re on the High Line, do you ever look inside people’s windows?” the local city councilman, Corey Johnson, asked the children.
“Yeah!” all the children replied in unison.
As they walked, a boy suggested the plants were like a jungle. Mr. de Blasio differed. “Maybe more of a forest,” the mayor said.
The children asked about the photographers and reporters.
“When I do things, these guys follow me a lot,” Mr. de Blasio explained.
“Mr. Mayor, what’s been your favorite part of the High Line so far?” a reporter asked.
The mayor turned instead to the children. “You like your teachers?” the mayor asked.
The entourage stopped at an area of benches set out over 26th Street and looked through a frame at a public housing development across the street.
“It is just a big open viewing station; that’s all it does?” Mr. de Blasio asked.
“Very cool,” the mayor said.
“Mayor, what do you think of the sumac?” a reporter asked, alluding to comments from a precocious child with surprising knowledge of the park’s vegetation. Mr. de Blasio did not respond.
After, he met up at New York University with an old roommate and longtime friend, Dr. Peter Dicpinigaitis, 56, and spent about 12 minutes in Room 235 of Weinstein Hall, their dorm in the early 1980s. Three women who currently reside in the suite listened and occasionally took part as Mr. de Blasio reminisced about the noise and his need for late-night power naps.
“Sometimes Bill would come home at midnight, and he’d be needing to start to study for the next day, so he would ask me to time him for a brief power nap,” Dr. Dicpinigaitis, now a critical care physician at Montefiore Medical Center, said later in a phone interview.
As Mr. de Blasio left the university, a student reporter named Sam Raskin, tried to ask a question about affordable housing. “We’re not doing that right now,” the mayor said as he made his way out the building.