HOUSTON — This city sprawls over 600 square miles, an area so big that Chicago, Philadelphia, Baltimore and Detroit could all fit within it simultaneously. The nine-county Houston metropolitan region, covering more than 10,000 square miles, is almost as large as the entire state of Massachusetts.
No single image or patch of land tells the whole story of Houston. But a journey along the 21-mile stretch of Interstate 45 starting near George Bush Intercontinental Airport that leads downtown toward the site where the city was founded is one place to start.
The highway now traverses vast stretches of dislocation and pain in the wake of Hurricane Harvey’s wrath, as Houstonians begin coming to grips with the devastation that the receding floods left behind. But the road also reflects the essence of an often misunderstood city.
On the surface, Houston is a utilitarian, sometimes unsightly sprawl of supercharged commerce. Underneath, it can often be a place of remarkable heart and grit, a city built on inhospitable ground that fully expects to rebuild from the storm’s ravages. Here are snapshots along the road.
The view from up here on the highway is unromantic and brutally efficient, not unlike the overall aesthetic of a city synonymous with air-conditioning and AstroTurf. It is all pavement, sky, Jersey barrier, billboard and Long John Silver’s.
But down below on West Road, another Houston goes largely unseen.
A homeless man who lives beneath the overpass with his wife walked to a nearby dollar store. They had $8 between them. When he returned, they had $7. He bought a white-handled broom to sweep their patch of sidewalk.
On the day of the floods, a fire marshal drove up to them and asked them if they wanted a ride to a shelter. They declined, but Mr. Moore was moved by the offer.
After he swept, Mr. Moore leaned the broom against the shopping cart, and he watched as his wife arranged a blanket neatly on the sidewalk and sat down to read the newspaper.
About 13 miles from the airport, a few blocks from the interstate and far from the downtown skyline, the mountains of Lyngrove Drive were growing higher and higher. People pulled out the flood-ravaged contents of their homes and piled them at the curb in mounds rising roughly six feet high in some cases: refrigerators, carpets, wallboard, sofas, cabinets, drawers, luggage, picture frames. It was broken junk, breaking hearts.
One of Ms. Rodriguez’s neighbors, Rigoberto Galdamez, 40, stood inside his empty home and bent down next to the kitchen to show the waterline on a cabinet — about one foot of water. Not a lot, it seemed. But just enough.
Before the flood, the largely Latino families on this block of Lyngrove Drive were friendly, but not close. It was a blue-collar place where working and sleeping and raising a family were more valued than socializing. Mr. Galdamez makes $16 an hour working in construction; Ms. Rodriguez’s husband is a welder.
After the flood, the block is closer. Harvey, of all terrible things, brought this block together.
As the waters rose, Ms. Rodriguez and her husband evacuated their four children on a small motorboat. Her husband had tried to drive through the water in his pickup truck, seeking a safe escape route for his family, but the truck died and water rushed in.
Michael Snow stood on the front steps of his two-story home near the bayou’s banks in the Woodland Heights neighborhood. The floodwaters went over the roofline. His house still stands, but Harvey effectively gutted it.
Amid the detritus of the house where he, his wife and his four children have lived for 13 years, there was a table standing neat and upright on the grass in their front yard: It held hot food for the cleanup crew, donated by an Indian church.
The sounds of hammers and tools clanged and rattled around him.
On the highway at the edge of downtown, at a tangle of converging and diverging highways, there is a worn-down railroad bridge where a graffiti artist’s messy block-letter message has endured for years. People slow down as they approach the bridge, pull out their phones and post pictures of it on social media. The slogan has become something of a local catchphrase, capturing in two ordinary words the no-limits ethos of a place forever linked with putting men on the moon.
As the Houston region grows ever more diverse, the phrase could perhaps use refining.
Stephen L. Klineberg, a sociology professor at Rice University who is the founding director of the university’s Kinder Institute for Urban Research, calls Greater Houston the most ethnically diverse metropolitan area in the country. In the Houston region, non-Hispanic whites make up 38 percent of the population, Hispanics 36 percent, African-Americans 17 percent and Asians 9 percent.
The floodwaters were ruthlessly undiscriminating. Black evacuees were escorted to dry land by Hispanic volunteers; Hispanic evacuees were rescued by white strangers; Jews were helped by Christians; Muslims cleared debris for non-Muslims; the rich crowded into shelters with the poor.
Near a flooded residential area along the Beltway 8 highway, a melting pot’s worth of helping hands and arms lifted a frail, paralyzed black man from his wheelchair into a pickup truck driven by an Asian banker.
“The thing that Lanier used to say about Houston that I loved, and is so true, is that Houston is one place where nobody cares who your daddy is, and that’s why people flock here,” said Bill King, a former mayoral candidate, referring to Bob Lanier, the mayor of Houston in the 1990s.
Even Houston’s Plymouth Rock is under water.
Allen’s Landing is the site where two New York brothers, Augustus Chapman Allen and John Kirby Allen, stepped ashore on the banks of Buffalo Bayou in 1836 and founded the town. They named it for Sam Houston, the hero of the decisive battle for Texas’s independence from Mexico.
Today, the historic site is tucked along the edge of Houston’s skyscraper-filled downtown, about a mile off I-45. And the setting now requires some imagination, and maybe a mini-submarine, to see up close.
The bayou swelled and flooded, leaving shreds of plastic and other debris behind on the walls and lampposts as the waters have slowly receded.
The two events — Harvey’s calamitous rains and the founding of the city — unfolded here on almost the same date, 181 years apart: Aug. 27, 2017, and Aug. 30, 1836.
Three years after the Allen brothers bought land on the banks of Buffalo Bayou, Houston was reeling from two distinct blows — the loss of its standing as the capital of the Republic of Texas and a deadly outbreak of disease. The yellow fever epidemic in the summer of 1839 was Houston’s first mass disaster.
High above the rushing waters at Allen’s Landing, Anne Olson stood on the roof of a building and surveyed the damage. Ms. Olson is the president of Buffalo Bayou Partnership, a nonprofit organization founded in 1986 that has been revitalizing a 10-mile stretch of the bayou.
