ARCADE FIRE at Madison Square Garden (Sept. 12, 7:30 p.m). On its recent album, “Everything Now,” Arcade Fire uses pointedly ironic disco jams to diagnose ills of modern society (anxiety, inequality, celebrity). At its best, the LP makes you think and dance in equal measure, and Arcade Fire’s arena tour should accomplish something similar. Expect highlights from a catalog reaching back more than a decade, performed with a sense of self-aware spectacle.
BIG THIEF at Music Hall of Williamsburg (Sept. 11-12, 8 p.m.). This Brooklyn-based folk-rock band turned heads in 2016 with its first album, the cheekily (but not undeservedly) titled “Masterpiece”; this summer, it drew even stronger reviews for its follow-up, “Capacity.” Both LPs are full of sharply sketched story-songs, which the band’s singer, Adrianne Lenker, invests with striking emotional clarity. Big Thief will be joined at these shows by Lucy Dacus (Monday) and Palehound (Tuesday) — two powerful acts in their own rights — among others.
MOUNT EERIE at Murmrr Theater (Sept. 11-12, 8 p.m.). Prepare to have your heart broken if you see the singer-songwriter Phil Elverum, who performs as Mount Eerie, this week. After losing his wife, the visual artist Geneviève Castrée Elverum, to pancreatic cancer last year, Mr. Elverum wrote and recorded the album “A Crow Looked at Me,” a piercingly direct document of grief. He will perform songs from the album at this pair of solo acoustic performances at Murmrr Theater, an appropriately intimate venue in Brooklyn.
PATTI SMITH AND HER BAND at Rumsey Playfield (Sept. 14, 7:30 p.m.). Since the release of her National Book Award-winning memoir “Just Kids” in 2010, Patti Smith has arguably been known as much for her elegiac writing as for her contributions to punk rock. This show is a tribute of another kind — a performance in honor of her husband, the musician Fred (Sonic) Smith, who died in 1994, with help from their two children, Jackson Smith and Jesse Paris Smith. Ticket sales benefit City Parks Foundation’s free SummerStage programming.
BRYSON TILLER at Radio City Music Hall (Sept. 8-9, 7 p.m.). When the Kentucky-raised singer Bryson Tiller headlined Radio City Music Hall for the first time, in the spring of 2016, it felt like a coronation for one of R&B’s new royals. His return to that ornate stage in Midtown Manhattan this week is more like a victory lap: Mr. Tiller’s second album, “True to Self,” debuted atop the Billboard chart in June, and there is little debate over whether he’s a big enough star to fill the room. The omnipresent rap producer Metro Boomin and the rising singer H.E.R. will open the show.
PETE TOWNSHEND at the Metropolitan Opera (Sept. 9-10, 8 p.m.). With the Who on a break between legs of its latest world tour, Mr. Townshend, the group’s guitarist and principal songwriter, is spending September on a passion project: a five-date run of shows at which he performs the Who’s landmark 1970s rock opera “Quadrophenia” with symphonic accompaniment. After passing through Lenox, Mass., earlier in the month for a Tanglewood appearance, the Classic Quadrophenia tour visits the home of the Metropolitan Opera on Saturday and Sunday.
WIKI at Rough Trade NYC (Sept. 11, 9 p.m.). Connoisseurs of New York City rap have been following the smart, scrappy lyricist known as Wiki since he debuted as part of the group Ratking five years ago. The greatest payoff yet arrived last month in the form of Wiki’s new solo album, “No Mountains in Manhattan,” which confirms his place as an unforgettable narrator in the tradition of Ghostface Killah, Nas and Prodigy. The details he calls out in his distinctive yelp, from subway lines to smoked-fish delicacies, are pure vectors of joy for Wiki’s fellow New York natives.
CAMILLE BERTAULT at Jazz Standard (Sept. 14, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Ms. Bertault posted a video on YouTube two years ago of herself singing along to John Coltrane’s famously treacherous “Giant Steps” solo. It became a small sensation: She doesn’t just nail every note; she approximates the saxophonist’s inflection, approaching moments of climax with a similar ramping effect, while exerting her own bright persona. Last year she released a diffuse but smartly constructed album, “En Vie,” on which she builds rich vocal harmonies and digs in deeply across lithesome ballads and dashing postbop.
CHET DOXAS at Nublu (Sept. 9, 9 p.m.). A saxophonist of broad tone and clear articulation, Mr. Doxas is about to release a sophomore album, “Rich in Symbols.” It’s full of big-canvas post-rock, influenced by the pyrotechnics of Snarky Puppy and the grandeur of Explosions in the Sky. He plays here with Matthew Stevens on guitar, Zack Lober on electric bass and turntables, Eric Doob on drums and electronics, as well as a second guitarist, Rob Ritchie.
FESTIVAL OF NEW TRUMPET MUSIC at Dizzy’s Club Coca-Cola (Sept. 11- 12). Since 2003, the trumpeter Dave Douglas has led the Festival of New Trumpet Music, an ecumenical celebration hitting its 15th year this week, with events on seven straight nights. Highlights include a five-trumpeter conclave on Saturday at the Stone’s glass box at the New School; an award ceremony and panel discussion on Sunday honoring Charles Tolliver, the postbop trumpeter; and this two-night run featuring Keyon Harrold, Marquis Hill and Maurice Brown, trumpeters who mine the fault line between funk, hip-hop and straight-ahead jazz.
ETHAN IVERSON TRIO WITH RON CARTER AND BILLY HART at Jazz Standard (Sept. 12, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Mr. Iverson, a pianist, has played in the Bad Plus since 2000. But in December he will leave that trio of louche provocateurs to focus on his own solo career (as both a musician and a writer). He will have more time to explore partnerships like this one, in which he’s joined by two jazz luminaries: Mr. Carter, a bassist and a National Endowment for the Arts Jazz Master, and Mr. Hart, a tonally astute drummer with a thriving career as a bandleader.
JAZZ AT LINCOLN CENTER ORCHESTRA at the Rose Theater (Sept. 14-16, 8 p.m.). Jazz at Lincoln Center rings in its 30th season with a three-night run by its namesake orchestra, led by Wynton Marsalis. These concerts focus on the compositions of Jelly Roll Morton, the sovereign composer-arranger. Two pianists on the rise, Aaron Diehl and Sullivan Fortner, will make guest appearances.
BUTCH MORRIS AND RADICAL BLACK COMPOSITION at Issue Project Room (Sept. 12, 8 p.m.). The cornetist-composer Butch Morris, who died in 2013, is best remembered as the inventor of conduction, a technique in which a conductor guides improvisers in a flow of collective invention. This event includes a panel on his legacy, moderated by the writer Adam Shatz and featuring the critic-musician Greg Tate, the musician-scholars George E. Lewis and Mary Jane Leach, and the multi-instrumentalist Brandon Ross. Mr. Ross will also perform.
MATANA ROBERTS: ‘BREATHE …’ at Roulette (Sept. 14, 8 p.m.). The alto saxophonist and narrative artist Matana Roberts has accrued a devoted following over the past seven years, largely thanks to her evocative “Coin Coin” suite, a continuing series of experimental, often operatic compositions investigating her family’s complex history in the American South. At Roulette, Ms. Roberts will debut “Breathe …,” a work of music and visuals that turns her historically minded, revelatory gaze on the militarization of police in the present day, and on the consequences it has wrought across the United States.
