Let us begin not with the who, which was several thousand bees and a bunch of people in anti-sting gear that looked like spacesuits, or the what, which was harvesting honey. Let us go directly to the where.
It was not a bosky setting that would bring to mind the Robert Frost poem about good fences and good neighbors, but the south roof of the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center on Manhattan’s Far West Side. Here the neighbors are the unfinished towers of the Hudson Yards development. They ring what has become an urban meadow — the south roof, mostly covered by 6.75 acres of kaleidoscopic sedum. It is yellowish green. It will turn red in time for Christmas.
The bees have been in residence since spring. The first 12,000 came from California, transplanted in a three-pound container that looked like a shoe box with screens on both sides. They were placed in wooden hives, which look like stackable drawers. There were 60,000 to 80,000 by midsummer.
Tending hives at the Javits Center would have been impossible a few years ago. Beekeeping was illegal in New York City until 2010, when the Board of Health lifted a Giuliani-era ban. The Javits Center’s green roof was installed a few years later as part of a $463 million project that was part face-lift, part green-roof sustainability project.
The sedum captures rainwater and keeps the Javits Center a few degrees cooler than before it was installed. “The bees are a grace note, but the grace notes can only exist because the green roof exists,” Ms. Newton said.
And the grace notes are watched. A live video feed from the roof displayed on a video wall by the Javits Center’s administrative offices. Ms. Newton had one eye on it when a crow touched down near the hive closest to the camera.
“That crow is going to try to grab a bee for lunch,” she said.
A few steps away was Rick Brown, the Javits Center’s chief engineer, who shook his head. “It’s going for the dead ones,” he said.
Ms. Newton watched for a moment, nodded and explained what was apparently happening: “One of their many jobs is to be undertaker bees and clean the dead ones out.” The bees had carried the carcasses from the hives and left them on ground, an easy treat for passers-by like the crow, she said.
Besides, she said, “Bees only sting in self-defense.” And only female bees, who are the workers and the queens, can sting. Male bees cannot.
 Then she put her hand next to the trying-not-to-tremble hand of a newbie in the group — mine. The bee did not sting, but it did not stay long, either. In seconds, it flew away.
So much anxiousness. But this is New York, the capital of anxiousness.
Ms. Newton opened a hive. The bees must not have released the fear pheromone, because they mostly stayed put.  They’ve got hair on their eyeballs.” Not to get too technical or anything, but bees had nothing to do with the origin of the slang phrase “hairy eyeball,” according to the Oxford English Dictionary.
Inside the hives, there was honey in the removable wooden frames — darker honey, she said, than a batch harvested last month. She shook the bees off a frame, and after shedding the beekeeping suits, watched Ms. Read carry the frame inside to the Javits Center’s huge main kitchen.
The chef, Alex Reyes, was waiting. He watched as Ms. Newton cut some honeycombs and spooned a dollop onto the small glass surface of a refractometer, a device used to gauge the moisture content in the honey. Ms. Newton held it up to the light.
“Pretty dry,” she said.
Mr. Reyes agreed when she handed the refractometer to him. “Really nice,” he said.
So she began carving the honeycomb into squares using a large knife. The squares looked almost like chocolate. Mr. Reyes said they reminded him of toffee. Ms. Newton said the honey was twice as sweet as sugar.
By now Ms. Newton was putting other frames in an extraction device, a spinner that would remove the honey the way a salad spinner removes the water from just-washed lettuce. The brand-new extractor broke down. Mr. Brown got it going using a battery-operated drill from his workshop, and Mr. Reyes made salads with honey in the dressing. Among the other ingredients were mustard, shallots, sea salt, garlic and vinegar. The salads will be sold in the Taste NY Bistro at the Javits Center.
But there was more honey, lots of it, in a white bucket with a spigot. Ms. Read filled dozens of one-ounce jars, 135 in all, with labels that did not stint on puns like “taste the buzz” and “a hive of opportunity.” There were several larger jars for Mr. Reyes, for more salad dressing.
