High-tech multihull sailboats driven by paid professionals may grab the headlines these days, but the world’s largest monohull sailboats racing offshore are still turning heads.
“The sheer size of the boats alone is really impressive,” said Rob Weiland, a race manager for the Maxi 72 sailboats, one of seven classes of boats competing at the Maxi Yacht Rolex Cup hosted by the Yacht Club Costa Smeralda in Sardinia, starting Sunday.
Maxi sailboats, the world’s biggest high-performance luxury yachts, have made the pilgrimage to the rocky coastline since 1980 to race from Porto Cervo, around the islands and back. The race started with a 70-foot boat length limit and has grown to include those in excess of 200 feet. Today, most of the boats are private state-of-the-art superyachts with price tags topping $10 million.
They are the pinnacle of naval architecture and design, largely helmed by committed amateurs. And while they may be divided into seven classes, they all share three things — cutting-edge technology, luxury and sheer size.
The Wally and Maxi 72 classes have strict owner rules that require the owner to drive the boat. The other classes do not have the same requirement, but are often helmed by the owner with crews of both professionals and amateurs, often friends and family.
There is no winning purse — but the victor gets bragging rights, a trophy and a Rolex watch.
“They don’t do it for the prize, they do it for the sport and the accolades of their peers,” said Giles Pearman, a spokesman for the Rolex sailing series that includes the Sydney-Hobart and Fastnet races, two of the toughest offshore races that feature large monohull boats.
“We are the oldest boat, and I’m the oldest helmsman — I love that fact,” said Hap Fauth, of the United States, the owner and skipper of Bella Mente, which won the Maxi 72 class the past two years.
The event began as a way to encourage amateur sailing. That remains a strong component in today’s races, but there are professionals on crews, with years of experience sailing in the America’s Cup, Volvo Ocean Race, Sydney-Hobart and Fastnet.
Ken Read, who helmed Comanche in the 2015 Rolex Cup, once compared the race to a baseball fantasy camp where a handful of good friends are sailing the coolest racing boats in the world. These big, monohull sailboats range from the 60-foot Durlindana 3 to the 119-foot Viriella, with some masts towering 150 feet above the deck and beams stretching from 9 to 20 feet.
This year, there will be 50 boats divided into seven classes with crews ranging from 14 to 30 people. Last year, a record 52 boats competed.
The J Class boats that normally compete at the Rolex Cup were racing in Newport, R.I., in late August in the first world J Class Championship Regatta. In Sardinia, organizers have 42 coastal and island course combinations that are decided according to classes and weather for a three- to four-hour race. Each class races daily.
In many ways, the Maxi Yacht Rolex Cup sailing is what the America’s Cup used to be — wealthy sailors racing each other in giant monohull sailboats for bragging rights. And the America’s Cup could possibly become that way again, with some high-tech engineering and design tweaks.
This June in Bermuda, Team New Zealand — after pedaling its way to a 7-1 America’s Cup victory over Team USA using leg-powered cycles to raise the sails and hydrofoiling catamarans that at times never touched the water — hinted at the idea of returning the race to monohull sailboats. No official announcement has been made.
The Maxi Yacht Rolex Cup is the high point of the Mediterranean sailing season. The general public is rarely exposed to this level of racing, with huge vessels navigating tight courses. That exclusivity is what keeps the captains and crew returning to this competition.
“The only time people might see it is while they’re traveling and reading an in-flight magazine and they see an advertisement for Rolex,” Weiland said.
That is just fine for most Rolex Cup sailors, who do not miss the pomp that surrounds the America’s Cup.
And it is about the thrill. For this select group, the noise and distractions of contemporary competitive sailing fall away, leaving only sailors, the sea and boats.
For some, racing these big boats feels like running a company.
