In his review of my book “The Vietnam War: An Intimate History” (Sept. 17), David Greenberg accuses me of making a “big error,” in saying that Richard Nixon “scuttled the negotiations” scheduled to begin in Paris just before the 1968 election. It was not an error. As John A. Farrell’s recent biography “Richard Nixon: The Life” makes clear, candidate Nixon’s clandestine and possibly treasonous contacts with South Vietnam’s president Nguyen Van Thieu were indeed aimed at scuttling the talks President Lyndon Johnson had worked for weeks to organize — and they succeeded. Thieu may have had other reasons for his sudden refusal to take part in the negotiations but Nixon’s actions were central to that decision.
In his letter to the editor, Geoffrey Ward makes a critical distinction that he glossed over in his book when he wrote, “The Nixon campaign had successfully scuttled the negotiations.” Nixon’s skullduggery was indeed “aimed at scuttling” the talks, as Ward writes in his letter. But there’s no firm evidence that the obstinate Thieu, who was wary of the talks to begin with, would have gone along if not for Nixon’s efforts; hence, to make Nixon — and not Thieu — the decisive historical agent in the scuttling amounts, I believe, to an unjustified overreach.
The reason I do not engage with an American corpus is that my essay is about the war’s impact on Vietnamese people and the creation of a Vietnamese refugee diaspora. Readers would not know this since Greenberg neglects to mention that fact, an erasure that he compounds by recommending a list of works that are mostly about white Americans (all by men except for one). Americans would learn much more about their own history if they read or watched Vietnamese perspectives from Dang Nhat Minh, Bao Ninh, Duong Thu Huong, Le Ly Hayslip, Mai Elliott, and many others.
Greenberg unfortunately replicates an American solipsism so deep and ongoing that it affects even a historian who should know better. Like many other Americans, he demands that the world knows America, but not that America knows the world. It is arguably the case that this American ignorance about non-Americans helped get Americans into the Vietnam War in the first place, and continues to mire them in international difficulty today.
I read Michelle Goldberg’s review of my book, “Blurred Lines: Rethinking Sex, Power and Consent on Campus” (Sept. 17), in a state of shock. Goldberg’s review compliments my nuanced character portrayals and kaleidoscopic structure. But it also gravely mischaracterizes my book.
Among several baseless criticisms, Goldberg declares that I fail to mention a prominent national rape statistic, stating that she learned about this statistic from the Rape, Abuse, and Incest National Network, an important advocacy group that runs a hotline for victims.
But RAINN did not generate this statistic; an advocacy group does not perform epidemiological surveys. If Goldberg had located the primary source, she would have found that I write lengthy passages about it under its correct name: the National Crime Victimization Survey.
Goldberg repeatedly expresses scorn and outrage over my failure to comprehend my own topic. “I’m not sure how anyone could write an entire book about the subject of campus rape and not reckon with this,” she writes about the statistic I just discussed. But the failure is her own, not mine.
Sexual assault in college is a tough topic. It is so fraught and personal that an individual can too easily assume he or she alone possesses the correct stance on the issue. This review offers further evidence of that unfortunate fact.
Eric Foner’s essay on Robert E. Lee (Sept. 17) was a fine exposition on The Lost Cause, but he is misinterpreting the lyrics of The Band’s “The Night They Drove Old Dixie Down.” The line is actually, “There goes the Robert E. Lee” (emphasis mine), referring to the sighting of a well-known steamboat. The preceding line puts the narrator “back with my wife in Tennessee” and there is no evidence Lee went to Tennessee after the war.
Furthermore, the line “the very best” does not apply to Lee. “You take what you need and you leave the rest/But they should never have taken the very best” may be a reference to the narrator’s brother, “just 18, proud and brave/But a Yankee laid him in his grave,” or to the high casualty rate among Confederate troops, but it does not refer to Lee himself since he was never “taken” as in killed or imprisoned.
