Robert Fairchild, the New York City Ballet principal dancer who earned a 2015 Tony nomination for his performance in Christopher Wheeldon’s “An American in Paris,” will leave City Ballet at the end of this season. His final performances, the matinees of Oct. 14 and 15, will be in George Balanchine’s “Duo Concertant,” with Sterling Hyltin.
Mr. Fairchild, 30, who grew up in Salt Lake City, joined City Ballet in 2006 and was promoted to principal dancer in 2009. His departure, which the company announced on Monday, is not entirely surprising: He has spent much of the last three years moving between City Ballet and the “American in Paris” productions in New York and London, as well as taking part in “A Chorus Line” at the Hollywood Bowl and “Oklahoma!” at the Royal Albert Hall in London. In a telephone interview, Mr. Fairchild said that with a number of acting and musical theater roles on the horizon, he felt he needed to choose a direction.
In November, he will appear as Harry Beaton in Mr. Wheeldon’s concert production of “Brigadoon” at City Center and in December, he will choreograph and perform the title role in the Ensemble for the Romantic Century’s production of “Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein,” directed by Donald T. Sanders, Off Broadway. He will also appear as the modern dance pioneer Ted Shawn in “The Chaperone,” a PBS film written by Julian Fellowes (“Downton Abbey”).
Mr. Fairchild spoke about leaving the company and about his future plans. Here are edited excerpts from the conversation.
Had you been thinking about making this decision for a while?
I remember a moment when, after an “American in Paris” show, my parents called me to say they had found an essay I wrote in fourth grade about Gene Kelly, and how I wanted to be like him and dance on Broadway. I had been in a ballet company for so long, I had forgotten that was my original dream.
But you work your butt off to get to New York City Ballet, and leaving isn’t a decision you can make lightly. It was a decision that took years to make. After “Oklahoma!” I got offstage and thought, I can’t imagine doing anything else right now. I think whenever there is a dream, you’ve got to jump.
You will be choreographing for “Frankenstein.” Is that part of what you want to do in the future?
I don’t want to overshoot myself. I’ve never said no to opportunities, but my main goal is performing. I am looking forward to doing more work in front of the camera. I loved playing Ted Shawn, the choreography and the period detail; there is a different skill set to be learned. I love to tell stories, so whether it’s a musical, a play, a TV show, it all excites me.
Which ballets will you most miss dancing in?
Alexei Ratmansky’s “Namouna” was one of the most special things I ever had choreographed on me. And Jerome Robbins’s “Opus 19”; you can’t hide any flaws and it pushed me on such an emotional journey. And “Duo Concertant,” which encapsulates what I love about dance and why I wanted to be in Balanchine’s company. It’s like tap dancing with ballet shoes, skimming like a stone on water.