Jeremiah Goodman was a house painter to the stars. Not the guy who smeared two coats on the siding and shutters, but the preferred illustrator commissioned to paint shimmering portraits of glamorous interiors for design magazines and advertisements and as keepsakes for the homeowners themselves.
Mr. Goodman died on Sept. 7 at his apartment in Manhattan. He was 94. His representative, Eric Bongartz, said the cause was heart failure.
Mr. Goodman pursued a career as an artist despite a childhood automobile accident that injured his writing hand. He first hoped to be a film-set designer but found that he hated Hollywood. He was encouraged instead to capture idealized versions of existing interiors on canvas rather than to envision imaginary ones for the movies.
Gaining access to the glitterati through friends in California, New York and France, he achieved for singular parlors what John Singer Sargent had accomplished for distinguished people.
The accessorized apartment and house interiors he painted belonged to, among others, Greta Garbo, the jewelry designer Elsa Peretti, the philanthropist Betsy Bloomingdale, Ronald and Nancy Reagan, the fashion editor Diana Vreeland, the photographer Bruce Weber and Wallis Simpson, the duchess of Windsor.
“In a digital age, Jeremiah reminded us what the hand could achieve before it was replaced by the eye of photography,” said Dean Rhys Morgan, Mr. Goodman’s curator and friend.
Mr. Goodman’s luminous watercolors and gouache (an opaque watercolor) contrasted strikingly with architectural renderings and computer-assisted designs.
Irving Jeremiah Goodman was born on Oct. 22, 1922, in Niagara Falls, N.Y., to Louis Goodman and the former Anna Cohen, Jewish immigrants from Russia who owned a general store.
Mr. Goodman signed his works with only his middle name; it sounded more artistic than either his first name or his full name, he later explained.
When he was about 5, he broke his right arm rolling down a hill after falling out of the back seat of his parents’ car while it was moving. While he was convalescing, he was given a box of crayons and taught himself to draw with his left hand, which he did for the rest of his life.
He graduated from the Franklin School of Professional Art in New York City and took courses in interior decoration and commercial illustration at the New York School of Fine and Applied Art (now Parsons School of Design).
He assisted window display designers in New York, worked as a machinist in Buffalo during World War II and moved to Hollywood before returning to New York.
Two lucky introductions influenced his career in the late 1940s. The actor John Gielgud encouraged him to paint interior portraits and still lifes, and the artist William Bankier Henderson introduced him to high society.
By 1952, Mr. Goodman was illustrating newspaper advertisements for Lord & Taylor, articles in The New York Times Magazine and other publications, and covers for Interior Design. (He would paint its covers for the next 15 years.) In 1987, he was inducted into the Interior Design Hall of Fame.
The publication of his retrospective “Jeremiah: A Romantic Vision” (2007) revived interest in his works and led to a number of gallery exhibitions.
Mr. Goodman acknowledged that his portraits were idealized — to “help hide all the sins” — and that he would not want to live in some of the rooms he painted.
Mr. Goodman said his thematic goal was saudade, a Portuguese word for a sense of longing.
“I want to make people dizzy with it,” he told T: The New York Times Style Magazine in 2006.
Mr. Goodman longed to create fantasies for people who led relatively dreary workaday lives and would never get to visit the vibrant inner sanctums that he painted for magazines.
