NOTES ON A FOREIGN COUNTRY: An American Abroad in a Post-American World, by Suzy Hansen. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $26.) In this remarkably revealing book, Hansen, who moved to Istanbul after 9/11, wrestles with her country’s violent role in the world and the ways America has failed to interrogate itself. Hansen is doing something both rare and necessary, writes our reviewer, the Pulitzer Prize winner Hisham Matar; she is tracing the ways in which we are all born into histories, into national myths, and if we are unfortunate enough, into the fantasies of an empire.
WARNER BROS: The Making of an American Movie Studio, by David Thomson. (Yale University, $25.) Thomson’s history details the development of a brash studio that gave us gangsters, dames, gunfire, wisecracks, a wry, hard-boiled tone and the much-beloved wartime Oscar winner “Casablanca.” It explores the intriguing possibility that the creative forces behind much of classic Hollywood might just have been those misunderstood vulgarians, the studio heads themselves.
WHEN THE ENGLISH FALL, by David Williams. (Algonquin, $24.95.) This oddity of a novel (and sly parable for the threat of climate change) puts a clever spin on “prepper” fiction, examining how the utopian world of the Amish grapples with disaster in the form of a global power outage brought on by a solar storm. Can a community that holds itself apart survive the rest of society’s collapse?
OUT IN THE OPEN, by Jesús Carrasco. Translated by Margaret Jull Costa. (Riverhead, $26.) This bleak and beautiful debut novel recounts a few days in the life of a boy fleeing his tormentors in an unforgiving, dystopian landscape of unrelenting harshness. Faced with horrible suffering, Carrasco asks, will we dispense grace or cruelty?
MADE FOR LOVE, by Alissa Nutting. (Ecco/HarperCollins, $26.99.) This futuristic — though also disturbingly familiar — novel about a woman with a surveillance chip in her brain races along like an antic thriller and allows the author to offer deft observations on love, sex, intention, childhood and gadgets. It crackles and satisfies by all its own weird rules, subversively inventing delight where none should exist.
THE WOMAN WHO HAD TWO NAVELS AND TALES OF THE TROPICAL GOTHIC, by Nick Joaquin. (Penguin, paper, $18.) Joaquin (1917-2004) is considered one of the Philippines’ greatest writers, and there is a constant duality in the works collected here: war and resistance, the hopeful and the tragic, the desperate and the despot. In the world of this book, time travel exists, shapeshifting is possible and a woman could be in power.
GLASS HOUSES, by Louise Penny. (Minotaur, $28.99.) In the latest escapist Three Pines mystery, Chief Inspector Gamache combats modern Canadian drug smugglers by delving into the Spanish past. One of the pleasures of returning to this series, our crime columnist Marilyn Stasio writes, is visiting old friends in the sheltered Canadian village where it’s set.
SARGENT’S WOMEN: Four Lives Behind the Canvas, by Donna M. Lucey. (Norton, $29.95.) The glittering world of the late-19th-century 1 percent is revealed through the back stories of four society women in John Singer Sargent’s circle, three of whom posed for portraits by him. Lucey creates a rollicking snow globe version of an almost unimaginable world of weath, crackpot notions of self-improvement and high-flying self-indulgence, and her book overflows with hilarious, disturbing detail.
GRACE, by Paul Lynch. (Little, Brown, $26.) The Irish writer’s third novel raises timeless questions about suffering and survival through the story of two children expelled from their impoverished home in the midst of the Great Famine. When you’re starving, Lynch seems to be asking, are you truly alive?