WASHINGTON — Roger J. Stone Jr., a self-proclaimed political “dirty trickster” and an informal adviser to the president, will strongly deny to congressional investigators on Tuesday that he worked with Russians to aid President Trump’s campaign.
Mr. Stone is scheduled to be interviewed by the committee behind closed doors in its continuing investigation of Russian interference in last year’s presidential election.
His prepared remarks amount to a combative and meandering defense, complete with exhibits intended to bolster his case — a touch more fitting to a courtroom than a closed-door interview with investigators. Though the opening statement presents little new information from Mr. Stone, who has for months caustically denied any involvement in the election meddling, it comes with added weight: Lying to Congress is a crime.
Mr. Stone wrote on Twitter on Monday that he also intended to release a statement after Tuesday’s session.
“I view this as a political proceeding because a number of members of this committee have made irresponsible, indisputably and provably false statements in order to create the impression of collusion with the Russian state without any evidence that would hold up in a U.S. court of law or the court of public opinion,” Mr. Stone said in the remarks.
His prepared remarks, however, said that Mr. Stone was merely referring to his expectation that Mr. Podesta’s business connections to Ukraine would soon come to light, based in part on opposition research.
Mr. Stone is also expected to tell the House panel that he was never in direct communication with Julian Assange, the founder of WikiLeaks, and therefore did not know in advance about emails that were stolen from the Democratic National Committee during the campaign. Rather, according to Mr. Stone’s prepared remarks, he learned about them on Twitter and later asked a journalist who knew Mr. Assange to confirm the report.
The statement does not dispute that Mr. Stone communicated with Guccifer 2.0, an online persona who American officials believe was a front in the Russian hacking efforts. But it does say he believed that the interactions were entirely “benign,” and it casts doubt on American intelligence concluding that the online account was a Russian intelligence front.