
If You Shame Them, Will They Pay?
Zoila Darton and Angela Carrasco felt sad about the state of women’s rights in the United States, and they decided to channel some of their frustration into action.
With the defunding of Planned Parenthood in the daily news, Ms. Darton and Ms. Carrasco wanted to do something on that group’s behalf. Ms. Darton enlisted her husband, a graphic designer, and together they played around with the idea of a benefit T-shirt design. 
Ms. Darton and Ms. Carrasco aren’t fashion designers. They’re partners in the Word Agency, a marketing and public-relations firm. The shirt was a side project. “It was a creative outlet,” Ms. Darton said.
Last week, they were meeting with a customer who wanted to exchange her shirt for a different size. “As we were leaving, she was like, ‘Yeah, I’m so glad I bought this one because I saw the other one in Forever 21 and I love yours so much better!’ We were like, ‘What do you mean?’” Ms. Darton said.
They posted a side-by-side comparison on Instagram, taking care not to explicitly accuse the fast-fashion behemoth. By the next morning, the post was shared not only by fashion editors, but also left-leaning people outside the industry, along with the tired eye roll: It looked as if Forever 21 had copied the work of an independent designer.
A designer’s path of less resistance may be to send a cease-and-desist letter, or hope for a hefty settlement. (“They build those settlements into their business structure,” Ms. Scafidi said.) One designer approached for this story could not speak to The Times because of the terms of her agreement with a fast-fashion brand.
“Indie designers now have this secondary strategy of appealing to the public via social media,” Ms. Scafidi said. This recourse is even cheaper than the stamp it costs to send a cease-and-desist.
Valfré, the phone case maker, contends that Forever 21 did not comply with its cease-and-desist. The company has filed a federal lawsuit against Forever 21, which has denied all liability. The case is moving toward trial.
