MASSAPEQUA, N.Y. — The elders of Columbus Lodge 2143 of the Order Sons of Italy in America here on the South Shore of Long Island had settled into their daily poker game on Wednesday when Joseph Saladino, the supervisor of the Town of Oyster Bay, came in to say hello.
Mr. Saladino, a Republican, and the club’s members had a message for the liberal Democrats who lead New York City and have raised questions about whether to take down the statue of Christopher Columbus that presides over Columbus Circle in Manhattan, motivated by claims about the Italian-born explorer’s dishonorable past.
“You don’t want it, we’ll take it here,” said Mr. Saladino, eliciting nods of agreement from the card-playing members. In fact, local leaders already have a plan to display any and all evicted Columbus statues in a prominent spot here.
Mr. Saladino said he and many of his constituents were upset that municipalities around the nation were re-evaluating Columbus’s place in history and allowing the Italian explorer to be drawn into a national movement to remove Confederate monuments. The movement’s scope has expanded to other memorialized figures with controversial pasts, prompting a review ordered by Mayor Bill de Blasio of the status of controversial landmarks.
Fearing that the Columbus Circle statue might be imperiled, Mr. Saladino and other political leaders in the Republican-leaning Town of Oyster Bay held a public event this week along with several Italian-American groups, to denounce Mr. de Blasio’s move and declare that Columbus remains a hero to Italian-Americans in Massapequa and other communities within the broader Town of Oyster Bay.
Mr. Saladino, a former New York State assemblyman, also expressed outrage at the defacing of a Columbus statue inside Central Park this month, and said the statue would certainly be safe in Massapequa.
He also took issue with New York City Council speaker, Melissa Mark-Viverito, a Democrat, and her recent call for the removal of the Columbus Circle statue. The speaker cited historical accounts that blame the explorer for implementing horrendous systems of enslavement, torture and the genocide of indigenous people.
He contended that Columbus actually took the tough stance of punishing crew members who committed transgressions.“That sounds like a progressive to me,” said Mr. Saladino, whose father helped found the local Columbus Lodge.
Mr. Gatto also took issue with contemporary assessments of Columbus.
He said the lodge honored Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo last Sunday as the grand marshal of the lodge’s annual Italian Feast and Festival in Massapequa, where the governor brought smiles by appearing and reiterating his opinion that the Columbus Circle statue should remain.
Mr. de Blasio speaks proudly of his Italian heritage and in his first year in office visited his grandparents’ home villages in Italy. Regarding Columbus, however, “There’s some things to be proud of, there’s some things to not be proud of,” he told reporters last month.
He has avoided taking a stance on the Columbus statue issue until the commission’s completes its work. The group’s findings for various memorials could range from recommending no action, to recommending the addition of an educational plaque, to deciding that “something isn’t appropriate anymore,” the mayor has said.
United States Representative Peter King, the Republican congressman whose district includes Massapequa and other parts of the Town of Oyster Bay, said he would also welcome any unwanted Columbus statues, and that Mr. Saladino was rightly “fed up with political correctness” and “pandering by progressives” in New York City and elsewhere on this issue.
Mr. King said he supported the supervisor’s stance against “this attempt by liberals and progressives to either rewrite history or just focus on the negative aspects” by re-evaluating political figures.
“The point is that life in the 15th century was very different than it is today and you could go through every leader in American history and judge them by the standards of a different time,” he said.
But not all Town of Oyster Bay residents agree. Lourdes Caban, 41, a hairdresser who works at a salon near the Triangle, said she grew up in Puerto Rico with the belief that Columbus was more of a conqueror of the native Taino people than a discoverer.
Ms. Caban, who lives nearby in Hicksville, called it ironic that Columbus statues are “all over Puerto Rico.” The one in Columbus Circle should be removed, she said, but relocating it to Massapequa would only bring protests out to Long Island.
