N.F.L. players across the country demonstrated during the national anthem on Sunday in a show of solidarity against President Trump, who scolded the league and players on Twitter this weekend.
■ With the support of owners, some of whom joined their teams on the field, dozens of players knelt in silent protests, while Tom Brady and others opted to stand and lock arms.
■ The Seattle Seahawks and the Tennessee Titans stayed in their locker rooms during the anthem in Nashville. The Pittsburgh Steelers also skipped the anthem in Chicago.
The entire offensive line of the Oakland Raiders, the only line in the N.F.L. made up entirely of African-American players, was joined by virtually the entire team in kneeling or sitting during the national anthem before their game against the host Washington Redskins. It was one of the strongest visual displays of the many protests today, and across the field, the Redskins stood with linked arms as some players chose to kneel.
Many fans at FedEx Field could be heard booing the players while they sat.
Michele Tafoya reported that Raiders Coach Jack Del Rio told her the Raiders players would have preferred to stay in the locker room, but because of the demands of prime-time television they would have likely incurred a delay of game penalty.
The protests were part of a massive show of solidarity in the face of harsh criticism by President Trump, who had called for protesting players to be fired. The day’s slate of games started early, with Baltimore and Jacksonville facing off in London, meaning the protests occurred over a span of 11 hours.
Want the big sports news, highlights and analysis from a rotating cast of Times journalists, delivered to your inbox once a week? Click here to receive our weekly Sports newsletter.
Every N.F.L. game today has carried some level of demonstration by players, with some teams going as far as not appearing on the field for the national anthem. But nearly nine hours after the games had begun, President Trump once again took to Twitter to condemn the players who choose not to stand for the anthem, and the league that allows it. It was his 12th sports-related tweet or retweet in a 36-hour period.
Miami Dolphins tight end Julius Thomas, who previously had stood during the anthem, instead knelt on Sunday with three teammates. Asked what had changed for him, he said: “To have the president trying to intimidate people — I wanted to send a message that I don’t condone that. I’m not O.K. with somebody trying to prevent someone from standing up for what they think is important.
LeSean McCoy, a running back for the Buffalo Bills, also addressed the issue following his game against the Denver Broncos.
“I can’t stand and support something where our leader of this country is just acting like a jerk, you know, angry and upset about N.F.L. players protesting in a peaceful manner,” McCoy said.
Neither the Seattle Seahawks nor the Tennessee Titans took the field for Meghan Linsey’s singing of the national anthem in Nashville.
The complete absence of players made for a bizarre scene where team mascots and game officials were the only things the television cameras had to focus on besides the flag and Linsey. Unlike at some other stadiums, where fans booed at the protests, the fans in Nashville were eerily quiet during the anthem, and after its conclusion Linsey took a knee on the field.
An N.F.L. executive said teams that did not take the field during the playing of the national anthem, including the Steelers, would not be fined. According to league rules, all teams are required to be on the sideline during the national anthem, though they do not specify whether players must stand.
At 2:20 p.m. Eastern, more than five hours into the slate of games and about eight hours after tweeting that fans should boycott games, Mr. Trump again weighed in on the national anthem demonstrations, issuing his approval for the locking of arms, while still condemning the players who chose to kneel.
The tweet appeared to be Mr. Trump suggesting that the players choosing to lock arms were showing support of the anthem, rather than protesting his remarks.
The protests did not all happen before the games. When the Giants tied the score in the second half of their loss to the Philadelphia Eagles, Odell Beckham Jr. chose to celebrate by dropping the ball and standing in the end zone with his fist raised above his head in a protest that has been done by black athletes going back to the 1960s. After the brief demonstration, Beckham ran to the sideline to celebrate the score in a more traditional fashion.
Beckham had been flagged earlier for unsportsmanlike conduct when he celebrated a touchdown by impersonating a dog urinating.
■ On Saturday, a rookie catcher with the Oakland Athletics became the first player to demonstrate during the national anthem at a Major League Baseball game. “We have a racial divide that’s being practiced from the highest power we have in this country,” the player, Bruce Maxwell, told The San Francisco Chronicle.
■ On Saturday night, during an appearance at the Global Citizen Festival in New York City, the singer Stevie Wonder kneeled in prayer. “Tonight, I’m taking a knee for America. But not just one knee. I’m taking both knees,” he said.
■ On Sunday afternoon, athletes demonstrated ahead of a W.N.B.A. finals game at Williams Arena in Minneapolis. The Los Angeles Sparks stayed in their locker room during the national anthem, while the Minnesota Lynx stood with their arms linked together.
■ At a Nascar race in New Hampshire on Sunday afternoon, The Associated Press reported that no team members appeared to demonstrate while the anthem played. The Hall of Fame driver Richard Petty said that anyone who does not stand up for the anthem ought to be “out of the country. Period.” He added that anyone at his company who protested the anthem should be fired.
The New York Times sent several reporters to N.F.L. games to ask fans what they thought of the president’s criticisms and the players’ protests. Perhaps surprising to no one, all sides of the debate still have adherents, even if dozens of prominent athletes and many N.F.L. owners — a deeply conservative group of businessmen — seem to agree on some basic things.
“I’m a Republican who voted for him, but I think this is a battle he doesn’t need to get into,” he said about President Trump.
As President Trump, the N.F.L. and the nation waged a fierce debate about the appropriate nature of national anthem protests, the man who started that debate, Colin Kaepernick, was nowhere in sight.
Instead, Kaepernick spent part of his day retweeting messages about the protests and photos of players who warmed up for their games in “#IMWITHKAP” T-shirts. But he also highlighted one that raised a point largely absent in this weekend’s discussion: that Kaepernick’s protests were never about President Trump, but instead an effort to raise the issue of racial injustice.
Kaepernick’s anthem protests began during the 2016 preseason, under a different president and largely unnoticed at first, in the wake of several high-profile incidents in which black Americans were killed during interactions with police officers. Initially, Kaepernick protested by sitting down.
“I am not going to stand up to show pride in a flag for a country that oppresses black people and people of color,” he told NFL Media at the time.
After his seated protests drew scrutiny, Kaepernick began kneeling instead, a change that he said allowed him to show respect while continuing to press his point. Several N.F.L. players joined him in solidarity, as did athletes in other sports and leagues.
Kaepernick, who has not addressed the news media since last season, now focuses his energies, and his time, on education and awareness of causes important to him. John Branch of The Times wrote about that ongoing political awakening this month.
The reaction to the N.F.L. anthem demonstrations was sharply divided on social media, with many fans taking the players to task for their perceived disrespect for the flag, and America. Others disagreed with the president’s statements and backed the players.
Steve King, a Republican congressman from Iowa, echoed President Trump by urging owners to fire players who did not stand.
The conservative commentator Dinesh D’Souza urged fans to boo those players.
Patriots quarterback Tom Brady, who is friends with Mr. Trump and whose politics have been a cause of much speculation, joined his teammates in locking arms during the anthem before their game against the Houston Texans in Foxborough, Mass. Brady, who has yet to address Trump’s recent criticisms, also put his hand over his heart. While Brady and teammate Phillip Dorsett locked arms, several other Patriots took a knee.
Bill Belichick, the Patriots coach, stood next to Brady during the anthem with his arms crossed.
In a first for anthem demonstrations in the N.F.L., Rico Lavelle, who sang the anthem in Detroit for the Lions-Falcons game, sank to one knee and raised a fist at the conclusion.
The Steelers did not emerge from the locker room in Chicago during the national anthem before their game against the Bears. Steelers Coach Mike Tomlin said the team would be unified in their actions, and the empty Pittsburgh bench was a stark image of the team’s unity.
Tomlin came out alone for the anthem and stood at midfield with his hands behind his back. Steelers offensive lineman Alejandro Villanueva, a captain in the U.S. Army, stood by the tunnel entrance with his hand over his heart during the ceremony.
In a pointed rebuke of President Trump’s call for N.F.L. owners to fire players who protest during the national anthem, Shahid Khan, the only Muslim owner in the league, locked arms with his Jacksonville Jaguars players on Sunday before their game in London.
During the national anthem, Khan locked arms with tight end Marcedes Lewis and linebacker Telvin Smith, both of whom are black, on the sideline to show unity with his players, who are trying to highlight social injustice and police brutality against African-Americans.
While the N.F.L. and several owners issued statements on Saturday saying they supported the players’ protests and were unhappy with the president’s comments, Khan was the first owner to stand with his players.
Khan is a Republican who contributed money to the president’s inauguration, and he has said he supports the president’s economic policies.
But he is also an immigrant and a Muslim, two groups that the president has routinely attacked. In February, Khan, who is Pakistani-American, said he opposed the president’s attempt to bar people from some predominantly Muslim countries from entering the United States.
Khan’s actions will put the spotlight on other team owners. Owners of the Bills, Lions, Dolphins, Falcons, Rams and Giants were among those who issued statements opposing the president’s comments. But many prominent owners, including Jerry Jones of the Cowboys and Woody Johnson of the Jets, were silent.
President Trump doubled down on his criticism of N.F.L. players who take a knee during the national anthem, saying fans should boycott games unless the players are fired or suspended.
N.F.L. owners, most of them conservative and many of them large donors to President Trump, joined with Kraft and backed their players’ rights to protest during the national anthem and condemned Trump’s criticism.
■ It looked as if the New England Patriots (2-1) were going to be beaten at home by a rookie quarterback, but Tom Brady led a furious fourth-quarter drive that went 75 yards in eight plays, scoring on a 25-yard touchdown pass to Brandin Cooks. After a 2-point conversion, the Patriots came away with a 36-33 victory, while Deshaun Watson and the Houston Texans (1-2) were sent home empty-handed despite leading with 23 seconds remaining.
■ Aaron Rodgers got the Green Bay Packers (2-1) into overtime with a late touchdown throw, and after his defense came through with a big stop, he found Geronimo Allison for a 72-yard catch-and-run that set up Mason Crosby’s game-winning 27-yard field goal. The winless Cincinnati Bengals, who led 21-7 at halftime, were left with a 30-27 loss.
■ Russell Wilson threw for 373 yards and four touchdowns, but a rare bad day for the defense of the Seattle Seahawks (1-2) resulted in a 33-27 loss to the Tennessee Titans (2-1). The usually formidable Seattle defense allowed 195 yards on the ground, which helped the Titans build a 30-14 lead that gave them enough cushion to survive a late surge by the Seahawks.
■ Kareem Hunt continued to make the N.F.L. look easy. The rookie running back of the Kansas City Chiefs (3-0) rushed for 172 yards and one touchdown in a 24-10 victory over the Los Angeles Chargers (0-3). Hunt now has 538 yards from scrimmage in the first three games of his career. The only player with more yards in his first three games was Billy Sims, who had 562 yards with the 1980 Detroit Lions.
■ The Denver Broncos (2-1) turned the ball over on their final four possessions in a 26-16 loss to the Buffalo Bills. Buffalo survived a subpar effort from the team’s best player, LeSean McCoy, who managed just 21 yards on 14 carries. Tyrod Taylor provided plenty of offense, completing 20 of 26 passes for 213 yards and two touchdowns. Broncos quarterback Trevor Siemian was brutal a week after leading his team to an upset victory over Dallas. He threw two interceptions and had a passer rating of 58.2.
■ Jordan Howard ran in a 19-yard touchdown in overtime that gave the Chicago Bears (1-2) a shocking 23-17 upset of the Pittsburgh Steelers (2-1). Given a chance to win the game after being tied 17-17 at the end of regulation, the Bears needed just four running plays to score, with Howard and Tarik Cohen leading them to victory. Howard finished with 23 carries for 138 yards and two touchdowns.
■ Matthew Stafford of the Detroit Lions (2-1) appeared to have thrown a game-winning touchdown pass to Golden Tate with 12 seconds remaining, but after a review it was determined that Tate’s knee had hit the ground before he crossed the goal line. The ruling carried with it a mandatory 10-second running of the clock, which could have been halted with a timeout if the Lions had any remaining. With that call, the Atlanta Falcons (3-0) escaped Detroit with a 30-26 victory.
■ Case Keenum and Stefon Diggs looked like stars as the Minnesota Vikings (2-1) hardly seemed to miss the injured Sam Bradford in a 34-17 victory over the Tampa Bay Buccaneers (1-1). Keenum threw three touchdown passes, Diggs had eight receptions for 173 yards and two touchdowns, and Dalvin Cook ran for 97 yards in a well-balanced offensive effort.
■ Blake Bortles, a name synonymous with quarterback mediocrity, looked like Peyton Manning, throwing for four touchdowns as the Jacksonville Jaguars (2-1) romped past the Baltimore Ravens (2-1) in London, 44-7.
■ Jay Cutler and Matt Haack (Miami’s punter) each threw interceptions, Jay Ajayi was completely unable to make a dent in the running game, and the Miami Dolphins lost to the Jets, 20-6. The Jets (1-2) outplayed the Dolphins (1-1) in every facet of the game.
■ Cam Newton threw three interceptions, Drew Brees threw three touchdown passes, and the New Orleans Saints (1-2) upset the Carolina Panthers (2-1), 34-13. Carolina’s defense had not allowed a touchdown coming into the game, but the Saints managed four, while the much-maligned New Orleans defense played one of the team’s best games in recent memory.
■ In a battle of previously winless teams, the Indianapolis Colts (1-2) beat the Cleveland Browns (0-3) thanks to a great effort by Jacoby Brissett, the young quarterback brought over from New England to bridge the gap until Andrew Luck can recover from shoulder surgery. It was the 15th consecutive road defeat for Cleveland. Brissett was a star, completing 17 of 24 passes for 259 yards and one touchdown while carrying the ball five times for 14 yards and two scores.
■ In Sunday night action, the Redskins (2-1) stymied the Raiders (2-1), 27-10. Washington outgained Oakland, 472 yards to 128, and held Marshawn Lynch to just 18 yards rushing.