This interview with Jody Gerson, chairman and chief executive of Universal Music Publishing Group, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.
A. I grew up in the suburbs of Philadelphia. My dad and my grandfather had a nightclub in Cherry Hill, N.J. That was my childhood. I grew up seeing Frank Sinatra and Richard Pryor in our living room.
I learned a lot from seeing things done the wrong way. I was exposed at a young age to very adult themes, like people who had issues with drugs, and I saw the insecurities of artists. I think I seemed like a grown-up from a very young age.
My parents were young when they had me. My mom was 20, and my dad was 25. In some ways, my parents grew up with me. Because of that, I knew somebody in the house had to be in control, and it was going to be me. I was the grown-up in the family.
I was always thinking that something was going to go wrong, and that really propelled me to want to have success.
How has your leadership evolved over time?
 I want the best out of people. When it doesn’t work, I find the kindest way to have the conversation: What’s right for them? What’s right for me? What’s right for the company?
I want people to grow. The big thing for me about leadership is being in a position to empower people who deserve to be empowered, and to set the right example for how they can empower others.
Any missteps early on, when you first started managing people?
Because I was so ambitious, I made the mistake of expecting everybody else to have the same kind of ambition that I did. You also can’t take up all of the air in the room.
I learned how to hire people, how to support them and how to put together a team of people. My management style is different from a lot of others because I don’t pit people against each other. I don’t think the point of management is to make people insecure.
This is your first C.E.O. role. Is it different from what you expected in any way?
I was worried at first that I had to know everything. I was worried that I had to be able to read a balance sheet. I was worried that I would have to know what the royalties were in Russia. I was worried that I had to understand the litigations in Germany.
But I quickly grew comfortable because I recognized that I have experts in every area of the company. I don’t have to solve every problem. They have to come to me and tell me what the issues are, and I have to surround myself with people I trust and who know what they’re doing in those areas.
I like being a C.E.O. I’m good at it, because I’m very secure about making decisions. And I like making the final decision.
I dig deep. I want to know what you would bring to the table at our company, what your passions are and what your life is like. I’m trying to understand who this person is. Do they share my integrity? Are they thoughtful people? Are they people who want to see other people succeed?
And are they going to be available when I have a question to ask on a Saturday and give me a quick reply? I don’t expect anyone to be staring at their phone, because it’s important to have balance, but I want somebody who wants to give it their all.
There are people who care about having success for their next job, and there are people who buy into the idea of helping us be the best company.
The big question for me is, what do you want? It’s a trick question. If it’s all about what you want and about your trajectory, and you don’t answer the question about what you want to accomplish within this company, it’s probably not the right fit. When I interview people, I just want to know what they want to contribute.
I’ll also ask, do you want my job? I often find that the wrong answer is “no.” I want people who want my job. Why not?
But many C.E.O.s I’ve talked to say they wish people were a bit more patient with their ambition.
Well, there are the people who are going to be nipping at my heels immediately, and it’s not the right thing. We are having a little bit of a generational problem now with kids who don’t have patience. Many of them don’t want to take the time to build a career.
That’s the hardest thing when I’m interviewing younger people. I was willing to wait 30 years to become chairman.
Any other off-key notes that you listen for when you’re interviewing?
There are a couple phrases that bug me these days. People often say, “To your point…” O.K., what about my point? “Fam” is another. It drives me crazy when businesspeople say to me, “You’re family to me, so I want to make sure…” I am not your family.
What would you say to a new hire about any pet peeves you might have?
I like people who are solution oriented. I know there are times when someone has to come to me to solve a problem, but the big thing is that you’re a problem solver, that you take initiative, that you’re confident.
I don’t mind mistakes. Go into making that mistake with confidence. Try it. See what happens. Be thoughtful. Educate yourself.
Learn something every day. You don’t know everything. There’s a lot that they know that we didn’t know when we were their age. But they have to be able to want to learn, too.
I just would like them to slow down a minute and listen. Stop talking. I’m not kidding. It’s something that I think about all the time. People who talk aren’t learning anything.