The novelist Jesmyn Ward pinned this speech above her desk. Her memoir and three novels — produced in the span of less than a decade — feel hewn from these grand Faulknerian verities. Not for her the austerity and self-conscious ironies of so much American fiction; her books reach for the sweep, force and sense of inevitability of the Greek myths, but as translated to the small, mostly poor, mostly black town in Mississippi where she grew up and where she still lives.
Her characters are tested not by the gods but by other elements, no less absolute in their pronouncements. “Salvage the Bones” (2011), her National Book Award-winning novel, follows a family caught in Hurricane Katrina (which Ward and her family narrowly survived). “Men We Reaped” (2013), her memoir, is a requiem for five young black men, including the author’s brother, who were lost to murder, suicide and addiction.
However eternal its concerns, “Sing, Unburied, Sing,” Ward’s new book, is perfectly poised for the moment. It combines aspects of the American road novel and the ghost story with a timely treatment of the long aftershocks of a hurricane and the opioid epidemic devouring rural America.
These are Jojo’s burdens. His gifts include a devoted grandfather and an ability to communicate with animals and ghosts that runs in the blood. His mother can see the ghost of her slain brother — but only when she’s high. She gets high a lot.
The story is set in motion when Michael is slated for release from prison. Leonie, that walking catastrophe, decides to collect him (and perhaps cook a little meth along the way). She hauls her children along, and they unknowingly pick up a mysterious hitchhiker: the ghost of a 12-year-old boy, a former prisoner at Parchman.
I’m happy to report that He is fully in evidence in this novel. It is Ward’s most unsparing book. Leaving aside the instances of explicit violence, the scenes featuring the hunger and confusion of small children are almost physically unbearable.
What do these ghosts want — and why is literary fiction suddenly so full of them? (See: “Lincoln in the Bardo,” by George Saunders; “White Tears,” by Hari Kunzru; “Grace,” by Natashia Deón; “The Underground Railroad,” by Colson Whitehead.) It’s the past that won’t stay past, to paraphrase Faulkner. The ghosts — most of them, at any rate — want to rest, but they need restitution first. They need to know what happened to them, and why. It’s the unfinished business of a nation, playing out today in the calls for the removal of statues of Confederate soldiers and in the resurgence of the Klan.
