BALTIMORE — For nearly two decades, there was never a question about who would close out a Yankees game. From 1997 to 2013 — with a detour because of a serious knee injury in 2012 — it was Mariano Rivera. Others then followed — David Robertson, Andrew Miller, Aroldis Chapman and sometimes Dellin Betances. Starting this season, the Yankees thought, it would be Chapman again for the next five years.
But that was before Chapman inexplicably lost his mojo in August and was relieved of the role for which the Yankees are paying him $17.2 million a season through 2021. Betances, who had closed before, was asked to do so again, along with Robertson, although Betances ended up with most of the assignments.
However, the fate of a late-inning reliever is fickle, and the revolving door in the Yankees’ bullpen has swung back to Chapman now that Betances’s September has begun to resemble Chapman’s August. In the two appearances he has made since losing the closer’s job, Chapman has looked a lot like the pitcher the Yankees signed to a five-year, $86 million contract last December.
Yankees Manager Joe Girardi, who hates to label his relievers publicly unless forced to do so, declined to categorically state on Wednesday that Chapman was once again a closer after Betances’s disastrous outing on Tuesday night in which he allowed a game-winning, two-out, two-run home run to the Baltimore Orioles’ Manny Machado with the Yankees one out from a victory.
But Girardi came as close as he ever does to making a definitive statement on the Yankee closer’s role when he implied that if Wednesday night’s game against the Orioles had not been rained out, the ninth inning would once again have belonged to Chapman.
The rotating closer arrangement Girardi has found himself in is a reminder of how unique Rivera was and how much easier it made things to have him at a manager’s disposal nightly.
For now at least, Girardi seems inclined to see if Chapman can simplify matters and, if not be as good as Rivera, at least be good enough to stay in the closer’s role. In the eighth inning on Tuesday, Chapman needed just 11 pitches to retire the Orioles and eight of those pitches were clocked at more than 100 miles per hour.
“That helped,” Girardi said when asked if Chapman’s showing influenced his decision.
Conversely, for the second consecutive season, Betances has shown signs of late-season fatigue and once again was victimized in an important game for the Yankees’ postseason hopes.
Last Sept. 15, with the Yankees surprisingly in contention an American League playoff spot and carrying a 5-2 lead into the bottom of the ninth inning against the Boston Red Sox at Fenway Park, Betances imploded, allowing five runs, the last three coming on a game-winning, two-out, three-run home run by Hanley Ramirez.
That game effectively derailed the Yankees; they lost nine of their last 16 games and missed out on the postseason.
It is too early to say whether Betances’s Tuesday night showing will have a similar effect, and the Yankees are in a much better position this season. They trail the Red Sox by three and a half games in the A.L. East going into Wednesday night’s games but with a lead in the wild-card race.
Meanwhile, with 24 games left in the Yankees’ season, it appears that Girardi will again entrust the end of his team’s games to the pitcher who was signed to do that job.
Wednesday’s game was rescheduled for 1:35 p.m. Thursday. Joe Girardi said everything he had planned for Wednesday would remain in place: Sonny Gray will start, and the lineup he posted for the game that was not played will be the same on Thursday.
The Yankees placed reliever Adam Warren on the disabled list with lower back spasms.