Diego Schwartzman did not allow himself to think his tennis career could be blunted because he is 5 feet 7.
Schwartzman is one of the shortest players in the top 100 on the ATP Tour, but he reached his first Grand Slam quarterfinal by beating 16th-seeded Lucas Pouille, 7-6 (3), 7-5, 2-6, 6-2, on Sunday at the United States Open.
“It’s not just for the big guys here,” Schwartzman, 25, said. “The big guys have a little bit of advantage to play tennis because they can serve better, they can do a lot of things better. If you are small, you just need to be focused in many things.
The big breakthrough for a small player had appeared in doubt late in the third set: One set from the quarterfinals, Schwartzman began to feel pain in his upper left leg.
Pouille won the next point after play resumed with a crosscourt forehand into the open court. Schwartzman did not even move toward the shot, instead gesturing at his leg as he muttered to his coach, Juan Ignacio Chela.
Pouille’s next three serves went unreturned, and momentum appeared to have swung toward him as Schwartzman had his leg taped by the trainer between sets.
That worry would soon be assuaged: Schwartzman dialed in on playing the best he could through his pain, and Pouille sputtered.
Instead of forcing Schwartzman to move after going up a break early in the fourth set, Pouille gave him many easy, unforced errors, and Schwartzman ran off with the final five games of the match.
Pouille admitted he had let Schwartzman’s injury distract him.
On Tuesday, Schwartzman will play 12th-seeded Pablo Carreño Busta of Spain, who beat Denis Shapovalov, 7-6 (2), 7-6 (4), 7-6 (3).
The No. 28-seeded Kevin Anderson of South Africa also reached the quarterfinals with a 6-4, 6-3, 6-7 (4), 6-4 win over Paolo Lorenzi. Anderson will face No. 17 Sam Querrey, who dominated No. 23 Mischa Zverev, 6-2, 6-2, 6-1.
Querrey was in intimidating form, hitting 55 winners against only eight unforced errors, seeming to pass the net-rushing Zverev at will.
The 77-minute match was the fastest completed men’s singles match of the tournament so far. Further foreboding for the field, Querrey’s second-round win over Dudi Sela was the second fastest.
Querrey is in his first quarterfinal in New York; that run will push him past John Isner to become the highest-ranked American man.
Schwartzman, who prefers clay courts, had not expected a breakthrough here. But he gained confidence from a week of training in hot weather at the United States Tennis Association training center in Orlando, Fla. He relaxed by going to Universal Studios nearby. He bought a pass to jump to the front of the lines for rides, though not all were fun for him.
Schwartzman has proved many doubters wrong by thriving in professional tennis. He said he gained confidence from the generation of Argentine players who preceded him — Guillermo Coria, Gastón Gaudio, David Nalbandian and Mariano Puerta. None of them were taller than 5 feet 11, but all reached Grand Slam finals.
Chela, also part of that previous generation, said Schwartzman had overcome many naysayers in Argentina.
