ERBIL, Iraq — As jubilant Iraqi Kurds celebrated their vote Monday on independence from Iraq, shooting off fireworks and parading in cars festooned with Kurdish flags late into the night, their neighbors conducted military exercises on the region’s borders, raising the threat of military intervention if it secedes.
It proved highly provocative for Turkey, Iran and Iraq, whose responses are likely to roil the region in the coming days, stirring the very turmoil that the United States hoped to avoid when it pressured the Kurds to call off the vote.
The White House has warned that a Kurdish move toward independence could set off ethnic conflict, and that it could fracture Iraq and undermine the American-led coalition against the Islamic State, also known as ISIS. “We hope for a unified Iraq to annihilate ISIS, and certainly a unified Iraq to push back on Iran,” the White House spokeswoman, Sarah Huckabee Sanders, said Monday.
The vote has strained Iraqi Kurdistan’s relations with the United States, which relies heavily on Kurdish fighters to assist the American-led coalition against Islamic State militants. The region, which is landlocked, is vulnerable to growing threats of sanctions along its borders.
Turkey and Iran, which fear that the vote will foment unrest among their own Kurdish minorities, are conducting military exercises on their borders with Iraq near Kurdistan. Late Monday, Iraq’s defense ministry announced joint maneuvers with Turkey.
Kurdish voters did not seem to care.
Kurdish officials said Monday night that the turnout among 3.9 million registered voters was 72 percent and that it was expected to rise as counting continued at more than 1,700 voting stations.
A convincing “yes” vote would not lead to immediate independence, but it would set in motion moves toward statehood and toward negotiations with Baghdad. Iraqi officials, however, have called the referendum unconstitutional and vowed to ignore the results. They fear losing a third of the country — and a major source of oil — should Kurdistan break away.
Iraqi officials were also angered that the referendum included residents of ethnically mixed, disputed areas controlled by Kurdish pesh merga forces but claimed by Iraq.
Iraq’s Parliament voted Monday to ask Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi to dispatch Iraqi troops toward disputed areas and to close land crossings leading into areas controlled by the Kurdistan Regional Government. Mr. Abadi is expected to discuss those issues with Parliament on Wednesday.
Baghdad also demanded that the Kurdish government surrender control of its international border posts and give up revenue from its lucrative crude oil exports to Turkey, the Kurdish region’s largest single source of income.
In Turkey, President Recep Tayyip Erdogan threatened possible military intervention and warned that his country could shut down a pipeline that runs from Iraqi Kurdistan into Turkey. Referring to a Turkish intervention in Syria last year, Mr. Erdogan suggested that Turkey could take similar action in Iraq. “We may enter at night without warning,” he said.
Mr. Erdogan also said that a border crossing from Turkey into northern Iraq had been closed in one direction, and that Turkey planned to shut it down entirely.
At Iraq’s request, Tehran halted flights on Sunday between Iran and the two international airports inside Iraqi Kurdistan. Kurds now worry that Baghdad will close airspace over the region.
Given the shared economic interests of all parties in the referendum dispute, it is difficult to predict how the confrontation will play out if the Kurds continue to aggressively pursue their independence ambitions after the vote.
Still, Turkey’s threat to close the oil pipeline was particularly worrisome to the Kurdish leadership. Kurdistan sends 550,000 barrels a day through the pipeline, earning the region roughly $8 billion a year.
Just a week before the referendum, the giant Russian oil company Rosneft and the Kurdish Regional Government signed a deal to build a natural gas pipeline to Turkey, which would be a likely conduit to European markets by 2020. The pipeline will have a capacity to ship 30 billion cubic meters of gas per year, many times more than Kurdistan now produces and equivalent to more than half of Turkey’s annual demand.
On Sunday, the Kurdish region’s president, Massoud Barzani, said the Kurds’ “partnership” with Iraq was over. He said Iraq’s Kurds could no longer tolerate living in a “theocratic, sectarian state,” a reference to Iran’s considerable influence on Mr. Abadi’s government, which is dominated by Shiite Muslims.
“From now on, Kurdistan will be a neighbor of Iraq, but not part of it,” Mr. Barzani said.
The most contentious of the disputed areas is Kirkuk, an oil-rich city inhabited by Arabs, Kurds, Turkmens and smaller ethnic groups. Pesh merga forces captured the city and surrounding areas after Iraqi troops fled an Islamic State assault in 2014.
A government official in Kirkuk said late Monday that voter turnout was 80 to 90 percent in Kurdish neighborhoods of Kirkuk, but less than 10 percent in Arab and Turkmen areas. The police blocked streets to vehicle traffic after Kurdish voters drove through Kurdish areas of the city, celebrating the voting.
Turnout will be an important gauge of the depth of opposition to the vote among many Kurds. Some Kurds who favor independence eventually say the region yet lacks the democratic institutions for nationhood. They are part of a significant contingent – including a “No For Now” movement – that opposes Mr. Barzani, and accuses his government of corruption, incompetence and nepotism. They were expected to signal their displeasure by staying home.
The United States has significant military and intelligence assets in Iraqi Kurdistan. Kurds are counting on relations with the United States to continue as usual once the referendum is completed and the rhetoric becomes less heated.
Kurdish leaders believe they have a trump card in the pesh merga fighting force, which has proved indispensable in battles against the Islamic State. Pesh merga soldiers, like the Iraqi Army, have received American training and weapons. They have fought Islamic State militants alongside Iraqi government forces, which include Shiite militias supported by Iran.
Mr. Barzani has said he is ready to begin negotiations with Baghdad over borders, security arrangements, oil income and other mutual interests, even if it takes two years or more.
Hoshyar Zebari, a former Iraqi foreign minister and a leader of the referendum effort, has stressed that the region will look no different the day after the vote than it did before.
