HACKENSACK, N.J. — A string of damaging personal revelations forced Rachel Noerdlinger to step aside in 2014 as the chief of staff to Mayor Bill de Blasio’s wife, Chirlane McCray. But as she tried to reestablish herself in the private sector, she was hit with another personal crisis early last year when, her son was arrested in New Jersey and accused of fatally stabbing a teenager.
A grand jury in Bergen County indicted Khari Noerdlinger, 20, on a charge of manslaughter in the February 2016 death of a 16-year-old, who tried to rob him in what prosecutors said was a drug deal gone bad. But this summer, the case quietly unraveled, and Superior Court Judge Christopher Kazlau dismissed the manslaughter charge on Sept. 7 at the prosecutor’s request.
On Friday, Mr. Noerdlinger’s lawyer, Jeffrey Lichtman, asked Judge Kazlau to dismiss the remaining charges — criminal possession of a knife and hindering prosecution. Mr. Lichtman accused the prosecutor and detective handling the case of lying to the grand jury and said that in their efforts to undermine claims of self-defense, they withheld evidence indicating Mr. Noerdlinger’s attackers were armed with knives.
A spokeswoman for the prosecutor’s office did not return a phone call seeking comment.
Judge Kazlau scheduled Mr. Noerdlinger’s next court appearance for Nov. 17.
Mr. Noerdlinger, who has been out on bail, stood between his mother and lawyers outside the courthouse here on Friday as the lawyers called for Ms. Grootenboer and the detective, James Costello, to be suspended and their cases to be investigated.
“If it’s happened here, as brazenly and easily as they did it here, it is absolutely impossible to believe that they haven’t done this before,” Mr. Lichtman said.
He told reporters that Ms. Grootenboer and Detective Costello had misled the grand jury about the nature of the confrontation, which occurred on Jan. 31, 2016 in Edgewater and left Savion Lewallen dead. There was no other way to describe their behavior, he said, other than to call it “massive” perjury and misconduct.
Mr. Lichtman said that after reading the grand jury minutes and concluding the case was tainted, he told the court in January that he wanted the case dismissed. But, he said, he did not file the motion because the prosecutor never turned over all of the evidence. After several delays, he said the county’s top prosecutor, Gurbir S. Grewal, agreed on Aug. 29 to dismiss the manslaughter charge.
Mr. Lichtman provided The New York Times with copies of interviews about the knives from a man charged as a co-conspirator in the robbery attempt and from Mr. Lewallen’s mother, as well as a transcript of the grand jury minutes.
What was not in dispute was that Mr. Lewallen was one of five people who tried to rob Mr. Noerdlinger on that night in 2016. Surveillance video of the fatal encounter, which Mr. Lichtman provided to The Times and which the prosecutor played for the grand jury, showed Mr. Lewallen and two other men attacking Mr. Noerdlinger on a street corner. One of the men, Kevensky Lubin, swung a bat. Mr. Lewallen and another man pulled out knives, according to the transcript of a videotaped statement from one of the suspects, Richard Jean-Pierre.
As the case investigator for the prosecutor’s office, Detective Costello was responsible for collecting and securing evidence, including the video of the encounter, interviews with witnesses, and search warrants that mentioned the knives. It is not clear to what extent he or Ms. Grootenboer reviewed, or were required to review, the evidence.
Detective Costello referenced the interviews during his grand jury testimony. But he said that the only weapon Mr. Noerdlinger’s attackers had was the bat and that no one had mentioned the possibility of the assailants having knives.
At least four times, Detective Costello told the grand jury that Mr. Noerdlinger was not injured during the attack, despite pictures his office took at the county jail showing investigators holding rulers up to Mr. Noerdlinger’s bruises.
After the attack, one of Mr. Noerdlinger’s assailants, Calim Gaspard, went to Mr. Lewallen’s home and left several items with his mother, including a bloody knife, according to the interview transcript with Mr. Lewallen’s mother. The woman, Angela Floyd, turned it over to the prosecutor’s office, but it was not mentioned during the grand jury presentation and Mr. Lichtman said to his knowledge, it has not been tested to determine if it was the weapon used to stab Mr. Lewallen.
At the meeting on Aug. 29, Mr. Lichtman said the first assistant prosecutor, Dennis Calo, denied that Ms. Grootenboer and Detective Costello had done anything wrong and characterized the errors as mistakes. The office also conceded that Mr. Noerdlinger was not a drug dealer, he said.
Jennifer Sellitti, a lawyer and spokeswoman for the state public defender’s office, said that state law requires prosecutors to disclose evidence to the grand jury that might be favorable to the defense, but it is ultimately up to the judge to determine how it applies to specific materials.
Ms. Noerdlinger said the last 19 months had been “excruciatingly painful” to watch her son endure, but she was grateful to be able to hire a lawyer.
