If voters sent any discernible messages in the contested Democratic primaries for New York City Council, they were that gentrification is bad, Albany legislators might be good, and a staunchly liberal vision is less important than a strong neighborhood constituency.
Oh, and name recognition matters a lot in low turnout races, but is not everything: Five state legislators sought to trade an Albany commute for the shorter trip to City Hall; three of them won.
With most of the races decided by late Tuesday, the results pointed to a modest reshuffling of the political map of the Democrat-dominated Council, whose 51 members include just three Republicans. It was a far cry from four years earlier, when a wave of progressive candidates filled about twice as many empty seats and shifted the city’s legislative body further to the left.
Indeed, several of Tuesday’s victors were moderate Democrats like State Senator Ruben Diaz Sr., a household name in the Bronx, who voted against gay marriage in Albany and won handily. On the other hand, name recognition probably hurt Hiram Monserrate, the former councilman and state senator convicted of fraud and assault. He lost his comeback bid in central Queens to a state assemblyman, Francisco P. Moya.
Much about 2017 was different from the last round of Council elections: the lack of a vibrant contest in the mayoral primary, which Mayor Bill de Blasio won on Tuesday in a walk; a far smaller number of exiting incumbents; and the virtual absence of spending by outside groups, which totaled $720,000 in all Council races this year versus nearly 10 times that in 2013.
In the contests for 10 open seats and another 10 with embattled incumbents, local issues dominated, particularly those related to the perennial concerns of gentrification, development and homelessness.
Councilwoman Laurie A. Cumbo in Brooklyn fended off a tough challenge that centered on a contentious affordable housing proposal for a city-owned armory (she supported the plan before coming out against it). Many opposed the project, saying its inclusion of market-rate condominiums would hasten gentrification.
Councilwoman Helen Rosenthal on the Upper West Side, where towering residential buildings have galled longtime residents, survived a challenge along similar grounds. So, too, did Councilwoman Margaret S. Chin in Lower Manhattan.
Divisions over homelessness led to a tough race for Councilwoman Elizabeth S. Crowley in Queens, who held onto her seat despite a challenge from Robert Holden, a City University professor who opposed the use of hotels in the district to house the homeless.
If any of the races achieved something more than local notice in the run-up to Tuesday’s vote, it was the contest between Mr. Moya and Mr. Monserrate.
Convicted in 2009 of assaulting his girlfriend at the time, and in 2012 of committing felony fraud while on the Council, Mr. Monserrate’s campaign was met with broad revulsion by Democrats citywide, many of whom gave to Mr. Moya’s campaign. Yet Mr. Monserrate enjoyed strong enough support in the Queens district, which stretches from La Guardia Airport to Corona, that he appeared to have a shot at winning.
Among the most contested races was the seat being vacated by the current Council speaker, Melissa Mark-Viverito, who represents East Harlem and the South Bronx but must leave because of term limits. There, Robert J. Rodriguez, a state assemblyman backed by county leaders and Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, appeared headed for defeat in a close race against Diana Ayala, a top aide to Ms. Mark-Viverito who was backed by Mr. de Blasio.
Democratic political observers saw in the race a matchup of dueling visions of city politics in 2017: one governed by the traditional county-based political apparatus, and another more independent and left-leaning wing that has been ascendant in recent years.
Similar dynamics could be seen in the Bronx, where a middle-of-the-road Democratic state assemblyman, Mark Gjonaj, spent well over $700,000 on the race and still faced a stiff challenge from Marjorie Velazquez, a liberal local district leader.
Ms. Velazquez received support from outside groups including Planned Parenthood, which sent mailings attacking Mr. Gjonaj (pronounced JOE-nye) for his votes on health care and adoption, comparing him unfavorably to President Trump. It was a rare appearance of Mr. Trump in Council contests that, for the most part, avoided national issues to focus on those closer to home. Mr. Gjonaj won the race.
The local focus, and lack of media attention, appeared to benefit more institutional candidates, said David S. Birdsell, the dean of the School of Public Affairs at Baruch College. “The information base available to all but the most actively engaged voters is very small, making name recognition perhaps the key variable in victory,” he said.
Keith Powers emerged on top of a large field a sprawling district along Manhattan’s East Side, as did Justin L. Brannan in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn. Mr. Brannan will face John F. Quaglione in the general election, who triumphed in the city’s only contested Republican primary for the Council.
All nine candidates endorsed by Mr. de Blasio appeared to be headed for victory.