Charlayne Hunter and Hamilton Holmes broke the color barrier at the University of Georgia in 1961. But the Bulldogs did not field a single black player until 1971. James Meredith famously desegregated the University of Mississippi in 1962 — nine years before Ole Miss allowed an African-American to play for the Rebels.
To put it another way, football was too important to desegregate. In the years before many pro franchises in football or any other sport opened in the Sun Belt, college football was the Saturday sacrament, a regional religion second only to evangelical Christianity.
The tawdry record of Southern universities should give no moral superiority to pro football or football outside Dixie. The last N.F.L. team to have an African-American player was, pointedly, the Washington Redskins. As Thomas J. Smith points out in his book “Showdown,” it took direct pressure from the Kennedy administration to get Washington to sign Bobby Mitchell, a halfback and future Hall of Fame inductee, in 1962.
Why, one might ask, would the White House care enough to intervene? Because with the civil rights movement marching at home and a battle underway against the Soviet Union for hearts and minds in the nonwhite “developing world,” having an all-white team in the nation’s capital was a liability.
Such college stars as Eldridge Dickey never received a chance in the N.F.L. African-American quarterbacks who had breakthrough seasons — Marlin Briscoe with the Denver Broncos in 1968, for example, and James Harris with the Los Angeles Rams in 1974-76 — were demoted from their starting positions and then unceremoniously traded to other teams.
The Colin Kaepernick affair of its time, in fact, was the controversy in Los Angeles when the Rams’ owners overruled their own head coach and brought in four white quarterbacks to try to replace Harris. Finally, the Rams shipped him to the San Diego Chargers, where he spent what should have been the prime years of his career as a backup.
The Los Angeles Times devoted a multipart series by Skip Bayless (now of Fox Sports) to the racial implications of the situation. Major black politicians, including the future Rep. Maxine Waters, raised Harris’s case in the L.A. City Council and the California State Legislature.
Ultimately, the efforts of pioneers like Harris led to the emergence of black quarterbacks, head coaches and general managers in the N.F.L. To this day, the league remains far ahead of major colleges in diversity at the top ranks. Despite such gains, as has been widely reported, seven N.F.L. owners donated $1 million or more to President Trump’s campaign or inaugural coffers.
If Trump sought to divide players from owners and from one another, he appears to have done just the opposite. Whatever he might hear from his base in a supremely red state, Americans aren’t nostalgic for the benighted days when Jim Crow ruled the gridiron. I have long admired the strength, guile and intelligence of N.F.L. players, and on Sunday they gave me renewed cause to honor their social conscience.