Bill and Marvin were part of a quiet but strategic experiment, funded by a private organization called the Stouffer Foundation, to instill in Southern white elites a value then broadly absent: a visceral and compelling belief in the societal benefits of integration. From the beginning, the boys were a pair, one hardly seen without the other, one name seldom said without the other to follow. Bill and Marvin. Marvin and Bill. To their white classmates and teachers, each existed as one half of a singular whole: the new black boys on campus. Bill was more reserved than his roommate (of course they would have to room together), with the look of someone holding something back, behind bespectacled eyes and a half smile. He was six months older than Marvin, seven inches taller, 35 pounds heavier and his skin several shades darker. His face had already taken a turn toward manliness. A Presbyterian minister’s first child, Bill was preppy before he knew what preppy was. A teacher would nickname the new duo Fire and Ice: Marvin, warmblooded, with his heart on his sleeve; Bill so confident and cool.
That same fall, four other Stouffer students broke the racial barrier at Saint Andrew’s School in Boca Raton, Fla. Another three enrolled in the Asheville School in the mountains of western North Carolina. Three more went to the Westminster School on Atlanta’s affluent north side. Twenty students in all integrated seven schools, a teenage vanguard that left black America for the wealthiest white enclaves. Not all of them made it. But each year that followed, a new class came. The privately financed experiment would become a turning point in elite high school education in the South, and it would test, in very real terms, how much a black child could achieve in a white environment and the price he would have to pay.
Black leaders debated the merits of educating an elite leadership class versus more broad-based common schooling, a divide famously personified by W.E.B. Du Bois and Booker T. Washington. At the beginning of the 20th century, Washington endorsed a more utilitarian model of education, including trade schools and workshops for industrial training. Du Bois’s approach was characterized by the term “talented tenth,” which he borrowed from a Northern philanthropist and used to describe the cadre of highly educated blacks who would lift other black people up, an ideal that grew deep roots in the culture. In 1963, the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. tried to enroll his son in an all-white prep school in Atlanta but was refused. The change would have to start within the white community.
Anne Forsyth, an heiress of the North Carolina Cannon and Reynolds families, traveled in Winston-Salem’s emerging white liberal circles in the mid-’60s. One of her sons went to a Northern prep school that had long accepted black students, and Forsyth noticed that racial integration was beginning to occur almost everywhere except the prep schools of the South. An idea took hold of her. What would society look like if she exposed young wealthy white students to black scholarship students? Would the South change if its future leaders were socialized to be less bigoted? Her aim, using a few token blacks to mend the South’s racial divide from the top down, was utopian to say the least. It was also novel, a systematic effort by whites to help rid other whites of their prejudices. Providing a better life for black students was secondary.
They wouldn’t choose just any black students. Forsyth started the Stouffer Foundation, named for her mother, and hired a small team of like-minded white colleagues who toured the South coaxing schools to open their doors to blacks and scouting black public schools for exceptional students. In the years after Brown v. Board of Education, new private schools popped up around the South, and older private schools expanded enrollment. The schools gave such reasons for their growth as “quality education,” “Christian atmosphere,” “discipline” and “college preparation,” but mostly they were academies with nostalgia for the Jim Crow South, schools to which white families fled in order to avoid integrated public schools. Thirteen years after the Supreme Court ruling made school segregation unconstitutional, the Stouffer Foundation quietly sent off its first class.
V.E.S.’s headmaster, a New Englander named Austin Montgomery, agreed to accept Bill and Marvin over the objections of many parents and members of the school’s board. “Why, why, why have you done this cruel thing to our beloved school?” one parent wrote. “A private boarding school like V.E.S. is an extension, a part of the family,” another wrote. “We have no intention whatsoever of integrating those of another race into our family.” The school’s tract of land had been part of a working slave plantation until Emancipation. In the years before Bill and Marvin arrived, V.E.S. tore down the remaining slave cabin on the grounds. Their dormitory bedroom looked out on Jett Hall, the campus’s main building, and from their windows, the campus spread out over 160 acres, with Georgian Revival buildings cropping out of red clay and open green space. The only other black faces belonged to the hired help, like the beloved custodian, Robert Thomas, son of a man named Paul, who had worked at the school in the old days as one of the white-coated waiters who served white boys in the dining room.
It’s possible that the stars aligned for the Stouffer Foundation’s experiment during the first months of Marvin and Bill’s time at school. “Divine intervention,” Bill calls it now. A high point came on the baseball field, where Bill attracted the attention of white boys at another school, the prestigious Woodberry Forest, which had previously refused the foundation’s request to desegregate. Forsyth, the heiress and philanthropist, later spoke about the incident: “Now, I don’t know what Bill said to these boys, but the next day during chapel, the head of student government asked Mr. Duncan” — Woodberry’s headmaster — “if they were supposed to be leaders in the South scholastically, socially and athletically, why weren’t they leaders in integration?” So Woodberry’s headmaster accepted three Stouffer students, the program growing by word of mouth.
But Montgomery never recovered the confidence of the school’s faithful after going against their will. He resigned before the start of Bill and Marvin’s sophomore year, and the school replaced him with the assistant headmaster, a Southerner. By that time, Montgomery had accepted two more Stouffer scholars, Johnny Holloway, from Durham, N.C., and Jerrauld Jones, from Norfolk, Va., assuring them and their parents that they would be looked after. He asked others at the school, including the football coach, to fulfill his promise.
The Stouffer Foundation continued its work. Forsyth, after providing seed money, faded into the background, giving management of the operation to John Ehle, a North Carolina novelist turned public-policy idea man. Ehle, before the 1968 school year, traveled to Knoxville, Richmond and Greensboro in search of talented black students, asking school counselors for their best and brightest. To the students and parents he met, many of whom had never had a white person in their home, Ehle must have seemed an apparition. He kept a file for nearly every one of the 140 Stouffer scholars, who eventually included girls, Native Americans and Latinos. Many files include audio recordings of his and others’ interviews with them. Ehle asked one student about his experience with integration.
“You don’t really have any dislike for them, though, do ya?” Ehle asked.
Like Bill and Marvin, Jerrauld and Johnny and Stouffer’s second class of scholarship recipients were required to attend an eight-week crash course in prep-school manners and academics, covering everything from how to hold a tennis racket to a reading list of “Huckleberry Finn,” the “Odyssey” and Robert Frost. Civil rights leaders including Vernon Jordan and Julian Bond were recruited to advise them. And Forsyth herself addressed them with the story of Bill’s ballgame, which for her embodied the Stouffer experiment’s ideal — by simple exposure, racial barriers fell away. Forsyth did not tell the students stories of the four boys who didn’t make it that first year, including one boy whose white classmates at another Southern prep school held him outside a third-floor dormitory window by his ankles. It’s possible that she didn’t know about him.
Bill and Marvin decided that the best way to respond to the exultation they saw after King was killed was to outpace the whites. It was not enough to outrank their classmates by a few decimal points; it had to be clear and unquestionable who was best. So they pulled away. Bill and Marvin were the top two students in their class their entire four years at V.E.S. They became the head counselors in the dorm. They were on the football team, which won a state prep-school championship, the first integrated team to do so, a year before the public-school team made famous by “Remember the Titans.” “Those white boys knew,” Marvin told me.
In Bill and Marvin’s march toward graduation, they expanded their little movement, insisting that the others keep it going, make it bigger. Year after year, they watched the project repeat itself. In Marvin and Bill’s senior year, the foundation sent one student to V.E.S., Tony Johnson, from Richmond, who shared a room with Terry and Greg. They felt more and more that they were operating not just on V.E.S.’s campus, but in history. “I used to always say that going to V.E.S. is bigger than you,” Marvin said. In 1970, the black students named themselves the Magnificent Seven, after the western film featuring seven gunfighters who protect a Mexican village from marauding bandits. They met at night to rally one another. Group dynamics took over; the white kids had numbers and dominant culture on their side. The seven operated as symbols, as representatives for all black people. How that changed the white people, if it did, is hard to say.
Bill quietly shone in the classroom and on the athletic field. Marvin, after trailing Bill in the academic rankings for three years, decided that in their final year he would best Bill. “I said: ‘Bill, you know I love you like a brother. But you’re not going to sweep me.’” It was Marvin’s understanding that the senior with the highest grade-point average for the year gave the valedictory speech, and as the sharpest edge of the Magnificent Seven, Marvin wanted his classmates and their families to have to look at him with his Afro. “I wanted them to understand the difference of somebody coming from what they perceive as poverty and a broken home and disadvantaged, that this person could be on top of your son, sons of congressmen, corporate men, lawyers, all that. I had something to say.” Marvin finally beat Bill that year. They finished first and second. Then Marvin’s faculty adviser came to his room, and he found out that Bill, who had the highest average over four years, would be giving the address. Marvin felt the school had chosen ice over fire. “I didn’t say anything, but I was hurt,” Marvin told me.
In October 2016, the 100th anniversary of the founding of V.E.S., the school invited people from across the school’s history back to Lynchburg. The festivities opened with an address by the present headmaster, G.Thomas Battle Jr., to a few hundred in the school’s new theater, during which Battle saluted Bill and Marvin for desegregating the school. Bill and Marvin — both now 64 and physicians — appeared very much the grown-up versions of their younger selves, Bill with his quiet reserve and Marvin ever jovial, each with the silver and heft of age. Battle asked them, along with the other Stouffer scholars, to rise and accept a round of applause. Five of the seven were there: Tony Johnson’s absence was a surprise, but no one expected Johnny, who had disappeared from their lives decades before.
The Magnificent Seven hadn’t all gotten together since Bill and Marvin’s graduation in 1971. As five of them moved around campus, I watched them swing between their past and present selves, between adolescent horseplay and a 60-something’s sense of a long life lived. In many ways, V.E.S.’s campus looks as it did 50 years ago. The chapel, the bell tower and the old dormitories still stand. In Jett Hall, there’s a permanent display honoring Bill and Marvin, featuring their freshman and senior yearbook photos.
“We had each other,” said Greg, who studied at Northeastern and then Stanford and is now a project manager at a construction firm. “We knew where we were, understanding the time in America we were in. And all this stuff might have been going on over our head. Like, what was going down at the river?” Weed smoking, apparently. Terry, a trial lawyer now, didn’t know either.
I bumped into Jerrauld at the barbecue lunch. We talked about how Ehle seemed to have a certain kind of person in mind when he picked them — resilient. “Don’t get it wrong,” Jerrauld said. “There was a lot of ugliness, hostility, overt and covert, that we had to endure here.” But he said the past looks rosier with time. Jerrauld went to Princeton and on to law school at Washington and Lee; he is now a state judge in Virginia, after having served in the State Legislature for 14 years and as a member of a governor’s cabinet for three.
It was hard to walk a few paces with Marvin and Bill without an old classmate stopping them to offer a pat on the back. Like Terry, Bill has served on the V.E.S board and has kept in touch with black students, and he has also endowed a scholarship that bears his name. We talked at the football game about black students at the school today, and he said that at times they struggled to find their place.
As the football game blared, Bill asked me how my high school experience compared with his. I’m an alumnus of a program called A Better Chance, which was started in Atlanta a few years before the Stouffer Foundation and at the time provided scholarships for black students to attend prep schools in the North. Now it helps send 2,000 students to nearly 350 schools nationwide.
But my education was something different from Bill and Marvin’s, not so connected to a movement and more about personal enrichment and attaining traditional measures of success. After going to public elementary and middle schools, I went to a private high school in Atlanta, my hometown, and on to Harvard, where I met Bill’s son. But I was always one of a select few black students. That is not the integration ideal. Sometimes I feel a yearning, something that I imagine some children of immigrants must feel, ones who weren’t taught their parents’ language and culture. Why didn’t my parents, my father in particular, who was a radical, a “race man,” ground me in any of that language? I’ve had the feeling lately that that oppositional posture should have been my inheritance — but my parents were focused on other things. “I wasn’t trying to do something for society; I was trying to do something for our black child,” my father told me recently. “It was a mistake not to have more conversations about the movement.” I’m finding that with age and the political climate in this country, I’m picking up the language on my own.
I interviewed dozens of Stouffer scholars before focusing on the story of the Magnificent Seven, and in those interviews, I saw this ambivalence in many of the scholars. Many seemed pleased with their professional success, but it had come at a cost. I recall one conversation I had with a very successful Stouffer alum, who told me that he goes back and forth between being incredibly thankful for his educational experience and wanting to “burn the whole system down.” Some of the scholars value how easily they can move in and out of white social circles; they appreciate the exposure to wealth in America. Others felt that the project, and their role in it, was an assault on their blackness.
Johnny is a pastor now at Durham’s Cup of Salvation Deliverance Church, which sits in a strip mall just off a busy thoroughfare outside the city center, sharing a huge parking lot with a bingo hall, a day care center and a nail salon. He greeted me at the door in March in slacks and a knit shirt that met neatly amid his belly. A couple hundred chairs lined the carpeted floors, and the walls, painted a rich blue, were stenciled in bold fonts with various names for Christ: the Alpha and the Omega, the Lily of the Valley, the Resurrection and the Light.
I wondered how Johnny’s presence, the sacrifice of his own body, had affected the white people who he said beat him, two in particular. One of them is dead now, and the other, who lives in North Carolina, didn’t return my calls.
Jerrauld, Johnny’s roommate, slept beside him every night. Could he have missed the violence? He hadn’t mentioned anything at the reunion but was more forthcoming when I called him later. “I was aware of those two guys being standouts when it came to harassment that certainly had racial aspects to it,” he said. “And Johnny was not alone. They did some of the same things to me as well.” Though Johnny recalls suffering on his own, Jerrauld remembers talking with Johnny about the two boys who beat them, and yet a third antagonist.  And he was verbally abusive to me. And I remember lying in my bed one night, thinking to myself: I am going to kill this guy. That’s how much I don’t like him. I am going to kill this guy. And I started to plan how I was going to do it.” He was going to throw him off the top of the dormitory, but he told his mother, and she drove the 200 miles from Norfolk to comfort him.
I am no longer conscious of the race of students in prep school: Agree or Disagree?
I would object to a black student dating my sister: Agree or Disagree?
I believe another five years of social change may result in a greater degree of integration than we have now: Agree or Disagree?
Some of their white classmates told me that knowing the seven changed them. But how do you quantify that? What’s easier to see is how the black students used the Stouffer experience to position themselves for success. As their lives progressed, each of them in his own way had to bring the bad that happened to accord with the good. I believe that’s a common refrain of many high-achieving black people in this country. In order to fully inhabit the bright parts of life — their educations, the friendships, the knowledge, the doors opened, the growth — they must own the darkness. Johnny told me I was the first person he had ever explored his feelings with. By the last time we spoke, he said he had made peace with what happened to him.
