Politics|Trump’s Big Gamble: Can He Pull Alabama Senator to Victory?
Trump’s Big Gamble: Can He Pull Alabama Senator to Victory?
HUNTSVILLE, Ala. — When President Trump took the stage here just days before Alabama’s pivotal Republican Senate runoff, he all but revealed his Oval Office deliberations about whether to stand with Senator Luther Strange and risk attaching himself to a potential loser.
“If Luther doesn’t win, they’re not going to say we picked up 25 points in a very short period of time, they’re going say, ‘Donald Trump, the president of the United States, was unable to pull his candidate across the line,’” he predicted to 7,500 Alabamians at a rally on Friday night as Mr. Strange looked on.
His blurting out of his political stage directions was a vintage moment of Trumpian indiscretion. But it also had the benefit of being accurate. The contest between Mr. Strange and Roy Moore, a former State Supreme Court justice and evangelical firebrand, is the most significant test yet of the president’s power to sway the party’s conservative base.
If Mr. Moore wins the runoff on Tuesday, Republican leaders fear he will further widen the split in the party between populists and the establishment. That could embolden more lawmakers to defy the party leadership and encourage other insurgents to challenge Republican incumbents, no matter Mr. Trump’s preference.
Dismissing the advice of his aides and flying here to campaign for Mr. Strange, Mr. Trump gambled that he alone could reverse Mr. Strange’s deficit in the polls. The president made the trip after being implored by Mr. Strange’s Senate colleagues to try to rescue his candidacy.
There is, of course, no small measure of irony in Mr. Trump’s decision to side with the establishment forces that lined up against his campaign for president. If Mr. Strange, who was appointed to fill the seat vacated by Attorney General Jeff Sessions, wins, Mr. Trump will deal a blow to some of the same anti-Washington forces that propelled his own rise.
But Mr. Trump has taken a liking to Mr. Strange, who, he noted at the rally, has not asked for any presidential favors, and several Senate Republicans have told him that Mr. Moore would be an unreliable ally. And should Mr. Strange prevail, the president will have established himself as the dominant force on the right, someone able to transcend the establishment-versus-Tea Party divide that has shaped Republican politics for the last eight years.
But should Mr. Strange lose, it would sow fresh doubts about Mr. Trump’s influence and create new headaches for party leaders. Other establishment-aligned candidates may find that the president is unable to inoculate them from populist challengers.
“If Roy Moore wins, Bannon and all the other of those people will pop out of the woodwork everywhere,” said Senator Richard C. Shelby, the veteran Alabama Republican, referring to the former Trump adviser Stephen K. Bannon, who has taken a leading role against the preferred candidate of his former boss.
Mr. Bannon aims to do just that.
He argues that should Mr. Moore win, Senate Republicans from Arizona and Nevada to Tennessee and Mississippi could find themselves in great peril.
What’s more, House Republicans, who are already facing a growing number of populist challengers, could face an even bigger wave of them. And Mr. Moore’s success could prompt wealthy conservative donor families like the Mercers “to invest more” in the insurgency, said Scott Reed, the top political strategist for the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
More immediately, the congressional wing of the party would be saddled with an often inflammatory Senate candidate who could invite a surge of Democratic money into Alabama and set off a host of questions about his provocative views on social issues that few Republican officials want to litigate.
Mr. Moore, 70, who rose to fame after he was removed from the bench for refusing to remove a statue of the Ten Commandments from the lobby of the State Supreme Court, is a pre-Trump-era Christian conservative, far more focused on issues of sex and morality than race and identity.
Reading from prepared remarks at a debate on Thursday in Montgomery, Mr. Moore declared that “crime, corruption, immorality, abortion, sodomy, sexual perversions sweep our land.” And appearing at a Baptist church last month in Jasper, Mr. Moore mused about what same-sex marriage could lead to. “Maybe you can marry a horse or a cow, or five men or five women,” he said.
Locally, some Republicans are also uneasy about the prospect of Mr. Moore — whose lead in the polls over Mr. Strange, 64, is in the single digits — being their nominee. They worry that the Democratic candidate, Doug Jones, a former federal prosecutor, could run well among moderate voters and create a competitive race. Mr. Moore won his last re-election to the state court by just a four-point margin in 2012, a year in which Mitt Romney carried the state by 23 points.
The Senate Democratic campaign arm has lined up a pollster to test Mr. Jones’s strengths and Mr. Moore’s vulnerabilities. And Alabama Democrats are openly rooting for the former judge.
Ms. Todd, who is also the state director for the Human Rights Campaign, said national gay donors should pay attention to the implications of Mr. Moore’s potential nomination. “It could really send a message across the country,” she said.
Many Republicans here believe that they will retain the seat, even if Mr. Moore is the nominee and it requires more money and attention than the national party would typically bestow on a deep-red state. At his rally on Friday, Mr. Trump said that both Mr. Strange and Mr. Moore were “good men,” and the president, seeming to hedge his bets, has said he will campaign for Mr. Moore in the general election if he wins the primary.
But for Republican elites, this contest has grown into something far larger than just a battle for a single Senate seat. To groups like the McConnell-backed Senate Leadership Fund, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and the National Rifle Association, which are sending mailers and airing television ads in the closing days of the race, Alabama is their chance to halt a rebellion.
It is, after all, not just the president who is putting his prestige on the line: Mr. Bannon is making an aggressive push for Mr. Moore, turning Breitbart News into a virtual arm of the former judge’s campaign and planning to appear with the former judge on the election’s eve. If Mr. Moore falls short, it will raise questions about the potency of Mr. Bannon’s populist army — and reveal the limitations of running against the establishment and Mr. McConnell when Mr. Trump is siding with party leaders.
