New York City’s public school system set an important national example this week when it made free lunch available to all of its 1.1 million students regardless of income level. The program ensures that more children will get proper nutrition during the school day. It will also relieve the sense of stigma and shame that often leads children to refuse subsidized meals — and go hungry — rather than let classmates find out that their families are poor.
Three quarters of New York City schoolchildren had already qualified for free or reduced-price lunches. The new initiative reaches another 200,000 children, saving their families about $300 a year per child. These additional lunches are not expected to cost the city more money, thanks to the federal Community Eligibility Provision program, under which schools that offer free lunch and breakfast to all children are reimbursed based on students’ poverty level. A new state data system that matched poor families with the schools their children attend has allowed the city to sign up for the program.
New York’s new program puts it in the company of major cities like Boston, Chicago, Dallas and Detroit. Nationally, however, far too many school districts still employ barbaric policies under which children are openly humiliated when their parents cannot pay lunch bills. These shaming tactics include berating students, stamping their arms with messages like “I need lunch money” and throwing meals into the garbage while hungry children stand by.
Missing meals and experiencing hunger impede a child’s ability to learn and achieve. Yet a new survey of 50 large school districts by the Food Research and Action Center, a national nonprofit group, shows that many school meal policies are quite retrograde on this front. For example, only eight of the districts offer free lunch to all students. Among the 40 schools that have established policies for dealing with unpaid meal bills, only a few explicitly prohibit schools from humiliating children. Worse still, some schools actually deny meals to older students who cannot pay.
Shockingly, most school policies do not even mention the fact that families in financial trouble might be eligible for free or reduced-price meals. Struggling families that fail to pay school lunch fees are driven further into poverty by debt collectors and their onerous fees.
As the Food Research and Action Center survey shows, these policies are cruel, counterproductive and costly. By taking advantage of the federal Community Eligibility Provision, schools can increase reimbursement for meals — thus wiping out meal debt — while they improve nutrition, eliminate stigma and cut administrative costs. It makes good sense for schools that serve poor children to register for this program without delay. Food, after all, is one of the fuels necessary to get through the school day.