UPDATE: After we posted this article, Times readers weighed in with their favorite books on the Vietnam War. These 10 books, in addition to the ones below, were recommended multiple times. For fiction: ‘Matterhorn: A Novel of the Vietnam War,’ by Karl Marlantes; ‘The Sympathizer,’ by Viet Thanh Nguyen; ‘The 13th Valley,’ by John M. Del Vecchio; ‘The Short-Timers,’ by Gustav Hasford; and ‘The Ugly American,’ by Eugene Burdick and William Lederer. Fon nonfiction: ‘Chickenhawk,’ by Robert Mason; ‘Kill Anything That Moves: The Real American War in Vietnam,’ by Nick Turse; ‘The Killing Zone: My Life in the Vietnam War,’ by Frederick Downs; ‘Pharoah’s Army: Memories of the Lost War” by Tobias Wolf; and ‘Street Without Joy: Indochina at War, 1946–1954,’ by Bernard Fall.
On Sunday, Sept. 17, PBS will begin airing “The Vietnam War,” a 10-part, 18-hour documentary by Ken Burns and his creative partner Lynn Novick. For those of you interested in books about Vietnam, here’s a list, along with clips and links to The Times Book Review’s assessment of each publication. Also, be sure to check out Vietnam ’67, a series by our colleagues on Opinion that features essays by historians, veterans and journalists recalling a year that changed the war and America.
The Times review of “In Retrospect” opens like this: “In his 79th year, Robert S. McNamara at long last offers the public a glimpse of his aching conscience.” McNamara tries to “prove that the mistakes were ‘mostly honest,’ even if traceable to a ghastly ignorance of the Vietnamese people, culture and terrain, and the historical forces of that time.” The review found “McNamara’s unwillingness to explore the human tragedies and political legacies” of the Vietnam War disappointing.
Hayslip’s account offers a rare view of “growing up in the shadow of war.” The book, an “intensely intimate portrait,” is a “human account of Vietnam’s destruction and self-destruction.” She “begins with the war’s corruption of family and community life in her village” and “then moves to the hard, impure compromises of survival as she becomes a teenage refugee in Saigon” among South Vietnamese and American soldiers.