Every day, Brent Peterkin still puts on a suit and tie and drives to his job in New Haven as statewide coordinator for Project Longevity, a program to thwart gun violence and redirect potential gang members in some of Connecticut’s most crime-ridden neighborhoods. It is also one of many social services nonprofit organizations that has lost its funding as the state approaches three months of operating without a budget.
Mr. Peterkin and Project Longevity’s five other workers have not been paid since June 30, when the state’s fiscal year ended, and it is unclear if they will get any back pay.
They have kept working anyway.
Connecticut is the only state in the country that has not enacted a budget for this year. State lawmakers failed to reach an agreement after months of wrangling as they confronted a $3.5 billion deficit. Now, the state is barreling toward another key deadline on Oct. 1, when an executive order on state spending calls for more painful reductions. It is another deadline that some state officials, including Gov. Dannel P. Malloy, a Democrat, have expressed doubt that they will meet.
The stalemate has had widespread implications as Connecticut faces a worsening financial crisis, spreading uncertainty and raising alarms.
Already, social services programs, like Project Longevity, are struggling to stay afloat, and some have shut down. The president of the University of Connecticut has warned that cuts included in a Republican proposal that reached the governor’s desk were severe enough to “simply decimate” the school. Towns and cities have grown frustrated, unsure of how much aid they will receive, except that it will likely be less than in the past.
In Hartford, the mayor said the situation might be the nudge that pushes the distressed capital city into bankruptcy.
Connecticut is among the country’s wealthiest states, but it also has one of the widest income gaps and mounting problems, like its growing pension obligations and shrinking tax base, that create a difficult financial landscape. The state has seen its population decline over the past three years and its structure, with no county governments, forces many of its 169 self-governing cities and towns to vie for state aid to supplement property taxes.
“They have very difficult choices that they need to make,” said Marcia Van Wagner, a state credit analyst for Moody’s Investor Service.
The discord over the budget does not just split along Democrat and Republican lines. Like many issues in Connecticut, the divide lies between the state’s affluent suburbs and its poorer cities, which have differing priorities as they debate how to divvy up a shrinking financial pie, especially on matters like funding education.
A potential breakthrough came recently when a Republican-led budget proposal passed with the support of three Democrats in the Senate and six others in the House of Representatives, an unexpected move, according to political observers, that hinted at a crack in the Democrats’ hegemony in Connecticut.
Republican lawmakers said the proposal for $40.7 billion in state spending over two years would yield $270 million in savings through changes to state employee pensions, eliminating and restructuring some agencies and programs and reducing funding to the public universities, among other cuts. It also proposed changes sought by some Democrats to the state’s budget rules.
“I was surprised when the budget went through,” said Sen. Len Fasano, a Republican leader, even though he helped orchestrate the effort. “I think it takes a lot of courage,” he added, referring to the Democrats who supported the plan.
At the University of Connecticut, which stood to lose at least $200 million over two years, its president, Susan Herbst, wrote a letter to students, faculty and alumni, warning of closing campuses and departments, ending majors and programs, as well as reductions in research, athletics and financial aid.
Mr. Malloy has vowed to veto the legislation, citing “irresponsible changes” to pensions, a lack of sufficient support for Hartford and other cities and cuts to school funding that he saw as excessive and threatening districts that struggled the most.
“We cannot risk rolling back the progress we have made over the last several years,” he said.
But with a growing sense that a resolution seems unlikely by the end of this month, the anxiety and frustration across the state has only swelled. The executive order that controls state spending has already frozen millions of dollars in contracts and grants and limited support sent to municipalities. If a new budget is not reached by Oct. 1, many towns and cities are expecting a much smaller fraction of the usual amount they receive from the state — or nothing at all.
This month, city officials in Hartford, which faces a nearly $50 million deficit, sent a letter to the state cautioning that a failure to reach a budget compromise with sufficient aid would make pursuing bankruptcy almost inevitable. The officials, including the mayor, Luke Bronin, noted that further cuts would force them to eliminate, and not simply reduce, essential city services.
“We cannot cut our way out of this crisis,” the officials wrote.
Michael Passero, the mayor of New London, said his city’s circumstances were not as dire, noting bright spots, like development projects and the defense industry. But nonetheless, he said, he and other city leaders were preparing for difficult cuts, largely sparing only services related to public safety. “Everything else that’s not absolutely life or death is getting sacrificed at this point,” he said.
But smaller towns and rural communities share similar concerns.
In Portland, a town of about 10,000 south of Hartford, officials said that if a budget were not reached by the start of next month, they stand to receive just over $10,000 from the state — not the $4.6 million they had expected. “You just can’t do this to communities,” said Susan S. Bransfield, the first selectwoman.
“The level of frustration is very high, but the level of fortitude has increased and the level of saying ‘we will get this right’ has strengthened,” she added, voicing a rare note of optimism, hoping the Legislature and the governor can achieve a resolution.
