MEXICO CITY — Oh, no. Not again.
This was the general sentiment across a broad area of the eastern Caribbean on Sunday as residents, some still sifting through the wreckage left by Hurricane Irma, braced for the impact of yet another powerful storm stalking them in the Atlantic Ocean.
Hurricane Maria was rumbling toward the Lesser Antilles, the crescent of islands that curves from the Virgin Islands to Grenada, and forecasters predicted that the storm would continue to grow as it plowed west-northwest through the Caribbean. It may reach major hurricane status by midweek as it approaches Puerto Rico and the British and United States Virgin Islands.
The new storm comes less than two weeks after Hurricane Irma, one of the most powerful cyclones ever recorded, made landfall in Antigua and Barbuda before sweeping through the Caribbean and Florida, killing dozens, destroying entire neighborhoods and leaving thousands homeless. Another Atlantic storm, Hurricane Jose, threatened the region in the wake of Irma, but ended up skirting the Lesser Antilles before turning north.
On Sunday afternoon, Hurricane Maria had maximum sustained winds of 75 miles per hour and was heading west-northwest at 15 miles per hour on a trajectory that was further south than Hurricane Irma’s. Forecasters said the storm’s likely trajectory early in the week would take it across or near islands that were largely spared the impact of Irma, including Dominica, Guadeloupe, Martinique, Montserrat and St. Kitts and Nevis.
Still, hurricane watches remained in effect for several of the islands further north that were battered by Irma, including St. Martin, St. Barthélemy and Anguilla, which are still trying to assess the extent of the damage they suffered, grapple with their losses and imagine a path toward recovery. Even if the storm remains mostly to the south of those beaten-up islands, its outer bands of wind and rain could halt recovery efforts, inflict further damage to already-broken buildings and cause flash floods and mudslides.
“Everybody’s upset with that,” said Christophe Louis, a businessman in Guadeloupe with investments in St. Martin.
Mr. Louis, who is a partner in a rum bottling and distribution firm in St. Martin, said the company’s warehouse had been damaged by Irma, and then looted. And now the island is bracing for more punishment.
Real-time map showing the position and forecast for Hurricane Maria, and the storm’s impact in Puerto Rico.
“Everybody’s so tired,” he said.
Throughout the region on Sunday, residents prepared for the latest storm’s arrival, boarding up windows and loading up on provisions. Officials opened storm shelters and publicized emergency contact numbers.
On islands that were threatened by Hurricane Irma but not hard hit, some found they did not have much work to do. Windows were still boarded up, and emergency stockpiles of food, water and supplies, gathered in advance of the earlier storm, were untouched.
Forecasters said late Sunday that Hurricane Maria could attain Category 2 status, with winds up to 110 miles per hour, by the time it breaches the Antilles chain late Monday, and that it could threaten Puerto Rico later in the week “as a dangerous major hurricane,” with winds up to 125 miles per hour.
Irma left more than 70 percent of households in Puerto Rico without power, but otherwise spared the island the worst of its fury. The island may not be so lucky this time, officials warned on Sunday.
“This has the potential of being a very big disaster,” Gov. Ricardo Rosselló said.
Electricity has been restored to 96 percent of households and businesses since Hurricane Irma, but Mr. Rosselló said there was little time to prepare an already vulnerable power grid for another storm.
Government officials in the United States Virgin Islands, which is still reeling from the devastation wrought by Hurricane Irma, warned residents not to remain in their damaged homes but instead to seek refuge in a government shelter.
Hurricane Irma knocked out the basic infrastructure on the islands of St. Thomas and St. John, leaving thousands of residents without electricity, water and telephone communication. St. Croix was mostly unscathed by the storm, but officials said the island could take a direct hit by Hurricane Maria on Tuesday.
