BARCELONA — A confrontation in Catalonia drew closer on Saturday, as people camped out in scores of polling stations throughout the region, intent on keeping them open for Sunday’s referendum in defiance of the Spanish government’s orders.
In the polling stations, mostly public school buildings, there was a festive atmosphere, with crowds of people singing protest songs, playing board games, taking dance classes, playing table tennis and otherwise passing the time until 6 a.m. on Sunday, the deadline set by the police to evacuate the buildings.
It remained unclear how many polling stations will open. Spain said on Saturday that only 163 voting sites were occupied, far below the 2,315 stations that Catalonian officials had promised. And no one knows what the police will do if, on Sunday morning, the people inside refuse to leave.
“The history of my country is going to be decided in the next few hours, so there’s no way I’m going to be staying at home in bed and watch it on TV,” said Eduard Elías, 50, a computer science engineer at a school in the Raval neighborhood of Barcelona, adding that he would leave only if the confrontation became violent.
The government of Catalonia, an autonomous region in northeast Spain, this month approved laws to hold the referendum, which it said would be binding. Spain’s prime minister, Mariano Rajoy, has warned that the vote violates the Constitution and that Spain will use all possible means to stop it.
But a large number of Catalonia’s 7.5 million residents are likely to ignore that warning, presenting Mr. Rajoy with the uncomfortable choice between using security forces to clear large crowds, or allowing the vote to take place and thereby acknowledging that the nation’s government in Madrid was unable to control events. Among the central players on Sunday will be Catalonia’s regional police, who number 17,000, and who have signaled reluctance to use force on citizens who go to vote.
Police on Saturday entered the Catalonian regional government’s telecommunications and information technology center after a court on Friday ordered them to stop electronic voting. The court also ordered Google to eliminate an application designed to help Catalans identify polling stations.
Opinion polls have indicated that less than half of the region’s residents support independence — though a majority want to vote on the region’s future — and crowds gathered on Saturday in Catalonian cities and towns to call for unity with Spain.
Fernando Satue, 67, a retired mechanic who was born in Huesca and has lived in Catalonia since he was 5, said that the mounting demand for independence has made him apprehensive about expressing his opinions in public.
He said he planned to stay home on Sunday, in part out of fear of unrest.
“A lot of things have been said, and at the end there will be violence,” Mr. Satue said.
The day passed peacefully in most places, but in Manlleu, a community near Barcelona that is home to many immigrants, four people who were camped out at a school were shot with a BB gun. Maria Lluisa Ines Sallavona, 71, said she was doing Sudoku puzzles “in a really nice and relaxed ambience” when she was hit in the neck by a pellet.
“I guess this is some kind of fanatic who has an allergy to independence,” said her husband, Lluis Sallavona Rovira, 77, a retired electronic technician, who sought medical attention for a wound in his back.
In many locations, the police made repeated visits to warn the people inside that they would have to leave by 6 a.m. on Sunday.
