GRAND RAPIDS, Mich. — Patricia Constantine thought hard about whether to use an image of the education secretary, Betsy DeVos, in her entry to this year’s ArtPrize contest. The mixed-media painting depicts Ms. Constantine as a carnival freak suffering for the perceived misdeeds of Ms. DeVos and President Trump. But Ms. DeVos isn’t just your everyday target in Michigan: She and her family provide major financial support to the ArtPrize awards that might honor the very works that skewer her.
Her piece is one of more than 1,350 entries by artists from 47 countries in one of the art world’s most peculiar and richest competitions, now in its ninth year. Over a three-week period, this city hosts ArtPrize, which displays entries in public spaces around town and lets viewers choose the winners of half its $500,000 purse. Ms. DeVos’s son Rick conceived the competition and initially financed it.
The 2017 competition, which culminates on Oct. 6, brings with it new curiosity and interest — as well as a more politicized flavor — because it is the first of the Trump era and the first since Ms. DeVos became education secretary.
The DeVos family, heirs to the multibillion-dollar Amway fortune, has long been controversial in Michigan for spending big on conservative political causes, but Betsy DeVos’s elevation brings new national prominence to the clan, which also includes her brother, Erik D. Prince, a founder of the private security firm formerly known as Blackwater. Mr. Prince is under fire for advocating privatization of United States military missions.
About 16 percent of the $3.5 million annual budget for the nonprofit ArtPrize comes from the various DeVos foundations, according to 2016 tax disclosures, with the rest from other foundations and local and national business support. Rick DeVos, a tech entrepreneur, is chairman of ArtPrize’s board, and family members donate generously and sit on the boards of many institutions that are among the 175 ArtPrize showplaces.
Mr. DeVos was unavailable to comment, an ArtPrize publicist said. Nobody from the Dick & Betsy DeVos Family Foundation responded to a request for comment, and Ms. DeVos did not answer an inquiry sent to the Education Department.
ArtPrize officials say the DeVos family’s influence over the contest is minimal. The DeVos Place Convention Center is a major ArtPrize venue, but its assistant general manager, Eddie Tadlock, said the family’s input over what pieces he hosts is “zero, zippo, nothing.” The DeVoses tour ArtPrize entries there every year, Mr. Tadlock said, and that has not prevented him from showing art with progressive political intentions.
That this year’s entries include so many more political statements than usual proves the DeVos family doesn’t influence what competes, said Kevin Buist, the exhibitions director of the competition.
That ethos does seem to hold, with several entries inspired by Ms. DeVos’s stewardship of the Education Department. The St. Louis-based artist Ilene Berman, for instance, presented an installation in which school desks made of gray industrial wool lay collapsed on the floor in what she said is a form of memorial. “The tendency to blame teachers and things happening at home for problems with our schools is missing people like Betsy DeVos’s role in what’s happening,” she said.
Nearby, “For-profit Education,” by a high school Spanish teacher, Sarah Ellis, takes a similar swipe. The work features a vintage blackboard upon which she projects a video that first presents a Plato quote on the importance of education followed by Ms. Ellis smashing with a hammer four coin-filled busts of the philosopher.
Many ArtPrize entries take aim at Mr. Trump. In one, the performance artist E. J. Cobb sits at a desk taking a red pen to the texts of Trump speeches, then displays the marked-up pages in a work titled “Fixed It for You.” Another work, by Esan Sommersell, titled “Blackface Trump: Accountable?,” reimagines Mr. Trump as a racial minority, setting his doctored profile against a red background adorned with a yellow Soviet hammer and sickle.
The environment also serves as inspiration. Among the most noticeable is a 56-by-86-foot vinyl installation “Oil + Water,” in the Grand River, that depicts an image shot by the photographer Ryan Spencer Reed at a 2016 protest against the Dakota Access Pipeline. Mr. Reed doctored the photo to make it appear as if it had been damaged by an oil spill. “I felt like I’d never get that piece in the water, because wouldn’t that make an awkward cabinet meeting between Betsy and Rex Tillerson?” Mr. Reed said, referring to the former Exxon Mobil chief executive turned secretary of state. In fact, the ArtPrize staff helped the artist obtain the necessary permits.
Whether the public — including many conservative Midwesterners who support Mr. Trump — will vote for progressive political art is unclear. ArtPrize awards were originally all decided by public vote, but since 2013, half of the prize money is awarded by a panel of art experts to counter the public’s preference for spectacles like one of this year’s most notorious entries, the world’s largest beanbag. The two largest prizes are $200,000 each.
The perennial criticism ArtPrize weathers is about its unusual concept — that any business in downtown Grand Rapids can declare itself a venue and artists in any medium can pay $50 to show their work if a venue operator agrees to host it. As a result, exhibition spaces this year include an auto body shop, a bridal store and the local Y.M.C.A.
Most artists who participate recognize that the event, which brought an estimated $28 million in business to Grand Rapids in 2016, is, as Mr. Reed put it, “an economic development piece with an artsy facade.” Still, Mr. Reed and others say the kitschy entries and the American Idol-style voting process have their own value.
