TEMPE, Ariz. — Nearly a week into their most recent therapeutic reunion, Michael Phelps and Grant Hackett, two giants of Olympic swimming, sat down to breakfast at a packed restaurant and wondered how they would explain themselves to their children someday.
The conversations they foresaw had nothing to do with Phelps’s record-shattering medal haul or with Hackett’s defiance of debilitating illnesses during a decade-long dominance of the 1,500-meter freestyle, the most grueling event in the pool, that earned him the nickname Captain Courageous from his fellow Australians.
They were reliving dark moments, times when they posed a danger to themselves and others.
Hackett, 37, laughed ruefully and told Phelps he had already spoken with a child psychologist about how to guide his 8-year-old twins through the shambles of his post-swimming life.
Such exchanges are the reason Hackett traveled 8,000 miles from Australia to Arizona last month to stay with Phelps and his wife, Nicole. It wasn’t his first visit. He has used their home as something of a halfway house, joking that he spends so much time with them that he is getting mail there.
His life in Australia, where distance swimmers can become celebrities on a par with N.F.L. quarterbacks in the United States, started careening out of control several years ago. In February, it derailed in a very public fashion.
He visited his parents’ Gold Coast home, and his father, Neville, called the police to report that Hackett had been drinking and had suffered a mental breakdown that sent him into a rage. The Olympian was taken to a detention center in handcuffs — a scene that was broadcast across Australia and set off a social media frenzy.
Hackett soon contacted his family, saying he was safe and simply hiding from the humiliation. Phelps could empathize with Hackett in a way few others could. Along with his 28 Olympic medals, Phelps accrued two arrests for driving under the influence — the second one after the police stopped him for going almost twice the speed limit on a road in Baltimore, his hometown. He had also been photographed holding a bong at a private party, an image that ended up in a British tabloid.
After the second D.U.I. arrest, in 2014, Phelps spent eight weeks at the Meadows, an Arizona treatment center, to deal with the anxiety and depression that he had tried to overcome on his own after the 2004, 2008 and 2012 Olympics. Recognizing how difficult it is for many people to recognize their vulnerabilities and reach out for help, Phelps has devoted himself to unraveling the stigma of mental illness.
Phelps has started some public speaking on the topic and has become an informal counselor to the stars, lending an ear to the golfer Tiger Woods after his arrest in May on charges of driving under the influence. A toxicology report revealed no alcohol in Woods’s system, but rather a mix of four prescription drugs and the active ingredient in marijuana.
Over the summer, Phelps said, he met an 11-year-old boy in California who had appeared in a documentary about anxiety. The boy was a swimmer, and he said he had wrestled with suicidal thoughts the year before. Phelps told the boy about the days he spent curled up in bed, “literally wanting to die,” after his second D.U.I. arrest.
From 1997 to 2007, despite a collapsed lung and a bout of mononucleosis, Hackett was unbeaten in the 1,500 freestyle and also set world records in the 200 and 800 freestyles. He won back-to-back Olympic gold medals in the 1,500 and missed a third one in the event by just over one second. After he retired from the sport, Hackett’s life resembled his freestyle stroke: He appeared to be effortlessly gliding to glory, but beneath the surface propelling himself forward was becoming almost too much to bear.
He was married to the entertainer Candice Alley, and their twins — a daughter, Charlize, and a son, Jagger — arrived the year after Hackett stopped swimming. He became a successful entrepreneur and hedge-fund investor, earned a master’s degree and did broadcasting work on the side. At the same time, he said, he was using alcohol and sleeping pills to quell anxiety and depression.
By 2014, his marriage had disintegrated and his substance use was leading to headline-generating behavior, including wandering dazed and barely dressed through a Melbourne hotel lobby.
His family pleaded with him to seek professional help, and Hackett spent a month at the Meadows, the same treatment facility Phelps entered later that year. But Hackett was not ready then to open up and acknowledge his weaknesses. He was trying to conquer his anxiety and depression as if they were swimming rivals.
After the February episode, Hackett knew he needed more help. The day after he resurfaced, he contacted Phelps and agreed to fly to the United States. He also decided that after stopping in Arizona he would enter a recovery center in Malibu, Calif. Phelps drove him the 400 miles to the facility.
Twice since his monthlong treatment, Hackett has traveled to spend time at the Phelpses’ home. “Michael’s been there and he understands, so it’s almost like you can plug right into that support,” Hackett said.
He and Phelps first crossed paths at the 2000 Olympics in Sydney. Phelps, then 15, marveled at how big swimming was in Australia and how much attention was paid to Hackett’s success.
As Phelps’s own fame grew, he gravitated toward Australian swimmers, who could understand the scrutiny he faced better than most of his American teammates.
He and Hackett found that personal relationships, even the simplest ones, could become a minefield for anyone with a measure of fame. It has been years since either of them has had a chance to make a first impression, because people assume they already know celebrities.
Woods, 41, who has been sidelined from golf by a back injury, recently spent time in a clinic, receiving inpatient treatment to help him manage pain medications.
Phelps contacted Woods through a mutual friend, the Golf Channel analyst Notah Begay III, who was Woods’s teammate at Stanford. A recovering alcoholic, Begay had reached out to Phelps around the time he sought help at the Meadows. Their first phone conversation lasted two hours.
And while Phelps keeps an eye on others, his wife is helping him find alternative forms of counseling that might accommodate his frequent travels.
Together, Nicole Phelps said, they have discovered groups that offer therapy by video links and even by text or email.
This sort of attention is what Hackett came here to avoid. “I just feel different — more balanced — when I get out of the fishbowl in Australia,” he said.
Phelps carded an 84, lowering his handicap to single digits. Hackett, who doesn’t play much golf at home, shot 103. A few days earlier, he broke 100 for the first time.
Another refuge is the water. On a recent morning, they swam for an hour in an Arizona State pool. Hackett and Phelps regularly raced in front of standing-room-only crowds. On this day, their audience consisted of a lifeguard.
Once they swam for medals and records, for a place in history. In retirement they swim to free their minds, to commune with the water. What used to be a high-stress profession has morphed into a peaceful interlude.
At the end of a 2,000-yard workout, Phelps called for a timed sprint from a dive.
“We didn’t come here to screw around,” he said.
Sometimes at night, Hackett and Phelps will start talking about mental health — their own and others’ — and the conversation will still be going strong at 1 or 2 in the morning. The more they give voice to their vulnerabilities, the easier it is to imagine one day explaining their worst moments to their children.
