Our guide to pop and rock shows and the best of live jazz.
BAND TOGETHER: A CONCERT AGAINST HATE at Knockdown Center (Sept. 22, 8 p.m). A solo set from Geoff Rickly, best known for fronting the ferocious post-hardcore band Thursday, is the main attraction at this benefit show for the American Civil Liberties Union. Joining Mr. Rickly on the bill in Maspeth, Queens, are the synth-pop group French Horn Rebellion and the singer Dave Elkins, among others; it’s an eclectic lineup, united by the shared goal of making noise for a good cause.
CHANCE THE RAPPER at Forest Hills Stadium (Sept. 26-27, 7 p.m.). Chance the Rapper is an agent of joy, spreading wholesome reminiscences of youth to listeners who appreciate the positivity. Sometimes “Sesame Street”-esque puppets are onstage with him. Chance’s shows are not for cynics, but fans of work like the exuberant “Coloring Book,” which he released last year to much acclaim, are likely to leave fully satisfied.
MAC DeMARCO at Radio City Music Hall (Sept. 22, 8 p.m.). The insouciant West Canadian singer-songwriter Mac DeMarco performs with a youthful verve, even though many of his best songs — including several on his excellent third album, “This Old Dog,” released in May — have to do with feeling over the hill. (In fact, he is 27.) This intriguing tonal contrast extends to Mr. DeMarco’s live shows, where he can often be found crooning about mid-20s malaise with a winning smirk.
INTERPOL at Forest Hills Stadium (Sept. 23, 6:30 p.m.). When the moody gentlemen of Interpol released their first album, “Turn On the Bright Lights,” in 2002, it entered the New York rock canon more or less instantly. The group’s catalog since has had highs and lows, but that dark, sexy debut remains a peak achievement. On Saturday, Interpol plays all of “Turn On the Bright Lights” in Queens, summoning memories of an era of downtown cool. Deerhunter and Battles open.
SEU JORGE at the Beacon Theater (Sept. 27, 7:30 p.m.). It’s been nearly 13 years since many fans discovered the Brazilian singer Seu Jorge through the David Bowie covers he recorded for the film “The Life Aquatic With Steve Zissou.” Those renditions, and the expanded all-Bowie album Mr. Jorge released in 2005, remain among his best-loved work, and on Wednesday he will perform them in tribute to Bowie, who died last year.
ROSTAM at Music Hall of Williamsburg (Sept. 27, 8 p.m.). A subtle producer and songwriter, Rostam Batmanglij was crucial to the flowering of the group Vampire Weekend over the last decade, though he generally ceded the spotlight to his co-writer, the lead singer Ezra Koenig. Mr. Batmanglij amicably left the band last year in order to chase other dreams — like contributing to Frank Ocean’s “Blonde” and his own solo debut, “Half-Light,” which arrived this month to strong reviews.
BRIAN WILSON at Radio City Music Hall (Sept. 23, 8 p.m.). Seeing Brian Wilson in 2017 can feel like an exercise in devotion. Mr. Wilson, now 75, no longer has the vocal range he had as a young member of the Beach Boys (really, who does?), and he often appears less than thrilled to be onstage. But these are mostly moot points when the person most responsible for “Pet Sounds” performs that album’s songs, as Mr. Wilson will do with his former band mates Al Jardine and Blondie Chaplin beside him.
ABRAHAM INC. AND FRIENDS at Symphony Space (Sept. 24, 7 p.m.). With his band Abraham Inc., the clarinetist David Krakauer doesn’t stop at melding jazz and klezmer. This group makes a brew that draws upon hip-hop and funk, too. Abraham Inc. is one of a handful of acts making music of cross-cultural cohesion at this concert, a benefit for the American Civil Liberties Union, co-sponsored by Jews for Racial and Economic Justice. Others include the guitarist Marc Ribot, the South African piano duo of Kathleen Tagg and Andre Petersen, and a pared-down Silk Road Ensemble.
JOSÉ CONDE ECLECTRIC AND OLA FRESCA at Flushing Town Hall (Sep. 22, 8 p.m.). With Ola Fresca, the vocalist and multi-instrumentalist Mr. Conde draws from a variety of Afro-Latin traditions, tossing son, salsa and timba into a nonacademic stew, ready for the street fair, dance club or concert hall. At 7 p.m., a dance lesson will be held for guests.
ANDREW CYRILLE AND BILL MCHENRY at Dizzy’s Club Coca-Cola. Mr. Cyrille, 77, a drummer, can exert a rumbling power without striking the drums especially hard. He’s an avant-gardist known for his work with free improvisers like Cecil Taylor and Oliver Lake, but his Haitian parentage has a way of shining through in the syncopations of his playing. He and Mr. McHenry, 45, a tenor saxophonist, released a powerful duo album last year called “Proximity.” It found Mr. McHenry’s lucid and tapered sound in fruitful partnership with the mercurial heft of Mr. Cyrille. On Sept. 26 they perform at 7:30 and 9:30 p.m. as part of the Coca-Cola Generations in Jazz Festival.
TOMAS FUJIWARA at the Jazz Gallery (Sept. 22, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Mr. Fujiwara knows his way around a scorching climax, but his drumming isn’t really about that; it’s defined by his illustrative, attentive touch. The tunes he writes seem to grow out of that sensitivity: They have the abstruse allure of non-narrative cinema. Next month he’ll release a fine new album, “Triple Double,” with a band featuring Ralph Alessi on trumpet, Taylor Ho Bynum on cornet, Brandon Seabrook and Mary Halvorson on guitars, and Gerald Cleaver doubling with Mr. Fujiwara on drums. That group appears here, presumably previewing some of the album.
STEVE LEHMAN QUARTET Featuring María Grand (Sept. 26 at the National Jazz Museum in Harlem, 7 p.m.; Sept. 28 at the Jazz Gallery, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.; Sept. 29 at Seeds Brooklyn, 9 p.m.). Mr. Lehman, 39, is an alto saxophonist at the forefront of experimental improvised music. He uses the complex electroacoustic technique known as spectral composition, but also has enough restraint to craft a heart-rending solo. Ms. Grand, 25, is a rising tenor saxophonist with a strong musical personality already intact. Here she performs in Mr. Lehman’s quartet — with Matt Brewer on bass and Damion Reid on drums — at different venues.
ADI MEYERSON QUARTET AND AARON BURNETT SEXTET at the Cell (Sept. 23, 8 p.m.). John Coltrane would have turned 91 on this date; for this program, titled “Coltrane Night,” two bands perform from the saxophone giant’s repertoire. Ms. Meyerson, a bassist, leads a combo featuring Godwin Louis on alto saxophone, Melissa Aldana on tenor saxophone, Eden Ladin on piano and Kush Abady on drums. It will focus on Coltrane’s straight-ahead work of the late 1950s and early ’60s. Mr. Burnett, a saxophonist, plays a set dedicated to Coltrane’s later experiments; his band features Peter Evans on trumpet, Corey Wilcox on trombone, Carlos Homs on piano and Nick Jozwiak on bass.
