A lot of fan art can be pretty lackluster. Consider your typical “Game of Thrones”-inspired noodlings, or the fiction that wistfully imagines romantic interludes between Harry Potter and Hermione Granger. Sure, there are occasional gems, but most are more ode than art.
Perhaps the single form of fan art that consistently bucks the trend is the alternative movie poster. Created by artists outside Hollywood, these hand-drawn beauties are not only better than most fan art, they’re often better than the real thing.
To be fair, most official posters today aren’t made to be beautiful or even art — they’re made to sell tickets. In the ’90s, studios figured the best way to do that was to skip hand-painted posters in favor of gigantic photos of stars’ heads. The creators of alternative movie posters, however, don’t care about big heads or bottom lines. They’re concerned, often obsessively so, with reminding us just why we love these films so much.
Many creators have become so popular that they’re also working for studios, on everything from variant posters (Tracie Ching’s prints for “The Jungle Book”) to Blu-ray covers (Marie Bergeron’s illustrations for Takeshi Kitano films). Last year, the illustrator Kyle Lambert created the official “Stranger Things” poster, his homage to classic hand-painted ones of the 1980s.
Today, there are galleries and digital archives (Repostered.com and AlternativeMoviePosters.com) devoted to the form. And then there are the books, like the “Crazy 4 Cult: Cult Movie Art” series, Mr. Chojnacki’s “Alternative Movie Posters” (being published in French by Akileos in October) and, this month, “The Art of Mondo,” a lavishly illustrated history of the company.
Justin Erickson and Paige Reynolds make up Phantom City Creative, whose recent commissions include a special edition soundtrack album for the A&E series “Bates Motel,” and a poster for a Christmas Day screening of Quentin Tarantino’s “The Hateful Eight.” For “Jaws,” Phantom City Creative envisioned a beach-facing window framed by a great white’s gaping maw. For “Godzilla,” Mr. Erickson captured the Japanese terror as a pile of wrecked buildings in one poster; in another, as a pillar of smoke and fire. “He even did a great one where he used the kanji for ‘Godzilla’” — the Japanese lettering spelling out the title — “and actually made it look like Godzilla,” Mr. Jones said.
Mr. Ansin is a master of the heroic image, be the heroes barbaric (“Conan the Barbarian”), metallic (“Iron Man,” “RoboCop”) or long dead (“The Mummy”). For a limited-edition poster of “Taxi Driver,” Mr. Ansin had to get special permission from Robert De Niro to use his likeness; look closely at the 42nd Street marquees, and you’ll see one for “The Party at Kitty and Stud’s,” Sylvester Stallone’s first and only foray into soft-core porn. Mr. Ansin’s take on the 1995 film “Ghost in the Shell” is as trippy and visually stunning as the anime original, a kaleidoscopic vortex of killer bots, freeways and special-ops agents, with the film’s heroic cyborg falling through its spinning heart.