If, as a public official, your best solution to a complicated problem is to build a wall, the odds are pretty good you’ll eventually smack into one. A wall was the thousand-mile backdrop to Donald J. Trump’s 2016 presidential campaign. But as we’ve seen over the past few weeks, with the president declaring and then undeclaring his intention to end the DACA program, the realities of immigration reform are complicated. They correspond little to the anxieties of the public imagination. Realities seldom do.
DACA protects roughly 800,000 undocumented immigrants who came to the United States as children and have lived here continuously since June 15, 2007. Were they to be deported, many would go back to countries they have never really known as home.
“In the Northern Triangle — Honduras, Guatemala and El Salvador — a ‘better life,’ for many, means a life where they are not afraid of being killed,” Markham explains. In 2013, 93 percent of unaccompanied minors in the United States — or “unaccompanied alien children,” in the chilly parlance of the law — came from those three countries.
“The Far Away Brothers” is impeccably timed, intimately reported and beautifully expressed. Markham brings people and places to rumbling life; she has that rare ability to recreate elusive, subjective experiences — whether they’re scenes she never witnessed or her characters’ interior psychological states — without taking undue liberties. In many ways, her book is reminiscent of Adrian Nicole LeBlanc’s “Random Family.” It’s about teenagers who raise themselves. They pine for support. They’re traumatized in ways they can barely articulate.
Readers follow the Flores twins as they make the decision, at 17, to leave El Salvador; undertake the grueling passage to the United States; and settle in Oakland, Calif., where their older brother, Wilber, has been eking out a living, having made the trek to America himself years before. (It was in Oakland that Markham met the twins. She was a program coordinator at their high school.) The twins suddenly lead the lives of both children and adults, balancing jobs with gym class, legal paperwork with texts from jealous girlfriends.
We also follow the travails of the Flores clan back home. Their experiences offer a window onto the deterioration of a nation.
It is startling, too, to learn the many ways immigration takes its toll on families. Wilber seethes at his twin brothers for imposing on his time, consuming his money and disrupting his plans. “Just when things had started to stabilize and he was thinking about going back to school,” Markham writes, “his brothers appeared, needing food, a place to sleep and Bob Marley T-shirts.” The twins bicker with one another about living arrangements and irresponsible choices. Their oldest sister, still living back home, fumes about the family debt. Their parents, poor farmers, borrowed $14,000 to smuggle the two boys up north. It was an extravagant price, carrying with it an even more extravagant interest rate.
But Ernesto and Raúl are adolescent boys, with adolescent-boy yearnings and adolescent-boy senses of judgment. They find work, but they also succumb to the temptations that most teenagers do. They buy Nikes and iPhones and burgers from McDonald’s. Rent costs a fortune. Pretty much everything costs a fortune. At the end of each month, they have almost no money to send home. “I’m afraid I’m going crazy,” Raúl tells his mother over the phone, when he rallies in earnest to pay off the twins’ debt, working long hours and skimping on food.
Markham infuses her narrative with facts and figures and policy particulars without ever once getting tangled up in them. She walks us through the fine print of immigration law, the workings of the legal system and the infrastructure designed around immigrants (housing unaccompanied minors is an awfully big business). She also provides a brief overview of El Salvador’s recent history. It is a ghastly one. By 2013, one-third of its population resided in the United States.
But Markham mainly focuses on the problems of the present. Build a beautiful wall? Impossible. We’ve already got 650 miles of one, a dotted line of fences along the border. “To connect all of them would mean building through massive swaths of harsh deserts and high mountains,” she writes, with a price tag that would likely run in the tens of billions of dollars. Obama comes in for criticism, too. His administration deported more than two and a half million immigrants, the most by any president in our country’s history.
