The blockbuster fight between the boxer Floyd Mayweather Jr. and the mixed martial arts fighter Conor McGregor last Saturday has a “very good shot” at being the top-grossing fighting event of all time, the Showtime Sports executive in charge of it said Friday.
The executive, Stephen Espinoza, said in an interview that the record is the May 2015 boxing match between Mayweather and Manny Pacquiao, which generated about $600 million in revenue worldwide.
The Mayweather-McGregor fight, at the T-Mobile Arena in Las Vegas, was a pay-per-view broadcast by Showtime Sports.
Espinoza said he did not yet have final numbers on the pay-per-view buys — he expects to have those sometime next week — but said that based on the tally so far, it approached the 4.6 million people who bought the Pacquiao fight and may very well have exceeded it.
The fight cost $89.95 to watch in standard definition and $99.95 in high definition. Espinoza said that about 80 percent of the audience chose high definition.
Wide availability on digital platforms gave the fight a boost, unlike the Pacquiao event, which was not streamed. In addition to ordering the fight through cable and satellite providers, fans could also purchase the Mayweather-McGregor match via Sling, Showtime’s app and U.F.C.’s Fight Pass. Espinoza said that 10 to 12 percent of the total buys were through a digital service, and those were mostly “incremental” viewers who did not have any other options for purchase.
But those digital platforms also contributed to technical problems. The broadcast was temporarily delayed to accommodate ordering malfunctions with both cable and digital providers, and at least one person has sued Showtime over the streaming quality of the fight. Showtime has said it will provide refunds to customers who could not watch the fight.
The promoters lost some money as a result of illegal streaming of the fight, though it is nearly impossible to calculate the costs. Showtime pre-emptively sued some websites for planning unauthorized distribution of the fight, but was not able to stop piracy. One digital security company estimated that about three million people viewed an unauthorized stream of the fight.
Some of those people watched on sites purposefully set up to stream illegally, but most watched on mainstream video platforms like Periscope, Facebook and YouTube, where a number of users simply pointed their phone at their television and hit record.
“During the fight, Showtime and its partners successfully blocked and removed the highest number of unauthorized streams for any event in the company’s history,” Showtime said in a statement.
In a typical fight, pay-per-view revenue is evenly divided; the fighters receive half, and cable and satellite operators and Showtime share the other half. Espinoza said that Showtime received a slightly more favorable split than normal for this fight, but would not go into other details.
International revenue numbers are not yet available, but Espinoza said that several territories would set records.
The gate record, also for the 2015 Pacquiao fight, is $72 million, and it is unclear if Mayweather-McGregor exceeded that. The T-Mobile Arena has a capacity of 20,000, but only 14,623 fans were willing to pay the $1,000-plus it cost to get into the door.
Though $300 million or more will go to the fighters, it most likely will not be evenly split. Mayweather will probably take 60 or even 70 percent of the fighters’ share. According to the Nevada State Athletic Commission, Mayweather is contractually guaranteed at least $100 million for the fight, and McGregor at least $30 million.
Mayweather was also guaranteed $100 million for the Pacquiao fight, but took home $250 million.