Bangladeshi villagers covered the bodies of Rohingya women and children who died when the boats in which they were fleeing violence in western Myanmar capsized.Credit...Suvra Kanti Das/Associated Press.
HONG KONG — At least 46 people believed to be Rohingya fleeing violence in western Myanmar have been found dead on the banks of a river along the boundary with Bangladesh, Bangladeshi officials said on Friday.
The dead — 19 children, 18 women and 9 men — were found at points along the Naf River over the past three days, the officials said.
An Associated Press photo showed Bangladeshi villagers on a beach covering the bodies of dead Rohingya women and children with a tarp.
The Rohingya are a predominantly Muslim ethnic group that faces oppression in Myanmar, which denies them citizenship rights.
Last week a Rohingya militant group attacked police posts and a military base in Rakhine State in western Myanmar, near the country’s border with Bangladesh. More than 100 people were killed, including at least 12 members of the security forces and 80 militants.
Following those attacks, Myanmar security forces and armed local residents carried out a campaign of mass violence against Rohingya that killed more than 200 people in Chut Pyin, a village in Rakhine State, according to Fortify Rights, a human rights group that focuses on Southeast Asia. The organization based its report on interviews with survivors and eyewitnesses.
The violence touched off an exodus of Rohingya to Bangladesh, where more than 300,000 Rohingya live in squalid refugee camps. Since the fighting began one week ago, at least 27,000 people have crossed into Bangladesh, with another 20,000 stranded between the two countries, the United Nations said Thursday.
Many Rohingya have been blocked at the border by Bangladeshi guards, according to the United Nations’ human rights agency, which called on Bangladesh to allow people fleeing violence to cross freely into the country from Myanmar.
A Rohingya extremist group called the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army claimed responsibility for the attacks last week. The government of Myanmar also blamed the group for the Aug. 26 killing of six Hindu villagers on in Maungtaw Township in northern Rakhine State.
The Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army has also killed some civilians it accused of being government informants and blocked Rohingya men and boys from fleeing Maungdaw, a township in Rakhine, Fortify Rights said.
The government of Myanmar denies that the Rohingya are citizens, instead calling them illegal immigrants from Bangladesh. About one million of them live in Rakhine State, where their ability to work and travel is limited.
Fires broke out in several parts of Rakhine State last week. The government said it was the result of “Bengalis” setting fire to their own homes, using the term that Myanmar officials often use in referring to the Rohingya.
In 2012, 10 Rohingya men were killed after three Rohingya were accused of raping and murdering a Buddhist woman. In the riots that followed, dozens of people were killed and some 90,000 Rohingya fled into Bangladesh.
The United Nations top human rights official condemned the attacks last week and called on Myanmar’s military to show restraint toward civilians. Zeid Ra’ad al-Hussein, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, also criticized statements from the office of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, Myanmar’s de facto leader, accusing United Nations agencies of aiding Rohingya militants.
In February, a United Nations report said a wide-ranging anti-insurgency campaign in Rakhine state had led to the killings of hundreds of men, women and children by the military and police. Those acts were “very likely” crimes against humanity, the report said.