In the criminal-entertainment system, ripped-from-the-headlines dramas are represented by two separate groups.
For decades, “Law and Order” and its spinoffs made up the first: police procedurals that used real-life crimes as jumping-off points for fictional murder cases.
“Law and Order True Crime: The Menendez Murders” (deep breath) is an attempt to fold this latest trend under the brand that the producer Dick Wolf created. The result is like a fast-food giant competing with Chipotle by chopping up a hamburger and rolling it in a tortilla. It’s got the form, but not the flavor.
The key to “American Crime Story” was that it was really an American justice story. It delved into the vibrant personalities, the media circus, the racial and celebrity dynamics behind Mr. Simpson’s acquittal. It wasn’t a whodunit. It was a whydoyoucareaboutit.
“Menendez,” written by Mr. Wolf’s longtime associate Rene Balcer, also borrows a tabloid murder case — that of Lyle and Erik Menendez (Miles Gaston Villanueva and Gus Halper), who were convicted in 1996 for the murder of their parents in 1989.
This means spending a lot of time with the investigators, Detective Les Zoeller (Sam Jaeger) and Detective Tom Linehan (Cliff Chamberlain) — who are so personality-free my notes distinguish them only as “Mustache” and “No Mustache” — and the brothers, who are sullen question marks.
New movies and TV shows are added to streaming platforms each month. Here are the titles we think are most interesting in December.
This just-the-facts approach worked well in the original series’s hourlong investigations. In the serial “Menendez,” whose details are readily Googled, there’s no suspense nor vivid characters to make up for it.
The potentially interesting part of the story involves Erik’s attorney, Leslie Abramson (Edie Falco), who must construct a defense for a client she immediately assumes is guilty. But in the attempt to balance the “law” and “order” halves of this series, she’s underdeveloped, with a only few flicks at rounding out her workaholic character.
Ms. Falco makes the most of what she has to work with. So do Josh Charles and Heather Graham in a side story about the affair between Erik’s psychologist, Jerome Oziel, and Judalon Smyth, which led to the leak of Erik’s confession in therapy. That subplot at least has some soapy verve, but it feels like it belongs in another, less buttoned-down series.
There is the barest germ of an animating idea in “Menendez” — the wealthy buy justice and get automatic benefit of the doubt from the police — but it’s perfunctory and blunt. If you’re not familiar with the Menendez story already, you may wonder why it was ever such a media obsession.
The missing spark is underscored in the second episode, with the brief appearance of celebrity defense attorney Robert Shapiro (Douglas Olsson). In “American Crime Story,” John Travolta’s eccentric interpretation resembled the real Mr. Shapiro hardly at all physically, but made his aggrieved vanity unforgettable.
This Mr. Shapiro looks a bit more like the real one, but he’s purely functional, there to deliver a line, advance the plot and prompt a fleeting “Hey, it’s that guy!” reaction. Like everyone else in “Menendez,” he’s a courtroom-artist’s sketch who never jumps off the page.