It has been 32 years since four American women reached the semifinals of the same Grand Slam tournament, and 36 since they managed it at the United States Open.
Improbably, they have pulled it off this year without the greatest American player of this generation (or any generation): Serena Williams.
“That’s the most surprising thing,” said the former United States Open champion Tracy Austin, who was part of the 1981 quartet here.
But with Williams on maternity leave, her compatriots have very ably filled the void and all the available slots for Thursday night’s semifinals.
The lineup: Williams’s older sister Venus versus Sloane Stephens, followed by CoCo Vandeweghe versus Madison Keys.
Vandeweghe and Keys advanced on a drizzly Wednesday with straight-set quarterfinal victories in Arthur Ashe Stadium under a closed roof. Vandeweghe, 25, defeated the world No. 1 Karolina Pliskova, 7-6 (4), 6-3, in the day session before Keys, 22, defeated Kaia Kanepi, a veteran qualifier from Estonia by 6-3, 6-3 in the night session. After she won match point, Keys let out a long shriek of delight.
With the 37-year-old Venus Williams in the mix, this is an American success story encompassing two tennis generations. The group is also multiethnic, with three African-Americans: Williams, Stephens and Keys, who is the child of a black father and white mother.
Keys, Vandeweghe and Stephens, who is 24, were born in the first half of the 1990s. All three had reached Grand Slam singles semifinals previously, with Stephens and Keys in particular having established themselves as major threats, but it is quite a feat for them to have all surged at the same major event.
The physical side has been quite a challenge lately, as well. Stephens, ranked 83rd, missed nearly a year because of a foot injury that required surgery, only returning in July at Wimbledon, where she lost in the first round. Keys is coming back from two operations on her left wrist: the first late last year and the second, a minor arthroscopic procedure to solve a nerve issue, after she lost in the second round of this year’s French Open in May.
Venus Williams has also returned to the fore after struggling for several years to manage an autoimmune disorder.
This will be the first United States Open singles semifinal for Keys, Vandeweghe, and Stephens. Vandeweghe’s victory over Pliskova also guaranteed that Garbiñe Muguruza would replace Pliskova as the world’s No. 1 women’s player on Monday.
Muguruza, the reigning Wimbledon champion from Spain, will be the 24th woman to reach No. 1 since the rankings began in 1975, and she will be the fourth in little more than a year to occupy the top spot. Pliskova will have held it for just eight weeks.
It is a time of uncertainty in the women’s game, a time perhaps of transition with Serena Williams out until at least next season.
“The goal is the Australian Open, but that will of course depend on many things, including how Serena recovers,” said her coach Patrick Mouratoglou.
The last time four American women reached the semifinals of a Grand Slam event was at Wimbledon in 1985 when Chris Evert, Kathy Rinaldi, Zina Garrison and eventual champion Martina Navratilova completed the sweep (there were also seven American women in the quarterfinals that year).
At the United States Open, the four slots were most recently filled in 1981, when Austin, Martina Navratilova, Chris Evert and Barbara Potter comprised the final four with Austin going on to defeat Navratilova in a taut final, 1-6, 7-6 (7-4), 7-6 (7-1).
Tiebreakers have been the key to success for their American successors as well. Venus Williams and Stephens both won their quarterfinals on Tuesday in third-set tiebreakers. Vandeweghe took control of her quarterfinal with Pliskova by winning the opening-set tiebreaker after saving a set point in the 10th game.
Still, extended rallies were rare in both quarterfinals on Wednesday. The Vandeweghe-Pliskova duel was often rocky, full of big power and unexpected errors. Both women cracked rackets early in frustration, but Vandeweghe has improved her ability to manage her emotions in crucial events this year.
It has been a breakthrough season for Vandeweghe, though one that has included pronounced dips in form and a coaching change: Craig Kardon, who had helped her break into the top 20, resigned during the French Open and was replaced by the former Wimbledon men’s champion Pat Cash.
Vandeweghe, seeded 20th here, has been a flickering flame: she has lost seven times in the opening round this year. But she has been much more reliable in the major tournaments. She also reached the semifinals of the Australian Open, and the quarterfinals at Wimbledon. She has dreamed of triumph at the United States Open since winning the girls’ title as a wild card at 16 without dropping a set.
American tennis fans know the feeling.