Fashion|Helmut Lang Returns! Or Does He?
Helmut Lang Returns! Or Does He?
In fashion, where hysteria is the dominant mode of expression and praise is often ladled out in heaps rather than spoonfuls, coronations can be instantaneous, new gods and icons minted every season. And then there is Helmut Lang.
Even among the great and the good, Mr. Lang stands apart. For those who followed fashion during his halcyon days in the 1990s and early aughts, his pieces were the stuff of cult fascination. His jeans were the only jeans (and he was one of the early few with the temerity to charge hundreds of dollars for them); his T-shirts were the perfect T-shirts; his coats were the must-have coats.
“Lang did for T-shirts and jeans what Ralph Lauren did for club ties and tweed jackets — he made them fashion garments,” Kate Betts, then the editor of Harper’s Bazaar, told The New Yorker for a profile in 2000, when Mr. Lang was arguably at the height of his powers, flush with investment from Prada and looking to take on the world.
Within five years, Mr. Lang had left his company amid rumors of disagreements with the Prada Group, and retired to Long Island to pursue life as an artist. (In 2011 and 2015, he created shows out of the remnants of his archive, which he shredded and made into sculpture.) The Helmut Lang brand, sold in 2006 to the Link Theory group, continued. But its new designers never recaptured the energy and influence that Mr. Lang had marshaled.
“My personal voice cannot be replaced by a design group,” Mr. Lang had told The New Yorker, and though the Lang brand continued selling new designs with some success, it seemed he was right.
As many of his contemporaries have faded from memory, Mr. Lang has remained influential. His clothes are endlessly riffed upon and knocked off outright, and many top designers acknowledge him openly.
The moves he made that seemed daring in the ’90s — borrowing details from fetish gear and military garb, showing his collections online, presenting men’s wear and women’s wear together, casting his shows with friends and models of all ages, shooting conceptual advertising campaigns that did not always display clothes — have become standard practice. The influence of the ’90s is bounding back into fashion. The time may be right to bring back Helmut Lang, in spirit if not in fact.
Andrew Rosen, the chief executive of Helmut Lang and of Theory, dismissed the longtime Helmut Lang designers, the husband-and-wife team of Michael and Nicole Colovos, and changed its course. In place of a new designer, Mr. Rosen hired Isabella Burley, the editor of the British fashion magazine Dazed, to be Helmut Lang’s first editor in residence, essentially operating a fashion label along the lines of a magazine.
She reached backward into the Lang archive, but also brought a necessary infusion of the new. She invited Shayne Oliver, the designer of Hood by Air and one of the many who cite Mr. Lang as a reference and inspiration.
“I referenced him so much it’s crazy,” Mr. Oliver said in an interview. Now he will be Helmut Lang’s first designer in residence, working on a capsule collection to debut at New York Fashion Week on Monday.
If Helmut Lang has not been quite Helmut Lang without Helmut Lang, one of Ms. Burley’s projects is to put him back into circulation. The company will reissue a revolving selection of pieces designed by Mr. Lang from past collections, a “re-edition” (in the manner of an artist’s estate) of Helmut Lang originals — the kind of pieces that still do a steady trade on eBay and resale sites like Grailed. The first 15 pieces, including a silver motorcycle jacket (from 1999), paint-splattered jeans (from 1998) and a horsehair bag (from 2004) went on sale at Helmut Lang stores and on helmutlang.com Friday.
Mr. Lang collaborated with artists (in particular, with his friend Jenny Holzer) on his ad campaigns; Ms. Burley has invited a dozen artists, including Carolee Schneemann, Walter Pfeiffer, Carrie Mae Weems, Adrienne Salinger and the estates of Peter Hujar and Mark Morrisroe to express their vision of the brand for T-shirts, posters and limited-edition items.
But Helmut Lang also needs urgency and novelty, the kind Mr. Oliver, who put his Hood by Air line on hiatus, is well positioned to provide. His collection, to be called Helmut Lang Seen by Shayne Oliver, will be only a small part of the Lang whole. He is not overseeing the main commercial collection that is Helmut Lang’s bread and butter, which remains in the hands of an in-house design team. Without the pressure to speak for the entire company or set its course, he has been given free rein to design a collection to make waves.
Hood by Air’s shows were flamboyantly theatrical, thumping celebrations of chaos that seemed to herald a new world order. Mr. Oliver set frenetic dancers free to disrupt his shows, hobbled models with mutant boots that seemed to walk in both directions, collaborated with PornHub and eschewed gender entirely. But he freely acknowledged his debt to Mr. Lang, whose quieter, more minute renovations of fashion orthodoxies, from the design of clothes to the culture around them, informed his own.
There is still a flavor of Hood by Air in his Helmut Lang pieces, including some that Mr. Oliver first tried there. He designed less in imitation than in homage, taking the broad strokes of Mr. Lang’s oeuvre — sharp tailoring, outerwear, slinky long dresses — and recasting them in his own image. “We kind of ignored everything Helmut, to be honest,” he said.
“Oh, work,” Mr. Oliver said quietly to a metal-ringed harness that looked borrowed from a bondage shop.
“Oh, work,” he said to a sleek leather overcoat with an asymmetric closure.
