HONG KONG — Three years after the pro-democracy Umbrella Revolution erupted in Hong Kong’s streets, Beijing has struck back.
Last month, an appeals court here increased punishments for three of the most prominent young democracy activists in Hong Kong. The three, Alex Chow, Nathan Law and Joshua Wong, had been given light or commuted sentences by a lower court for their roles in events that set off three months of pro-democracy demonstrations. But a vindictive Hong Kong government, backed by Beijing, insisted on longer sentences and got what it wanted.
The new sentences ranged from six to eight months in prison. And because the prison terms exceed three months, the three men are barred from running for political office for five years. Many more democracy protesters charged since 2014 may yet be thrown in jail.
The city’s once fiercely independent judiciary caved to pressure from Beijing. Hong Kong, for so long a beacon of freedom relative to mainland China, now has political prisoners. And it’s likely to get worse.
The outcry that followed the recent resentencing was not so much about the tough punishments as the unusual manner in which the appeals court handled the case. The proceeding was supposed to focus on the lower court’s sentences, but it went much further and reinterpreted the facts of the case. The court effectively claimed in its ruling that the three activists had used premeditated violence to occupy public space.
The opinion of the court was punctuated with typical Communist rhetoric. For example, a phrase that means “a spell of ill winds” is commonly used in Beijing’s propaganda campaigns to vilify so-called subversive ideas and to cow their proponents but almost never appears in the Hong Kong media. The judge used the phrase to attack the concept of civil disobedience, which underpinned the Umbrella Revolution.
Foreigners have been offering words of support for the three political prisoners, but they need more than that. The young dissidents will leave prison with crippling legal bills. They need financial assistance.
Their case may yet reach the Supreme Court, where the sentences could be overturned. But not many people think that will happen. Neutering judicial independence is one step in Beijing’s plan to eliminate Hong Kong's autonomy.
The legislative branch, reeling from the recent arbitrary removal of six pro-democracy legislators, may soon also be made into a servile tool of the government.
Veto power, long employed by pro-democracy legislators to block pernicious bills, may be eliminated. That could happen if the pro-democracy side suffers losses in coming elections or if the government removes two more pro-democracy politicians from the Legislature. Both scenarios seem possible.
Pro-Beijing legislators have also vowed to get rid of the filibuster, one of the few other powers the opposition can muster to stall harmful legislation in a lawmaking body heavily stacked in favor of the mainland government.
Without those safeguards in the legislature, the government would be in a stronger position to pass laws limiting political freedoms, which it tried to do in 2003 with a nefarious security bill that was shelved following enormous street protests.
Beijing’s strategy for the executive branch is more straightforward: appoint the right kind of people to the important top jobs. Security and ideology-relevant portfolios, such as the police, border control, education and electoral affairs, have already gone to people considered loyal to Beijing.
Hong Kong is now a semiautonomous enclave sitting on China’s periphery with some 6,000 Chinese troops stationed on its soil. The local government does the bidding of a bullying Beijing. The city has an ever more strident police force, pliant judges, fraying institutions and political prisoners from an opposition movement that is increasingly in favor of independence, a scenario that was rarely even discussed before Beijing started tightening its grip on the city three years ago.
Could Hong Kong become the next Tibet — a semiautonomous region in name only?
Tibetans are subjected to severe repression: their culture and language are suppressed, and their personal freedoms are too often ignored. There are enough similarities between Hong Kong and Tibet to fear that Beijing could eventually resort to an identical approach in Hong Kong.
Hong Kongers and Tibetans are ethnically different from their Han brethren from central and northern China. Both places are supposed to be autonomous regions with their own special rights. Historically, Tibet has been China’s window to the Indian subcontinent, lying on an ancient Silk Road, while Hong Kong has been for centuries China’s preferred conduit to Southeast Asia and beyond. Both came under British influence.
We’ll see if Beijing tries to make the two regions even more alike.