“Reset” contains a fair amount of repetition like this — which doesn’t make it a bad book, though it can sometimes come across as disjointed. It is a tricky thing to write a memoir that’s also supposed to function as self-help and tell-all and activist’s manifesto, as well as indictment. 
Pao starts with her guard up, painting a largely idyllic portrait of her childhood in Maplewood, N.J., as the middle daughter of high-achieving Chinese immigrants, who inculcated their children with a tenacious work ethic and a fervent belief in the American dream. To her parents, Pao writes, “America was a land of boundless potential; any experience of exclusion could be solved like an engineering problem.” She concedes that as the only Asian children in the community, the Pao girls were subject to awful jokes and the occasional epithet, but “most of the time there was harmony in Maplewood, and my sisters and I flourished there together.” The sections on her childhood are filled with bland sentiments like this. Her parents had “kept their heads down and worked hard,” and they told their daughters to do the same.
At least it seemed to work for her — she who was accomplishing so much, climbing the ranks, eventually leaving a lucrative career in law in order to get an M.B.A. and pursue a lucrative career in Silicon Valley. A first marriage to an investment banker comes and goes with barely a ripple. It’s only when the memoir arrives at her tenure as a chief of staff at Kleiner Perkins that she fully sheds the voice of the innocent babe in the woods and allows some welcome cynicism and anger to come through. Her sentences get sharper; her jokes more cutting. She is scornful and funny on the managing partners’ deathly fear of flying commercial and their rich-people preparations for the apocalypse, much of which entails escaping to New Zealand. (“Maybe it’s the operational manager in me, but all I can think about are apocalypse logistics: What zombie pilot is going to fly all those planes, and which zombie air-traffic controller is going to help land them?”) Lonely, and at an age when she thought she would have started a family, she has a few sexual encounters with a colleague, whom she describes as charmless but persistent. She ends things when she discovers he’s not in fact getting divorced from his wife, and eventually, she says, the retaliation starts, when he gets promoted and begins wielding power over her, freezing her out of opportunities and giving her negative performance reviews.
Readers looking for other kinds of workplace gossip will find a smattering here: a venture capital scion who “never seemed to work particularly hard”; a self-proclaimed vegetarian who would load up his plate with steak at the office lunch buffet; the managing partners’ bizarre fixation on hiring 26-year-olds. Pao describes a whirlwind courtship with her current husband, the black hedge fund manager Alphonse Fletcher Jr., known as Buddy, who helped her become more attuned to issues of race and intersectionality. They had a daughter in 2008, and in 2012, pregnant again, Pao filed her lawsuit and had a miscarriage a month later. She felt “Kleiner had taken everything from me,” and she “began to speak up in the office,” having nothing left to lose.
But of course there was still plenty to lose, and she describes the feeling of sitting in court, “listening to Kleiner partners trash me from the stand,” saying Pao was “not the warmest person,” “a bit too opinionated” — or, as one partner cruelly put it, a “cancer.” In a bitterly ironic turn, Pao was forced to resign from her position as interim chief executive at Reddit less than four months after she lost her lawsuit against Kleiner Perkins, having already drawn the ire of Reddit users outraged by her decision to rid the site of revenge porn and other offensive content. 
This sounds like a promising development for Silicon Valley. For her book, though, it puts Pao back in safety mode, as she abandons the scabrous energy of her middle chapters and reverts to the kind of upbeat language she used when describing her childhood. The same goes for the metaphor she chose for her title. “Reset” sounds so careful and inoffensive and technocratic; after seeing a glimpse of the franker, free-wheeling Ellen Pao, one can’t help hoping for something more.