Tennis|Sloane Stephens Beat Stresses, Physical and Mental. Can She Beat Venus Williams?
Sloane Stephens Beat Stresses, Physical and Mental. Can She Beat Venus Williams?
Through the first four months of the 2016 tennis season, Sloane Stephens had won three WTA titles and was being considered a contender for the French Open.
Then, at her first tournament on European clay in Madrid at the end of April, she received a call: Her grandmother had had a stroke.
“‘She’s not going to make it; you need to come and say goodbye,’” Stephens recalled hearing. She flew to her grandmother’s hometown, Fresno, Calif., as soon as she could.
Her grandmother, 86, pulled through, and Stephens soon went back to Europe to compete at a warm-up tournament in Strasbourg, France, and then the French Open.
Three months later, after the Olympics, Stephens sustained a stress fracture in her left foot near the ankle, an injury that kept her out for 11 months.
Her stress fracture healed after surgery and rehabilitation.
But more remarkably, the effects of other stresses of the tour have also subsided for Stephens, who has reached the semifinals of the United States Open for the first time. She will face Venus Williams at Arthur Ashe Stadium on Thursday night for a spot in the final.
Stephens, 24, vaulted into the international spotlight in 2013, when at 19 she beat Serena Williams to reach the semifinals of the Australian Open and made a run to the Wimbledon quarterfinals during the summer.
She was met with lofty expectations by many as the next big thing in American tennis.
But the sport she had played since she was 9 suddenly felt burdensome.
When the injury forced her away from tour life last year, Stephens suddenly had time for things she had given up: weddings, baby showers, her cousin’s soccer games.
Most important, she had more time with her grandparents, whom she calls her best friends.
Being away from tennis was still frustrating, though, especially during the months she spent on a “peg leg.” She was unable to put weight on her surgically repaired foot.
Learning not to despair was a process.
Stephens has carried that sense of optimistic calm back on tour. She has also prioritized finding things she enjoys doing off the court, such as shopping for furniture for her new apartment (her foyer still needs a daybed, she said), and soaking up more of the culture in the cities she passes through on tour.
After losing the first two matches when she returned from her injury, she has played the best tennis of her career, winning 13 of her last 15 matches, all against top-50 opponents.
Ranked 934th four and a half weeks ago, Stephens has reached consecutive semifinals in Toronto, Cincinnati, and now the United States Open, a run projected to propel her ranking up 900 spots.
“Now, having some good results, it’s only as stressful as it needs to be,” Stephens said.
Kamau Murray, who has coached Stephens since November 2015, said the biggest difference in Stephens’s maturation process was simply her age.
“She’s 24, not 18,” he said. “With the tennis players, we are a lot less patient than we are with other athletes. LeBron James at 24 was handling the life and the media and the expectations better than he was at 18.
Another strong influence on Stephens’s road back has been her boyfriend, the soccer player Jozy Altidore, whom she has known since she was in fifth grade. Altidore, who has had his own injury struggles, helped Stephens stay upbeat.
Stephens, who was one of the fittest athletes in the sport before her injury, said she had kept her expectations low as she got back into the routine of the tour.
But it has clearly worked out just fine, something that did not seem to shock Murray.
“This isn’t a total surprise,” he said. “I felt like we were on the right direction in 2016. And then when she can walk again, we can pick up where we left off.
Stephens said she felt ready to deal with challenges down the road as well.
