When Sylvia Fowles broke her nose in May, she did not flinch.
In a game between Fowles’s Minnesota Lynx and the San Antonio Stars, the Stars rookie Nia Coffey, full of naïve bravado, decided to challenge Fowles, the three-time W.N.B.A. defensive player of the year.
Fowles took a palm to her nose in the confrontation at the rim, but Coffey received the brunt of the impact. Her shot was blocked with so much force that it sounded like a volleyball spike; Coffey was duly sent to the ground and had to be helped up by a teammate.
To reinforce the lesson, Fowles stood tall, snarling down from her 6-foot-6, 211-pound frame, without once checking her nose.
Fowles might receive more physical punishment per game than any player in the league; her minutes logged for the Lynx are an incessant stream of elbows to the face and twisted arms bending against their will as she jostles for rebounds with some of the W.N.B.A.’s biggest, most physical players.
Fowles’s resolve was vital this season for the Lynx (27-7), who had the W.N.B.A’s best regular-season record for the fifth time in seven years, despite injuries to the top players Lindsay Whalen and Rebekkah Brunson, and with Maya Moore averaging her lowest scoring total since 2012.
The Lynx start the playoffs in a best-of-five semifinals against the Washington Mystics beginning on Tuesday night. And when the W.N.B.A. announces its Most Valuable Player Award winner later this week, Fowles is expected to win the honor for the first time in her career.
For all the chaos and pain she endures (and causes) on the hardwood, Fowles’s life away from basketball is spent in quite a contradictory manner, in a continual search for moments of tranquillity.
Currently, Fowles is studying to become a funeral director, where her focus is on improving the look of the deceased in a way that might ease the suffering of loved ones before they say final goodbyes.
Fowles, 31, has about a year and a half of online studies remaining to complete her degree in mortuary science from the American Academy McAllister Institute in New York. Fowles, who grew up in Miami, was first drawn to the field attending her grandmother’s funeral when she was about 5, she said.
Before the service, in a bout of youthful mischief, her older siblings persuaded Fowles to kiss her grandmother lying in her coffin.
As a child, Fowles believed the itching sensation meant the funeral directors must have done something wrong while preparing her grandmother for her funeral; that if her lips itched, her grandmother, too, must have been in discomfort.
Fowles wanted to learn how to properly prepare the deceased, perhaps easing the grieving process for families and friends knowing that those who died were handled with care. 
Away from practices and the Lynx’s pursuit of their fourth W.N.B.A. title, Fowles studies lessons on cremation, funeral direction and principles of embalming. Envisioning a post-basketball career in cold, silent environments that many would consider eerie, Fowles said, brings her peace.
Before Fowles began studying for a life after basketball, she found introspection through outlets like knitting, a hobby she started at around 6 and continues today.
Alone, Fowles said, she often ponders issues like the impact of the Lynx’s involvement in protests last season against gun violence and the inequality faced by professional women’s basketball players, who must cobble together careers in short-season leagues like the W.N.B.A. and off-season trips overseas.
The selflessness that motivated Fowles’s off-court professional career has also has been a key trait of the Lynx’s continued success since she arrived in a trade with the Chicago Sky during the 2015 season.
Fowles immediately meshed with Minnesota’s core of Brunson, Moore, Whalen and Seimone Augustus, her college teammate at Louisiana State. After the Lynx held off the Indiana Fever to win their third championship that year, Fowles was named Finals M.V.P.
This season, Fowles averaged 18.9 points, 10.4 rebounds and 1.9 blocks, starting all 34 games for the Lynx. Across the board, Fowles posted her best numbers in Minnesota. She accepted the extra burden without complaint, but became somewhat uneasy earlier this summer about the growing spotlight as she became the favorite to win the M.V.P.
Eventually though, with support from her teammates, Fowles came to peace with her newfound attention, learning to accept it.
“I think it’s just my time,” she said.