Each morning Linda Fairstein, the former sex-crimes prosecutor turned crime novelist, glances at the mug shots of early 20th-century Westchester County criminals lurking in her bathroom and grins.
Ms. Fairstein has lived for less than two years in the Upper East Side duplex penthouse she shares with her second husband, Michael Goldberg, whom she met in 1969 on her first day at the University of Virginia law school and married in 2014. Read what you will into their living room, punctuated on one end by “Hurricane III,” an immense Clifford Ross photograph of churning waves, and on the other by a pair of dour ancestral portraits with white slashes across their mouths.
Downstairs, Ms. Fairstein’s “writing cave,” as she called it, is lined with memorabilia from her formidable career as well as both her marriages: Photographs of John F. and Robert F. Kennedy inscribed to her first husband, the lawyer and political adviser Justin Feldman, who died in 2011. Courtroom sketches from her years as the head of the sex-crimes unit of the Manhattan district attorney’s office. And a Paul Beliveau collage, commissioned by Mr. Goldberg for their first Christmas as a married couple (so long, disappointment!) and featuring fictional covers from her Alex Cooper novels — the 19th of which, “Deadfall,” came out in July and turned its prosecutor-protagonist into a suspect.
“I said, if it doesn’t work, there goes my best friend,” Ms. Fairstein recalled of the night Mr. Goldberg asked her out in 2013. “And it’s worked. It’s been a very happy, easy thing.” These are edited excerpts from the conversation.
I’m from Mount Vernon, so they’re from my home turf. I picked the most interesting faces or expressions or manner of dress. This guy looks like Lyle Lovett, this one like Matt Damon and this one like he’d be singing opera. And this woman was arrested so many times! I had them framed in my palette, a nice bright aqua, so they’d pop. They just make me smile when I walk in.
And this glam shot of Mariska Hargitay of “Law & Order: Special Victims Unit”?
Dick Wolf has always said that the show was based on our unit. This morning I went down to the D.A.’s office to meet with the new showrunner and writers to talk about the tricks of the trade. I adore Mariska, who calls me her fairy godmother. She cares enormously about victims of sexual violence.
Isn’t that a photograph of Eleanor Roosevelt?
Justin’s best friend in the ‘50s and ‘60s was Franklin Roosevelt Jr., and they had houses near each other in Dutchess County. Mrs. Roosevelt was very ill and wanted to be on the Hudson, and Franklin Jr. had a boat. And she said, “Get Justin and his three children. Let’s all go out on the river.” That was supposedly the last weekend before she died.
Who’s the guy in the fedora?
What’s the story behind those funky portraits in your living room?
When Mike and I first started dating, we went to an antique show in New York. There was a pair of ancestral portraits, and the decorator had put this big swath of white oil paint over their mouths. I remember it as this very bold, daring, diagonal sweep. Mike remembered it as a Band-Aid. We found this pair of ancestors two years ago in Key West and had them restored. Then we desecrated them. My niece is a fine art photographer, and she mixed white oil paint, and then Mike and I fought about how wide [to make the slash]. This has been the biggest thing we’ve had to bicker about in our married life. So far, he’s won.
Did you let him win?
Oh no! I still have my jar of “Goldberg White” paint. Someday he’s going to yield on this. I don’t let him off, ever.