Media|Facebook Tells Advertisers It Can Reach Many Young People. Too Many.
Facebook Tells Advertisers It Can Reach Many Young People. Too Many.
Facebook faced criticism on Wednesday after an analyst pointed out that the company’s online advertising tools claim they can reach 25 million more young Americans than the United States census says exist.
The analyst, Brian Wieser at Pivotal Research, said in a note Tuesday that Facebook’s Ads Manager says it can potentially reach 41 million 18- to 24-year-olds in the United States and 60 million 25- to 34-year-olds. The catch, according to Mr. Wieser: the census counted just 31 million 18-to-24-year-olds last year and 45 million 25-to-34-year-olds.
The criticism over audience figures comes as Facebook disclosed on Wednesday that hundreds of fake accounts apparently based in Russia had purchased $100,000 worth of political advertising during the American presidential election last year; the tech firm said it had shut down the accounts.
The census figure discrepancy is likely to be a setback for Facebook with advertisers and a boon for outside measurement companies like Nielsen and ComScore, particularly as Facebook vies to make video advertising a bigger part of its business, Mr. Wieser said. Mr. Wieser is one of two analysts with a “sell” rating on Facebook shares, compared to 42 “buy” recommendations and three “hold” ratings, according to data compiled by Bloomberg.
A screenshot of how Facebook shows potential audience size to advertisers.
Over the last year, Facebook has disclosed a host of measurement errors around how long and how often people watch videos and read articles on the site. The issues can have major ramifications for how publishers and advertisers allocate their marketing budgets. The disclosures have spurred an industrywide conversation about how major technology companies like Facebook are measuring their audiences, particularly as they compete aggressively with television, and whether third-party measurement companies should be used to avoid potential conflicts.
Facebook said earlier this year that it would agree to an audit of information it provides to marketers through the nonprofit Media Rating Council, and it has offered new tools for marketers to gauge the visibility and success of ads.
This latest flare-up underscores why publishers and ad agencies have been pushing for more accountability and oversight of tech companies like Facebook and Google by outside companies, said Jason Kint, the chief executive of Digital Content Next, an online publishing industry group.
