A review on Page 11 this weekend about “Blurred Lines: Rethinking Sex, Power and Consent on Campus,” by Vanessa Grigoriadis, refers incorrectly to her reporting on the issues. She does in fact write about Department of Justice statistics that say college-age women are less likely than nonstudent women of the same age to be victims of sexual assault; it is not the case that Grigoriadis was unaware of the department’s findings. In addition, the review describes incorrectly Grigoriadis’s presentation of statistics from the Rape, Abuse and Incest National Network. She showed that there is disagreement over whether the data are sound; it is not the case that she gave the reader “no reason to believe” the statistics are wrong.
A review on Sept. 3 about two books by Walt Whitman misstated the academic status of Zachary Turpin, who wrote the books’ introductions. He is an assistant professor of English at the University of Idaho; he is no longer a graduate student at the University of Houston.
A bibliographic note with a review on Aug. 27 about the picture book “No One Else Like You” misstated the number of pages in the book. It is 32 pages, not 40. It also misstated the book’s suggested retail price. It is $16, not $17.99.
A bibliographic note with a review on Aug. 27 about the picture book “Why Am I Me?” misstated the publisher. It is Scholastic, not Viking.
An article on Page 16 this weekend about the growing prominence of gender-fluid artists refers incorrectly to Diamond Stingily, an artist. Ms. Stingily is not transgender. The article also refers incorrectly to Sadie Benning’s series of photographs. They are portraits, but not self-portraits.
An article last Sunday about Shakespeare plays coming this season misspelled the surname of the director of “Arden/Everywhere” at the Baruch Performing Arts Center. She is Jessica Bauman, not Baumann.
An article last Sunday about revivals of “gay plays” misstated the year for the original production of “M. Butterfly.” It had its premiere in 1988, not 1998.
An article last Sunday about an uptick in flawed heroines on television referred incorrectly to the marital status of the main character in “Ten Days in the Valley.” She is single, not divorced, and she was not married to her daughter’s father, whom she suspects in the girl’s abduction.
A theater entry in the New Season listings last Sunday described the original film version of “Benny and Joon” incorrectly. Johnny Depp played the stranger who changes the lives of a brother and sister; he did not play the brother, who was portrayed by Aidan Quinn.
A movie entry in the New Season listings last Sunday misstated the length of “Human Flow,” a film by Ai Weiwei. It is 2 hours 20 minutes, not nearly three.
An art entry in the New Season listings misstated the museum where the exhibition “Edvard Munch: Between the Clock and the Bed” originated. It is the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, not the Virginia Museum of Art.
An article last Sunday about Unesco heritage sites referred incorrectly to the Indian city of Ahmedabad. It is the former capital of Gujarat state — not the current capital, which is Gandhinagar.
An article last Sunday about the fashion designer Ralph Lauren’s vintage car collection described incorrectly a comment by Mr. Lauren about his personal net worth. When he said he set his worth higher than Forbes magazine’s estimate, he was referring to the value of his company, not his personal net worth. The article also referred incorrectly to the departure of Stefan Larsson as the chief executive officer of Ralph Lauren. The designer did not abruptly remove Mr. Larsson; the departure was mutually agreed upon.
A news analysis last Sunday about Hillary Clinton’s new book and role in public life misspelled the surname of the executive director of the Barbara Lee Family Foundation. She is Adrienne Kimmell, not Kimmel.
To contact the newsroom regarding correction requests, complaints or other comments about our coverage, please email |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| call 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397).
Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| or faxed to |||PHONE_NUMBER||| .
