LOS ANGELES — In any other year, big-hearted dramas like “Stranger Things” or “This Is Us” or a period drama like “The Crown” would dominate the Emmys.
But this was no normal year.
This is a moment in which the partisan chasm has widened and political discourse has taken on a greater sense of urgency. Bright lines are dividing those supporting President Trump and those vilifying him, and Hollywood has never been shy about signaling where it stands.
And so Sunday night’s Emmy Awards, as much as they were a celebration of artistic accomplishment, were also a statement that, eight months into a Trump presidency, topical and decidedly progressive shows rule the day in television — at least among the industry insiders who dole out the accolades.
“Saturday Night Live,” which revived its fortunes last season with a weekly skewering of Mr. Trump, claimed the most awards of any show Sunday. “The Handmaid’s Tale,” a dystopian drama that tapped into fears about authoritarianism in America, nabbed best drama and several other awards. And individual winners like Alec Baldwin, Donald Glover and John Oliver took the stage to spoof Mr. Trump and give voice to the liberal worldview that prevails in much of the entertainment industry.
When his former co-star on “Mad Men,” Elisabeth Moss, was asked if she had seen an Emmys quite this political, she was emphatic.
All year, late night shows with an anti-Trump bent and left-leaning cable news shows like Rachel Maddow’s on MSNBC have seen their ratings soar, and now that political posture has received the seal of approval from Emmys voters.
The show did not draw a big audience. The ceremony, hosted by Stephen Colbert, attracted just 11.38 million viewers, Nielsen said, in line with last year’s total, which was a record low.
On Fox News on Monday morning, the White House adviser Kellyanne Conway said viewers were “tuning out” because of how politicized the Emmys have become, and suggested that Hollywood’s anti-Trump posturing had become tiresome.
Still, the heated political climate produced some startling changes for the Emmys.
“Saturday Night Live” has never appealed much to Emmy voters, and they had not given it a top show award in more than two decades. But just two years removed from inviting Mr. Trump to host “S.N.L.,” the NBC late night show excoriated him this past season, and reaped the rewards: Mr. Baldwin won an Emmy for his portrayal of Mr. Trump, and Kate McKinnon, who portrayed both Ms. Conway and Hillary Clinton, won an Emmy as well.
Alec Baldwin won an Emmy for his portrayal of President Trump on “Saturday Night Live,” and then mocked him on Sunday.
Other shows benefited as well, including Mr. Oliver’s “Last Week Tonight,” which won the prize for best variety talk show for the second consecutive year. Mr. Oliver delights in using Mr. Trump as a punching bag on his show.
Mr. Glover of “Atlanta” and Julia Louis-Dreyfus of “Veep” were among the many winners who mocked President Trump on stage. And after Mr. Baldwin won, he alluded to the fact that Mr. Trump had long coveted an Emmy but never won one. “I suppose I should say, at long last, Mr. President, here is your Emmy,” Mr. Baldwin quipped.
What benefited those shows, however, appeared to have hurt dramas like “Stranger Things” and “This Is Us,” both of which were decidedly retro and unpolitical.
Still, Hulu’s success was a shock in its own right. Hulu, which is co-owned by Disney, Comcast, Time Warner and 21st Century Fox, has a smaller programming budget compared with those of streaming rivals like Netflix and Amazon.
But “Handmaid’s,” which was in development long before the Trump administration, struck a chord with viewers concerned about women’s rights, and its creators proudly embraced the fact that some regarded their show as eerily timely.
Early reviews for the series, which had its premiere three months after the inauguration, were positive, and it has been the show of the year for many TV critics.
Hulu’s marketing department took no chances. The streaming service bought its first-ever Super Bowl ad for an original series, even though the event was months before the premiere. And throughout the year, Hulu hired actresses to don red capes like characters in the show, and circulate in cities like Austin (during the South by Southwest Festival), New York, Los Angeles and Washington to create word-of-mouth buzz.
And as Hulu increases the size of its budget — it will be about $2.5 billion for content this year — a basketful of Emmys is the kind of payoff that may generate even more spending, especially as digital titans like Facebook, Google and Apple enter the scripted television market.
Because Hulu does not release viewership data, it is impossible to know how popular “Handmaid’s” was, but it was far more successful than its previous iteration. In 1990, the novel was adapted into a feature film that was a flop at the box office and did not receive warm reviews.
Ms. Atwood underscored that point as well.
