SUNDAY PUZZLE — It’s been too long, puzzlers! I send fond greetings to the regulars and would like to briefly introduce myself to any and all new Wordplay devotees. I work with Deb at The Times, mainly in technology, which happens to be relevant to my approach to the crossword in the 21st century. My job includes troubleshooting and maintaining all of our apps and internal systems, and I do my best to keep up with our tech and do the daily puzzle on my phone, where features like a timer and a streak counter are offered. All well and good, maybe even addictive for some, but when I fill in on this column and really get to ruminate over these grids, I solve them on paper, at my kitchen table, with talk radio on and a cup of either coffee or wine. (Yes I have stems, I’m not a savage; they come out when there’s company.) Often a dog or two loll at my feet. I know I made good time if my coffee’s still hot when I’m done, and I know I’m in trouble when the cup is empty and the dogs get restless.
This puzzle, by the veteran Sunday constructor Alan Arbesfeld, was of medium difficulty for me. The theme wasn’t terrifically opaque, but there were plenty of headscratchers in the normal clues, some of which we’ll get into in a bit.
There are seven themed entries in today’s puzzle, all running across. They’re posed as questions and most have a reference to an American city, although two forgo that specifically and include a region in the United States. Both mentions are indications that each answer will similarly include something related to United States geography. The title of the puzzle is a clue itself, “State Lines,” but I wouldn’t say that this information made the clues solve themselves; I didn’t get a firm grasp on what Mr. Arbesfeld was getting at until I narrowed a couple of answers down by filling in crosses.
What you need to do is deduce the U.S. state (or states) that must be included in an answer, and then use their postal (or two-letter) abbreviations in a common phrase or term that cleverly answers the question posed by the clue.
My favorite example was “Sooner this, Sooner that … can’t you talk about any other subject?” I know that Oklahoma is the Sooner State because people couldn’t move there soon enough, back in its formative days. So the two-letter abbreviation for the state, OK, must appear in the entry in a punny way to answer the question in the clue, while at the same time making a common phrase: EVERYTHINGS OK.
Obviously this theme is pretty evergreen, assuming the United States doesn’t formally disintegrate. But while solving it I listened to a very interesting discussion on the radio about state populations and Congress that was frankly a little hair-raising. We seem to have redistributed our population a little bit like we’ve redistributed our wealth, and things are getting pretty lopsided all around. So enjoy ’em while you can, people! Our 50 states!
A lot of the nonthemed clues in this puzzle had clever twists, which I think increase the difficulty and the enjoyment of solving a big Sunday grid.
15A: “Gasoline may make it go” turned out to be a pretty grim type of combustion, ARSON. I ran through a long list of vehicles and yard and garden tools before this became apparent.
22A: “Change of locks?” had to be a pun, as indicated by the question mark. Looking back, I don’t know why I starred this clue as a toughie since NEW DO is such an apt entry, but that’s often a sign that a clue is just elegant.
95A: I don’t stay up on my Disney much, so when I saw “Big 2016 film set in Polynesia” I searched my recent memory for a serious movie. I figured out MOANA through a few crosses and had a “D’oh” moment because of course in New York you can’t go a day without hearing about some insane accomplishment by Lin-Manuel Miranda (who co-wrote this movie’s music). So really this should have rang a lyrical bell.
96A: I worked on “Cab alternative” by trying to think of rivals to Uber, with three letters. Instead I should have been looking for alternatives to Cabernet, similarly shortened — in this case, ZIN.
106A: I was misdirected by this clue, “Consider it done”; since the entry appeared in quotations, I took it for a theme answer and left it until later in the game to fill in. It finally finished as I SHALL, which almost made the grade since there is an actual state concealed in there (ALabama). But the other rules of this theme are broken here, and it’s actually pretty hard not to use any of the 50 two-letter state abbreviations in nonthemed answers in a puzzle. Pulling that off would’ve been pretty amazing.
15D: “Firmly in place” was one of a handful of straight clues I didn’t get, for some reason. I guess I gravitate toward more chicanery on a Sunday and managed to fixate on some variation of tongue in cheek, but this was simply ANCHORED. I struggled with the across clues that furnished the first two letters of this answer, and a couple of other crosses were a bit tricky (including TD BANK, one of those entries that makes sense but makes for an illogical fill until it’s completed).
42D: The radio led me astray when I got to this clue, “Part of a recovery effort.” Too many disasters at once — hurricanes and earthquakes — had me racking my brain for something like “search and rescue” that would fit the grid. Instead the puzzle was hinting at a more personal cataclysm, and it took a while for me to fill out “AA MEETING”; another example of a clue with gnarly, unusual twinned letters to make you doubt yourself when solving.
52D: I got this in its entirety only from crosses, and still looked at it skeptically until checking out its etymology; TOP HOLE just made no sense to me for “First-rate, in British slang.” Turns out that it’s very similar in origin to top notch, both of them finding their roots in horse-jumping, where the best horses soar over the highest bar or rail of a fence, which is held in place by pegs in either a hole or a notch, sort of. I mean, pish posh, folks. Maybe you use “top hole” every day, but in my defense this is only the third usage in the puzzle since 1965. If you knew it then top hole, old chap!
65D: I consider this clue, in retrospect, to be the yin to 42-Down’s yang. “Getting help getting clean” made me think of renting a power washer before being IN REHAB.
A pony-riding quest for speed and glory.
Open on Windsor Horse Show TEXT CARD The Shetland Pony Grand National Commentator (VO) Well they’re lining up, they are lining up for starter’s orders. They’re running and they are away! Montage of race horse shots Ben Hemmings (VO) When the adrenaline builds up, some people can handle it, and some people can’t. TEXT CARD A short film by Cabell Hopkins Ben Hemmings (VO) When you finally come to do the big race, you make history. Cut to Onley Grounds Equestrian Centre. Shots of kids listening to an adult speak. Sebastian Garner: The Shetland Pony Grand National. What it’s all about? It is serious, but we also have a lot of fun. It’s a sporting event, and someone people as you know have gone onto become jockeys. So this is your stepping stone. Joe Akehurst: I started 17 years ago in the Shetland Grand National. I was lucky enough to work my way up to ride for 10 years as a professional. Racing is like a drug. Its so addictive. As soon as you get a taste of the cherry, it’s hard to let go. Sebastian Garner (VO): All the children have to be between age 8 and 14. But they have got to remain under 5 foot. Once they hit the dizzy height of 5 foot, that is unfortunately when their career in the Shetland Pony comes to an end. Cut to Ben Hemmings and Kinvara Garner at home with a pony. Kinvara Garner: My name is Kinvara Garner. And I’m 12 years old and I’m 4 foot 7. I think the ponies are my best friends. Even though they can’t talk or anything, I think they understand you. Ben Hemmings: My name is Ben Hemmings. I’m 11 years old, my height is 4 foot 9, and I’m from Lancashire. I definitely want to be a jockey. Cut to various child jockeys: Poppy: My name is Poppy and my pony is called Vieve. Robbie: My pony’s called Captain. Rebecca: My name is Rebecca. I am 13.  Tom Fletcher: My name is Tom Fletcher and this is Bob. Robbie: I like jumping and also I like racing, so if you put them together this is what I like doing. Cut to child running in circles after a pony. Beryl (VO): The ponies themselves are naughty little devils.  KG: Sometimes they don’t want to go over a jump, and they will decide. You can’t tell them what to do. They have a mind of their own. They like to do what they like to do, when they want to do it. BH: At school, I would get up at 6.30 to 6.45 in the morning. Muck him out and get him ready. And then I’ll go to School, and then I’ll come back and just practice, practice, practice. KG: Sometimes we take them up to the paddocks. And we’ve also got at home some jumps that I take mine over. Keep them on a daily basis just going, gradually it starts to get fitter, like a human. JA: If you want to become a jockey, it’s seven days a week, you have to sacrifice other things in order to be able to do this. KG: I want to be one of the lady jockeys, as there’s not really that many, and it’s quite unfair, so there should definitely be a few more women. Cut back to Windsor Horse Show. SG (VO): Royal Windsor is one of the biggest Equestrian Horse shows in the country. The Queen will be there every day. There’s an audience of 8 or 9 thousand people. It’s just a magical thing for them to be involved. KG (VO): Once I walk down to the start that’s when my nearves really start to pump. But as soon as they say ‘Go’, they are gone, and the whole crowd is gone, and it’s me and my pony. Commentator (VO): Well they’re lining up, they are lining up for starter’s orders. They’re running and they are away! Montage of racing shots. KG (VO): My winning strategy is to get in the lead. The inside line is best, you can’t let anyone else through. Commentator (VO): The more you cheer the faster they go! KG (VO): I do like to have fun, but I certainly like to win as well. It’s quite competitive sometimes. End of race. KG (VO): Well you’ve got everything there, you get to go quick, you get to jump, and you get the meet all the famous people. I couldn’t ask to anyting better, its such fun, you get such a buzz. My mum doesn’t really want me to beomce arewal jockey when I’m older as she thinks its too dangerous. But I really want to be one, and I think if you grip tight, and hold on, you can try to get there. Fade to credits.
