The man standing before us, a middle-aged geologist with festering mother issues, doesn’t like sharing his feelings with others. Yet because he is the center of a drama, and a memory play at that, he finds himself baring the unmentionables of his soul to an abyss of unseen listeners.
He doesn’t finish the sentence. He doesn’t need to.
The missing word — and the real estate that Mr. Posner has ambitiously claimed as his own in “The Treasurer” — is hell. That’s the place where the character identified only as the Son, played with a masterly mix of reluctance and compulsion by Peter Friedman, has told us he is headed. It seems clear, though, that he’s already there.
 Or to be specific, one man’s inability to love his mother, even in misty recollection. And if that emotional setup makes you think of that, uh, mother of such memory plays, “The Glass Menagerie,” you are definitely on Mr. Posner’s wavelength.
But Mr. Posner, a writer still on the sunny side of 30, has a precocious feeling for the harshness with which people often judge themselves as they approach the midpoint of their lives. And if that empathy shades into overstatement by the play’s end, he has already managed to create a persuasively sad and funny worldview that extends beyond the solipsistic.
For as rendered through the Son’s perspective, a vision emerges of an age of paradoxically remote intimacy. Staying in touch with distant friends and family has never been easier than in this era of smartphones and FaceTime; then again, neither has the possibility of keeping your distance.
Marinda Anderson and Deanna Dunagan in a scene from Max Posner's play.
More often than not, conversations are conducted with an ear to the phone and eyes on a data-filled PC screen. And the lines between the personal and the technological are blurred in often inspired ways, as when the Son answers a series of surreally intimate password questions from a bot.
Mr. Friedman’s character lives in Denver. He is happily married (to a therapist!), and has grown children. He is comfortable in his roles as Husband and Father. Being a Son is another matter.
And that’s the role that becomes the center of his life when his mother, Ida Armstrong, a recent widow, moves into a retirement home and proves increasingly incapable of looking after her finances. The Son, the youngest of three brothers, accepts the job of monitoring Mom’s bank account.
Since Ida, always a reckless spender, continues to wield her credit cards promiscuously, it is a role that brings him little joy. Not that she’s ever been much of a source of happiness for him. She walked out on the family when he was 13, to marry an eminent newspaper editor (later a politician) in their hometown Albany, N.Y.
Even in the throes of the dementia that eventually overtakes her, remnants of her social reflexes remain intact. Since the Son has never had much of a dialogue with his mother, their faltering conversations aren’t all that different from before. And as her mind fails, he at last has more control over her; there is satisfaction in this situation, and bottomless self-contempt.
Laura Jellinek’s set, lighted by Bradley King, is a world of naked and mutable surfaces, from which homes can materialize instantly and disappear just as fast. Everything seems to occur in an isolating suspended twilight, so that even in those rare moments when characters are face to face, they still appear sealed off from one another.
Mr. Posner’s writing is often effectively double-edged, an amalgam of 21st-century casualness and cadenced lyricism. He is blessed in his director, Mr. Cromer, whose ravishing production of “The Band’s Visit” opens on Broadway this fall, and his cast. Mr. Friedman is marvelous in evoking a rational man being steadily consumed by a cancerous guilt, while Ms. Dunagan’s shrewd performance fully justifies his jagged ambivalence.
So much of the play adroitly balances the everyday and the extreme — while suggesting how crisis pushes reality into the realm of nightmares — that I felt a bit cheated by its bluntly fantastical conclusion. And a few topical jokes and moments of meta-reference (the Son’s own son is a dramatist, writing a play about his grandmother) are irritatingly facile.
But Mr. Posner, whose program notes suggest he is (like Tennessee Williams in “Menagerie”) drawing from his own family here, has a sharp and original ear for the tension between what is spoken and what is not. The Son of “The Treasurer” is a very articulate man, but words fail him — in ways he will regret into eternity.