There was no shortage of operatic-scale drama in the building of the Metropolitan Opera House, which celebrated its 50th anniversary last season.
There was the sheer scope of the artistic megaproject that was the Met and Lincoln Center, muscled through by mid-20th-century power brokers, including Robert Moses and John D. Rockefeller III, who wanted an American cultural acropolis. There was the human cost: the poor and working-class families uprooted from their homes on the West Side of Manhattan in the name of slum clearance.
There were odd flashes of serendipity — as when an errant paint splotch on an artist’s rendering inspired the Met’s crystal “sputnik” chandeliers, which still rise before each performance. And for the world premiere of Samuel Barber’s “Antony and Cleopatra” on opening night in 1966, after the giant stage’s turntable broke and the star soprano was trapped inside the pyramidal set at a late rehearsal, a labor strike threatened to silence the music entirely.
The whole saga is being told in a new documentary, “The Opera House,” which will have its premiere on Oct. 1 at the New York Film Festival. In an unusual bit of site-specific cinema, the screening will be held at the Met.
The film, directed by Susan Froemke (who also made “The Audition,” about the Met’s annual young-singers competition, and other documentaries about the company), tells its story to a soundtrack of Verdi, Wagner and Puccini. Watch some of its highlights.
Robert Moses, the imperious New York City building czar, is interviewed about the center's planning.
The Met had been searching for a replacement for its grand but cramped old home on Broadway near 39th Street since as early as 1908. It initially intended to anchor what eventually became Rockefeller Center, but the plan fell through after the 1929 stock market crash. The company flirted with Washington Square Park and Columbus Circle, and finally found a new home when city planners decided to raze acres of West Side tenements, plotting urban renewal.
The people who lived in the neighborhood were not keen on being cleared out, though. One resident of the old neighborhood, Michael Meehan, told the filmmakers how he and his friends used to play ball on West 62d Street with a Spaldeen, using sewers as bases. Another, Joe Sanchez, spoke of the happiness his family had found in the railroad apartment on 62d Street and Amsterdam Avenue that they moved into when he was nine. Both Mr. Meehan and Mr. Sanchez were driven out.
Leonard Bernstein and President Dwight D. Eisenhower were among the guests when ground was broken at Lincoln Center.
In some old CBS footage of the Lincoln Center groundbreaking that the filmmakers unearthed, Leonard Bernstein is seen conducting the New York Philharmonic in Copland’s “Fanfare for the Common Man,” and President Dwight D. Eisenhower delivers a speech underscoring the extent to which the project was seen as an American move in a Cold War cultural competition.
The Met's beloved "sputnik" chandeliers were the result of an architect's mistake.
The Met’s crystal chandeliers, which have come to be called “sputniks” for their space-age starburst design, are among the most popular features of the theater. Operagoers relish watching them ascend to the ceiling before each performance. The gift shop sells scarves with their image. And, for $73,924 each, replicas are available for home use.
And they came about by accident.
Tad Leski, an architect who worked with Wallace K. Harrison — who was designing the new Met after his successes planning Rockefeller Center and the United Nations — was preparing a sketch on deadline to show Rockefeller and Rudolf Bing, the company’s general manager. Then a splat of paint fell onto the drawing. With no time to start over, Mr. Leski added some lines to the splatter, to make it look like refracted light.
A starburst was born.
Leontyne Price, the soprano featured on opening night of the "New Met," reflects on her experience.
The great soprano Leontyne Price is the star of the documentary, just as she was the star of new house’s opening more than half a century ago. In an interview filmed this year, shortly before she celebrated her 90th birthday, she recounts, with flashes of humor and in great detail, what it was like to open the new Met — and even breaks into song a couple of times.
The director Franco Zeffirelli erupts when a much-touted feature of the new theater malfunctions.
The run-up to opening night was anything but smooth. Mr. Bing came to regret his hubris at trying to introduce four big new productions within the theater’s first nine days. Disaster struck when a supposedly state-of-the-art turntable on the Met’s stage, which the director Franco Zeffirelli had planned to use to rotate the sets and the armies of choristers in his production of “Antony and Cleopatra,” broke down in rehearsal.
The scene bears more than a passing resemblance to another of Ms. Froemke’s Met documentaries, “Wagner’s Dream,” her 2012 behind-the-scenes chronicle of the creation of Robert Lepage’s production of Wagner’s “Ring” cycle, built around a giant set that had a habit of breaking down at inopportune moments, including on opening night.
In recent years there has been an explosion of opera documentaries, as filmmakers have discovered the drama that often heats up backstage when divas, maestros, impresarios and strong-willed directors are all brought together in the pressure-cooker of creating high-stakes, large-scale live performances. A few weeks after the new Met documentary appears, “The Paris Opera,” Jean-Stéphane Bron’s film about that company’s 2015 season, will open in New York and more than 20 other American markets.
The Met, in particular, has become something of a documentary factory in recent years. Mr. Gelb is the rare impresario with a background in producing music films, and he has been collaborating on them with Ms. Froemke for more than three decades, beginning with their 1985 film “Ozawa,” about the conductor Seiji Ozawa.
