The future of men’s tennis has appeared to be previewing itself during the first week at the United States Open. Just how far into the future is anyone’s guess.
Teenagers and early twenty-somethings do not set the rules in this sport, as they once did. They do occasionally break them.
In the first four days of the tournament, Frances Tiafoe, a powerful 19-year-old American, pushed Roger Federer deep into a fifth set. Denis Shapovalov, an 18-year-old Canadian and perhaps the game’s most intriguing comer, displayed breathtaking southpaw strokes in stunning eighth-seeded Jo-Wilfried Tsonga. Andrey Rublev, a 19-year-old Russian who was not in the top 100 until June, wasted No. 7 Grigor Dimitrov.
But these results can confound. When 20-year-old Borna Coric of Croatia defeated the fourth-seeded Alexander Zverev of Germany, also 20, on Wednesday night, he dispatched the player who was supposed to be not only a best bet for the future, but also primed for the present.
Zverev, it seems, has a problem holding up to the taxing conditions of best-of-five-sets tennis.
Let Dimitrov — who, at 26, has been navigating the tour’s treacherous trails for almost a decade but still fancies himself as a young riser — explain.
To Dimitrov, it felt like yesterday that he was where Shapovalov and others are now. Experts flattered him with a “Baby Fed” moniker, a reference to Federer, the third-ranked player in the world. People also told Dimitrov after junior boys’ titles in 2008 at Wimbledon and the U.S. Open that he needed to strike fast on the men’s tour, too.
Grandiose expectations aside, Dimitrov, at 23, rose to No. 8 in the world in 2014. He has earned about $10 million in prize money. He came to New York riding a Masters 1000 tournament victory in Ohio, hoping for that elusive Grand Slam title breakthrough.
And then, in his second-round match Thursday against the lanky Rublev, he managed to blow 4-1 leads in the first two sets and succumbed, 7-5, 7-6 (3), 6-3. He departed the tournament knowing the good news is that his pursuit of greater Grand Slam legitimacy, along with the accompanying cruelty, could continue for as long as a decade, given the recalibration of professional tennis’s career cycle.
“I think I’m just starting my prime,” he insisted, not without justification, in a recent interview at a Midtown hotel.
Once a launching pad to instant stardom for the young and relentless, tennis — for men and women — has become more of an adult-themed province. At the highest levels of the game and below, the path to prominence and head-spinning paydays extends well beyond the norm of generations past.
But there he was, the ultimate grinder, showing no signs of departing the game any time soon.
More to Dimitrov’s point about delayed peak performance, Stan Wawrinka won the first of his three Grand Slam titles at 28. Andy Murray did not show his very best until his late 20s.
Below the greats, even the journeymen are notching their best results later and later. The American Sam Querrey reached the Wimbledon semifinals a few months shy of his 30th birthday. The Spaniard Feliciano López achieved his career-high ranking (No. 12) in 2015, the year he turned 33.
While more prominent on the men’s side, the pattern has not escaped the women. The most obvious case is Serena Williams, turning 36 this month and vowing to return as the winning machine she was before pregnancy. Her sister, Venus Williams, at 37, is having her best season in years.
But a classic example of delayed development is Angelique Kerber, 29, who won her first two Grand Slam titles in 2016 before slumping this year.
The average age of an ATP men’s tour champion in 2016 was almost 29. Fourteen were 30 or older. A decade earlier, there were none that old. While that speaks to the lasting dominance of the men’s big four — Federer, Nadal, Novak Djokovic and Murray — it also provides a clear blueprint for the longer career path.
“I think this generation is going to inspire the rest of the generations to play a schedule that’s achievable, sustainable, so that you can play Grand Slam tennis for a long time,” Venus Williams said at the Australian Open in January, seven months before she was a Wimbledon finalist at 37.
What Martin Blackman, the general manager of player development for the United States Tennis Association, called “the old paradigm” is not completely dead. Given the absence of several top-10 men’s players, and Federer’s cranky back, one of the younger or very young players could break through next week. Not to be overlooked is how Jelena Ostapenko, a 20-year-old Latvian, announced herself with a stunning championship run at the French Open in June.
“There’s always going to be great young players,” Blackman said.
And then there are those impulsive judgments based on the old paradigm. After beating Dimitrov on Thursday, Rublev was actually asked what had taken him so long to deliver a result commensurate with his talent.
Whatever he does the rest of this year, and probably for a few more, he will be a work in progress, laying the physical and nutritional groundwork while he deals with the pressure of heightened expectation.
“The foundational work needs to be done, and without it the potential for injury and burnout is so much higher,” Blackman said.
The process has been slowed by the veterans’ reluctance to step aside as quickly as in previous eras. In that respect, the Williams sisters set a standard for smart career pacing, uncompromising on rest and exploring outside interests despite calls to more consistently bolster the tour.
Martina Navratilova knows all about fitness and durability, calling herself “a trendsetter as far as training outside of the court.” That approach helped her to reach the Wimbledon final at 37 in 1994.
Every generation has had a competitive outlier or two, she said, those whose habits and good fortune granted them greater longevity. But thanks to enhanced racket technology and other factors stressing the body, employing a small army of muscle toners and calorie counters is essential.
In Blackman’s time on tour during the 1990s, he said, a player with a coach was ahead of the game. Now the stakes are much higher. The climb for career security is much harder. No matter their age, the players are much needier.
If the Rublev match taught him anything, it is that the tennis journey, however long it lasts, never is.