MADRID — Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy is the great survivor of Spanish politics. He has withstood electoral defeats, a banking bailout and party corruption scandals, not by demonstrating political boldness but rather by being cautious and often waiting for others to fail.
Now, however, Mr. Rajoy’s political survival is at stake — as well as the unity of Spain — as a secessionist challenge that he allowed to fester in Catalonia threatens to spiral out of control. His support for the recent arrests of Catalan separatists and elected officials has emboldened the independence movement. It was a rare forceful move by Mr. Rajoy — and it could backfire.
Catalonia’s separatist regional government is preparing to hold an independence referendum on Oct. 1, ignoring opposition from politicians and judges in Madrid who say the vote would violate the Constitution. On Wednesday, the Spanish police raided the regional government’s headquarters in Barcelona, arresting 14 people.
Almost immediately, roughly 40,000 people poured into the streets in protest. Catalan leaders suggested that Mr. Rajoy was taking the country back to the dark days of Franco and fascism.
“The Spanish government has overstepped the red line that separated it from authoritarian and repressive regimes,” said Carles Puigdemont, the Catalan leader, after the arrests on Wednesday.
Those detained were eventually released, but they are expected to be charged with civil disobedience and the misuse of public funds to organize an illegal vote. On Friday, the Spanish government announced that it would send more police officers to Catalonia to maintain order and block a referendum; additional officers are being billeted in ferries off the Catalan coast. And over the weekend, Madrid announced that it would centralize the command of all police operations in Catalonia, including the region’s autonomous police force.
There is disagreement over who is responsible for the escalation of the conflict. But there is a growing consensus in Madrid that Mr. Rajoy missed opportunities to negotiate with Catalonia’s leaders and also to take advantage of the political divisions within the autonomous region. Instead, his critics said, he stonewalled the Catalans, who were initially more focused on issues of money than of sovereignty.
Mr. Rajoy has years of experience in negotiating with Catalans. In 1996, he was among the leaders of the conservative Popular Party who traveled to Barcelona to strike an agreement with their Catalan counterparts to allow José María Aznar to become prime minister of Spain.
But in 2012, in the midst of Spain’s banking crisis, Mr. Rajoy rejected a request from Catalonia’s regional government to negotiate better fiscal terms for a region that accounts for almost a fifth of Spain’s economy. The leadership of the main conservative party of Catalonia then joined the drive to split from Spain.
Five years later, Catalan leaders are saying that they are no longer interested in tax concessions but want to manage their own state. The separatists hold most of the seats in their regional parliament (without having won a majority of votes). Opinion polls show support for independence waning, but a majority in favor of voting over Catalonia’s future.
Indeed, Spain’s main opposition Socialist party, which had backed Mr. Rajoy’s stance toward Catalonia, now appears less certain in its support.
On Tuesday, Margarita Robles, the party’s parliamentary spokeswoman, criticized Mr. Rajoy for relying on purely legal rather than political tools to confront the separatists. She asked him to clarify exactly what emergency steps the government was willing to apply in Catalonia.
“The Socialists are caught between wanting to be seen as a solution for Catalonia and wanting to use this conflict as the opportunity to remove Rajoy,” Mr. Ramoneda, the columnist, said.
Analysts say Mr. Rajoy had no choice but to toughen his stance. “Whether it’s Rajoy or someone else in charge, nobody can allow separatists to dynamite the rule of law,” said César Díaz-Carrera, a politics professor at the Complutense university in Madrid.
But some analysts also note that Mr. Rajoy avoided raising the stakes the last time separatists held a ballot on independence, in November 2014: That vote was declared illegal, but neither Mr. Rajoy nor the police took physical measures to stop it.
In 2014, however, Catalonia’s vote was nonbinding, and Mr. Rajoy held a parliamentary majority, which meant his political survival was not on the line.
Even as Mr. Rajoy faces criticism from the Socialists, he is under pressure from hard-liners within his own Popular Party, who want him to activate emergency powers to take full administrative control over Catalonia, rather than use piecemeal steps to stop Catalans from financing and organizing their referendum.
Mr. Rajoy’s administration is also reliant on the support of lawmakers from Ciudadanos, a party that was initially started in Catalonia in opposition to the separatist movement.
While Mr. Rajoy might have squandered previous opportunities to negotiate an end to the Catalan conflict, he is now at least giving a “measured response” to separatists who are willing to violate Spanish law, according to Luis Garicano, a leading member of Ciudadanos.
