Real Estate|What Frightens the ‘Goosebumps’ Writer R. L. Stine?
What Frightens the ‘Goosebumps’ Writer R. L. Stine?
What Scares R. L. Stine?
R. L. Stine, the author of the best-selling children’s horror book series “Goosebumps” — 400 million copies and counting — is amazingly cheerful for a writer.
He laughs at other people’s feeble attempts at wit, patiently answers questions without the slightest hint that he has been asked them a thousand times before, and often invites young fans to visit the 11-room Upper West Side co-op he shares with his wife, Jane, and their King Charles spaniel, Minnie.
This free-flowing niceness must surely be a pose. It’s enough to make even the gullible wonder how many skeletons are stashed in Mr. Stine’s abundant closets.
You know what? Not so much as a tibia. Actually, the skeleton is hanging in plain sight, “Goosebumps” hat atop its head, in Mr. Stine’s office, amid the posters, the vintage radios and the Nickelodeon Kids’ Choice Awards for book of the year.
Mr. Bones fits perfectly behind the desk, whose wrought-iron legs were fashioned to look like spider limbs. Across the room: a replica of the “Goosebumps” durable malefactor, Slappy the Dummy, whose latest villainy is chronicled in “I Am Slappy’s Evil Twin” (Scholastic).
And there sitting cozily beside Slappy is a dummy version of the fellow who created him. “He looks just like me,” Mr. Stine said happily.
It seems eminently fitting that when the master of middle-school menace bought his co-op just over 20 years ago, the place was scary to behold.
Well, yes, but they had chosen to focus on the positive — for example, the fact that the elevator opened right into the apartment. “I love it. It’s cool,” said Mr. Stine, who, as the author of thrillers, would be well disposed to such a feature. After all, it immediately shoves people into the middle of the action.
The couple’s initial idea was to remodel two bathrooms. Their architect had his own ideas. Among other adjustments, the dining room and the library switched places, and the kitchen was moved to the back of the apartment. Ceilings were lowered, floors were redone to include lines of inlay, tiles were commissioned to trim the fireplace.
Here, he is selling himself, if not his attention span, short. It is true that Mrs. Stine took the lead in outfitting the apartment — Arts and Crafts is the dominant theme with several pieces, including the dining table and chairs, and stained glass-paneled doors, custom made — but Mr. Stine had his own aesthetic imperative.
“I wanted a pool table, because the previous owner had a pool table in the living room and I thought, ‘What a great idea,’ but we didn’t want it in the living room,” he said. “That’s why we ended up moving every room in the apartment: to make room for the pool table.” An antique that cost more than Mr. Stine’s car and needed to be assembled piece by piece on site, the pool table sits like a vast island nation in the library.
The Stines are slightly puzzled at the suggestion that perhaps they don’t need such a large space. They often have house guests, they explain, and unlike many New Yorkers they welcome the prospect.
