They responded after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, and hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Harvey.
Now, just days after their deployment to the floods of southeast Texas, the Los Angeles search-and-rescue team known as California Task Force 1 is preparing to do it again in Florida.
Early Monday, Hurricane Irma was crawling up Florida’s west coast, including St. Petersburg and Tampa, after thrashing parts of the Caribbean and the Florida Keys.
“We’re just kind of preparing for battle right now,” said Carlos Calvillo, an assistant fire chief with California Task Force 1, which has about 70 members.
California maintains eight urban search-and-rescue teams as part of a federal disaster response system. They are self-contained units — traveling in truck convoys with food, fuel and rescue supplies, including boats.
When not deployed, most of the members work in neighborhood fire stations across the state.
Even as an intense wildfire season has strained California’s firefighting forces, all of the teams were tapped to help out in Texas.
Four of those — from San Diego, Los Angeles, Menlo Park and Oakland — were subsequently deployed to Florida, said Brad Alexander, spokesman for the California Office of Emergency Services.
California Task Force 1 was on the road home from Houston, where they logged more than 50 rescues, when they got the call to turn around, said Mr. Calvillo.
Four days and more than 1,700 miles later, on Saturday, they were at a staging area in Orlando.
The task force’s members spent the weekend gearing up for what could be a vast rescue effort. At one point, they passed around pictures of the devastation Hurricane Andrew left Florida with 25 years ago.
They wanted to get a sense of what, exactly, could happen in the state.
The team has been touched by the many of the encounters they’ve had since leaving home, said Brian Humphrey, a spokesman for the Los Angeles Fire Department.
Cars pulled out of line at gas stations to let them fuel up first. On the road, they were given free meals from well-wishers, including a fire station in Midland, Tex., and a local contractor in Addison, Tex.
Sam Hodgson, a photographer for The New York Times, has been embedded with the team in Orlando.
Alan Blinder contributed reporting from Orlando.
• Apple is unveiling a premium iPhone that starts at about $1,000 at an event in Cupertino on Tuesday.
• Ben Shapiro, a conservative writer, is scheduled to speak at U.C. Berkeley on Thursday. The lead-up to the event has been shadowed by security concerns.
• The three-day Monterey Jazz Festival kicks off Friday. Among the performers: Chick Corea, Brad Mehldau and Angelique Kidjo.
• The Emmy Awards will be held in Los Angeles on Sunday. “Saturday Night Live” and “Westworld” lead the nominations.
And Finally ...
When the conditions are right, California sunsets erupt in pinks, oranges and reds.
For the full effect, some well-placed clouds act like a movie screen, reflecting even more color to the ground.
But are California sunsets unique?
Sunsets are colorful because of a process called scattering, which refers to molecules in the atmosphere sending the light off in different directions.
The wavelengths on the red end of the spectrum pass more easily through the atmosphere than do those at the blue and violet end.
So when light travels longer distances through the atmosphere, such as at sunset and sunrise, more of the blue gets filtered out, making it appear redder.
It’s commonly said that Los Angeles smog actually enhances the effect.
“That’s a myth,” said Stephen F. Corfidi, a meteorologist at the University of Oklahoma who has written about sunsets.
Pollution actually mutes the colors by deflecting light, he said. The brightest hues are produced when the air is cleanest, hence the vivid displays characteristic of the tropics.
The same principle applies to sunsets over the Pacific, where less pollution above the ocean gets in the way. That means Californians on the coast can usually count on bright colors.
Even so, Mr. Corfidi wasn’t prepared to write off the smog-affected sunset as inferior.
