Denis Shapovalov’s high-flying and improbable run at the United States Open continued Friday as he advanced to the fourth round of only his second Grand Slam main-draw event.
Shapovalov, an 18-year-old qualifier from Canada who upset eighth-seeded Jo-Wilfried Tsonga in three sets in the second round Wednesday, was beating Kyle Edmund, 3-6, 6-3, 6-3, 1-0, when Edmund had to retire because of an upper back problem.
His misfortune helped Shapovalov move forward, gaining more recognition with every match.
Injuries and upsets have characterized the 2017 U.S. Open, and the trend continued Friday. No. 29 Diego Schwartzman shocked No. 5 Marin Cilic in four sets, leaving one half of the men’s draw depleted of major stars.
Schwartzman beat Cilic, the 2014 U.S. Open champion, 4-6, 7-5, 7-5, 6-4, to advance to the fourth round of a Grand Slam event for the first time. He will play No. 16 Lucas Pouille as the draw sheet becomes even more jumbled.
The tournament began without injured stars like Novak Djokovic, Andy Murray, Stan Wawrinka and Milos Raonic, and now the highest seed left in Shapovalov and Schwartzman’s side of the draw is No. 12 Pablo Carreño Busta, Shapovalov’s next opponent.
After Cilic lost early on Friday, 10th-seeded John Isner held the label of highest seed left. But seven hours later, Isner was gone too, eliminated by 23rd-seeded Mischa Zverev, 6-4, 6-3, 7-6 (5).
No. 2 Andy Murray started as the leader of this half of the draw, but he withdrew with a hip injury two days before the tournament. Then No. 4 Alexander Zverev lost to Borna Coric in the second round.
The other side of the draw features Rafael Nadal and Roger Federer, but both have been shaky at times in their early matches. Those two and Juan Martín del Potro are the only former U.S. Open champions still alive. In the other half of the draw, 17th-seeded Sam Querrey is the only player to reach a Grand Slam semifinal.
That leaves room for unproven young stars like Shapovalov to dream big.
Shapovalov is the youngest player to reach the fourth round of the U.S. Open since Michael Chang in 1989, when he was 17.
The tennis industry, already preparing for the day when players like Federer, Nadal and Djokovic are no longer at the top, have been promoting the next generation of players, including 20-year-olds like Zverev and Coric, 23-year-old Dominic Thiem and Frances Tiafoe, who is 19.
But Shapovalov has barged his way into the conversation with a month of tennis to pad out any 18-year-old’s résumé. He beat del Potro and Nadal in consecutive matches at the Rogers Cup in Montreal two weeks ago, and before that he won a Challenger tournament in Gatineau, Quebec.
“The month of August has been absolutely life-changing for me,” he said.
His ranking soared from No. 161 on July 17 to No. 69 coming into the Open, and it will continue to rise now. Shapovalov (pronounced Shah-po-VAH-lov) also won the Wimbledon junior tournament in 2016 and the U.S. Open junior doubles along with his fellow Canadian prospect Félix Auger-Aliassime.
But what makes him so intriguing is his uncanny athleticism. He routinely fires rockets with his one-handed backhand — a rare shot for a North American — while on the run. When he leaps for high balls at the net, he resembles a small forward soaring to the rim.
He also looks like a basketball player before his first serves when he dribbles the ball between his legs from behind, then tosses it into the air.
Edmund was also the opponent when Shapovalov had the worst moment of his career back in January. During a Davis Cup match against Britain, Shapovalov grew frustrated after he missed a shot and fired a ball in anger off his racket, unintentionally striking the chair umpire in the face.
Shapovalov immediately put his hand to his face in anguish and apologized to the umpire, but he was defaulted from the match and Canada lost because of it. The umpire sustained a broken orbital bone under his eye.
If Shapovalov can get past Carreño Busta, he could play Schwartzman, 25, in the quarterfinals. No one would have expected that matchup — not even Schwartzman, who was not even expecting to get to the fourth round.
SHARAPOVA ADVANCES Maria Sharapova rolled into the fourth round, beating the 18-year-old American Sofia Kenin, 7-5, 6-2. She will face 16th-seeded Anastasija Sevastova on Sunday.
