CENTRAL PARK FAMILY DAY at Wollman Rink (Sept. 24, noon to 3 p.m.; gates open at 11:30 a.m.). You can often find both horses and dogs in Central Park, but those at this event aren’t the usual variety. Part of the Rolex Central Park Horse Show, this free festival invites children to meet Honor and Hamlet, miniature horses who are therapy animals with the organization Mini Horse Heroes, and to take Instagram-worthy photos with Chloe the Mini Frenchie, a tiny French bulldog and social media star. The fun will also include rides on both ponies and mini Land Rovers; a pony grooming station; a hobby horse competition; a dog agility demonstration; and a performance by the members of the Pompeyo Family, who offer a circus-style show with rescue dogs.
KINGSLAND WILDFLOWERS GREEN ROOF FESTIVAL at Broadway Stages (Sept. 23, noon to 4 p.m.). New Yorkers may not be famous for letting the grass grow under their feet, but they certainly let it grow over their heads. At this free festival in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, children can tour one of the city’s many rooftop gardens and take part in related activities: horticulture with the Eagle Street Rooftop Farm, a mapping project with Trout in the Classroom and bird-watching with New York City Audubon. They can also explore more underground concepts with Sewer in a Suitcase, a workshop tool that illustrates what happens to water once it leaves the household drain.
LARD DOG & THE BAND OF SHY at Joe’s Pub (Sept. 24, 2:30 p.m.) This rollicking — and by no means shy — group of musicians is all about the power of the imagination (LARD is an acronym for “Life’s a Real Dream”), and its second album of funky pop, “Dreamers,” continues the theme. The band, led by the songwriter, cartoonist and animator Steven Erdman, whose alter ego is the space alien Lard Dog, will celebrate the CD’s release at this Manhattan show. If you’ve never been to a Lard Dog performance, you can expect a huge amount of silliness with some under-the-radar seriousness, like the song “Don’t Let the Boogah Bug You Out,” which seems like good advice for anyone.
‘NAUSICAA OF THE VALLEY OF THE WIND’ (Sept. 24, 12:55 p.m.; Sept. 25 and 27, 7 p.m.). “Mad Max: Fury Road” is definitely not a children’s movie. But young viewers can find their own strong and fearless heroine in a post-apocalyptic landscape in this 1984 film by the great Japanese animator Hayao Miyazaki, who based it on his own manga.  When another kingdom wants to eliminate the swarm with a dangerous weapon, Nausicaa seeks a different path. Part of Studio Ghibli Fest 2017, presented by GKids and Fathom Events, this PG-rated feature, along with a shorts program, will be shown in select theaters in both an English-dubbed version (Sunday and Wednesday) and one with subtitles (Monday).
‘RHODA AND THE FOSSIL HUNT’ at the American Museum of Natural History (Sept. 23; through Oct. 15) Tyrannosaurus rex and opera are rarely mentioned in the same phrase, much less found under the same roof. But all that will change when On Site Opera presents this world premiere, with music by John Musto and a libretto by Eric Einhorn. Free with museum admission (though reservations are required), this family opera captures the real adventures of the 8-year-old Rhoda Knight Kalt (the soprano Jennifer Zetlan), whose grandfather Charles R. Knight (1874-1953) painted and sculpted the museum’s fossils as living animals. Henry Fairfield Osborn (the tenor Patrick Cook), then the museum’s president, commissioned the work from Knight (the baritone Robert Orth), whose curious granddaughter often accompanied him. Children who join Rhoda on a search for missing fossils — including Deinocheirus and T. rex — will be happy to hear that the opera isn’t Cretaceous in length: a mere 20 minutes.
WORLD MAKER FAIRE at the New York Hall of Science (Sept. 23-24, 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.). This event bills itself as the “Greatest Show & Tell on Earth,” and that’s essentially correct, though with lots more sophistication than that description implies. A celebration of do-it-yourself science, technology and art, the festival returns to Queens with demonstrations and workshops that range from the functionality of 3-D printing to the pure fizzy fun of combining Coke Zero and Mentos mints. Child-friendly programs include “Musical Inventions for Kids,” “Every Kid Can Code” and “Droid Building 101.” And don’t miss the appearances by Allie Weber, 12, a.k.a. Robot Maker Girl.
