Olympics|Might Athlete Protests Reach Podiums at the Winter Olympics?
Might Athlete Protests Reach Podiums at the Winter Olympics?
Feyisa Lilesa, an Ethiopian marathon runner, gained international attention when he crossed his arms above his head at the finish line at the Rio Olympics in a defiant gesture against his nation’s government.Credit...Olivier Morin/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images.
PARK CITY, Utah — The protesting of racism and police brutality by American athletes started with W.N.B.A. players at a news conference in July 2016 and soon spread to the playing fields of the N.F.L. and the hardwood courts of the N.B.A. In less than five months, the Winter Games in Pyeongchang, South Korea, will present a far larger stage for demonstration: an Olympic podium.
Kehri Jones, an Olympic hopeful in bobsledding, was among those at an athlete summit here this week who said that athlete activism was something she had been thinking about and discussing with teammates as the Pyeongchang Games approach. The matter intensified last weekend after President Trump disparaged N.F.L. players who had chosen to kneel during the national anthem in protest of police violence.
“I am an African-American woman and my family is all African-American,” said Jones, who is from Fort Hood, Tex. “I worry about my family and my siblings and my father going out and ending up in some of these awful situations,” she added, speaking of police brutality.
Olympics officials and sponsors oppose political demonstrations in any form at the Games, but that has not stopped some athletes. Perhaps the most well-known instance of a political statement by American athletes was when the sprinters Tommie Smith and John Carlos raised their fists in a Black Power salute at the 1968 Mexico City Games.
Last summer, at the Rio Games, the Ethiopian marathoner Feyisa Lilesa crossed his arms over his head at the finish line to protest Ethiopia’s treatment of his ethnic group, the Oromo people. He has been in exile since.
“As athletes, we have a very unique opportunity to speak up about things that we believe in and to be that voice for people who are not being heard,” Rippon said.
When asked if he would make some kind of statement at the Olympics if he makes the podium, he hesitated. “I hope by the time the Olympics comes around the atmosphere and tensions of the political climate are different,” he said, adding that he would support teammates should they express their views.
While some athletes left open the possibility of making a political statement at the Winter Games, others said it was out of the question.
“You won’t see me taking a knee at the national anthem, especially at an event like the Olympics,” said Troy Terry, a hockey player hoping to make the United States team for Pyeongchang.