Puerto Rico is on the brink of a humanitarian crisis, economies across the Caribbean are on life support, and dozens of people are dead.
The region was still recovering from Hurricane Irma when it was pummeled last week by Hurricane Maria. Days after the storm passed, Puerto Rico is still without power and has spotty access to water. Other islands suffered similarly, raising fears of a potentially permanent exodus.
The region needs immediate and long-term help. A few of the groups collecting donations to provide such relief are listed below.
These are just a few local organizations that have vowed to help in recovery efforts. As discussed in detail below, it’s important to do your research before giving to any charity.
A coalition of elected officials in New York and Puerto Rico joined the Hispanic Federation, a Latino nonprofit, to launch this relief fund for Puerto Ricans affected by Maria. Proceeds will go to community and civic organizations in Puerto Rico, the group said.
The government of Dominica is collecting donations through JustGiving, a crowdfunding website. The money will go toward temporary roofing, blankets and non-perishable foods.
The crowdfunding website maintains a list of campaigns, many of them local, collecting donations for victims of the storm. Donors can give to a campaign or directly to GoFundMe, which will then distribute the money to the campaigns.
This group was already providing medicine, medical care and aid to victims of storms in Texas, the Florida Keys and Haiti, when it sent two teams to Puerto Rico after Hurricane Maria. It also sent thousands of health and hygiene kits to St. Lucia and St. Martin last week.
All five living former presidents have united to raise money for One America Appeal, a fund administered by the George H. W. Bush Presidential Library Foundation. Donations will be distributed to a variety of funds aimed at helping storm victims in Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Texas and Florida. Those groups include two listed above: Unidos por Puerto Rico and the Fund for the Virgin Islands.
There are, of course, many charities collecting donations to help victims of Hurricane Maria, including several others that earned four stars from Charity Navigator. They include: the faith-based ICNA Relief, International Relief Teams, Project Hope and MedShare.
But high ratings may not always be enough. Despite earning three stars from Charity Navigator, the American Red Cross has faced strong criticism in recent years for its response to the 2010 earthquake in Haiti, stemming from a ProPublica and National Public Radio investigation that suggested that the group had badly mismanaged relief efforts. (The Red Cross has disputed the criticism.) The organization also recently apologized for temporarily suspending registrations for financial assistance for victims of Hurricane Harvey.