Size-wise, the biggest deal of the new art season comes right at the start with “Pacific Standard Time: LA/LA,” a roundup of some 70 museum exhibitions in Los Angeles and throughout Southern California devoted to Latin American and Latino art. The chronological arc is wide, from pre-Columbian gold to contemporary performance. So is the ethnic spectrum, with surveys of Afro-Brazilian and Chinese Caribbean art, and work by artists of Japanese descent living in Lima, Peru, and Mexico City.
On the East Coast, the major attractions are basically self-sellers. “Michelangelo: Divine Draftsman and Designer” unites 150 drawings by the High Renaissance titan at the Metropolitan Museum of Art (Nov. 13-Feb.12), and adds some sculpture as a chaser. Admission lines are probably already forming on Fifth Avenue.
A bankable master will rule in Washington, too, when “Vermeer and the Masters of Genre Painting: Inspiration and Rivalry” arrives, from the Louvre, at the National Gallery of Art in Washington on Oct. 22. Ten pictures by Vermeer are in a package with dozens of paintings by 17th-century Dutch colleagues and frenemies like Pieter de Hooch, Gerrit Dou and Gerard ter Borch.
At New York’s Morgan Library & Museum, you’ll find work by European virtuosi from before and after that time in “Drawn to Greatness: Master Drawings from the Thaw Collection” (Sept. 29–Jan. 7). With 150 works — Mantegna to Matisse — from a spectacular ensemble (I mean, really, truly) assembled by Eugene V. and Clare Eddy Thaw over some 70 years, this is sure to be the old master sleeper of this season.
A group show I’m especially looking forward to is “Trigger: Gender as a Tool and a Weapon” at the New Museum (Sept. 27-Jan. 21). Queer — sexual identity beyond body parts and bed partners — is here, and here to stay, and has made ambiguous the new logical. The show will be in the estimable hands of the New Museum curator Johanna Burton, and the 40 artists are a hot crew.
I’m also putting money on a smaller show, “Speech/Acts,” at the Institute of Contemporary Art in Philadelphia (Sept. 13-Dec. 23), which takes contemporary black poetry as both its theme and its material. That’s dynamite matter to work with, and there will be six terrific artists — Jibade-Khalil Huffman, Steffani Jemison, Tony Lewis, Tiona Nekkia McClodden, Kameelah Janan Rasheed and Martine Syms — on the job.
Among other overdue museum solos I’m looking forward to: “Carolee Schneemann: Kinetic Painting” at MoMA PS1 (Oct. 22-March 11). Ms. Schneemann’s career has been long and influential, and is still very much in progress. She began as a gestural painter and became a performer painting with her body in space. And she has always kept the work personal, which has been a problem for academic critics, with their notorious fear of intimacy. Yet intimacy is what makes her art feel vital now.
