One of fashion’s foremost thinkers and bravest aesthetes, particularly when it comes to masculine attire — a few seasons ago, she dressed men as bedazzled golfers in cartoon-print berets and rhinestone cleats — had pointedly ditched outré design and focused instead on the humble, the simple, even the ho-hum. And Prada wasn’t alone: The rise of the unremarkable is the most newsworthy story of the men’s wear season. In Paris and Milan, designers shrugged off the extraneous and the extreme and reined in their aesthetics, focusing on the functionality of the clothes.
Men’s wear has long tended to be quieter than women’s, of course. Since the late 18th century and the so-called great masculine renunciation, when men jettisoned jabots, brocades and embroidery in favor of somber wool suiting, men’s clothing has been generally less flamboyant than its female counterpart. Two revolutions — the Industrial and the French — made an idle, indulgent, aristocratic life considerably less desirable than it had formerly seemed. High fashion remained an arena where peacocks could flourish, and at certain labels, they still do. But more and more, high fashion follows the world’s general mood and collective cultural shifts — so it’s no surprise that designers find themselves drawn toward the plainer, simpler and more everyday. ‘‘Human,’’ ‘‘simple,’’ ‘‘real,’’ as Prada put it.
The turnaround has been best epitomized by the recent shift in Demna Gvasalia’s collections for Balenciaga. For spring 2017, he referenced priests, popes and Mafiosi, with silhouettes tugged tourniquet-tight or jutting boldly out, and bright-colored jackets cut from the same damask that covers walls at the Vatican, falling from wide, angular shoulders of linebacker width. It was a lot of look. For winter, an abrupt volte-face: sweatshirts, jeans, hoodies and loose, workaday suits, in fabrics made to hang easily around the body. Gvasalia was inspired by corporate dress, he said, by the reality of what men wear every day. There were even a few looks with a new Balenciaga logo, clearly based on the wave motif of Senator Bernie Sanders’s presidential campaign.
That seemed like a gimmick. But it also illustrated an undeniable truth — that we’re living in a moment in which politics have become omnipresent in everyday life and casual conversation. Even European fashion hacks — the type that don’t usually get involved in the intricacies of American elections — understood the reference. The clothes themselves, too, are easy to understand in this context: The extreme upheaval of normalcy has sent designers scrambling after it, hankering for the unexceptional in a confusing, often terrifying new era. In uncertain times, the familiar and long-trusted become objects of lust. When the world is falling apart around you, you just want to wear a cardigan.
There are historical antecedents for this. In the 1980s, when the radical policies of the ’70s were replaced by Reaganomics and the conservatism of Margaret Thatcher in the U.K., we got Christian Lacroix’s archaic follies of crinolines and corsets, and the anarchic vibrancy of a nightclub scene that gave birth to Leigh Bowery in London and, later, to New York’s club kids. Fashion was a form of rebellion, with excess serving as agitator and provocateur, a backlash to conservative security. Then, as Black Monday crashed markets and the gulf war unfolded, uncertainty took hold, and designers found minimalism. With everything going on in the world, clothes were the last thing people wanted to worry about.
Of course, what seem like unexceptional clothes are, in fact, exceptional, if in subtler ways. Prada’s sweaters are cozy, handmade, naïvely decorated. They are garments that focus on the experience of the wearer, making them intensely personal. They’re a comfort binge. When Lucas Ossendrijver of Lanvin debuted a scarf woven with the word ‘‘Nothing,’’ it felt less like a nihilistic slogan than a comforting and even liberating statement. Nothing to see here; nothing to worry about.