A three-hour immersion in the world of a cappella music at the first International Championship of A Cappella Open Finals left a layman listener with a few perhaps unanswerable questions. Is Meghan Trainor one of the great comic performers of our time? Did Bon Iver’s Justin Vernon secretly copy his spooky space harmonies from extreme a cappella arrangements? What is the aftermarket like for white collegiate beatboxers?
This competition, which took place Saturday night at Carnegie Hall’s Isaac Stern Auditorium, was a kind of finishing school for unaccompanied vocalists of all stripes, from student-driven harmony groups to slightly older performers who have graduated out of that scene but still want to dismantle pop songs into zip-boom-aaah vocal pieces, either as a side hobby or, in the footsteps of the uncomfortably, sometimes devastatingly popular group Pentatonix, a full-time job.
Here, 10 acts competed: the 2017 high school and college champions, and winners of six regional semifinals, an international semifinal and a wild card. There were groups striving to make a cappella their lives, groups that formed as passion projects and groups that seemed intent on dismantling the a cappella establishment from within by taking advantage of the competition’s open format to import styles of singing you won’t see at most college pre-frosh weekends.
At times, and especially during the awards portion of the evening, that made for a confusing mandate, with global folk songs pitted against choral lite-gospel, and smarmy pop-rock alongside the familiar complex multipart vocal harmonizing (with vocal percussion!) that is a cappella’s public face.
A cappella’s mainstream — the stuff of Pentatonix and Straight No Chaser, or the sort captured in the “Pitch Perfect” films and the recent reality-TV series “The Sing-Off” and “Sing It On” — can often verge on parody. Its penchant for melodrama, glee and hyperextended notes sung with what one commentator described as “dynamics” but in fact suggest the Doppler effect can all grate with too much exposure.
These were refreshing palate cleansers, reminders that the mainstream of a cappella is still capable of surprise. But they were rarities. Most of the traditional groups stuck to the genre’s familiar tricks, including selecting curious pop songs with intricate percussion but unimaginative vocals (Jason Derulo’s “Cheyenne,” Rosie Lowe’s “Who’s That Girl?”). That may explain why the only artist covered twice was Ms. Trainor, who is effectively a pop-soul cabaret singer.
At these groups’ best, they recalled pop experimentalists like Marian Hill, Maggie Rogers, Tune-Yards and even Bon Iver (covered in spooky yet gleaming fashion by the Nor’easters, the 2017 college champions, which placed second here). The Quintessence, from the republic of Georgia, thanked the United States “for jazz” and performed intricate, faithful, distractingly dense Manhattan Transfer covers.
At the genre’s worst, it rewards singers with jab but no depth, who distend notes to the point of unrecognizability, creating a kind of neutered new-age sound. Or it prizes singers like the Transit Vocal Band frontman Adam Decker, who imported the needy gestures of a schlock-rock bar singer (he was inexplicably honored for his antics with the other award for outstanding soloist).
In some of the groups, the male performers are afterthoughts, primarily there to provide vocal percussion. A cappella music features perhaps the highest concentration of working beatboxers anywhere outside hip-hop (or perhaps higher than there, too). Most here were functional; a couple — the flamboyant Johnny Buffalo from Backtrack, who won outstanding vocal percussion, and James Wallace of Transit Vocal Band — aspired to complexity. A couple of groups even incorporated — gauchely — the gargantuan percussive drops that have dominated dance music in the 2010s.
They were almost all white, part of a larger racial dynamic at play here. A cappella music is often overwhelmingly white, which is one reason that the group Women of the World — which won the competition — stood out, with members of Japanese, Indian, Haitian and Italian heritage. Theirs was the outlier performance in many ways: It was seamless, not breaking between songs; it was in six different languages; it took in non-Western singing traditions. It was also, in places, excellent, especially on “Rhydhun,” with striking lead vocals and vocal percussion by Annette Philip, one of the night’s standout performers.
And yet, despite its high-wire professionalism, the group managed to smooth out all its songs in a way that minimized their differences. The result was as much global ambience as regional specificity.
The scoring system established by Varsity Vocals, the organization that administers this competition as well as the annual college and high school championships, allows judges to award bonus points to the most galvanic performers. It’s a setup that might favor a skilled group detached from a cappella orthodoxy.
But Women of the World’s victory had strong symbolic meaning. The world of a cappella can feel insular, with its own practices, codes and in-jokes, as much a commitment to heritage as to vocal excellence. It need not be that way, though. All around the world, people sing without accompaniment. They would probably have a lot to say to one another if, like here, they were to find their way into the same room.