WASHINGTON — President Trump’s nominee to lead the Justice Department’s civil rights division defended his work on both sides of discrimination cases on Wednesday during his confirmation hearing, seeking to ease the concerns of civil rights advocates who have denounced his nomination.
Mr. Trump’s choice, Eric S. Dreiband, a partner at the Jones Day law firm and a former George W. Bush administration official, vowed to enforce the law as vigorously as he defended major corporations.
Mr. Dreiband has defended major corporations in discrimination cases related to age, pregnancy and religion. He also represented the University of North Carolina last year in litigation against the Justice Department over transgender bathroom access, and in one of the most high-profile instances, he argued before the Supreme Court in 2015 that Abercrombie & Fitch had been justified in refusing to hire a Muslim woman because she wore a head scarf that clashed with its dress code.
Civil rights activists have condemned Mr. Dreiband’s nomination to lead the division, which handles voting rights, policing and discrimination cases. As America’s top civil rights lawyer, he would inherit a number of politically charged investigations, including the Justice Department’s joint inquiry into last month’s deadly violence in Charlottesville, Va., at a counterprotest of white nationalists.
Mr. Dreiband pledged to uphold the division’s mission.
“Anyone who perpetrates crimes or any other civil rights violations that come within the jurisdiction of the civil rights division should know — they should be on notice, if I’m confirmed — that the civil rights division is coming for them,” Mr. Dreiband told the Senate Judiciary Committee, deploring “the bigotry and ideology” of white supremacy.
Just how broadly Mr. Dreiband will interpret the law remains a question. Under the Obama administration, the Justice Department pushed the frontiers of civil rights law, inserting itself into private lawsuits on behalf of transgender students, juvenile prisoners and people who videotaped police officers.
Attorney General Jeff Sessions has been quick to unwind much of that legacy. In the first six months of the Trump administration, Mr. Sessions withdrew protections for transgender students that had allowed them to use bathrooms corresponding with their gender identity; reversed an objection to Texas’ strict voter-identification law; and initiated a sweeping review of legally enforceable consent decrees with troubled police departments pursuing reform.
On Wednesday, Mr. Dreiband pointed to his work at the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and Department of Labor as evidence he had protected and would continue to protect Americans’ civil rights. He invoked a case he had overseen at the E.E.O.C. in which a deaf man had received a settlement for having been refused a job as a dishwasher.

Ms. McGowan was a career prosecutor in the Justice Department’s civil rights division until February. She departed because she disagreed with the administration’s agenda, she said.
Allies of Mr. Dreiband’s said on Wednesday that he was focused on facts and forcefully argued for whomever he represented.
Just three Trump administration Justice Department officials, including Mr. Sessions, have been confirmed by the Senate so far.