Q. How do I investigate an apartment, its history and potential problems, before I buy it? Is there a way to determine if the neighbors are noisy, disruptive or have problems with hygiene, like hoarding? Can I test for environmental issues like mold or, in my case, cat dander? Is it possible to find out if the apartment ever had an infestation of bedbugs or other vermin? What about crime in the building? How would I know if the building has ever been reported to the city?
A. Whatever apartment you buy, you will have to make nice with the neighbors, and keep the mice away. However, you can be alerted to some problems ahead of time by doing your homework before you sign on the dotted line.
If your offer is accepted, hire a lawyer. Your lawyer will, among other tasks, handle what is known as due diligence. This process should reveal problems with the apartment or the building. Your lawyer should read the board minutes and request information about the building and the apartment from the managing agent. Reported problems about vermin, mold, leaks or neighbors should turn up in the minutes. Beware: Board minutes are notoriously vague, so the managing agent’s response would hopefully fill in gaps. Your lawyer should also have the seller sign a rider disclosing any problems in the past two years and check city records for violations against the apartment.
Your lender, meanwhile, would look at the building’s financial standing. Does the building have pending lawsuits? Does it have sufficient funds in its reserves? If the bank decides the building is a risky investment, it may not lend. Before you even make an offer, you could check StreetEasy to see if banks have issued mortgages for other apartments in the building. “It would be a red flag if banks aren’t lending,” said Zack Tolmie, a home lending officer at Citibank.
As for the cat dander, well-behaved pets do not usually show up in board minutes. So you may not be able to confirm if the seller has a cat. However, your apartment will, in all likelihood, be delivered vacant. At that point, you could remove any wall-to-wall carpeting and clean the space to reduce allergens.