SOMEWHERE, PERHAPS on a great-aunt’s Thanksgiving table, or in the drawer of a rattan nightstand in that cottage you rented on the Cape or in a yellowed photo from an advertising supplement that an Etsy find came wrapped in, you have seen it. Maybe you’ve even held it in your hand. It is a teacup, a finger bowl, a heart-shaped jewelry tray, a curved platter, likely in an unmistakable shade of chalky blue, adorned with a raised eggshell-white neo-Classical winged horse, or a gladiator kneeling in silhouette.
But once, Wedgwood was more than jasperware (or everyday china for those who couldn’t afford Meissen) — a century ago, it was even avant-garde. This was when the company allowed a staff designer, Susannah Margaretta Makeig-Jones, known as Daisy, to foment an aesthetic revolution that helped save Wedgwood’s fortunes and laid the way for the contemporary embrace of cerebral, off-kilter decoration. Even now her work seems daring and hallucinatory, an antidote to tasteful minimalism.
FIRST: MAKEIG-JONES’S work bears no resemblance to what came before it. In fact, it can be read as a deliberate rebuke to the ­toga-draped maidens pouring water from urns on the matte surface of a jasperware teapot. Fairyland Lustre, Makeig-Jones’s signature 1915 collection, was instead a dense, Blakeian voyage to a swampy, surreal post-Victorian world. Rendered with Fauvist intensity, there were elves and winged woodland creatures swimming, diving and drowning in iridescent glazes of cobalt and emerald. There were Asian pagodas and imps on a bridge to nowhere. Ebony cherubs bounced in golden spiderwebs; feral creatures rode bareback on butterflies through weeping forests.
Makeig-Jones herself was an anomaly, as revolutionaries often are. The art-school trained daughter of a provincial doctor, she came to Wedgwood in 1909 at age 27, via family connections. Hired as an apprentice painter, she joined the mostly female artisans in the vast workrooms. She was promoted to designer a couple of years later, eventually outgunning not merely her male colleagues, but the renowned outside artists Wedgwood had always relied on.
Her arrival was fortuitous: Wedgwood was in a slump. As often happens to companies in crisis, creative risk — even if it meant a woman taking the lead — seemed suddenly necessary. Throughout the 18th and 19th centuries, Wedgwood had managed to navigate the brutal competition among British pottery companies, including ­Minton and Spode, by innovating with glazes and new patterns, some quite forward-­looking for their time — a foreshadowing of what Makeig-Jones would imagine — including scallop shell-shaped dishes, both in iridescent pink and with abstract splotches, and riotously colored majolica. But by the early 1900s, Wedgwood had lost creative momentum. Today, we consider china to be a genteel acquisition, handed down through the generations: Some of its charm, and much of its perceived value, derives from how dated and out-of-style it looks. But then, dishware was one of the few major purchases entirely controlled by women, and they wanted something fashionable, not old.
Makeig-Jones’s fancies may not have killed jasperware — then and now, still Wedgwood’s best seller — but she made its innocent take on Neo-Classicism feel dated. On the other hand, Fairyland Lustre, and its companion series, Flame Fairyland Lustre, both based on Makeig-Jones’s increasingly unhinged watercolors and made with transfer print techniques, heavy underglazing and lots of gilt, yoked the decorative energy of late Art Nouveau to the dark current of emerging Modernism. As Europe entered World War I, it was just the sort of sophisticated aesthetic diversion people were looking for. During the 1920s, when Wedgwood was trying to cultivate a more contemporary image in the U.S., the patterns became beloved among young women with bobbed hair who dreamed of being as unencumbered as the designer’s gossamer nymphs.
Things didn’t end well for Makeig-Jones; they often don’t for revolutionaries. There isn’t much recorded history on the subject, but it’s been suggested she grew increasingly erratic, dictatorial and demanding, that she withdrew into her netherworld of elves and goblins. But that is the tenor of things often said about women who refuse to know their place or even acknowledge that they have one.
In any case, by the time the Depression descended, no one on either side of the Atlantic was in the mood — or had much money — for fine china. Modernism had won the fight against ornament, and Makeig-Jones’s creatures and the supersaturated mythical bower they inhabited fell from fashion as quickly as they had risen. The company, by then helmed by the sixth generation of Wedgwoods, built new facilities and created Art Deco-inflected collections more in tune with the times. Makeig-Jones was forced out in 1931, and died 14 years later. It is said she stomped out on that final day, and perhaps she did. But maybe, like her fairies, she just took wing.