The way boxing works these days, it’s all too easy for top fighters to pick and choose their spots, ducking the top competition to keep their titles and records.
But this year, fans have been treated to several top-flight bouts. In June, Andre Ward defeated Sergey Kovalev in a light heavyweight battle of two of the world’s best fighters.
Here are some questions and answers about the fight.
When and where is it? Saturday in Las Vegas at the T-Mobile Arena, which was also the site of the McGregor—Mayweather circus/bout. The arena is sold out.
Coverage starts at 8 p.m. Eastern on HBO pay-per-view. The main event is expected about 11 p.m. The fight costs $69.95, and $10 more for HD. Jim Lampley, Max Kellerman and Roy Jones will call it.
The fight is also distributed by the promoter through streaming at ringtv.com.
Who is Canelo Álvarez? At 27, Álvarez is 49-1-1, his only loss coming to Floyd Mayweather, who you may have heard of. Among the fighters he has vanquished are Shane Mosley, Miguel Cotto, Amir Khan, and most recently Julio Cesar Chavez Jr. He is one of Mexico’s most popular athletes. And with the fight occurring on Mexican Independence Day, his fans may have even more to celebrate.
Who is Gennady Golovkin? A ruthless 35-year-old Kazakh who is 37-0, with a series of brutal knockouts that have made him a sensation. Golovkin punches as hard as a fighter 15 pounds bigger, ESPN found. His last fight, against Daniel Jacobs, was an unconvincing decision, putting a few doubts in some fans’ minds.
Who’s going to win? That’s a tough call. Currently, Golovkin is a slight favorite with bookmakers. His odds translate to about a 60 percent chance of winning.
Experts assembled by ESPN see it a little differently. Nine selected Álvarez and five Golovkin. Despite the fearsome slugging of the men, 10 of the 14 expect the fight to go the distance.
Nine boxers and trainers split almost evenly, according to Forbes: Five pick Álvarez and four Golovkin. Mayweather is among those picking Álvarez.
Álvarez’s 49 wins include 34 knockouts. For Golovkin the figure is 33 of 37. But neither man has been knocked down in his professional career.
Is there a belt on the line? Golovkin holds the IBF, WBA, and WBC middleweight titles.
Are there bouts worth watching on the undercard? In a battle of unbeatens, Diego de la Hoya, a cousin of Oscar who is the Ring’s No. 6 junior featherweight, battles Randy Caballero. In a featherweight bout, Joseph Diaz, an undefeated former American Olympian, takes on the Mexican Jorge Lara.