In the midst of the general abnormality of Donald Trump’s presidency, the speedy and frictionless rehabilitation of Sean Spicer in recent days was curiously predictable. In the past week, the once-disgraced White House press secretary has made a sudden and jolly re-emergence: an appearance on “Jimmy Kimmel Live!,” a fellowship at Harvard and, at the Emmy Awards, a self-parody of his demonstrably false claim that Trump’s inaugural crowds were bigger than Barack Obama’s. “This will be the largest audience to witness the Emmys, period — both in person and around the world,” Spicer insisted in a perfect sendup of his most famous lie.
Laughter ensued. Nicely played, Spicey: The first thing they teach in flack school is that self-deprecation is key to any image rehab. And so is the earnest concession of remorse, which Spicer dispatched a few hours later, after the after-parties (when asked by The Times this week if he regretted criticizing reporters who accurately reported the inaugural crowd size, he replied, “Of course I do, absolutely”), pivoting away from the defiance shtick he previously served up to Trump’s base (“I have no regrets,” Spicer told Sean Hannity after quitting his job in July).
You could, of course, make yourself dizzy with the quadruple back flip of parody, self-parody, self-self-parody and meta-parody at work here. Is this an instance of the New Normal Trump merging with the Old Normal Swamp to form an even more breathtaking Mega-Swamp? Regardless, Spicer’s breezy rematriculation into polite society has had a scripted quality to it — as has the immediate backlash from the left, journalists and various unamused sectors of Twitter railing against the “normalizing” forces of Kimmel, Harvard and all those Spicey-swarming selfie-seekers at the Emmys.
Nonetheless, Spicer’s trajectory is more nuanced than some of the more burlesque examples of Trump-derived celebrity (to wit: Anthony Scaramucci, who, Buzzfeed reported over the weekend, might be considering a run for president. Because of course the Mooch might run for president). Spicer held the White House’s so-called podium job — a high-pressure duty that carries a certain gravitas and profile, especially after President Bill Clinton’s spokesman Mike McCurry began allowing cameras into the daily White House briefings (a decision he later said he regretted). The explosion of cable-news coverage, and with it the advent of partisan celebrity and remaking of politics as entertainment, has pretty much guaranteed lucrative post-White House employment for podium alumni. There are talking-head slots, book contracts and paid speaking gigs — provided, that is, that the press secretaries stay on the job for a respectable period of time and don’t embarrass themselves too badly.
That’s where Spicer has become a special case. Even when he held the job, speculation abounded about what might await him when he tried to “monetize his public service,” Swampese for cashing out. Would the same rules apply to someone who broke so many tacit rules? Would someone who did so many things deemed beyond the pale enjoy a seamless return to the pale? And would the same rich pastry tray of potential next acts be laid out for a guy who was caught in so many lies, who once asserted out of nowhere that Hitler never used chemical weapons, who was serially humiliated by his boss and subjected to an evisceration for the ages by Melissa McCarthy on “Saturday Night Live”?
But Spicer, for all his professional sins, achieved something far more pertinent to the current environment: In the space of barely half a year, he became the most famous White House press secretary in history, hands down. After a while, the celebrity itself becomes the thing. Spicer’s embattled narrative became its own subplot in the greater Trump reality show. How long could he last? How much could he take? How low would he go? People tuned in to watch his briefings in record numbers.
Spicer’s fascination factor came to almost transcend any disgust or admiration he engendered. When Trump marvels, as he often does, about “how famous” a person has become, he is bestowing his highest expression of admiration — and, sometimes, a kiss of death, if you happen to be working for him and threatening his spotlight. Spicer was rather obsessed with his own celebrity when he was at the White House. He spoke a lot about how off-the-charts his “Q score” was, how recognized he was everywhere he went, all the foreign leaders and celebrities who knew who he was.
By the rules of partisan confirmation bias, revulsion for Spicer ensured that he would also become a sensation among the Trump “base.” Yes, Spicer was “polarizing,” loved and loathed — but mostly, just known. His brand was fire. His requisite “Dancing With the Stars” invitation arrived right on schedule. The only surprise was that he turned it down.
Or maybe Spicer had just become so famous that he actually became bigger than the institution. The Mooch managed this in only 10 days, after all. How long before Spicey and the Mooch take their act on the road — maybe to Iowa?