A few weeks ago, a subterranean lounge named Mailroom began luring downtown types to the financial district with the siren call of free drinks, food from Momofuku and D.J.s including James Murphy of LCD Soundsystem, Mark Ronson and Clara 3000.
But there’s a twist: Mailroom is wedged beneath a Wall Street high-rise that includes WeWork, which offers shared office spaces, and WeLive, which rents dorm-style residences. Though open to the public, Mailroom is essentially a membership perk.
Then she learned that an outpost of Mailroom will be installed in every WeLive location. “This isn’t just doing one bar,” she said. “It’s about being part of an incredible project that can be in all 21 cities in America and potentially all over the world.” Ms. Cardoso signed on.
This fall, Mailroom is in good company: Many of New York’s latest night life offerings are components of more goliath endeavors. Ian Schrager’s Public hotel on the Lower East Side includes a roof deck lounge, a basement club and a hot-list restaurant. The Magic Hour Rooftop Lounge is atop the Moxy hotel in Times Square. The 1 Hotel in the Dumbo section of Brooklyn has a rooftop bar. And a Playboy Club, which is being resurrected in New York after three decades, will burrow below the Cachet hotel in Midtown West.
In Manhattan, real estate prices and competition from Brooklyn have led clubland operators to exchange autonomy for the streams of built-in patrons, scalability and financial safety provided by larger hospitality companies.
When things come together, it doesn’t matter who pulls the strings. Last month, the indie-folk band Grizzly Bear was performing at Public Arts, a club under the Public hotel guarded by velvet ropes and formidable bouncers. Under diffused blue lighting, bartenders in short-sleeve lumberjack shirts sloshed drinks and the crowd cawed for an encore.
Here are some of the notable bar and club openings in New York this fall.
What started as an impromptu party in the Broadway dressing room of Alan Cumming is going brick and mortar with the opening of Club Cumming. The East Village storefront, previously home to the popular gay haunt Eastern Bloc, is being transformed into a Weimar-inspired cabaret bar (Eastern Bloc’s owners are still involved). The modest space will have illustrated murals of New York night life personalities including Joey Arias, mismatched chandeliers and a small curtained stage with a piano.
Beyond debauchery, events will include book releases, “stitch and bitch” knitting classes and tantric sex workshops. “To have a local bar that is home for artists and those who love them, that’s important to me,” Mr. Cumming said. “I’ve always wanted to make people talk to each other instead of looking at their phones.” Opens this month.
The rooftop lounge of the Moxy NYC Times Square, a new brand by the Marriott marketed to millennials, will be booby-trapped with social media bait: adult-themed mini-golf, topiaries of amorous critters and unobstructed views of the Empire State Building. “You can expect this to blow up Instagram feeds,” Mr. Tepperberg said. A handful of $99 hotel rooms are available only on the Magic Hour menu. Other highlights include a second-floor bar with a pool table, a subway-tiled seafood brasserie and an egg-centric sandwich shop for those seeking other selfie backdrops. Opens this month.
The Irish owners of Lillie’s Victorian Establishment, a pair of Manhattan bars devoted to the actress Lillie Langtry, have opened a cheerfully opulent bar honoring her friend Oscar Wilde. The cozy space, which could be mistaken for an antiques shop, has a curvaceous 118-foot bar, walls teeming with literary paraphernalia, chandeliers with peacock feathers and wainscoting said to be from Hope Castle in Castleblayney, Ireland, the hometown of Frank McCole, one of the owners.
“My father acquired some of the stuff, but I never asked him why and how,” he said. “Some things you don’t need to know.” The bar’s 26 clocks are set to 1:50, said to be the moment of Mr. Wilde’s death, and an appropriate last call for the 2 a.m. closing time.
The disappearance of Williamsburg’s indie music hub prompted hand-wringing about North Brooklyn’s cultural soul, but alternatives are sprouting up deeper down the L line. The owners of Glasslands, a Kent Avenue sweatbox that closed in 2014, will make an encore with Elsewhere, a 24,000-square-foot performance space in Bushwick. The industrial compound includes a concert hall of torched wood and stainless steel, a more intimate club with a D.J. booth, a second-floor coffee shop, and an art gallery nested in an elevated walkway.
“It’s not a huge box,” said Jake Rosenthal, an owner. “There’s nooks and crannies. We wanted the physical space to be explored.” Acts including No Age and Parquet Courts are booked for Elsewhere’s opening in November.
After taking over the space occupied by the L.G.B.T.-friendly Out Hotel, the Cachet Boutique hotel is converting the cavernous ground-floor lounge into a paean to heterosexuality. The Playboy Club, which last operated in New York some 30 years ago, returns with a muscular brass-and-wood bar, a “spirit library” and, of course, waitresses with rabbit ears and poofy tails. The proprietors insist the focus is more about showmanship than sex. “Not saying it’s ‘Sleep No More,’ but there really is an element of performance,” said Nicole Levinson of the Cachet Hospitality Group. “It’s like walking into a moment.” Opens in late November.
