In 2007, the top-selling image for the search term “woman” in Getty Image’s library of stock photography was a naked woman lying on a bed, gazing at the camera with a towel draped over her bottom half.
In 2017, it’s a woman hiking a rocky trail in Banff National Park, alone on the edge of a cliff high above a turquoise lake. She’s wearing a down jacket and wool hat, and her face isn’t visible.
Stock photos — generic images that appear in places like ads, billboards, magazines and blogs — reflect the culture at a moment in time.
Over the last decade, the most sold images from Getty for the search term “women” have evolved from photos of mostly naked models to active women to ones in which women’s appearance is beside the point.
In 2017, based on the Getty photos most chosen by marketers and the media, to be a woman is to be on your own, physically active and undeterred by either sweat or circuit boards.
* In 2008 and 2011, the top-selling images were licensed exclusively; these are second on the list.
When the Lean In collection began three years ago, the most downloaded photos showed women in work or family settings: a pregnant woman leading a business meeting or a father playing with a baby while the mother worked on her computer. The 15 most downloaded from the collection so far this year are more likely to show women scaling a wall or doing push-ups, alone. The images customers see when they search are determined by both popularity and human curation.
It could also be sending another message about this political moment: that women feel they’re fighting on their own, said Giorgia Aiello, an associate professor of media and communication at the University of Leeds in Britain. “It’s focused on the individual rather than the person as part of a collective, which would be key to a certain definition of feminism,” she said.
Either way, it’s part of a cultural embrace of nontraditional gender roles and broader diversity. In July, Britain’s advertising regulator announced rules banning ads that promote gender stereotypes, sexually objectify women or promote unhealthy body images. TONL, a new stock photo service that shows culturally diverse images, debuted in August. At Getty, global searches for “woman protest” quadrupled in the last year. Searches for “woman coding” tripled, and those for “female C.E.O.” grew 47 percent.
But even photos that push gender boundaries nod to convention, according to Ms. Aiello, who along with researchers at the Digital Methods Initiative in Amsterdam studied how the Lean In photos were used. Men shown with babies, for instance, tend to be bearded and muscled, as if to emphasize their masculinity.
The researchers found that photos from the Lean In collection are most often used in lifestyle articles about topics like fashion, food and health, or in those about the challenges of balancing work and motherhood or succeeding in a male-dominated career. The most typical images in the Lean In collection are of Caucasian women in their 20s with long brown hair.
Though many depict women in tech or science, these were seldom used to illustrate general science stories, but rather accompanied articles about the challenges of being a woman in science, the study found. Similarly, images of nonwhite women were used more on sites that focused on race and ethnicity.
