The Learning Network|Announcing a New Monthly Feature: What’s Going On in This Graph?
What's Going On in This Graph?
Announcing a New Monthly Feature: What’s Going On in This Graph?
Clockwise, starting in the top left corner: Closing the Gap; Rihanna Fan Map; Where the Heat and the Thunder Hit Their Shots; The Global Refugee Crisis, Region by Region; Changing Attitudes; Is Sushi ‘Healthy’? What About Granola?.
Note: To find the latest “What’s Going On in This Graph?”, visit this page.
Rihanna or Justin Bieber? The Weeknd or Migos? If you live in the U.S., what’s the most popular musician or band in your area? Take a look at this set of 50 fan maps, based on YouTube’s geocoded streaming data, and see what you discover.
The maps come from The New York Times’s Upshot, which emphasizes data and graphics in its analysis of politics, policy and everyday life. There you can find charts, graphs and interactives of all kinds on everything from cultural phenomena, like music preferences or “Game of Thrones” characters, to breaking news events, such as North Korea’s missile launches, to the important issues of our day, like affirmative action and the opioid crisis.
Teachers tell us these data visualizations are rich texts for classrooms across the curriculum, not just in the math or statistics class. Whether in a literature class analyzing Jane Austen’s language, a science class considering climate data, or a civics class studying gerrymandering, teaching students how to read, interpret and question graphs, maps and charts is a key 21st-century skill.
Well, we’ve developed a way to do just that. This year, we’re delighted to announce that we’ll be partnering with the American Statistical Association (A.S.A.) for a new monthly feature, “What’s Going On in This Graph?”, or “WGOITGraph?” The A.S.A. educates the public about using data to understand our world and believes that statistical literacy is important for everyone.
If you’re familiar with our popular “What’s Going On in This Picture?” series, you’ll have some idea already of how “WGOITGraph?” will work. In that feature, we partner every Monday with Visual Thinking Strategies to publish an intriguing Times photo stripped of its caption, and to invite students to come to our site and discuss what they see. On Fridays, we reveal the original caption along with related information. Teachers tell us that the exercise helps students practice their visual thinking skills and their use of evidence to support claims, across subjects and grade levels. And — just as important — they tell us it’s fun.
In this experiment with the A.S.A., we’re going to do the same with The Times’s rich trove of graphic visualizations — graphs, maps and charts.
Starting on Sept. 19 and then afterward on the second Tuesday of every month from October to May, we’ll publish a Times graphic on a topic that is suitable for subjects across the curriculum.
• What do you wonder?
• What’s going on in this graph?
The process of sense-making truly begins when we create questioning, curious classrooms full of students’ own thoughts and ideas. By asking What do you notice? What do you wonder? we give students opportunities to see problems in big-picture ways and discover multiple strategies for tackling a problem. Self-confidence, reflective skills, and engagement soar, and students discover that the goal is not to be “over and done,” but to realize the many different ways to approach problems.
Here’s a written explanation about how the strategy works during the different steps in problem solving. In this video, embedded below, Annie Fetter, a math educator at the Math Forum, explains how she uses the notice-wonder strategy with students.
The last question we pose — What’s going on in this graph? — invites students to think critically about what they have already noticed and wondered. Their answers will reveal their interpretations of what they have discovered.
Teachers from A.S.A. will help select the graphs we use each month, moderate the live online discussion and, equally important, provide a “reveal” at the end of the week. The reveal will include whatever information is missing and also provide related statistical concepts and academic vocabulary to help students increase their depth of quantitative literacy.
We will publish our first “WGOITGraph?” on Tuesday, Sept. 19, and then we’ll continue on every second Tuesday from October to May — Oct. 10, Nov. 14, Dec. 12, Jan. 9, Feb. 13, March 13, April 10 and May 8 — so mark your calendar. You’ll be able to find all our “WGOITGraph?” posts in this column.
And, just like with our sister feature, “WGOITP?”, we’ll provide live moderation on the first day of publication. So, from 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. Eastern time on the Tuesdays that we run this feature, moderators from A.S.A. will help push students to look closely at the graph and think deeply about what it might mean.
Since the graphs themselves will remain online at the top of each post, teachers can continue to use them for discussion with future classes without the “answers” — whatever information we have omitted — being obvious. Teachers can use any week’s graph, and students can post comments, whenever it is convenient. We will leave each post up and open to comment indefinitely.
Please let us know what you think of this new feature. And if you’re as excited about it as we are, please help us spread the word.
For more teacher and student statistics resources, go to the A.S.A. K-12 website, which includes This is Statistics, resources, professional development, student competitions, curriculum, courses and careers.