CHICAGO — Attorney General Jeff Sessions cannot follow through, for now, with his threat to withhold public safety grant money to Chicago and other so-called sanctuary cities that have refused to impose tough new immigration policies, a federal judge ruled Friday.
In what is at least a temporary victory for cities nationwide that have defied Mr. Sessions, Judge Harry D. Leinenweber of the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois ruled that Chicago had shown a “likelihood of success” in arguing that Mr. Sessions exceeded his authority when he set the conditions. Among them are requirements that cities notify immigration agents when people who are in the country illegally are about to be released from local jails.
The City of Chicago had asked Judge Leinenweber for a “nationwide” temporary injunction this week, asking him not to allow the Justice Department to impose the requirements until the city’s lawsuit against the department was complete.
City officials have said such a ruling would prevent the Justice Department from withholding the public safety funds, called Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance Grants, to the cities based on their refusal to comply with the department’s orders.
Chicago has applied for $2.2 million in the federal grants: $1.5 million for the city and the rest for Cook County and 10 other suburbs. But in a recent court hearing, lawyers for the city said that more than 30 other jurisdictions across the United States had filed court briefs supporting Chicago’s lawsuit, and that up to $35 million in grants was at stake. At least seven cities and counties, as well as the State of California, have refused to follow the new federal rules.
Chicago argued that it would suffer “irreparable harm” if it lost money earmarked to expand the city’s use of new technology that detects when someone fires a gun. But following the Justice Department’s requirements, Mr. Emanuel said Friday, would “drive a wedge of distrust” between immigrants and the police force.
The ruling is another blow to Mr. Sessions, a longtime champion of tougher immigration laws. This month, he announced that the administration would end a program that protects young immigrants who were brought to the United States illegally as children or came with families who overstayed their visas. President Trump later announced that he was working on an agreement to protect them.
Whether or not the ruling means that Judge Leinenweber will ultimately decide in favor of the city is unclear, but he did demonstrate that the city had a good case.
During a hearing, Ron Safer, a lawyer for the city, said that if the Justice Department prevailed, it could use the same argument to “seize” even more authority to tie grant money to doing what Mr. Sessions wanted.
On Friday, Mr. Emanuel declined to speculate on whether the Trump administration would find another rationale to deny the city the grant — something that has never happened. Nor would he say if he thought that the administration would find another way to punish the city, such as pulling the 20 agents with the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives who were recently assigned to the city as part of a new initiative against gun violence.