Every Friday, pop critics for The New York Times weigh in on the week’s most notable new songs and videos — and anything else that strikes them as intriguing. This week, Noah Cyrus teams up with a rapper embroiled in controversy, Angel Olsen reveals a song from an upcoming album of rarities and Sweet Pea Atkinson gives us a taste of his first solo album in 35 years.
Just want the music? Listen to this Playlist on Spotify here (or find our profile: nytimes). Like what you hear? Let us know at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| and sign up for our Louder newsletter, a once-a-week blast of our pop music coverage, here.
“Special” is a previously unreleased song from “Phases,” a collection of Angel Olsen’s non-album tracks, demos and rarities due Nov. 10. It’s an obstinately slow, seething, eventually erupting seven minutes of latter-day Velvet Underground rock. Ms. Olsen mingles a declaration of longing and an identity crisis — “Tell me I’m nothing” — that’s set to four endlessly circling chords and sung with slurred, dead-eyed vocals as the band gradually works itself up to the verge of feedback. The song might have derailed an album sequence, but it deserved to be unearthed. J.P.
Like her big sister Miley before her, Noah Cyrus is aligning herself with hip-hop at an early, pivotal stage of her career. But unlike her older sister, she has chosen a lightning rod to associate herself with. In the last 12 months, the Florida rapper-singer XXXTentacion has gone from jail — on charges of assaulting a pregnant woman — to the Billboard Hot 100, thanks to his rowdy punk-rap single “Look at Me.” Two weeks ago, gruesome details from the deposition of his alleged victim were reported by Pitchfork. It would seem to be a particularly ill-advised moment to implicitly co-sign him. Ms. Cyrus is 17, and her fans likely much younger. Putting them in the crosshairs of a potential moral quandary lands somewhere between thoughtless and irresponsible.
Weaves’ answer to political frustration and bafflement is equal parts wry distance and primal fury in “Scream” from “Wide Open,” its album due Oct. 6. “We are living in a time when misery is just common circumstance,” Jasmyn Burke sings with a slyly jazzy tone; the band provides a deliberate, skulking shuffle and a teasing wah-wah guitar. But they’re soon joined by Tanya Tagaq, an untrammeled vocalist who shrieks, growls and cackles with all the intensity of Yoko Ono or Diamanda Galás. She stokes the band into a crashing, clattering brouhaha as Ms. Burke wails, “I want you to scream your name.” J.P.
Here comes the first solo album in 35 years from Sweet Pea Atkinson, a journeyman vocalist who never truly found stardom but soaked up a library of American sounds working behind Bonnie Raitt, Solomon Burke, Lyle Lovett and others. “Get What You Deserve” is a fine reintroduction to Mr. Atkinson’s distinctive swagger and his smoldering, emphatic croon. There’s Motown soul, flinty Memphis blues and svelte 1980s balladry etched into these songs. Nowhere is the brew more potent than on “Am I Grooving You,” a plea for romantic affirmation first sung by Freddie Scott. Over a two-chord throb, Mr. Atkinson beseeches: “Do you need me?/Do you always want me by your side?” Eventually a corps of sharp female voices delivers the payoff: “You know you make me want to shout/Baby, you really knock me out.” G.R.
Ibeyi is a duo of twin sisters from Cuba now based in France; Mala Rodriguez is a smoky-voiced rapper from Spain. Their collaboration, “Me Voy” (“I’m Leaving”) is a programmed pop construction with a brittle near-reggaeton beat and lyrics in Spanish. It’s about a tryst before a separation, an almost mystical closeness and what comes afterwards as the lovers have to move on. The sisters sing, “Remember it.” J.P.
The Swedish songwriter Alice Boman is a ghostly, whispered presence in “Dreams,” which starts as an elegy and ends with solace. “When hope dies, that is what hurts the most/The clarity that comes when you see what you have lost,” she breathes over simple piano chords. A ticking beat arrives and other instruments materialize as the singer conjures her own refuge, perhaps illusory but as tangible as the music itself: “Is there a place where we can go where dreams begin?” J.P.
A lot of the music being made today (hip-hop, electronic, jazz, what-have-you) is about asking how far the low end can carry things on its own. More than before in American music, bass is the resonance, the rhythm and the grounding force. Musicianer — a trio featuring the baritone saxophonist Josh Sinton, the bassist Jason Ajemian and the drummer Chad Taylor — is all about low power. But it doesn’t deal in known commodities: These three players don’t care much about cycles of percussion or deep, immersive atmosphere. Instead Mr. Sinton wrings his corpulent instrument for its full range of values: toneless smears; soul-baring swells; chomping, roughed-up blasts. “Evening of Mourning (Ferguson Goddam)” is a lament for racial justice, with its musical roots in New York free jazz: starting with a simple repeated cry, the saxophonist opens up space for Mr. Taylor, who sets things in motion with hard-bitten splashes of improvisation. Then the trio moves toward a surge, evoking chaos and determination and messy cohesion. G.R.