SATURDAY PUZZLE — Natan Last and Finn Vigeland teach a class in crossword construction at the Jewish Association Serving the Aging (also known as J.A.S.A.) in Manhattan, and this is another in the series of annual class projects. I’m always blown away by how good a job the group does.
I found this puzzle to be about average difficulty for a Saturday. There are lots of nine- and 10-letter entries in a “pinwheel” configuration. Many of these took me a few crossings to get. I often solve a crossword Downs-first. This is a good strategy if the long entries are horizontal because the smaller crossing entries tend to be easier, so you get some crossing letters before you tackle the long entries. A pinwheel pretty much invalidates that strategy, so just plan for a few more passes and another cup of coffee.
15A: “That’s some boyfriend you have” could be said ironically. “What a loser” fits. But no, HE’S A KEEPER.
17A: “Low-stress address” is a nice clue for EASY STREET. The J.A.S.A. class always comes up with some nice clues.
19A: I wonder if one of the J.A.S.A. seniors was on that EL AL flight, crammed in with 1,087 other cranky passengers?
20A: This is spelled “Emergen-C.” Get it? It’s important that we seniors get enough vitamin C.
35A: “Flaps” for HOOHAS is another clue that could have been lots of things.
39A: “Pressing need” for STARCH is a bit of misdirection that didn’t fool me. I needed one.
43A: The London Underground famously announces “Mind the gap” at stations with curved platforms.
61A: “Fair competition” is a brutal clue for POTATO RACE.
63A: Another nice clue. It’s a completely fair singular clue for an entry that sounds plural.
4D: LAY LOW is the past tense of “lie low.” Forget that and this one becomes tricky.
7D: Constructors must have a database of E’ER usage in English literature.
8D: “Small suits” was worth a chuckle when SPEEDOS revealed itself.
9D: “Big Bang Theory” fans know Sheldon was very close to his MEEMAW.
14D: SID CAESAR was the only “fact-based” entry of these three adjacent nines. It helped a lot.
33D: SHARK TANK (“Popular ABC reality show starting in 2009”) was, again, the only one of the three parallel entries with a definitive answer. Thanks again, editors.
40D: CHAYOTE is a very versatile squash. It’s a passion in New Orleans, where it’s used in all kinds of Creole and Cajun dishes. They call it “mirliton,” a French nonsense word.
59D: GOL wasn’t my first entry. “OLE” was. Brutal.
Finn Vigeland: We’re having a lot of fun at the J.A.S.A. class by making types of puzzles as yet untried by the group, and someone in the class was hungry for a themeless with chunky, stacking corners. We were tickled by the SHE LOVES ME / HE’S A KEEPER combination, and spent a lot of time tinkering with the lower left, which is our favorite section. Our last puzzle in May debuted ARREST HIM; we’re pleased to bring the entry back to The Times.
It’s tough to write a themeless in the first place, let alone as a group, since you want to make sure you’ve exhausted every possibility to ensure the cleanest possible grid. The class was very patient as we all tested and retested new fill in the corners. If we recall correctly, the bottom right had a few other types of RACEs and LINEs at some point in time.
After that workout, I need something completely different. How about you?