Ronni Ginott was at a New Year’s Day party in 2003 when her husband, David, had a heart attack and died on the spot, at 58.
In an instant, Ms. Ginott, then 55, became not only a single mother of two daughters, but also the owner of E.M. Winston Company, her husband’s musical-instrument rental company. She knew nothing about the business, and her husband had no succession plan.
Had she discussed his will with him when he was drafting it a decade earlier, she might have discovered this. But they were both in their 40s, too young to worry about death, or so she thought. And so Ms. Ginott never got around to learning about her husband’s will, assets or their estate.
Not long ago, Ms. Ginott shared her story with her friend Diane Terman Felenstein. Ms. Terman Felenstein co-founded the 008-Investment Club, an investing group for women, in 1996. It spawned similar organizations around the country and a book, “The Money Club.” The group disbanded after a few years. But as time passed, Ms. Terman Felenstein, who runs Diane Terman Public Relations in New York, heard horror stories of women just like Ms. Ginott — smart, accomplished women — who still cast a blind eye to financial matters, especially those relating to later life.
So far, they have held three seminars in New York City, with over 200 women in total attendance, many of whom are in their 60s and 70s and were original members of the 008-Investment Club. Each seminar tackles a different issue, led by experts, including wealth advisers and divorce lawyers.
Laurie Ruckel, deputy chairwoman of the Trust and Estates Department at Loeb & Loeb, a law firm, discussed estate planning. Louise Phillips Forbes, a senior associate real estate broker at Halstead Property, stressed the importance of understanding the value of your real estate.
Women tend to live longer than men and must plan accordingly. In the United States, the average life expectancy is 81.2 years for women and 76.5 for men. This means women will most likely have to deal with money matters at some point, whether they like it or not.
Her husband died two weeks before the case was scheduled to go to trial, and the will and power of attorney over his finances remained as her husband wished. Still, “It cost me an enormous amount of money in legal fees,” she said.
Of course, understanding a legal document is one thing; executing it is another matter altogether.
Such was the case with Eileen Stein, whose husband of 45 years, Michael, died three years ago. Despite knowing everything in his will, she felt jolted when she realized she was actually in charge. She froze.
“I was terrified and grieving at the same time,” she said. But she hired lawyers, and they helped her wade through the morass. She is still running the instrument rental company today. But she learned a lesson: “Wills should be updated and reviewed together,” she said.
