Five football players at Wheaton College, an evangelical school in Illinois, were charged with a string of felonies on Tuesday in connection with what prosecutors said was a hazing episode in 2016 in which another student was bound, beaten and left half-naked on a baseball field in the middle of the night.
Paul Darrah, a spokesman for the DuPage County State’s Attorney’s Office, said arrest warrants had been issued for the five suspects: James W. Cooksey, Kyler S. Kregel, Benjamin W. Pettway, Noah R. Spielman and Samuel J. TeBos.
LaTonya Taylor, a spokeswoman for the college, said all five had been “deemed inactive for practice or competition” by the coaching staff and administrators, but they remained listed on the team roster online on Tuesday afternoon.
Three played last week against Carthage College, according to The Chicago Tribune. Wheaton is currently ranked fourth in the country in Division III by the American Football Coaches Association.
Mr. Darrah said the suspects were charged with a range of crimes including mob action, unlawful restraint and aggravated battery, which is the most serious charge and carries a potential penalty of two to five years in prison.
Mr. Cooksey, Mr. Pettway and Mr. TeBos did not respond to voice mail messages seeking comment on Tuesday. Phone calls to Mr. Spielman and Mr. Kregel were not answered, and Mr. Kregel did not respond to an email seeking comment. Mike Swider, who is the head coach and has worked on the Wheaton coaching staff for 33 years, also did not respond to an email seeking comment.
The victim, whose name prosecutors did not release, provided a statement about the episode through his lawyer, Terry A. Ekl. In the statement, he accused the suspects of abducting him from a dorm room on March 19, 2016; wrapping duct tape around his arms, legs and chest; and transporting him in a vehicle to a baseball field. On the way there, he said, they beat him; partly stripped him; threatened to rape him; tried to sodomize him with an unidentified object; and took his phone, wallet and one shoe. They then dumped him half-naked in the field shortly before midnight, he said.
During the assault the assailants played Middle Eastern music on their car radio, put on fake Middle Eastern accents and threatened to rape him, the victim said. His lawyer said the victim was not Muslim or of Middle Eastern descent and he believed that the assailants pretended to be Middle Eastern to “scare” the victim.
After the assault, the victim made his way back to campus and called his mother, who arranged for him to meet his grandparents at a nearby hospital. Emergency room staff members there called the police and conducted a rape test, which concluded that he had not been penetrated, his statement said.
The victim said the assault caused “a tremendous amount of pain” and left him with labral tears in both shoulders that required surgery. The day after the attack, his father moved his belongings out of his dorm and he now attends a college in Indiana, Mr. Ekl said.
“I am confident that the criminal prosecution will provide a fair and just punishment to the men who attacked me,” the victim added.
Wheaton College is an evangelical Christian institution in Wheaton, Ill., about 25 miles west of Chicago. The liberal arts college, which has about 2,850 students, describes its mission as providing excellence in Christian education.
College administrators were told about the hazing allegations by the coaching staff and members of the football team in March 2016, Ms. Taylor, the college spokeswoman, said in a statement on Tuesday. She declined to say whether the players were taken off the team at that time or to explain why they were on the 2017 team roster.
After an internal investigation, the players were given a “range of corrective actions,” the college said. The school said it was unable to disclose what those correction actions may have been because of federal student privacy protections.
The college defended itself against criticism that its actions violated academic freedom or displayed anti-Muslim sentiment. Ms. Hawkins agreed to “part ways” with Wheaton after the controversy.
