WASHINGTON — Roger J. Stone Jr., an informal adviser to President Trump, said on Tuesday that Mr. Trump’s former campaign chairman is expecting to be indicted by federal prosecutors investigating Russia’s attempts to disrupt last year’s election.
Mr. Stone’s remarks about the former campaign chairman, Paul J. Manafort, came after Mr. Stone spent hours behind closed doors with members of the House Intelligence Committee, which is also investigating Russian election interference. Mr. Stone said he had heard about the possible indictment from his lawyers, who had heard it from Mr. Manafort’s lawyers.
The New York Times reported this month that prosecutors working for the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, had told Mr. Manafort they expected to indict him. Mr. Mueller’s team is believed to be investigating Mr. Manafort for possible violations of tax laws, money-laundering prohibitions and requirements to disclose foreign lobbying.
Kevin Downing, a lawyer for Mr. Manafort, did not respond to a message seeking comment.
In July, federal agents carried out an early-morning raid of Mr. Manafort’s home, taking binders stuffed with documents and copying Mr. Manafort’s computer files, looking for evidence that he set up secret offshore bank accounts.
Mr. Stone said on Tuesday that although he was not familiar with the details of Mr. Manafort’s finances, he believed that federal prosecutors were trying to pressure the former campaign chairman into testifying that members of the Trump campaign colluded with Russians to disrupt the election.
He said he did admit to the committee that he once exchanged messages with someone claiming to be Guccifer 2.0, an online persona that American officials believe was a front in the Russian hacking efforts and responsible for copying thousands of emails from the Democratic National Committee.
Mr. Stone’s refusal to name the person who had helped him make contact with Guccifer 2.0 seemed to frustrate Democrats on the committee.
Mr. Schiff does not have the power to unilaterally issue a subpoena to Mr. Stone. Committee rules require that any subpoena have the signature of Representative Devin Nunes, the California Republican who is chairman of the committee.
