A few years after Jill Testa married, she and her husband bought a townhouse in Westchester County. It was the first new construction real estate Ms. Testa had owned, and there would be no going back.
“I really liked that everything was clean and shiny and that nobody had lived there before me,” said Ms. Testa, the owner of an e-commerce business. The follow-up to that happy experience was building a house. “I loved the newness of everything,” she said.
When her marriage broke up and she moved to Manhattan, Ms. Testa saw no reason to change her ways. She rented in a new development; subsequently bought a condo in a building that had just undergone a gut renovation; then, two years ago, sold that property and moved into a two-bedroom apartment in a brand-new building on Riverside Boulevard, a purchase based on a floor plan.
“I don’t think they’d even broken ground,” said Ms. Testa, 59, who was nervous about unknowns like how much sun the apartment would receive — a hazard of buying before the shovels show up.
It’s all a matter of priorities. “Certain people want something that no one else has lived in,” said Frances Katzen, an associate broker at Douglas Elliman. “They want cutting edge.” And they are willing to pay a premium for it. According to Jonathan Miller, president of the real estate appraisal firm Miller Samuel, the median sale price of a Manhattan prewar apartment was $3.1 million in the second quarter of the year, while a new construction condo of similar size went for $3.3 million.
But more than getting, say, wide-plank, oak floors that no one else has trodden and a stainless steel cooktop that no one else has boiled water on, residents of new buildings may be gazing on sights that no one else has seen.
Josh Rubin, an associate broker at Douglas Elliman, said people who seek out new buildings may do so because of the architects involved or because of the appreciation potential. “They think the quality makes it a better investment,” he said.
New construction appealed to Brian M. Pasalich, who owns a century-old house in Seattle that he calls inviting but dusty “no matter how much you clean it.” He moved to New York seven years ago and has rented in a succession of new buildings, including one near the Pepsi-Cola sign in Long Island City. “There’s just something about being the first person in a residence. It’s pristine,” said Mr. Pasalich, 43, who works in financial services.
Residents of new buildings make other trade-offs, Ms. Katzen said. “Unfortunately, new developments tend to be more cookie-cutter in their floor plans. There are less formulaic layouts in prewars. You also give up closet space in new buildings,” she said.
Shaun Barker-Oswald, an associate broker at Douglas Elliman, isn’t categorically opposed to an older building. Still, his last three apartments have been brand new, each a step up from its predecessor in the way of amenities, appliances and finishes. “Every new one has just felt more luxurious,” said Mr. Barker-Oswald, who, in October will be moving to the new One Hudson Yards.
For their part, Mr. Pasalich and Mr. Latham plan to stay at 1 QPS Tower for two years. Still, they are taking due note of the buildings going up around them and contemplating their next move because, after all, how long can a new building be considered new?
“Generally a building is new for five years,” Mr. Moss said. “It used to be a 7-to-10-year window, but with the rapid pace of condo development the time frame has gotten shorter.
