THE QUEST FOR PERFECTION lends itself to parody: the film director demanding the 40th take; the novelist toiling over a masterpiece for a decade in a darkened room; the artist slashing the canvas in despair over an errant brush stroke.
But every so often a lucky few manage to escape caricature and that particular brand of madness in their pursuit of genius. Without drama or self-pity, they harness those meticulous impulses to shape a bold and shining thing. And when they look at what they have achieved, they do what the Milan-based interior architect and furniture maker Vincenzo De Cotiis might do: smile slightly, shrug and break out a very good Barolo. Or they should, at least.
De Cotiis, who is on the cusp of his 60s, with a sprinkling of tattoos, Gucci loafers and a head of graying hair, has in recent years become known for his ability to turn raw industrial spaces into stylish hotels and retail palaces, often relying on found materials to complement the rough integrity of the structures. His work embodies Italy’s fluency with the lexicons of both decay and high Modernism, a complicated language that in the developed world might be shared only by the Japanese. In its embrace of the ruined and the incomplete as well as its celebration of the porous borders between eras, contemporary Italian design expresses an exquisite melancholy, unburdened as it is by a compulsion to tidy up, to constantly perfect, to refine and polish.
Perhaps because he grew up in a country that offhandedly integrates its ruins and monuments into daily life, neither fetishizing them nor letting them be bulldozed for high rises, De Cotiis feels free, even compelled, to explore the ambient tension between crumbling antiquity and futuristic minimalism. He has collaborated with the architect Jean Nouvel on the seven-floor Excelsior galleria refashioned from an old movie palace in the Galleria del Corso, and created the shoemaker Premiata’s interplanetary-like flagship on Via Sant’Andrea. His aesthetic is simultaneously clinical and tumbledown: archaeological-dig-meets-mad-scientist-laboratorio. In his work, time periods casually collide and elide.
 Progetto Domestico, the furniture-making operation that he devotes much of his time to, has more in common with an artist’s studio than a manufacturing business. In an atelier several hours away in the Marche region, he produces — often alone, blowtorch or chisel in hand — one-of-a-kind or highly limited objects. Displayed in his gallery in the Porta Nuova neighborhood (the staff of his design practice occupy a back room) are massive wall cabinets with silvered planes of brass like the shell of a giant tortoise and undulating room dividers made of his favorite material: fiberglass scavenged from old boats, which he joins with richly veined marble from obscure quarries and waves of mirror-polished metal. He takes inspiration from his legendary countrymen Gio Ponti and Carlo Scarpa, both of whom exuberantly mixed high and low materials at a time when such combinations seemed daft.
Those juxtapositions aside, what might distinguish De Cotiis’s work most is that every surface, no matter how humble — from the floor-scraping bottom of a metal table leg to the inside of a hollow fiberglass stool that nothing larger than a small mammal could squeeze in to inspect — is finished with a perfectly flush setting, the seams so invisible that it can appear as if one element has morphed into another. ‘‘True beauty is found in the parts you cannot see,’’ he says. The technique, which is a proprietary secret, makes the pieces feel both enduringly ancient and sleekly futuristic, as though De Cotiis can bend the time-space continuum as easily as he does heated glass and molten metal.
So they knew they had found what they were seeking the moment they stepped into the courtyard of the 18th-century structure, its exterior painted a buttery mimosa hue, and a row of nine quaintly shuttered windows looking onto the street from the second floor. The entrance to the apartment is at the top of a curved mahogany stairway that opens onto a well-preserved late-Baroque landing with travertine floors and hand-stenciled walls that resemble flocked wallpaper.
Such period signifiers bend, bleed, even explode as you step over the threshold into the apartment itself, where one feels immediately transported — perhaps to an alien planet with a distant parallel past, perhaps to an alternative present. A previous tenant had dropped the ceilings and covered the walls and the 200-year-old parquet floors, but De Cotiis stripped the original surfaces back once more, revealing generations of peach or light gray plaster, uneven and ghostly, rich with centuries of history. The faded frescoes on the vaulted ceilings, bordered with delicate moldings, hint of original shades of umber and steel blue. As delicate as such operations are, though, the most difficult thing might be knowing when to stop: How far to go back? How much to let show through? A hint of the Napoleonic era, a sliver of Art Nouveau? It’s an instinctual process for De Cotiis, who uses his graceful hands like divining rods, touching the surface, feeling its age, its stories. The walls, left untreated, leave a fine sift of plaster dust if you brush against them; to inhabit the space means becoming part of its very life, to be written into its history. ‘‘It is very slow,’’ he says of bringing such a space to just the right moment, one both timeless and out of time, ‘‘and there is no way to speed it up. Imperfection takes longer than perfection.’’ De Cotiis also restored the apartment’s ornately curved archways that had been adorned during the 18th century with then-fashionable faux marble effects and later painted over by a previous owner; he painstakingly chipped at the layers, revealing as much as possible of the elegantly faded pattern without destroying it.
THE SENSE OF nuanced antiquity he has cultivated exists in radical counterpoint to the apartment’s spareness. ‘‘We might be the most minimal people on earth,’’ says Claudia Rose, who frowns slightly when describing the haute bourgeois home she grew up in nearby Pavia, with ‘‘a lot of heavy curtains,’’ fine paintings and gilding. ‘‘We love empty space,’’ she says.
There is plenty of it here, beneath the twisted brass light fixtures by De Cotiis that hang like polished Tinkertoy clouds. The few pieces of furniture, including long, low, pale peach velvet sofas and coffee tables inlaid with glass-smooth discs of rich veined stone, are switched out often. Neither he nor his wife believe in growing overly attached to objects; the horizontal surfaces are kept as clear as a cutting board, and Claudia Rose sometimes comes home to an entirely different apartment, its interiors transformed by her husband’s endless redrafting. Resin platforms, cast off-site in large rectangular sections and then joined so they appear as a single sheet, cover the floor in place of carpets. The whitish one in the dining area, beneath the monumental table with its angled underside of silver-plated brass, is inlaid flush with the floor; others, like the ones in the library and bedroom, where the couple spend their meager downtime under rumpled slate-colored linen sheets drinking Champagne and streaming ‘‘Breaking Bad’’ and ‘‘Downton Abbey,’’ are raised to define the space more clearly.
Paradoxically, the master bath is the most sensually dense space: The walls, counter and sink are made from the same rare dark green and pink marble from Brazil favored by the severe Viennese architect Adolf Loos, whose 1908 manifesto was called ‘‘Ornament and Crime.’’ It is as moody and mysterious as the pre-monsoon sky over Goa. ‘‘You have to know when to be strong instead of subtle,’’ De Cotiis says.
