It may not have attracted mass audiences, but “Mother!,” Darren Aronofsky’s allegorical thriller, did succeed in getting a lot of people talking — even if they hadn’t seen the movie. “Mother!,” which stars Jennifer Lawrence and Javier Bardem, is meant to be a parable about climate change and environmental destruction, as Mr. Aronofsky and Ms. Lawrence revealed in a recent New York Times article. Critics were divided — A.O. Scott called it “a hoot” — but on nytimes.com and on our Facebook page, most moviegoers weren’t persuaded. Here is a selection of their comments, edited for length and clarity.
Susan Andersen Dumbest movie ever.
Jamie Elizabeth This movie gave me a stomachache.
Richard Nielsen Seems like false advertising to call this a horror film. The horror is realizing I paid money to watch it.
Heather Bocanegra I love love love these two actors, but it was horrible.
Scott Thomas The hate the average viewer has for this movie just makes me want to see it more.
Bridget Manter The biggest problem with this movie is that it will take somebody with half a brain to understand it, and that’s far too much to ask of the American public.
Elizabeth Renant Aronofsky’s problem is an inability to tell the difference between style and substance. “Black Swan” had the same problem: in the theater I saw it, people were laughing at the end. Shock for its own sake isn’t quality.
Howard Weiner This amazingly powerful and beautiful (yes) film is nothing if not original. Shocked by the film? Get over it. “Mother!” has done what the writer-director set out to do: Provoke intelligent conversation after experiencing a film like you’ve never seen before.
Kas So this movie is about: 1) a middle-aged guy married to a woman 20 years his junior; 2) unspeakable violence done to a woman. Sounds original! Seriously, I think the most shocking thing about this is the idea that a couple can survive and own a home based on a poet’s salary.
Larry Hedrick Of course I was put off by the extremely violent, disgustingly orgiastic, and grotesquely barbaric nature of some of Aronofsky’s scenes; so was everyone else. And yet there is more disturbing moving imagery of actual events in the recent human past on YouTube than the auteur has on offer here.
Dan Poulson I was never bored; piecing together the various symbols and clues became a treasure hunt. My only complaint is that the film is structured as a kind of stations of the cross for the Jennifer Lawrence character, which necessarily means that she lacks any kind of real agency. She spends the entirety of the film in a state of traumatized bewilderment.
Rob DePiazza I dug the movie for its outlandishness and agree with A.O. Scott about its comedic attributes, but I could barely tolerate the weakness of Lawrence’s character.
Joe Zamarelli It’s funny to me the reviews that are so focused on the allegory aspect. My experience watching was so much more about the relationship, what she was dealing with, and the themes of vampiric/selfish art, creation and celebrity.
Sarah Anne Rhodes Truly hated this movie. The allegory was not lost on me, nor was the intentional absurdity of the plot. Aronofsky’s point was made about an hour into the film, but he proceeded to beat a dead horse for the remaining hour.
David Hartman “Mother!” has beautiful cinematography and may pretend to intellectual high-minded allegory, but in reality the repetitive theme of creation and destruction plays out more like “Groundhog Day” in hell than a biblical allegory. If Tom Six (director of “Centipede”) used Bergman’s cinematographer to film a script by Rob Zombie, you’d have this movie.
Joshua Trimble It’s been a long time since I overheard Ma and Pa Kettle talking about a film on the way out of the theater. Art above all else should be misunderstood loudly.
Thomas Bracken Here’s a free clue. Watching your movie should explain the movie.
Sharon Sheppard It has been a long time since a movie affected me in such deep and weird ways and left me thinking about it for days afterward. There were so many ideas going on my head felt it would explode, but in a good way. “Mother!” is not for those seeking escapist entertainment, but I would urge people to watch it and spend time arguing about it afterward.
David Michael Miller I saw it with my cousin and have since spent more time talking about it than we spent watching it. Not many movies can dig that deeply into my brain. If you think it’s easy, you go get a camera and do it.
Lynn I sat in the movie and asked myself, how does Darren Aronofsky know exactly how it feels to be married to my husband?