Australia|The New York Times in Australia? Yes. Here’s Why.
The New York Times in Australia? Yes. Here’s Why.
This FAQ was updated on November 23, 2018.
The New York Times is in Australia — we opened a new bureau in Sydney on May 1, 2017.
Why, and what are we offering readers?
Our project is always evolving (like a start-up) and this page is meant to help explain what we’re up to.
If you have something I don’t address here, feel free to email |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| or bring your inquiry to our subscriber Facebook group.
The New York Times is expanding globally and Australia has become a priority for two reasons: because we have a significant number of digital subscribers in the country; and because Australia, New Zealand and the Pacific all offer a rich vein of reporting in a part of the world that is increasingly important.
How do you choose what to cover?
We have around a half-dozen journalists roaming Australia and its closest neighbors, and we aim to do many things at once: Cover the news with context; deepen Australia’s understanding of itself and the world; and provide a bit of surprise and delight.
We often prioritize themes that are “borderless” or playing out worldwide, from immigration and climate change to technology, geopolitics, trade, pop culture and gender.
We also try to add something “Times-ian” to all our stories. It could be a global perspective on a local by-election; a robust standard of three anonymous visits for our restaurant critic; or world class photography, say for the Deni Ute Muster.
And of course, we try to help readers live a little (our Australia Holiday Gift Guide is one example), and laugh too… even when that means letting Australians make fun of Americans and the British.
Are you offering a local Australia edition?
We’re not offering a local edition like what you’ll find with the Guardian or Buzzfeed in part because our readers want and expect a broader mix: They are eager consumers of journalism not just about Australia, but about the world.
That said, we are always exploring new ways to highlight our local efforts.
For example, we recently added an “Australia” tab in The New York Times app for iPhones and iPads. Here’s where to get it. The app lets you move our Australia section up by the list by dragging and dropping it where you want it.
Apple News is another good way to find our work. And we recently started partnering with Crikey, to include New York Times stories in their morning newsletter at least once a week.
We are always looking for new ways to ensure that our journalism about Australia gets seen by Australians so if you have ideas, email us.
What else are you bringing to Australia?
A lot. To start, we’re also providing more opinion coverage from and about Australia.
Two of our regular contributors may already be familiar to you: Julia Baird, a host of “The Drum,” writes for us about everything from politics to Australian accents; Lisa Pryor, a doctor and author from Sydney, provides thoughtful commentary on an equally wide range of subjects.
We’re also bringing in a regular flow of New York Times journalists for reporting trips and live events.
This year, our visitors included Maureen Dowd (who arrived just in time for the leadership spill in Canberra), Peter Baker, our Chief White House Correspondent, Rukmini Callimachi, our ISIS reporter, and Matthew Anderson, our European Culture Editor.
We have more big plans for 2019.
But who are you writing for?
We’re writing for people who are curious and eager to be informed about Australia and the world — those who are looking for fresh perspective and rigorous, non-partisan journalism... along with a touch of culture, good taste and fun.
The audience for our Australia coverage tends to blur the line between local and international. As our publisher recently put it, we are an American institution that is “global first.” As a result, our Australia stories are aimed at a wide readership that includes all Australians in the country, but also Australians treveling or living in other countries.
The readership for our Australia stories also includes New York Times readers all over the world, from Americans in Sydney and Santa Monica to Brits, Brazilians and Chinese immigrants in London and Melbourne and Auckland.
But it’s also worth pointing out that these readers come to us for the full scale and scope of The New York Times report.
The Australians we are writing for — and curating for — engage with a wide range of our journalism, from our ambitious series on China, to investigative journalism out of Washington to pop culture profiles written with zest.
The easiest way to see the full package? One way is to sign up for my weekly newsletter, the Australia Letter. Another way is to download the New York Times app for your phone.
Are the journalists in the Australia bureau American or Australian?
I’m American. Just about everyone else is from Australia or elsewhere in the region, and it’s quite a diverse bunch. That includes some recent additions.
• Jamie Tarabay, a product of Western Sydney, recently joined us after spending more than a decade covering the world for CNN, NPR and other international outlets. She focuses on national security, among other things.
• Isabella Kwai, also from Sydney, covers news and Australian identity, with an emphasis on immigration and undercovered communities.
• Livia Albeck-Ripka is our Melbourne reporter. She’s a former fellow on the New York Times climate desk, who covers science, tech and a whole lot of other stuff.
• Jacqueline Williams is an investigative reporter originally from Canberra, who joined the bureau from The Times’s investigative unit in New York.
• Vicky Xiuzhong Xu is our researcher. She was born in China and recently graduated from the University of Melbourne.
• Clarissa Sebag-Montefiore writes about culture for us, from arts funding to the Sydney Opera House to #MeToo in Australia.
• Charlotte Graham-McLay is a regular contributor (and sometimes comedian) in New Zealand. She’s also a former intern for The New York Times in Hong Kong.
• Besha Rodell finds Australia’s hidden gems in the world of food for us. Her restaurant criticism won awards in Los Angeles, where she lived until returning recently to Melbourne, where she grew up.
• Tacey Rychter, our audience editor, is a proud Melburnian who was traveling in Vietnam when she was hired. She’s a foodie and a lover of all things culture.
• Adam Kershaw, another Melburnian, who previously worked in Hong Kong for The Times, is our General Manager — the director of all things business development. He’s easy to reach by email.
We also have world-class photographers and contributors we rely on regularly, and we work closely with editors, developers and business colleagues in Hong Kong and New York.
Then why do you report money in U.S. dollars, instead of Australian? Why miles, not kilometers or kilometres? Why French fries, instead of chips?
The New York Times is a U.S.-based publication with a global readership. Articles about Australian topics are also read by people in the United States and around the world, so we follow New York Times style for consistency.
That said, we’ve made an effort to include kilometers and local currency for Australian articles when possible.
We’ve successfully lobbied for a change to The New York Times style guide to make sure Indigenous and Aboriginal are capitalized when referring to Australia’s First Peoples. And we are working with our technology team on a geo-targeted solution that would seamlessly integrate currency, measurement and date formats that are sensitive to cultural differences around the world.
Do you accept pitches or submissions from freelancers?
While we mostly use in-house staff and an established base of freelancers, we do consider pitches from new writers and visual journalists.
Pitches can be sent to |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Please make sure your pitch includes the following in no more than two paragraphs.
• What is your story idea and what does it reveal about Australia in the context of the world? Why does it matter to a global audience?
• How will you take the reader through the story? Which characters do you plan to talk to?
• Why are you the best person to write this story? Have you had previous experience with this topic?
Please also send samples of your best work. We appreciate pitches that show evidence of in-depth reporting and sharp analysis.
Can I work with The New York Times in Australia?
Check The New York Times job page for listings.
Who do I email if I have a news tip?
Please email tips to |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Phew. That should do it. Thanks for reading. Thanks for subscribing.