Travel|Five Places to Go in Ojai, Calif.
Five Places to Go in Ojai, Calif.
Spend some time in Ojai and locals will let you in on their motto: “Keep Ojai lame.” It’s a tongue-in-cheek resistance to the increasing tourist traffic in this small, verdant city, 80 miles northwest of Los Angeles. Long a haven for yogis, spa-goers and anyone with vaguely spiritual inclinations — the Ojai Valley runs east-west rather than north-south, which some say creates an “electromagnetic vortex” of good energy — the city is also drawing fashion types and foodies with new shops, restaurants and cool places to hang out. Many popular spots are located along or just off Ojai Avenue, the main drag that is easily traversable by foot or bike.
Since 2014, this bar, cafe and home goods shop has been charming locals and visitors with prettily plated snacks and generous pours of wine. The ample outdoor space includes a hammock for those who want to hang.
With a cavernous tasting room, live music and a lawn made for picnics, this year-old winery invites guests to grab a glass and stay a while. It produces about 4,000 cases per year; the Syrah and Barbera are worth bringing home.
Get a Swedish massage elsewhere. What stands out at the spa of this immaculately polished resort are the out-of-the box options, like the Kuyam treatment, a sauna-mud bath hybrid derived from the Chumash Native Americans of the Ojai Valley. There’s also an on-site “energy alchemist” who leads the willing in guided meditations and other rituals that purportedly banish bad vibes.
This clothing and accessories boutique, now three years old, might have been air-dropped in from Williamsburg, Brooklyn or Silver Lake in Los Angeles. On the men’s side, there are button downs durable enough to herd cattle or throw back a few rounds of cocktails at Harvest, Ojai’s hot spot of the moment; for women, there are sumptuous, easy to wear dresses by the designer Ulla Johnson.
Opened in 2016, this collection of 11 artfully decorated Airstream trailers at the east end of town often gets bought out for birthday parties and yoga retreats. This is not a typical trailer park: There’s a boutique that sells incense and dinner can be catered by one of the local restaurants.
