As the resident manager of Kelly Street Garden, part of an affordable housing development in South Bronx’s Longwood neighborhood, Sheryll Durrant, 52, likens her job to an intense workout. “I’m constantly moving 40-pound bags of compost, digging, weeding and trellising,” she said. “There’s no time for sitting around.” The 2,500-square-foot community garden grows more than 30 varieties of fruits, vegetables and herbs, which are free for residents in the development. On Sundays — her only day off — Ms. Durrant relaxes with her husband, Bruce Zeines, 62, an artist and graphic designer, and their 16-year-old son, Noah. Their apartment, naturally, faces the garden.
LOGGING HOURS I wake up around 9, but if I’m really tired, it might be 10. I’m up before 7 a.m. the other six days, and this extra rest is a real treat. Bruce is up before me, but Noah, being a teenager, is still sleeping.
MAGIC BEANS Starting my day with freshly brewed coffee is a must. We’re part of the Park Slope Food Coop because we used to live in Brooklyn for 18 years, and we still go once a week to get our groceries, which usually include a different kind of coffee. Trying all the various blends with beans from around the world is something I really look forward to.
MIDMORNING FEAST Bruce and I make breakfast. He’s an excellent cook, so I mostly just help him. We like big-morning meals on Sundays- it might be pancakes but more often than not, we do omelets with different greens that we’re growing in the garden like Swiss chard. On the side, we love having the challah bread from Hot Bread Kitchen and either plums or pineapple.
CHAT ALFRESCO With our stomachs full, Bruce and I go to the garden, where we sit either on the lawn chairs or on the picnic benches and talk for hours. We love to talk to each other, but during the week, we’re both busy working, and this is our chance to catch up. Our conversations range from the serious to the silly: it could be about our visions for the garden or what we want to do when we retire or we talk about science or swap funny stories about Noah from when he was a child.
SYNCED UP WITH THE TEEN Around 2, we head back to our apartment to be with Noah, who is still barely awake. Bruce will sometimes make him the same breakfast we ate hours earlier, and then he gets dressed so that we can all go out as a family.
FAMILY OUTING We’ll usually do some sort of activity in Manhattan. We may go to the movies and like going to theaters on the Upper West or Upper East Side because those neighborhoods are easy to reach by subway from our apartment. We’re into superhero movies like “Spider-Man” or “Batman” but are game for any good action movie. Bruce, being an artist, also likes to check out museums, and another favorite Sunday ritual is to visit the Met to see the latest exhibit.
PICK A NEIGHBORHOOD A big highlight of our Sunday is going out to eat. We like every kind of cuisine, and rather than pick a specific restaurant, we pick a neighborhood and find an appealing spot there. It could be Harlem, which has fantastic restaurants with Caribbean, African and American soul food, or Chinatown for dumplings and noodles or Koreatown for kimchi. The South Bronx also has some delicious restaurants. One of the best Mexican places we’ve ever been to is La Morada — their quesadillas, guacamole and tacos are awesome.
SOLO TIME After being together all day, this is our time to chill out individually. Noah gets online to chat with his friends, Bruce draws and I find a movie or show to watch on my laptop. My go-to is a British murder mystery series like “Midsomer Murders.” It’s set in sleepy English villages, and I like it because it’s thrilling but also tongue in cheek and not superserious like some mystery shows can be.
FALL ASLEEP TALKING Bruce and I get into bed around 10:30. Noah is still awake. I’m not even sure what time he goes to sleep — I just know it’s after us. Bruce and I never get bored of talking to each other, and we chat until we fall asleep. By 8 the next morning, I’ll be back at the garden raring to go.