Throughout Texas and Louisiana, Hurricane Harvey cleanup is underway. Florida, Georgia and the Caribbean islands are just starting to assess the damage from Irma, while the storm pushed north to flood Charleston, S.C. Hurricane Jose’s path is still uncertain, but one thing is true: If you’ve been hit by either of these — or any other storm — cleaning up can be a nightmare, and few resources tell you where to start.
Storm cleanup is different from regular, and even heavy duty, cleaning. There are hazards, health concerns and other issues that go beyond normal cleaning that require specialty products, tools and cleaning techniques, as well as protective gear and safety measures not required in regular cleaning. After a large storm and flooding, many belongings will be a total loss, but often there are unexpected treasures that survive that can be restored. Here are guidelines to follow for cleaning what can be salvaged.
After a flood, removing water and drying everything out can be daunting. In addition to utility pumps for water removal, wet/dry vacuums like the ShopVac, and carpet and upholstery cleaners like the ones made by Rug Doctor and Bissell, can be used without cleaning solutions to extract water from both hard surfaces, like concrete and subflooring, and soft surfaces, like carpet and upholstery. For spot cleaning, a good wet mop, like these suggested by Wirecutter, a New York Times company, will split the difference. If you’re willing to invest in a wet/dry vacuum, Wirecutter has a suggestion for you too. Safety is a concern when handling any electric tools in a flooded area, and you should avoid using machines like the Rug Doctor if there is more than a half inch of standing water. Do not enter a flooded space unless you are sure the electricity is turned off.
After standing water has drained or been removed, dampness will persist, and along with that moisture will come mold, mildew and smells. Dehumidifiers, once the water is gone, can help keep the air at a comfortable humidity until you can make bigger repairs. Portable air-conditioning units (but not outdoor or ground-mounted central air units, which can be contaminated with silt) can also help reduce humidity and moisture levels in your home. If a dehumidifier or air-conditioner offers the feature, use the ‘extra dry’ setting. Both of these options are great while you get lingering moisture out of walls or flooring, or to finish dehumidifying your home once you’ve made those repairs. Carpet and upholstery cleaners can be used with a pre-mixed odor-eliminating solution or diluted white vinegar (if allowed by manufacturer instructions) to remove those damp, mildewy smells from your floors.
A bleach solution and scrub brush can be used to remove mold from hard surfaces; the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention offers a reference guide to bleach-to-water ratios for use in disaster cleanup. When cleaning mold, it is important to wear protective gloves and N-95 (or better) masks, particularly if you suffer from respiratory issues or have a weakened immune system. Goggles are also recommended.
To treat moderate dampness and mustiness, desiccants and odor absorbers such as DampRid, silica, the Bad Air Sponge and activated charcoal-based products are all good choices. It’s also worth keeping in mind that even with all these tips, you still may want to get a professional mold test for your home — even the best efforts of individuals may not be enough, and you might need professional help. After Katrina, for example, some people needed expensive antimicrobial spraying equipment for their whole home. Do your best to clean up, then keep an eye, ear and nose out for spots on walls, smells, or inexplicable coughs.
Heavily soiled laundry requires special handling, and this is especially true in the case of heavy soiling caused by floodwater. Before doing any wash, ensure that the water supply is clean and uncontaminated, and that your laundry machines are safe to use. If they are not, head to your closest laundromat or dry cleaners. If access to laundromats or dry cleaners is an issue, check to see if corporate disaster relief services, such as Tide’s Loads of Hope program, or volunteer laundering services, like Ladies Who Launder (and Men Too…), are available in your area. If you do need to replace your washer and dryer, Wirecutter has some budget-friendly suggestions here.
Start by taking the heavily soiled laundry outside to rinse wet or muddy items off using a hose, or place them into a utility sink for pre-rinsing if outdoor space is not available.
Allow the items to dry, ideally in the sun, to help prevent mildew from developing, then shake out and brush off any dirt and mud that remains after the initial rinse.
To ensure safe handling of contaminated textiles, wear gloves, and consider the use of goggles and/or a mask or a respirator. The C.D.C. recommends disposing of items that have been exposed to sewage spills and groundwater runoff, as well as things like pillows, plush toys, or clothing that have been in floodwater for an extended period of time.
When laundering heavily soiled textiles, it’s important to check the water during the rinse cycle to make sure the items are clean. Multiple wash cycles may be needed to fully remove soil and other contaminants. Many washing machines offer an extra rinse cycle, which is helpful to use with those really dirty clothes or sheets. Fine or vintage items should be washed using the delicate cycle, or hand washed in very hot water (wear protective gloves if you’re handwashing). A boiling pot may be required to fully disinfect delicate items that cannot withstand the agitation of a washing machine, though you risk shrinking them that way.
For disinfecting clothes or other laundry, use the hottest water setting that is safe for the fabric type. Provided they are safe to be used in laundry per the manufacturer’s instructions, add pine oil disinfectants such as Pine-Sol or Lestoil, or phenolic disinfectants like Lysol, or chlorine bleach, at the start of the wash cycle.
Once your items are thoroughly cleaned, they may go into a dryer — but not before, as the heat will set stains into soiled textiles. To reverse lingering dinge or yellowing, consider Engleside Restoration, especially for antique or vintage textiles like quilts and ceremonial clothing, such as baptismal or wedding dresses, you want to save.
For your safety when working in wet conditions, wear rubber or insulated footwear, and again, do not enter a flooded space unless you are sure the electricity is turned off. If your home has natural gas service, check for gas leaks before using electrical equipment in your home, including lights. If you have a gas grill, have your canisters checked by a professional before you try using them again.
The Environmental Protection Agency recommends wearing gloves and other protective equipment in post-flood conditions, including respirators and goggles. Similarly, the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission has a safety guide to follow before you walk into a flood-damaged home. If you want to brave returning to your home before the water has fully receded, do so only with the proper equipment.
Your protective gear should be suited to the materials you’ll handle, such as heavy duty work gloves for handling debris, and natural rubber, neoprene, or polyurethane or PVC gloves for use with disinfectants like chlorine bleach. Household gloves can be used when working with milder detergents and cleaners.
Snakes and other wildlife will also be a concern, so use caution when working in flooded areas. The American Red Cross recommends employing a wooden stick to turn over upended items that might harbor critters, as well as for scaring away snakes and for moving potentially-live electrical wires. Additionally, floodwater and mud will make flooring slick, creating slip-and-fall hazards.
When it comes to insurance claims, it is ideal to have photographs or video of both the interior and exterior of homes, automobiles, boats, etc. before the damage occurred to show their previous condition. Regardless of whether pre-storm photos and videos are available, photos and videos documenting the damage should be taken before cleanup efforts begin. If receipts are available, they should be preserved. Taking a photo of an item with the receipt of its purchase side by side makes providing proof after a loss to an insurer more likely to result in a successful claim.
