President Trump is seeking to revisit the nuclear agreement with Iran to toughen its provisions rather than scrap it right away as he has threatened, enlisting allies to pressure Tehran to return to the negotiating table, administration officials said Wednesday.
Mr. Trump, who denounced the agreement in a speech to the United Nations General Assembly this week as an “embarrassment to the United States,” wants to expand on it by extending its time frame and imposing new limits on Iran’s development of ballistic missiles. Although European officials strongly back the current deal, some signaled openness to negotiating a separate follow-up agreement.
The maneuvering suggested a possible path forward for Mr. Trump short of abandoning the accord, but it remains uncertain whether he can reach consensus with the European allies, much less with Russia and China, the deal’s other patrons. Iran on Wednesday ruled out revisiting the agreement as President Hassan Rouhani declared it a “closed issue” and warned that if the United States pulled out, Iran might resume uranium enrichment.
The accord, reached in 2015, required Iran to curb its nuclear program in exchange for the lifting of international sanctions. Under United States law, Mr. Trump has until Oct. 15 to certify whether Iran is complying and the deal remains vital to America’s national security. While he has done so twice since taking office, he has signaled that he will refuse to do so again.
That by itself would not abrogate the deal, but would give Congress 60 days to reimpose sanctions on Iran, an action that would mean an end to the agreement, at least for the United States. Mr. Trump may see decertification, or the threat of it, as leverage to press Iran and the other powers to restart talks. He could offer to certify for another 90 days if other parties agreed to explore new negotiations.
Mr. Trump remained coy later when he met with Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain and declined to tell her his decision either. “Prime Minister May asked him if he would share it with her and he said no,” Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson said.
Mr. Tillerson met in the evening with counterparts from the other countries that brokered the deal — Britain, France, Germany, Russia and China — as well as Iran’s foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif. It was the first time Mr. Tillerson had been in the same room with Mr. Zarif since taking office and he described the session as businesslike.
Mr. Tillerson acknowledged that international inspectors have found that Iran “is in technical compliance with the agreement, and no one around the table took exception to that.” But he argued that Iran was violating the larger aspirations of the deal by engaging in destabilizing activities not directly covered by it, like supporting terrorist groups.
No breakthrough was apparent on Wednesday evening. Federica Mogherini, the foreign minister for the European Union who led the 90-minute meeting, rejected scrapping or renegotiating the agreement. “The international community cannot afford dismantling an agreement that is working and delivering,” she told reporters outside the Security Council chamber.
Two provisions he focused on involve the expiration of the agreement and its failure to stop Iran from developing ballistic missiles. Under the deal, some provisions expire, or “sunset,” after as few as 10 years while others are in force longer and some are permanent. And although United Nations provisions seek to limit ballistic missile technology, the nuclear agreement does not prohibit Iran from developing such weapons.
President Emmanuel Macron of France opened the door to rethinking its terms on Wednesday, two days after meeting with Mr. Trump. Speaking to reporters at the United Nations, Mr. Macron said France favored keeping the agreement “because it’s a good one,” but would support adding “two to three other pillars,” or provisions. He cited ballistic missiles and the deal’s expiration dates.
At a later news conference, Mr. Rouhani demanded an apology from Mr. Trump and said the nuclear agreement could not be amended, reopened or renegotiated. Given the Trump administration’s open hostility, he said he saw no reason for dialogue. “It is not realistic,” he said. Should the agreement unravel, he said one option “may be to start enrichment” of uranium.
If negotiations were to reopen in some form, the challenge for Mr. Trump would be how to persuade Iran to make further concessions. The sanctions that forced Iran to the table under Mr. Obama have been lifted, so Mr. Trump would have less leverage. And it is not clear what, if anything, he would be willing to offer to strike a deal.
