SAN FRANCISCO — For years, Bob Gordon, the owner of Footprints Cafe in Brooklyn, handled the delivery of his restaurant’s meals, like his Caribbean-inspired “Rasta Pasta,” to customers. So when he decided to work for the first time with an outside delivery service — UberEats, the delivery arm of the ride-hailing giant Uber — he was nervous.
Then, the orders started pouring in.
By winning over restaurant owners like Mr. Gordon, Uber has barreled into the crowded, cutthroat space of food delivery. As its new chief executive, Dara Khosrowshahi, assesses the strengths and weaknesses of the company with an eye toward an initial public offering in the next 18 to 36 months, top executives believe UberEats could generate enormous growth. Even as Mr. Khosrowshahi grapples with issues such as Uber’s loss of its operating license in London, he has said UberEats has been a “wonderful surprise,” according to a person who has spoken with him.
UberEats stands out even from the rest of the company’s fast-growing — and unprofitable — business. The delivery service, available in more than 120 markets globally, sometimes eclipses Uber’s main ride-hailing business in markets like Tokyo; Taipei, Taiwan; and Seoul, South Korea, the company said. The number of trips taken by UberEats drivers grew by more than 24 times between March 2016 and March 2017. As of July, UberEats was profitable in 27 of the 108 cities where it operated. Uber declined to reveal the service’s revenue.
Uber came late to food delivery, which is a $100 billion-plus market, or about 1 percent of the total food market, according to a study by McKinsey. Typically, food delivery companies fall into one of two categories. The first is aggregators like Grubhub, which collect restaurant options and menus through an online portal for customers, and which usually require restaurants to handle delivery themselves.
The second is full delivery services like Postmates and UberEats, which take orders through an online portal and deliver the food for restaurants. The restaurants generally fork over a fixed percentage of an order as a fee, while customers also pay a fee to the delivery service.
The competition is stiff. Postmates, which established a foothold six years ago, has raised more than $250 million, has more than 100,000 delivery drivers (the company calls them “postmates”) and makes 2.5 million deliveries every month. Grubhub, a public company, had $3 billion in gross food sales in 2016, with an active base of 8.17 million customers.
There is also the threat of Amazon, which has tried food delivery in a few markets. The Seattle retail giant’s recent acquisition of Whole Foods provides hundreds of potential bases for drivers to pick up prepared food for delivery in major urban areas, where takeout orders are popular.
Matt Maloney, the founder and chief executive of Grubhub, said his company’s focus on food orders set it apart.
Both Amazon and Postmates declined to comment on UberEats.
Uber first dabbled in food delivery in Los Angeles in 2014 under the name UberFresh, offering prepackaged lunches and dinners from restaurants. Uber also tried other experiments, like UberEssentials, a way to deliver pantry and drugstore items quickly.
“If you can hit a button and get a car in a few minutes, what else can you get in a few minutes?” Mr. Droege said.
But the situation wasn’t ideal, with drivers usually carting food around in a safe storage container in their car trunks. That led to issues with food quality, and customers were unhappy when their food arrived cold. People also wanted a greater selection of restaurants, something that competitors like Postmates provided.
In December 2015, Mr. Droege’s division introduced a separate app, UberEats, in Toronto, working with restaurants to provide freshly cooked meals that could be ordered with a few touches of a smartphone button. The service took off, and over the next 18 months UberEats expanded its sales force to bring more restaurants on board and to open in new cities.
Uber has also spent the better part of a decade mapping cities and finding the most efficient routes, which the company said may help improve delivery times. And since the problems with UberFresh, it has invested in better technology and added more drivers in participating cities. The ideal UberEats delivery has the driver arrive at the restaurant just as the food has finished cooking, and has it delivered to the customer while still warm.
“What Uber has are the last-mile logistics, and that’s crucial,” Mr. Cakmak said.
Uber has taken the partnership approach to speed up the growth of UberEats, echoing a strategy of companies like Postmates. Uber struck a deal with McDonald’s this year to offer delivery from thousands of its restaurants. Lucy Brady, a McDonald’s executive, said on an investor call in July that the initial results of the partnership were positive.
The service has stumbled at times, including this month when it faced complaints that an ad in India — telling husbands to use UberEats so their wives could take a day off from cooking — was sexist. The company apologized for the ad.
Uber said it had invested in increasing its UberEats sales force, as well as hiring data scientists to analyze daily information on customer orders and preferences to help restaurants improve their service or promote their more popular menu items.
For Mr. Gordon, the owner of Footprints Cafe, Uber’s investments have been a boon for business. He said the delivery service had helped his restaurant reach new customers outside its loyal Caribbean community, without spending on advertising or promotion on Facebook or Groupon, as he did in the past.
