The widow and the biographer of the beloved British children’s writer Roald Dahl told the BBC in an interview this week that Charlie Bucket, the young boy whose life is changed by a golden ticket in “Charlie and the Chocolate Factory,” was originally supposed to be black.
“His first Charlie that he wrote about was a little black boy,” the widow, Felicity Dahl, said in the interview. It was timed to the author’s birthday, which fans of his work celebrate as Roald Dahl Day. He would have been 101.
Mr. Dahl’s work is widely beloved and has spawned a fleet of film adaptations since the 1964 book was made into a movie, “Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory,” in 1971. The film starred 12-year-old, blond-haired Peter Ostrum as Charlie.
Mr. Dahl’s other well-known children’s books include “James and the Giant Peach,” “Fantastic Mr. Fox,” “Witches,” “Matilda” and “The BFG,” all of which have been turned into popular movies. A Broadway musical based on “Matilda” opened in 2013 and closed in January, while one based on “Charlie and the Chocolate Factory” is currently running.
But racial and ethnic controversy has followed Mr. Dahl’s work for years. The author has long been dogged by accusations of anti-Semitism, and critics denounced his original portrayal of the Oompa Loompa workers in Mr. Wonka’s chocolate factory.
They were originally depicted as hard working but mischievous African pygmies who were brought to the factory to make candy. Mr. Dahl revised their portrayal in later editions of the work, turning the Oompa Loompas into fanciful dwarflike creatures from a made-up country, Loompaland. In the 1971 film they were depicted as squat, green-haired, orange factory workers.
Last year, on what would have been Mr. Dahl’s 100th birthday, The Forward, a Jewish newspaper, published an article, “The 5 Most Anti-Semitic Things Roald Dahl Has Ever Said.” Representatives for The Roald Dahl Literary Estate and the Roald Dahl Foundation, which employs Mr. Sturrock, did not immediately respond to an email seeking comment on Thursday.
“Praise for Mr. Dahl as a writer must not obscure the fact that he was also a bigot,” Mr. Foxman wrote. He also cited many of the statements published by The Forward, 26 years before its article came out.
