As Congress returns this week from its summer recess, Washington and its press corps are stirring from what has been a fitful August slumber. It will be a busy fall, just as it was in 1998, when I became the congressional correspondent for The Baltimore Sun as a new name entered the political conversation: Monica Lewinsky.
Back then, the Capitol’s august press gallery above the Senate chamber was jam-packed with reporters. Every regional newspaper worth its salt had someone in the Capitol keeping an eye on its congressional delegation and the most pressing matters of the day. I sat crammed in next to a reporter from The San Francisco Examiner, another from New York Newsday, another from The Chicago Sun-Times and three from The New York Times.
Then came the long eclipse: the decline of the mid-size, then major daily newspapers, and with them, the twilight of the congressional reporter. The Senate press gallery, with its century-old tile floors and chandeliers, is now a sadder place. Where I, a Baltimore Sun reporter, was once crammed into a carrel alongside such venerable Times reporters as Lizette Alvarez, Alison Mitchell and Eric Schmitt, there are file cabinets. I returned to the congressional press corps in 2012, this time as a reporter for The Times. The hallways of the Capitol were and still are packed with reporters, but most of them work for newsletters and pricey trade outlets catering to Washington lobbyists and insiders.
The reporters writing for a national audience who remain on the Congress beat have greater responsibilities. They must inform readers around the country — indeed around the world — of major legislative actions, of fights brewing in both parties with the leadership of the House and Senate, and of developments on the backbenches, once the purview of regionally focused newspapers.
In the era of President Trump, congressional reporters have a loftier responsibility as well — one that in the 20 years I have been in Washington I have never felt so keenly. They must cover the legislative branch through the prism of the Constitution, to see Congress not as a bumbling backwater of policy making but as a coequal branch of government, designed as a check on the power of the executive.
That was easy enough to see when the party that controlled Congress was not the one sitting in the White House’s West Wing. John Boehner, then the speaker, and Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, were not shy about checking the power of Barack Obama, just as Nancy Pelosi, the speaker in that era, and Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the majority leader, set themselves up as bulwarks against George W. Bush at his nadir.
But this is different — not only because Mr. McConnell and Speaker Paul D. Ryan are from the same party as Mr. Trump, but also because Mr. Trump appears to have so little regard for or understanding of Congress. The partisan efforts by congressional leaders to block the Bush agenda, and then to block the Obama agenda, were made possible by the powers granted by the Constitution, but they were not motivated by a duty to defend the Constitution itself.
In an op-ed on Thursday, Senator John McCain, the Arizona Republican battling brain cancer, threw down that gauntlet, urging Congress members to “be diligent” in serving as a check on the president’s power. His challenge was meant for all his Republican colleagues, in both chambers of Congress. But it falls hardest on the shoulders of Mr. Ryan, who spent most of his adult life preparing for this opportunity to remake the tax code and reshape the government — only to be confronted with a weightier task: to serve as a counterweight for a president of his own party.
While I have covered other things besides Congress during my 20 years in Washington — the Clinton White House for The Baltimore Sun and the Obama White House for The Wall Street Journal; economic policy for USA Today, The Washington Post and The New York Times; defense, the war in Afghanistan and politics — I always found my way back to the beat where everything converges. As I move now to managing and editing coverage of Congress, I am motivated to capture its importance to American governance.
We don’t yet know what conclusions will be reached by current investigations — into Russia’s efforts to interfere with the 2016 election and into the Trump campaign’s possible involvement in those efforts. We do know that deciding the ramifications of those conclusions will fall to Congress, and that The Times will be a key lens through which the world will view them.