New York City F.C. and a major New York City real estate developer will submit a proposal to build a soccer stadium on property at Belmont Park ahead of a Thursday afternoon deadline. But the site might not be their first choice — and it is not their only one.
The Empire State Development Corporation, which controls the Belmont site, had issued a request for proposals from developers interested in the Long Island property, and it set a deadline of Thursday at 2 p.m. for submissions. The Islanders are also expected to submit a proposal to build an arena on the site.
N.Y.C.F.C., which plays in Major League Soccer, confirmed it would submit a proposal in partnership with the developer, the Related Companies, but refused to comment on its plans. A Related spokeswoman declined to comment.
“N.Y.C.F.C. is in very active pursuit of a new home,” the team said in a statement.
That pursuit apparently includes other options. N.Y.C.F.C., which currently plays home games at Yankee Stadium, and Related expressed interest earlier this year in an Empire State Development Corporation site at the Harlem River Yards, a 12.8-acre parcel on the Harlem River in the Mott Haven section of the Bronx, according to a person familiar with the discussions. And the team is investigating at least two sites in Willets Point, Queens.
A fifth potential site, a nine-acre parcel near Yankee Stadium that once seemed the team’s most promising option, could also be back in play. That site, between the Major Deegan Expressway and East 153rd Street, is owned by an elevator parts manufacturer, and the sides were close to a deal for it in 2013 before the talks fell apart.
But there has been renewed interest in discussions since the company, GAL Manufacturing, agreed to sell a controlling stake to a San Francisco-based holding company, Golden Gate Capital, in May. Golden Gate Capital did not respond to a request for comment.
New York City F.C. is jointly owned by City Football Group, which owns the Premier League club Manchester City, and the Yankees. The team’s four-year search for a stadium has been one of the consistent story lines since it entered M.L.S. in 2015.
Its current stadium arrangement is imperfect. The soccer configuration at Yankee Stadium yields a field that some players have criticized as too narrow. And this season finally produced an unresolvable scheduling conflict that forced the soccer team to move a match: It played last Saturday’s home game about two hours from the Bronx, at Pratt and Whitney Stadium in East Hartford, Conn.
The stadium situation, a persistent grievance among fans, has not hurt the team at the gate. New York City F.C. reported an average attendance of more than 29,000 in its inaugural season and a slight dip to just over 27,000 in 2016.
While that average has fallen again this season, to 22,000, the team’s attendance still ranks in the top five leaguewide, and last week N.Y.C.F.C. clinched its second consecutive playoff berth.