Good morning on this flawless fall Friday.
A long time ago in a galaxy far, far away — well actually, in present-day New York City — a group of musicians brought “Star Wars” to life.
And they still are, for another week. The New York Philharmonic is showing screenings of the film series, performing the score live as the movie rolls.
Picture a movie theater. But below the big screen, there’s a sprawling stage almost overflowing with more than 80 instruments.
David Newman, who is conducting the series at the Philharmonic, described it as a reinterpretation of the film in which musicians become actors in the story.
Live concert movie events are not a new concept, Mr. Newman explained, but as the technology has advanced over the last several years, the immersive experience has taken off.
Playing alongside a film does have its challenges, like synchronizing the film and live music.
As we watched the show — unsure, at first, of whether to look at the screen or at the violin bows moving furiously below it — we eventually became so drawn in by Han Solo’s charm and Yoda’s wisdom that we forgot the Philharmonic was even there.
An A+ day, followed by an A+ weekend.
Radiant skies on this Friday — think mostly sunny and a high around 70 — with more of the same on Saturday a gorgeous Sunday.
• The annual New York Film Festival, presented by the Film Society of Lincoln Center, continues with world premieres, filmmaker talks and more at several city locations. Times and ticket prices vary.
• Yankees host Blue Jays, 1:05 p.m. (YES). Mets at Phillies, 7:05 p.m. (SNY).
• Boo at the Zoo, a monthlong Halloween event with hayrides, magic shows, a haunted forest and more, begins at the Bronx Zoo. Times and ticket prices vary.
• Yankees host Blue Jays, 1:05 p.m. (FOX). New York Red Bulls at Toronto F.C., 7 p.m. (MSG). Mets at Phillies, 7:05 p.m. (WPIX). New York City F.C. at Chicago Fire, 8:30 p.m. (YES).
• Jets host Jaguars, 1 p.m. (CBS). Mets at Phillies, 3:05 p.m. (SNY). Yankees host Blue Jays, 3:05 p.m. (YES). Giants at Buccaneers, 4:05 p.m. (FOX).
In this week’s edition of eccentric holidays that we didn’t even know existed, Sunday is International Raccoon Appreciation Day.
Yes, that’s a thing. The National Wildlife Federation says so, and so does our city government.
You cannot keep raccoons as pets. And you might not see raccoons around town as frequently as you see rats (which, by the way, are in peak mating season at the moment). But the furry critters are nonetheless a big part of our city landscape.
So how to celebrate?
Don’t get too close — they can carry rabies — but you can learn more about raccoons, and how we can coexist with urban wildlife, on Sunday at Raccoon Art Day, hosted by the Department of Parks and Recreation in Central Park.