When Ta-Nehisi Coates’s first book, “The Beautiful Struggle,” was published in 2008, it landed with barely a ripple. At the time, Mr. Coates was a struggling writer. He had lost three jobs, and he and his family relied on unemployment checks, his wife’s income and occasional support from his father to stay afloat. By the time the book came out in paperback, his fortune had shifted slightly; he’d become a regular contributor to The Atlantic magazine, writing a blog that attracted a moderate but engaged audience.
“I went and did a few events. I did one in Brooklyn and I did one in San Francisco, and maybe 30 people showed up. And I thought, ‘This is what I want. This is it,’” he said in a conversation over a recent lunch.
Suffice it to say that Mr. Coates’s second book, “Between the World and Me,” published in 2015, did not suffer the same lack of readership. An early galley was sent to Toni Morrison, who strongly endorsed the book, calling it “required reading” and likening Mr. Coates to James Baldwin. That year, Mr. Coates was awarded a MacArthur Fellowship and the National Book Award in nonfiction. His appearances filled auditoriums and the book was adopted on college syllabuses. It has sold 1.5 million copies internationally and has been translated into 19 languages, catapulting him to prominence.
His new book, “We Were Eight Years in Power: An American Tragedy,” traces this ascent. In it, he collects articles he wrote for The Atlantic during Barack Obama’s presidency, interspersing them with explanatory, autobiographical essays. The book goes on sale Tuesday, Oct. 3, and already, his book-tour stop at Brooklyn’s Kings Theater has sold out — a far cry from the intimate crowds of his early career.
In the beginning of September, about a month before his book was to be published, Mr. Coates gave a preliminary reading at BLVD Bistro, a soul-food restaurant in Harlem tucked into the ground floor of a brownstone that preserves old-school features like brick walls and a tin ceiling. Mr. Coates stood at the head of the room, in front of a large wall decal of James Baldwin’s face lined with the words, “Our crown has already been bought and paid for. All we have to do is wear it.” He wore a white button-down shirt, jeans and blue and white Nike sneakers.
That perceived detachment has drawn criticism. When “Between the World and Me” was published, Dr. West took issue with Ms. Morrison’s comparison of Mr. Coates to Baldwin and expressed as much in a Facebook post, writing that, unlike Mr. Coates, “Baldwin’s painful self-examination led to collective action and a focus on social movements.” In his view, Mr. Coates’s inattention to the Black Lives Matter movement and political activists in “Between the World and Me” “shows a certain distance” from his subject matter.
In 2015, just before “Between the World and Me” was published and became a sensation, Mr. Coates and his family moved to Paris. He experienced the frenzy surrounding his book “through a filter,” and the presidential election from a distance. He noted a “clear difference” between how his blackness was perceived in Paris; there, his Americanness was the most conspicuous part of his identity. Mr. Coates laughs off the parallel to Baldwin’s time in Paris, saying that the move was his wife’s idea and “not at all” inspired by the famed intellectual’s experiences.
He returned to the United States last year, ill-prepared for his newfound celebrity. He started to receive invitations to “secret rich people meetings.” He was offered opportunities unrelated to his work as a journalist: to direct music videos (which he turned down) and write comic books and screenplays (which he accepted). His appearances became spectacles, and he found it strange for people to clap for him when he walked into a room.
As to what he plans to do next, Mr. Coates mentions his continued collaboration with Marvel Comics on the Black Panther comic book series, which “satisfies the kid in me” and is “the place where I can go to do something that sort of feels private again.” He was tapped to write a screenplay called “Wrong Answer,” which will be directed by Ryan Coogler and is based on the standardized test cheating scandal that occurred in Atlanta public schools from 2005 to 2012.
He is also working on a novel, due by the end of the year. The project is tightly under wraps, though his editor, Mr. Jackson, described it as “historical” with “elements of the fantastical,” and Mr. Coates said it deals with race.
