The most indelible image of “A Chorus Line,” the Pulitzer Prize-winning 1975 musical conceived by Michael Bennett, is a horizontal line of 17 hopeful dancers trying out for a Broadway show. Sure enough, Playhouse on Park in West Hartford gives us that image in its current production, even if the 17 just barely fit across the stage without the dancers on the ends having to play footsie with the audience.
The small theater — small for a big-cast musical, at least — has a thrust of a playing area, with the audience on three sides. The fourth side is a back wall where the dancers stretch across the stage. Or squeeze across the stage. At the top of the play, when several extra dancers join the 17 principals, all doing their step-kick-walk-walk-walk routines before the first cut, you almost fear for the cast; one extra-enthusiastic arm extension and someone might blacken an eye.
By necessity, this production has to be a different sort of “Chorus Line.” But the unusual 26-foot-by-26-foot playing area — described in the program, sensibly, as a rehearsal studio rather than the traditional setting of a Broadway stage — inspires some choreographic choices that lift the show to its heights. It turns out the theater space is one of the top performers in this problematic but lovable and sometimes exhilarating production.
Those eager for the songs by Marvin Hamlisch and Edward Kleban will be most pleased. The choral numbers — the opening “I Hope I Get It,” the concluding “One” — are sung with gusto and charm, and solo lines from Ben Cooley, Kayla Starr Bryan, Jared Starkey and others reveal just how much talent is behind that unified sound. Ms. Bryan, Tracey Mellon and Sarah Kozlow offer a shimmering, heartfelt “At the Ballet,” an early assurance that the show is going to be just fine. The number is also well acted, as the women recall their inspirations — some positive, some not — to take up toe shoes. As Sheila, the line’s oldest and most cynical dancer, Ms. Mellon is another reason to trust the production. She’s stellar.
Bobbi Barricella is another standout as Diana, who decries a demeaning teacher in “Nothing.” She comes off as more mature than many Dianas, perhaps because this cast is relatively young; I counted 10 program biographies in which performers note that they’re still in college. The large cast features only two members of Actors’ Equity Association, the professional union.
Those two, Eric S. Robertson as the director, Zach, and Michelle Pruiett as his onetime love, the job-seeking Cassie, bring more seasoned chops to the production. Mr. Robertson, button-down in a Rick Santorum-style sweater vest (not the only odd costume choice), goes for focused and proper when pulling out the personal lives of the performers auditioning, and he’s a good dancer in his limited opportunities to show those skills. Ms. Pruiett makes for a dynamic Cassie, finding a range of levels as an actress and displaying technique and passion in her dance solo and vocals for “The Music and the Mirror.” But their scenes together lack a certain chemistry.
Still, you can believe them in their roles, which isn’t always the case in this ensemble. While the cast is skilled, you have to suspend your disbelief to see this as a Broadway-level dance audition. If you concentrate on what works, however, there are some exciting take-aways.
The montage of “Hello 12, Hello 13, Hello Love” into the jubilant “Gimme the Ball” (led by Ronnie Bowman Jr.’s Richie, in the zone and loving it) becomes like a club scene in its loose, playful joy. Darlene Zoller’s choreography offers ever-changing rotating crosses and many circles and squares, refreshing looks for “Chorus Line” and a smart choice for these particular dancers. Thank Christopher Bell, the lighting designer, for his care here and throughout the show. Also thank Sean Harris — who, with Ms. Zoller, is co-director — for abetting the cast’s well-defined characterizations and interaction during the intermission-free production.
There are other treats. Andee Buccheri is a confident Val, giving “Dance: 10; Looks: Three” a wit that befits its celebration of cosmetic surgery, and Tino Ardiente brings welcome subtlety to the hesitant, damaged Paul. Kudos also to Rina Maejima’s elfin Connie; Mallory Cunningham’s pitch-challenged Christine; the smoothly professional Spencer Pond as the dance captain, Larry; and Alex Polzun’s back flip.
If you are disturbed by amplification — I’m not, so much, but others speak with messianic zeal on the point — you’ll be annoyed that everyone wears a mike, seemingly unnecessary in such a small space. But as with the whole of this production, which understands the play’s sublime sense of the special individuals amid the collective, look for the good. You’ll find it.