Brock Turner, the former Stanford University student convicted of sexually assaulting an unconscious woman behind a Dumpster on campus, described his actions as the product of a culture of drinking, peer pressure and “sexual promiscuity,” according to his courtroom statement.
In his letter to the judge, Mr. Turner blamed a “party culture” and drinking at Stanford University for his actions in the sexual assault case.
The case has spurred a national uproar because of a sentence criticized as far too lenient and a statement by the defendant’s father complaining that his son’s life had been ruined for “20 minutes of action.” The judge is also facing a recall effort and has received threats of violence to him and his family, an official said.
The 23-year-old victim read her own statement in court, recounting the horror of finding out details of her attack on the news (she had been intoxicated and could not remember the assault) and having to break the news to her family.
The night the news came out I sat my parents down and told them that I had been assaulted, to not look at the news because it’s upsetting, just know that I’m okay, I’m right here, and I’m okay. But halfway through telling them, my mom had to hold me because I could no longer stand up. I was not okay.
The Santa Clara County government released the more-than-7,000-word statement read by the victim in the courtroom. She detailed the shock of finding out what happened to her after the attack, and the wrenching aftermath.
Mr. Turner said the events of that night had left him “a changed person.” In addition to his six-month jail sentence — far less than the 14-year maximum — he will serve three years’ probation and must register as a sex offender. He also lost his swimming scholarship to Stanford.
In his letter, he said the woman had consented to the sexual encounter, even as he admitted “imposing trauma and pain” on her. He repeatedly cited an environment of peer pressure, drinking and promiscuity, factors he said he would use his time on probation to advocate against.
The victim’s statement went viral after it was published last week by BuzzFeed. It was read live on CNN by the anchor Ashleigh Banfield on Monday. On Wednesday afternoon, Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York said that his wife, Chirlane McCray, and other figures would read the statement from Gracie Mansion in a video posted to his Facebook page.