SANTA CLARA, Calif. — Christian Pulisic and his father, Mark, were video chatting on Sunday from separate continents. They had a lot of things to discuss.
The previous night in Kansas City, Kan., Pulisic, at 17 years 212 days, had become the youngest player to score a goal for the United States national team — at least in the institutional memory of American soccer and for certain since 1990, when the federation began stringent record keeping. Mark Pulisic had watched the game from Verl, Germany, reclined on a hotel bed with an iPad in his hands. As he fought off sleep in the middle of the night, the sight of his son celebrating had had the surreal feeling of a dream.
Their conversation the next day, though, turned out to be short. Everything was awesome, his son told him, but actually, he added, he needed to run. He had to go eat with the guys.
In many ways, Christian Pulisic is an everyday American teenager. He plays Ping-Pong and pickup basketball to kill time. He loves LeBron James and listens to Justin Bieber. He has a few more inches to grow (he presumably hopes). He has dabbed in public.
But the developments in the last six months of his life have been rather extraordinary. Since January, he has worked his way into the first team of Borussia Dortmund, one of the top clubs in Europe. In April, he scored his first Bundesliga goal. A week later, he scored his second. By then, he had already made his first appearance for the United States senior team, and this month he will be on the American squad when it opens the Copa América Centenario tournament against Colombia on Friday night at Levi’s Stadium.
That combination of obvious talent and tangible early success, in turn, has begun a familiar American swirl of hype, expectation and apprehension.
The game in the United States, while embraced in greater numbers every year, remains without a universally talismanic personality. Soccer, more than many other team sports, welcomes young prodigies into the ranks of its adult players. There has thus long been a discernible yearning in the collective mind of American fans for a young superstar to carry that mantle as the One, and Pulisic’s emergence has started those conversations anew.
It is a process that has made people close to him uneasy.
Lessons learned from young players of the past have made many people hesitate to place expectations on teenage players. But with Pulisic, it has not stopped the chatter altogether.
Last week, Thomas Rongen, a former United States under-20 coach, told The New York Daily News, “I really think that Pulisic is going to be the best player the United States has ever produced.” SB Nation produced an online video that suggested, “Christian Pulisic might be U.S. Soccer’s best young talent ever.” Pulisic shared the video on his Facebook page on Saturday morning, adding an emoji of a smiley face wearing sunglasses.
Friends, family members, coaches and teammates have lauded Pulisic’s level head and humble attitude. They say he has maintained a quiet, deferential presence around his older teammates, but they have embraced him as a colleague — even if Kyle Beckerman, a 34-year-old midfielder, could only laugh when asked what it was like to have a teammate half his age.
Pulisic’s confidence emerged from a young age. Growing up in Hershey, Pa., he generally played two years above his age. When he trained as a 14-year-old with Becher’s team, it was with men in their 20s and 30s. He rarely dominated games, but his physical and psychological limits were constantly pushed.
Even before his teenage years, Pulisic could play the ball with either foot and had an innate sense of movement. But he was always small for his age. The early teenage years can be a worrisome period for soccer players and the coaches monitoring them, and Pulisic faced the normal questions: Will he grow? Will his muscles develop? Will the developments manifest as strength, or clumsiness?
A timely growth spurt as he was training in U.S. Soccer’s youth residency program helped attract the attention of overseas clubs, including Dortmund.
“Once he got that quickness and burst, it really brought out all the ability he already had,” said Steve Klein, a family friend who helped coach Pulisic at the club and youth national team levels.
In 2014, Pulisic and his father moved to Dortmund, where they live now in a four-bedroom townhouse. (Mark Pulisic took a youth coaching position at Dortmund when Christian signed there as a 16-year-old last January.) His sister, stepbrother and mother, Kelley, still live in the United States. Pulisic is too young to drive in Germany, so he gets rides to practice from his father and takes the train around the city. After two years of daily lessons, and games of pickup basketball and H-O-R-S-E at Dortmund’s training site, he speaks German conversationally.
Dortmund has been conscious of controlling Pulisic’s media exposure this spring, even as his play began to attract international attention, and Mark Pulisic was happy to learn this week that U.S. Soccer was limiting his son’s media obligations to postgame interviews.
But the attention may keep growing, particularly if Pulisic plays well at the Copa América, where he is expected, at least in the early going, to provide Klinsmann with a spark off the bench. Already, he has showed flashes of the subtle traits that capture fans’ imaginations, and hinted at bigger things: a feathery first touch, elastic ankles, rhythmic running and a willingness to mix it up.
Pulisic received a loud cheer on Saturday when he entered the Bolivia game for the final 20 minutes. Fans behind one of the goals began chanting his name before he even touched the ball. His goal, in the 69th minute, was a simple finish and, in a blowout game, largely trivial. But the entire team jogged over to congratulate Pulisic as he celebrated. His forehead came up only to the shoulders of most of his teammates.
After the game, he stood for a short interview in which he played down his first goal.
When he was finished, he walked over to sign autographs for a small group of waiting fans.
Typical teenager stuff.