BEIJING — The Obama administration plans to use annual talks with leaders in Beijing to push for cuts in excess Chinese industrial output, which has inundated foreign markets with discounted steel, aluminum and other products, Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew said in Beijing on Sunday ahead of the meeting.
The talks, known as the U.S.-China Strategic and Economic Dialogue, bring together senior American and Chinese officials every year to discuss a broad range of economic, foreign policy and security concerns. On the economic side of the talks, China’s exchange rate controls and intellectual property violations will be high on the American agenda, while North Korea and the South China Sea are expected to dominate the security talks.
But Mr. Lew said the economic track of the meeting in the Chinese capital this year would also take up China’s flood of exports of steel and other products, which have spilled into the international marketplace, provoking anger from producers, unions and politicians.
“Excess capacity is not just a domestic issue,” Mr. Lew told an audience of students and academics at Tsinghua University ahead of the start of the dialogue on Monday.
A senior Chinese official said last week that his side was prepared to discuss excess capacity but was vague about how China would respond.
“We cannot wait just because the burden is heavy, or fail to act just because there are many hardships,” Mr. Xi said at a meeting of policy makers in May in which the program for cutting excess capacity was discussed, according to an official summary.
But the Chinese government’s plans remain opaque, and, meanwhile, much of that excess output is being sold on foreign markets where other manufacturers are struggling to compete with China’s much cheaper production.
The cut-price exports of solar panels, aluminum and other goods have become especially contentious during the American presidential race. Donald J. Trump and Bernie Sanders have both argued strongly that trade agreements have been unfairly tilted against American workers.
In March, the United States put a tariff of 266 percent on some Chinese steel makers for selling below cost. And last month, in separate actions, the Commerce Department announced duties of 450 percent and 522 percent on some imports of Chinese steel.
Mr. Lew appeared to wager that he could help win more action from Beijing by putting excess capacity high on the agenda before the Group of 20 summit meeting of leaders of the major economies, which China will hold in the eastern city of Hangzhou in September. China is also trying to win official status as a market economy from the United States and European Union, which would make it easier for its manufacturers to ward off punitive tariffs on exports.
Mr. Lew said the Obama administration was watching to see whether changes introduced by the Chinese authorities in August amounted to a real, lasting step toward loosening controls on the renminbi exchange rate. China devalued the currency by almost 2 percent, and the central bank, the People’s Bank of China, said at the time that market forces would play a bigger role in setting the value of the currency.
In recent months, he noted, China has sometimes acted to strengthen the value of the renminbi, making imports into China more attractive, rather than weakening the currency. More recently, the yuan has weakened against the dollar to levels not seen in five years.
The strategic dialogue began nearly 10 years ago in George W. Bush’s administration as an effort for the United States and China to set an agenda for the most important issues and find a path to solving them. In 2009, it grew from an economic focus to include security issues. The meeting has evolved into a set of talks involving hundreds of officials meeting over several days to discuss issues as diverse as civilian aviation and the protection of elephants, as well as the big economic and security matters.
But with Mr. Xi concentrating more power in his own hands, the usefulness of such a wide-ranging exercise may have outrun itself, some Americans said. Mr. Xi opened the dialogue with a speech, and his closest economic adviser, Liu He, met with Mr. Lew on Sunday.
With the Obama administration in its final lap and a leadership transition looming in China next year, it is unlikely that this year’s dialogue will result in any breakthroughs, said Eswar S. Prasad, professor of trade policy at Cornell University.
“While the dialogue will include many top-level Chinese technocrats, there is a widespread perception that their influence on economic policies and reforms has been circumscribed by the rising concentration of power in the hands of President Xi and a close circle of his aides,” he said.
The new American president — whether Donald J. Trump or Hillary Clinton — would be unlikely to continue the annual talks in such a broad manner, Professor Prasad said. Top officials on both sides probably view the dialogue this year “as their last waltz together,” he said.