MINNEAPOLIS — On a recent episode of his late-night show, Stephen Colbert poured himself a bowl of Lucky Charms cereal and then doused it in Baileys Irish Cream, jokingly referring to the concoction as an Irish continental breakfast.
Then Mr. Colbert’s first guest, Tom Hanks, demanded his own bowl, sarcastically noting that it was “not exactly the ‘breakfast of champions,’” a reference to the decades-old slogan for Wheaties.
The sequence delighted officials and employees at General Mills, which makes both Lucky Charms and Wheaties, among other products.
“It was organic,” said Bridget Christenson, communications manager for General Mills, noting that the company has no commercial arrangement with Mr. Colbert or his show.
The gag recalled mid-20th-century radio and television advertising, when companies like General Mills owned or sponsored programs as vehicles to pitch their products. Often, the show’s stars did the pitching. When Gracie Allen struggled to bake a cake on “The George Burns and Gracie Allen Show” in the 1950s, an actress playing Betty Crocker stopped by to help. The Lone Ranger endorsed Cheerios, which sponsored that TV show from 1949 to 1957, and children were encouraged to send away for promotional products like toy guns and miniature cowboys and Indians.
It also illustrated how deeply many of General Mills’ products — and even some of its marketing slogans — have become ingrained in pop culture consciousness.
“To me, a great brand is a story told well, and a lot of General Mills’ portfolio has done just that,” said Dean Crutchfield, a branding expert in New York.
By 1980, General Mills had accumulated so much brand memorabilia that the company established an archive at its headquarters, in Golden Valley, Minn. The archive grew with the 2001 purchase of Pillsbury, a Minneapolis milling rival with its own rich marketing history. Several years ago, General Mills moved the archive to a former Pillsbury building in Minneapolis near the Mississippi River, not far from the site of its first flour mill.
The archive, which is closed to the public, houses thousands of artifacts in about 3,000 square feet of temperature- and humidity-controlled space. In honor of the company’s 150th anniversary, General Mills made selected items from the archive available to members of the news media.
Among the photos, packaging and promotional items are an early rendering of the character Betty Crocker, who was created in 1921 to answer consumers’ baking questions; cookbooks from the 1880s, when General Mills was known as the Washburn Crosby Company; some of the first clay animation models of Poppin’ Fresh, the Pillsbury Doughboy; and a box of Cheerioats, the original name of Cheerios. The name was changed in 1945 to settle a trademark lawsuit.
Ms. Faucher said consumers and longtime employees had contributed some items to the collection and archivists had discovered others on eBay. Three shelves contain two copies of virtually every printing of the Betty Crocker cookbook since 1950. The book is known as “big red” for the original’s color and thickness.
One item not in the collection: the gold medal that Gold Medal flour is named for, won at the first Millers International Exhibition in 1880. Washburn Crosby swept all three medals in the contest, but the gold and bronze ones disappeared in the 1890s. The silver medal remains in the archive.
Many artifacts illustrate how marketing and advertising have evolved. Wheaties made its debut as Washburn’s Gold Medal Whole Wheat Flakes in 1922, only to be renamed two years later in a companywide contest.
Washburn Crosby hired a quartet to sing an early commercial jingle, “Have You Tried Wheaties?,” live on the company’s radio station, WCCO, in 1926. (The call letters stand for Washburn Crosby Company.) So-called Wheaties quartets were hired later in other cities. In 1934, Lou Gehrig was the first athlete featured on a Wheaties box — though he appeared on the back.
Through its sponsorship of radio programs like the “Betty Crocker Cooking School of the Air” and one of the earliest soap operas, “Betty and Bob,” General Mills introduced its products from coast to coast. Programs often began on WCCO before being syndicated nationally, Mr. Forsythe said.
The Betty Crocker program ran on the radio for 27 years before moving to television, where the actress Adelaide Hawley played Betty. (It was Ms. Hawley who offered Ms. Allen a hand in the kitchen.) General Mills later sponsored cartoons, notably “Rocky and His Friends” and “The Bullwinkle Show” from 1959 to 1964. In a nod to the company’s roots, Rocky and Bullwinkle lived in the fictitious Frostbite Falls, Minn.
Decades later, many still endure. Tacked to a bulletin board near Ms. Faucher’s desk is a testament to the lasting impact of the most iconic General Mills character. It is a life insurance solicitation, addressed to Mrs. B. Crocker.