After almost 800 N.H.L. goals, after 21 All-Star stints, after six Most Valuable Player Awards, Gordie Howe left hockey a bit sad. He had wanted to play on the same team with his sons.
And then, two years into his retirement, the fledgling World Hockey Association beckoned with a team in Houston. Howe’s boys Mark, 18, and Marty, 19, were drafted. And Howe joined them.
Howe and his boys came up to The New York Times to hype the new league and their roles. It was 1973, and Howe was 45. He was still famous, a member of the Hall of Fame, almost 200 goals ahead of anyone who had ever played.
I had written about him many times, awed by his dominance of his sport in a way, I imagined, that Babe Ruth had taken over baseball, the way Muhammad Ali had overshadowed boxing. Everyone was in awe of Howe — even opposing players.
While the public thought of him as Mr. Hockey, to teammates and opponents, Howe, who died Friday at 88, was known as Power. He had started playing for Detroit shortly after World War II, in an era when everyone in the N.H.L. was Canadian, when there were only six teams, just 120 players. Most of them were high school dropouts because of the junior system in effect at the time: You wanted to make it to the N.H.L., you had better play junior hockey, which had a punishing schedule that left little time for schoolbooks.
Howe was the league’s official greeter. His was a time when you did not complain about a hit to the head (“tape an aspirin on it,” was the general advice). When the Rangers’ future star Brad Park legally checked Howe in their first meeting, Howe flicked out his stick — and Park went down with a sliced cheek, the blade of Howe’s stick just missing his eye.
There were many players who believed that Howe was the dirtiest player in the N.H.L. But by no stretch of the imagination was he a goon. He was a smooth-as-silk skater, a DiMaggio on the ice, effortless, it seemed. And yet he played all out, and played. In 17 seasons he never missed a game. In two other seasons he missed only one — and yet he played his last 20 years with a permanent twitch as a result of a concussion.
I knew nothing of hockey when The Times assigned me to the game in the mid-1960s. And yet the first time I saw Howe, I understood what the superlatives were all about. With his loping style, he cradled the puck as if it were a baby — and then he’d switch the stick to his right hand and straight-arm an opponent with his left, sending him tumbling, all the while sailing straight ahead. And then he would look to his right, as if about to pass the disc to a teammate. Instead, he would flick his wrist — and blast home a goal. Just like that.
The numbers are so huge they almost make no sense. In his 23rd season, he set a record for right wings for total points and assists. He appeared in 11 Stanley Cup finals, the Wings winning four during a six-year span. He captured six scoring championships and yet never produced a 50-goal season or a game in which he scored more than three goals. He just did everything right, all the time.
But in 1973, in the offices of The Times, wearing a suit, Howe was a doting father and not a scary opponent. In fact, the old man did not look so big. When he played, at 6 feet and 200 pounds or so, he was larger than most of his opponents.
Gordie was amazed at this new world of money in sports.
“Each of my boys will earn more money on the interest of their salary than I earned after 10 years in the league,” he said. He was slated to make more money over the next four years than he had in his first 20 with Detroit.
Howe did not hesitate. He had been given a front-office job with the Red Wings in which his duties apparently entailed nothing more than smiling. For Howe, the guy who was always in charge on the ice, it was demeaning.
Remarkably, Howe went on to play seven more seasons, although when you think of the big guy he’s wearing a Red Wings uniform with the number 9. That number, in fact, was a badge of honor for anyone on another team. You had to be the best to get that number, and it generally was reserved for only a star player.
But when all was said and done, Howe’s proudest moments came as a father. And it’s how I remember him, close to his two boys, looking at them proudly.