The Rio de Janeiro Olympic Games, from Aug. 5 to 21, are the first to be held in South America, and they come with some baggage. Brazil’s chaotic and ever-changing political situation, concerns about the Zika virus, security issues: All of these are contributing to trepidation from North Americans, who are reconsidering whether to venture south for the Games.
A recent survey of travel agents by the travel technology company Trisept Solutions showed that 63 percent had seen less interest in these Olympics than in previous destinations like London and Beijing, with 88 percent stating that they had not seen an increase in interest in traveling to Rio for the Games.
Numbers may be down, but this means that those who do decide to go can find many ways to save money, even with less than two months left.
“For Americans, the strong dollar should be a major factor for them to book their trip to Brazil now,” said João Rodrigues, an executive at FSB, which handles North American public relations for the Brazilian Tourism Board. The strength of the dollar (now worth about 3.4 Brazilian reals, compared to 2.26 two years ago at the time of the Brazil World Cup), coupled with Brazil’s economic recession, means that prices have dropped significantly for visiting Americans.
When it comes to getting to Rio, airfare is still affordable. “Airfare has consistently been much less expensive than for the World Cup, and even less expensive than New Year in Rio,” said Julia Carter, the director of sales at Brazil Nuts, a United States-based tour operator specializing in South America. Her agency is offering air-and-hotel packages of $2,599 a person for five nights in an Ipanema hotel, with nonstop flights from Miami to Rio. No event tickets or extra luxuries are included, but this is enough to get most visitors started.
Saving more on airfare might mean missing the beginning of the Games, but it could still be worth it. Aislyn Greene, the South America editor at Afar magazine, said that deals kick in if you’re willing to arrive after the opening ceremony.
When it comes to finding a hotel, it’s mid-range or below at this point, with the five-star properties fully booked. But Ms. Carter said that prices for three-star hotels are dropping.
To save even more, look to AirBnB, which is an official sponsor of the Games and which announced that it would have 25,000 accommodation options available.
She also recommends AlltheRooms.com, which aggregates information from several home-sharing sites like VRBO, HomeAway and Flipkey.
There are other factors to consider, too. Brazil has waived its usual visa requirements for travel between June 1 and Sept. 18 for citizens of the United States, Canada, Japan and Australia (Americans normally pay $160 for a visa). Visitors can pick up a Rio Cultural Passport for 15 reals, which gives free or discounted access to more than 700 cultural attractions and events, as well as discounted weekend metro fares during the Games.
For those who would rather avoid the subway, Bike Rio has bicycle rental stations in the neighborhoods where the majority of Olympic events are taking place: Copacabana, Barra, Deodoro and Maracanã. These cost 5 reals for an hour (a single ticket on the subway is 4.10 reals), and they are an easy way to get around if you’re staying in those areas.
Then there’s the time difference: While attendees flying from the East Coast to London and Beijing had to contend with time differences of five and 12 hours, respectively, there’s just a one-hour difference between New York and Rio de Janeiro, which means that there’s no losing a day to the fog of jet lag. And while travelers should exercise caution when it comes to Zika, August is winter in Brazil, the period in which transmission of mosquito-borne diseases is lowest.
“Probably the biggest value advantage consumers will find is the last-minute thing — they’re going to get a better deal now than they would have for Beijing or London,” Ms. Carter said. “If you’ve been thinking about going, the price in most cases should be lower than it was a year ago,” she added, although she cautioned that it might not be quite as much of a bargain as consumers are anticipating.
