GOSHEN, N.Y. — Ten days after Vincent Viafore disappeared in the frigid waters of the Hudson River, Angelika Graswald, his fiancée, had a run-in with police detectives that would prove pivotal in the case, an investigator testified on Tuesday at a pretrial hearing here.
On April 29, 2015, Ms. Graswald went to Bannerman Island, where the couple had kayaked earlier that month, to lay a wreath in his memory. Investigators were there to look for any clues in what was still being treated as an accidental drowning. The body of Mr. Viafore, 46, would not be found until late May last year.
In his testimony, Aniello Moscato, a senior investigator with the New York State Police, said Ms. Graswald had called him that April morning. The two had been in touch daily during the search for the body.
At that point, Mr. Moscato said, he suggested that Ms. Graswald might be more comfortable talking privately with Donald DeQuarto, the investigator with whom she had been working most closely.
Shortly afterward, Mr. DeQuarto told Mr. Moscato that Ms. Graswald had admitted removing a plug from her fiancé’s kayak, a detail that prosecutors have seized on as evidence in their murder case against her.
“I said, ‘You’ve got to be kidding me; she told you that?’” Mr. Moscato testified. “I was in shock.” He added that after Mr. Viafore vanished, “she was being treated like a widow, a grieving widow.” The couple shared an apartment in Poughkeepsie and had planned to be married on the beach in Latvia, where Ms. Graswald was born.
The pretrial hearing, known as a Huntley hearing, is an opportunity for the defense to challenge the way in which the police obtained their evidence. Ms. Graswald’s lawyer, Richard A. Portale, has said he does not want jurors to have access to an 11-hour police interrogation video, arguing that incriminating remarks by his client were coerced.
Ms. Graswald, 36, was charged with second-degree murder hours after the encounter with the police on Bannerman Island. Investigators have said she not only removed the plug of Mr. Viafore’s kayak but also tampered with his paddle, which she moved out of his reach as he struggled in the water. She was motivated, they say, by two insurance policies totaling $250,000 of which she was the beneficiary.
Mr. Moscato also testified that on the Friday after Mr. Viafore vanished, Ms. Graswald invited him to a nightclub, along with other search-and-rescue workers. “She wanted all the people assisting with the search to join her at the party,” he said.
When Mr. Moscato saw Ms. Graswald on April 29 on Bannerman Island, he and another investigator asked her to walk them through the places she had gone with Mr. Viafore in the hours before his kayak capsized. Mr. Portale has said the reason Mr. Viafore drowned is that he was not wearing a life jacket during their paddle through rough water back to shore.
Mr. Moscato also testified that Ms. Graswald, who had arrived in the United States as an au pair, was cagey about where she and Mr. Viafore had beached their kayaks on their visit.
“We were joking about the boat breaking down and if I fell into the water,” Mr. Moscato said. “She would save me if I’m not a good swimmer or whatever.” The police had detected that type of behavior in the days following Mr. Viafore’s drowning, when Ms. Graswald posted lighthearted photographs and videos to Facebook.
Ms. Graswald has been in the Orange County Jail since her arrest on April 30 of last year. The hearing, which began on Monday, is to continue on Thursday. No trial date is scheduled.