Mack Rice, whose biggest hit as a singer and songwriter was the enduring rhythm-and-blues classic “Mustang Sally,” died on Monday at his home in Detroit. He was 82.
The cause was complications of Alzheimer’s disease, said a spokeswoman for his family, Pat Lewis.
Detroit became his home, but Memphis and Stax Records were Mr. Rice’s muse. His “Mustang Sally” and “Respect Yourself,” a hit for the Staple Singers that he wrote with Luther Ingram, have been recorded by artists ranging from B. B. King to Bruce Willis.
He was born Bonny Rice in Clarksdale, Miss., on Nov. 10, 1933, to Robert McIlvaine and Irene Williamson. (Rice was his mother’s original last name.) Ike Turner, who was two years older and would also become a professional musician, was a boyhood mentor.
“Ike was trying to teach me to play piano, but I wasn’t interested,” Mr. Rice recalled in an interview with The Commercial Appeal of Memphis in 2007.
In 1950, he moved with his family to Detroit, where he graduated from high school. After he served in the Army in Germany, his mother showed him a newspaper advertisement that said a local R&B group called the Falcons was recruiting singers.
He soon began singing with the Falcons, whose other members included Wilson Pickett, Joe Stubbs and Eddie Floyd. But he would find real fame as a songwriter.
“Mustang Sally” began as “Mustang Mama,” which he was inspired to write by the newly introduced Ford Mustang sports car. It was Aretha Franklin, the pianist on Mr. Rice’s demo of the song, who persuaded him to rename it.
He recorded “Mustang Sally” as Sir Mack Rice in 1965 (he was knighted by the record’s producer, Andre Williams), and it reached No. 15 on the Billboard R&B chart.
A year later, Pickett’s recording of the song, with its “Ride, Sally, ride” chorus, became a phenomenon. The song was ranked No. 434 on Rolling Stone’s list of “The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time” published in 2004, and covered by the Rascals and many others.
Mr. Rice also wrote for the Stax recording artists Albert King (“Cadillac Assembly Line”), Johnnie Taylor (“Cheaper to Keep Her”) and Rufus Thomas (“Do the Funky Penguin”).
He later ran an asphalt company in Detroit, performed at festivals and continued to record until he retired in 2006.
He is survived by his wife, Laura Mauldin; his sons, Rodney, Dwayne and Bonny Jr.; and two sisters, Mary Lee and Berta Lee.