The Chicks, whose bluegrass roots and rock ’n’ roll spirit broke down country music barriers and made them the best-selling female band of all time in the United States, were in the middle of a lengthy hiatus. The trio had not been heard from since scaling back a 2006 tour that suffered from continuing reverberations from “the incident”: a remark the singer Natalie Maines had made about President George W. Bush a few years earlier.
“I was feeling like maybe our time had passed, and this was Taylor’s time,” said Ms. Maguire. Then Ms. Swift covered the Chicks’ 1999 hit “Cowboy Take Me Away,” much to her daughters’ astonishment, and the crowd sang along. Loudly.
But live, the trio sounds like it has never been away. “I just wait for it to feel right, and it felt right,” said Ms. Maines, 41, on the night before the 53-city “DCX MMXVI Tour” kicked off. The Chicks gathered in a backstage lounge at the Riverbend Music Center, an outdoor amphitheater on the banks of the Ohio River here, and happily talked over one another, making their decision to return to the spotlight sound casual and carefree.
If the Riverbend audience is representative, the Chicks’ fans are primed for this comeback. The sold-out show cleared more than 20,000 tickets, one of their biggest crowds ever. Forty-something fans filled the more expensive seats under the roof, while packs of raucous college-age women in tank tops, jean shorts and boots packed the lawn area.
The rise and fall of the Dixie Chicks, with its extreme highs and lows, seems practically scripted for maximum drama. Ms. Strayer, 43, who plays banjo and guitar, and Ms. Maguire, 46, a fiddle player, are sisters (born Emily and Martha Erwin), who were among the co-founders of the band. It took its name from Little Feat’s hit “Dixie Chicken,” in Dallas in the late 1980s. After a few independent releases and lineup changes, Ms. Maines stepped in as lead singer in 1995.
The group seemed to come out of nowhere when its 1997 album, “Wide Open Spaces,” spun off three No. 1 singles on the country charts and was certified 12 times platinum. Its 1999 follow-up, “Fly,” slightly modernized the band’s sound and style, and sold 10 million copies.
Then, in 2001, the Chicks sued their label, Sony Music, for unpaid royalties; they settled out of court, but it delayed the release of the 2002 acoustic-based “Home.” Though the record’s sound was less conventionally commercial, it sold six million copies.
Though “the incident” has come to largely define the public legacy of the Dixie Chicks, often overwhelming their musical contributions, the band members now seem to shrug it off. They laugh when Ms. Maguire recounts recently visiting a friend, who instructed her not to go into the bathroom because she might be offended by something on the wall — a picture of the family with President Bush.
Ms. Maines has remained active in various social causes. She has been a supporter of the West Memphis Three, a group of Arkansas men convicted of the 1993 murder of three young boys. And on the current tour, she is raising funds for Proclaim Justice, an organization that advocates for the wrongfully imprisoned. Ms. Maines expressed reluctance, though, about getting involved in the current presidential election.
During the concert, the Chicks’ performance of “Ready to Run” was accompanied by video screens with goofy animated images of all the candidates, crosscut with shots of clowns and hot dogs. But one moment in the show received particular attention in the news media: While they sang their 2000 hit “Goodbye Earl,” a tale of a woman and her best friend murdering an abusive husband, a montage of criminals and shady-looking characters through history flashed to a quick shot of Donald J. Trump, with devil horns, a mustache and a goatee scribbled on. In a sign of changing times, it drew cheers.
One thing that never recovered was the Dixie Chicks’ relationship with Nashville. Their last album, the 2006 LP “Taking the Long Way,” took a more pop-oriented direction on its way to winning five Grammy Awards. The band members claim to pay no attention to country music today; Ms. Strayer even needed to describe to the other two last year’s “Tomato-gate” controversy, when an influential radio consultant insisted that country stations needed to limit how much music they play by female artists.
