That feeling of unease intensifies when Eugene V. Kaspersky — the stocky, garrulous, 50-year-old founder and chief executive of the global computer security company — begins to catalog possible threats: The computerized elevator you just left is vulnerable to cyberattacks, as are your smartphone and smartcar. Your bank, without question. Your electricity and water supplies could be at risk. Cybercriminals grow smarter, bolder and more elusive every year.
Kaspersky Lab is most famous for being the home of the brainy geek squad that exposed Stuxnet and Flame, the American-Israeli cyberweapons that disrupted Iran’s nuclear program.
One gang alone is believed to have stolen up to $1 billion from banks, mainly in Russia, in 2013 and 2014. And this month, Kaspersky Lab experts helped Russia catch its largest hacking gang yet — 50 people were arrested and accused of stealing $45 million since 2011. Investigators now believe the North Korean government hacked an international financial messaging system in February in an effort to drain $1 billion from the central bank of Bangladesh. They managed to get $81 million before the Federal Reserve Bank of New York became suspicious and cut off the transaction.
After banks, commodities are a big new target. Hackers manipulate supply records, disguising surpluses to sell. “We now have reports that it is massive, it is everywhere,” said Mr. Kaspersky, who speaks colorful English with a Russian accent.
Mr. Kaspersky is something of an anomaly in Russia, a businessman who built a global brand from scratch, using brains and persistence. His firm is among the most successful international computer security operations in the world, with offices in 32 countries, about 400 million people using its software (by its own estimate) and high-profile advertising campaigns, like its sponsorship of Ferrari’s Formula One team.
Some of the questions are rooted in Mr. Kaspersky’s past — even in Russia, where the company and its founder generate both pride and suspicion.
Mr. Kaspersky was born in 1965 in Novorossiysk, on the Black Sea, to an engineer father and a mother working in the national archives. His mother nurtured his early aptitude for mathematics and, after the family moved to Moscow, he blossomed into a prodigy.
After he placed second in a major Russian math contest at age 14, he was recruited by the prestigious Kolmogorov Physics and Mathematics School, a boarding school run by Moscow State University that fosters high school math whizzes.
Mr. Kaspersky went on to a K.G.B.-sponsored university education intended to transform mathematicians into cryptologists, and pictures of him in a K.G.B. uniform are readily available online. “I was not good enough to become a true cryptologist,” he said, laughing.
Instead, he turned to software engineering, becoming the go-to guy in the Red Army for computer problems. “I wrote the code for the Soviet military,” he said.
There is a strong sense in Russia that no company, particularly no computer security company, could succeed without Kremlin support, and Russian tech experts invariably refer to two episodes that fed mistrust.
Mr. Kaspersky once advocated requiring an individual passport for web access, an idea the Kremlin encouraged, although he has come to focus on controlling access only to sites of high national security interest, like utilities. Government critics also found Kaspersky Lab slow to react during protests in 2011, when numerous opposition websites collapsed under a severe criminal attack widely attributed to the Russian government.
In December, Mr. Kaspersky raised questions by signing his first cooperation agreement with a major state-run Chinese enterprise. Some Russian internet experts saw that as proof of choosing sides, becoming the anti-West cybercop and endorsing the Chinese model of a highly filtered internet.
Mr. Kaspersky said his China contract was simply a matter of capitalizing on its need for better security, especially since he sees Russian malware emerging there.
Mr. Kaspersky said he stayed in Russia for its skilled software engineers. He and others attribute their prowess to a Russian educational system that, while less regimented than in Soviet times, still nurtures elite math skills. Widespread hacking is partly rooted in the tradition of not paying a kopeck for anything that could be grabbed free off the web, like software or movies.
Mr. Kaspersky appears in self-effacing nerd mode around Kaspersky Lab headquarters, busing his own cafeteria tray and riding the elevator downstairs to smoke outside like everybody else, despite the vast balcony outside his office.
He claims not to know his net worth, which Forbes recently estimated at $1.1 billion, putting him at 66th among Russia’s top 200 richest people. He wears a Swatch and usually flies commercial airlines. In addition to Formula One, he underwrites various quirky or scientific projects — including the excavation of the mysterious Minoan civilization of Akrotiri, on the Greek island of Santorini — and he delights in exploring remote spots in eastern Russia, the American West and New Zealand, among other places.
Mr. Kaspersky works as his brand’s high-profile envoy, spinning around the globe seemingly at the speed of the lights on his cyberthreat map. His travels last year included 116 flights and included more than 50 presentations. He documents every step on a blog translated into nine languages.
Where Mr. Kaspersky breaks out of the nerd mold is with his brash, booming presence at large corporate events.
Hundreds of Kaspersky employees converge on Moscow twice a year: for the company birthday party in July (when Mr. Kaspersky often serves as the M.C. for a talent contest), and for a New Year’s Eve celebration.
