David Axelrod was having a candid conversation with an old colleague when, almost accidentally, the two made some news.
Mr. Axelrod, a former senior adviser to President Obama, was talking to Eric H. Holder Jr., the former attorney general, on his podcast, “The Axe Files.” He had asked Mr. Holder for his thoughts on Edward J. Snowden, the intelligence contractor who leaked classified documents about the National Security Agency in 2013.
“We can certainly argue about the way in which Snowden did what he did, but I think that he actually performed a public service by raising the debate that we engaged in,” Mr. Holder said.
It was the first such public admission from the man who was the top law enforcement official in the United States when Mr. Snowden fled the country. The podcast comment was covered widely in the news media.
Mr. Holder’s appearance on “The Axe Files” made him another member of a group that might informally be called the Obama-casters. Since the president made a much-noted appearance on the popular podcast “WTF With Marc Maron” in June 2015, three prominent former staffers have started their own shows, sometimes securing lengthy — and occasionally newsworthy — interviews with their administration peers.
Together, the two shows have hosted close to a dozen former and current members of Mr. Obama’s administration, eliciting in-depth conversations with major figures including Samantha Power, the United States ambassador to the United Nations; David Plouffe, who managed Mr. Obama’s 2008 presidential campaign; and Ben Rhodes, a national security adviser.
While administration officials often embrace media roles after leaving the White House, podcast experts say there is something about the medium that makes particular sense for this administration.
Mr. Maron agreed, saying that podcasts help to promote intimate personal discussions, something President Obama embraced during their conversation.
“He’s very human as presidents go, I think,” Mr. Maron said.
Mr. Axelrod, who had not been much of a podcast listener, was taken with the format after hearing Mr. Obama on Mr. Maron’s show.
Neither Mr. Axelrod nor Mr. Favreau sees it as part of their shows’ mission to scoop their more traditional media competitors, but in separate interviews, both men acknowledged that breaking news was desirable because it helped promote their podcasts. And each said that guests would be more likely to speak genuinely without resorting to talking points if they were not expecting an inquisition.
“People are more likely to break news because you sit, and you’re comfortable and you’re having a conversation and you let your guard down a little bit more” on podcasts, Mr. Favreau said.
Administration officials have also been known to express irritation with more traditional media outlets, and Mr. Favreau said that the podcasts provide an antidote to the rushed discussion that is typical of cable news.
“Those of us who were in the Obama White House, that was always sort of our critique of the Washington political conversation: That it was surface level, and it was a way of relaying talking points and repeating conventional wisdom,” he said.
