Shelby Miller got back on the winning track after a short stint on the disabled list.
Miller threw six and two-thirds sharp innings, Jake Lamb hit a two-run homer, and the Arizona Diamondbacks beat the reeling Phillies, 3-1, on Monday to complete a four-game sweep in Philadelphia. Miller (2-6) allowed one run and five hits, striking out five in his first start since May 24.
The Phillies went 0-6 in their first winless homestand of six or more games since Sept. 21-27, 1964, when they went 0-7 at Connie Mack Stadium before losing three more games in a monumental collapse from first place.
The Phillies’ Jeremy Hellickson (4-6) allowed three runs and four hits before getting an out. He rebounded nicely and lasted seven innings.
Jean Segura led off for Arizona with a double and scored on a Phil Gosselin single. Lamb hit a towering shot off the scoreboard in right for his 14th home run and a 3-0 lead.
The Phillies got their only run in the second inning when a Tyler Goeddel double scored Andres Blanco.
AROUND THE MAJORS Mark Reynolds hit two home runs to power the Colorado Rockies to a 5-3 victory over the host Miami Marlins in a record-setting home run contest. Trevor Story, Nick Hundley and Charlie Blackmon also homered for the Rockies, who salvaged the final game of a four-game series. Marcell Ozuna hit two home runs, and Giancarlo Stanton had one for the Marlins. The eight solo home runs accounted for all of the runs scored in the game, setting a major league record. The previous mark was five. Francisco Lindor and Juan Uribe homered in the eighth inning, and the Indians beat the Tampa Bay Rays, 7-4, in Cleveland. Carlos Santana also homered for the American League Central-leading Indians, who have won four straight. Jeff Locke pitched six and two-thirds scoreless innings, Erik Kratz hit his first home run since 2014, and the Pittsburgh Pirates beat visiting San Francisco, 1-0, ending the Giants’ eight-game winning streak. The White Sox escaped a bases-loaded, no-out jam in the ninth, and Jose Abreu doubled home two runs off Red Sox closer Craig Kimbrel with two outs in the top of the 10th inning to lift Chicago to a 3-1 win at Boston.
COLLEGE WORLD SERIES A two-run single by pinch-hitter Ryan Cumberland broke a tie, and Noah Davis and Kyle Nelson combined to hold down the offense of Miami, the No. 3 national seed, as U.C. Santa Barbara won, 5-3, in a College World Series elimination game in Omaha. The Gauchos (43-19-1) kept their first Series appearance going and will play Wednesday against the loser of Monday night’s game between Oklahoma State and Arizona.
The Hurricanes (50-14) went 0-2 for only the second time in their 25 Series appearances. Their other two-and-out was in 1979.
Santa Barbara struck for four runs after a rain delay of 1 hour 2 minutes in the sixth. Cumberland made the score 3-1 with his one-out single down the first-base line, and the Gauchos used back-to-back squeeze plays for two more runs.
Ekaterina Makarova and Elena Vesnina, each a former champion, moved into the second round of the Eastbourne International in England.
Makarova, who established herself on the WTA Tour by capturing the Eastbourne title in 2010 as a 100th-ranked qualifier, fought off five first-set points to beat the wild card Tara Moore, 7-5, 6-4. Vesnina, the 2013 winner, beat Heather Watson, 6-2, 6-3.
There were also victories for Andrea Petkovic, who overcame a challenge by Saisai Zheng to win by 5-7, 6-2, 6-4, and Eugenie Bouchard, who dismissed the qualifier Varvara Lepchenko, 6-1, 6-2.
Vesnina next plays Belinda Bencic, the defending champion.
The International Boxing Federation, a sanctioning body, announced that it would punish boxers who compete in the Rio de Janeiro Olympics by removing them from its rankings or vacating their titles.
The International Boxing Association recently decided to allow professional boxers to try to qualify for the Olympics, but no major fighters have accepted the invitation.
The I.B.F. has joined other sanctioning bodies, fighters and trainers in strongly condemning the plan, citing serious health risks in pitting seasoned pros against amateurs.
The I.B.F. said it would remove any Olympic fighters from its rankings for a year. The federation would also take its title belt away from any champion fighting in the Olympics.
The World Boxing Council had already announced its intention to impose a two-year ban on Olympic fighters.
Although Olympic qualifying continues next month, the likelihood of any prominent pros fighting in Rio appears to be slim.
The Sabres’ general manager, Tim Murray, said he took a calculated risk in acquiring the rights to the prospect forward Jimmy Vesey.
Now the challenge is to sign Vesey, this year’s Hobey Baker Award winner as the top player in college hockey, before he is eligible to become an unrestricted free agent on Aug. 15.
Vesey, 23, is a playmaking forward who completed his senior year at Harvard this year. He opted to become a free agent rather than sign with Nashville, which selected him in the third round of the 2012 draft.
At 6 feet 2 inches and 201 pounds, Vesey led the Eastern College Athletic Conference with 46 points (24 goals, 22 assists) in 33 games this past season. Over all, he had 80 goals and 64 assists in 128 games at Harvard.
DUCKS TRADE GOALIE TO MAPLE LEAFS The Anaheim Ducks traded goalie Frederik Andersen to the Toronto Maple Leafs for two draft picks, the teams announced. Anaheim acquired the 30th overall pick in the coming draft and a second-round choice in 2017 for Andersen, who has shared the Ducks’ crease with John Gibson for the past two seasons.
Andersen and Gibson combined last season to win the Jennings Trophy for the N.H.L.’s lowest goals against average.