In the first five minutes of the new season of “UnREAL,” beginning June 6 on Lifetime, Constance Zimmer’s character, Quinn King, gets a vulgar tattoo, plies executives with cocaine in a Las Vegas hotel room and makes potty-mouthed plans to turn racism into ratings gold.
Quinn, the baroquely profane mentor and nemesis to Shiri Appleby’s mercurial protagonist, Rachel, wields her walkie-talkie like a weapon as she oversees “Everlasting,” the fictional dating show within the show. The competition’s producers push the genre’s routine manipulations, like casting for conflict and orchestrating outbursts, to monstrous extremes. They cajole, threaten and otherwise torment the striving beauties with whatever is handy — last season a contestant with bipolar disorder killed herself after her handler tampered with her mood-stabilizing medication.
“They’re the mole people living behind the walls, preying on the butterflies under the light,” said Sarah Gertrude Shapiro, the former “Bachelor” producer who created “UnREAL” with Marti Noxon.
But beneath the phony glamour and skulduggery is a more searching story about modern romance, gender roles and the price of ambition, one that is exceptional in its primary focus on two flawed and complicated women. Quinn and Rachel are the kind of capable but tormented antiheroes generally played by men, and while various love interests hover at the margins, the women’s convulsive relationship is “the real love story of this show,” Ms. Appleby said.
“It’s a female ‘Breaking Bad’ set on a reality TV show,” Ms. Shapiro said.
Initially, however, she wanted nothing to do with the show. Ms. Zimmer was the first choice to play Quinn, because she can be fiery but also “vulnerable without melodrama,” Ms. Shapiro said. But she turned down the role multiple times, wary both of playing yet another no-nonsense career woman and of starring on a Lifetime show. (“I’ve said this to Lifetime, so they won’t be upset if I say it again,” she said.) The producers hired a different actress but were unsatisfied with the initial pilot, so they went back to the drawing board and renewed their pursuit of Ms. Zimmer.
In 2002, she got her first role as a series regular, as a sarcastic assistant on the sitcom “Good Morning Miami.” The show lasted less than two seasons, but soon after she joined the Hollywood lad fantasy “Entourage,” in perhaps still her most well-known role. As the film executive Dana Gordon, her main job was to clash affectionately with Jeremy Piven’s Ari Gold. The character solidified her smart-sexy-tough type, leading to roles as a lawyer (“Boston Legal”), a withering political operative (“The Newsroom”) and a shady bureaucrat (“Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.”).
Asked why she thinks it took so long to get a starring role, Ms. Zimmer took a sip of water and shrugged. “I don’t know, why does it take women so long to get what they deserve in general?” she said.
