Ever since the mid-1980s, Thirstin Howl the 3rd had been saving everything: every photo of him and his friends, dressed in head-to-toe Polo; every last mention of his gang, the Lo Lifes, in a media publication, large or small. The clothes, the accessories, the ephemera. Over the years, his life became a museum.
“I’ve been documenting this story without even knowing I was documenting,” he said recently, discussing the impending release of “Bury Me With the Lo On,” a thick, ostentatious and loving coffee-table book that captures the history of a certain subculture of Polo obsession, beginning with the Lo Lifes, the Brooklyn gang that he helped found that terrorized department stores from the mid-1980s to the early 1990s.
All of the blueprints for hip-hop’s current obsession with fashion are contained herein: the laserlike focus on brand, the lifestyle aspiration, the subversion. Today, the genre’s stars collaborate with high-fashion houses or create their own clothing lines. None of that would have been possible without the Lo Life blueprint.
The Lo Lifes formed in 1988 from the union of two shoplifting crews from Brooklyn: Ralphie’s Kids from Crown Heights, and Polo U.S.A. from Brownsville.
“Bury Me” is made up of vintage photos, largely from the Thirstin Howl archive, and regal current-day portraits of Lo Lifes and Polo obsessives shot by Tom Gould, a young photographer from Auckland, New Zealand, who moved to New York in 2009 with an interest in hip-hop and graffiti and an urge to document the culture he had studied only from afar. He met Mr. DeJesus the following year.
Indeed, one of the most striking aspects of this book is, in Mr. Gould’s portraits of Lo Life founders, how good the clothes themselves look, still department-store crisp despite two-plus decades of wear. Each member’s portrait is paired with vintage photos, as well as a first-person account of his relationship to the brand, often relating wild stories of teenage shoplifting.
And the book’s vintage photos are consistently thrilling, from the ones capturing parties where dozens of teenagers wore stolen Polo head to toe, to one Lo Life member’s grinning 1988 Bloomingdale’s security mug shot, which he stole from the store.
“The first generation, it was straight ’hood,” Mr. DeJesus said. “It was criminal. You’d get robbed. You’d have to rob.” But by the mid-’90s, things were beginning to change. Polo had gained a foothold in hip-hop, and many Lo Lifes had died or were in prison. After completing the last of several prison stints in 1994, he went straight and brought his crew with him.
Initially there were tensions between the generations, but those have largely been quelled. Nowadays, the community comes together at Polo clothing conventions or annual events like the Lo Life BBQ in Brooklyn, or Lo Goose on the Deuce, a gathering in Times Square.
Mr. DeJesus isn’t the Polo obsessive he once was. (“I have children, so they ransacked my collection,” he said.) But he recently released a Lo Life clothing line, riffing on vintage Polo motifs.
