FALLUJA, Iraq — In the days leading up to the storming of Falluja by Iraqi forces, Brig. Gen. Hadi Razaij, the leading Sunni police commander in the campaign, sat on a cot in an abandoned house near the front line. He described the resistance that lay ahead: a determined force of hundreds of jihadists that had months to prepare.
General Razaij’s presence on the battlefield shows that local Sunnis, and not just the Shiite forces that now dominate Iraqi politics, are fighting to liberate their own communities, and has helped tamp down fears that the battle for Falluja would heighten sectarian tensions.
He was dispassionate as he described the challenges, but for him the fight was personal, too. General Razaij’s brother stands accused of being a member of the Islamic State and is in a prison cell after being arrested at a checkpoint with a car full of explosives.
In northern Iraq, Nofal Hammadi, the governor-in-exile of Mosul, is working with the United States to plan for that city’s liberation from the Islamic State. He, too, has family in the fight: Mr. Hammadi’s brother is an Islamic State official, having appeared in a video pledging his allegiance to the terror group and disowning his brother.
Even as the central question of Iraq remains unanswered — whether the country’s Sunni minority and Shiite majority can ever peacefully coexist in a unified state — the experiences of General Razaij, Mr. Hammadi and others add a troubling corollary: It is not clear that Iraq’s divided Sunnis will ever be able to find peace among themselves after a conflict that in many ways is playing out as a war within families.
After all, when Iraqi Sunnis talk about fighting the Islamic State, it is not a discussion of some shadowy and unknowable force. It is about sons and brothers, nephews and neighbors.
General Razaij was asked how many of his men were fighting against brothers or other close relatives who had joined the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL. “It’s so many,” he said.
One of General Razaij’s men, Salih Ibrahim Sharmoot, is a policeman from Falluja who has been fighting along the city’s southern edge — a battle in which government forces made quick and surprising gains on Friday, capturing the main government compound.
He said his brother Muwafaq joined ISIS in 2013. Antigovernment fervor was running strong in Falluja, in opposition to the sectarian policies of Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, the prime minister at the time, who had ordered the mass arrests of Sunni men on often unsubstantiated terrorism charges.

For Iraq ever to be at peace with itself after the end of the Islamic State, it will require reconciliation on a number of levels, especially within the Sunni community. That minority fell from power after the United States-led invasion in 2003 and has witnessed its own decimation, with millions of its followers now displaced from their homes as fighting between government forces and ISIS rages across Sunni-dominated areas.
The last time this happened, in 2006 and 2007, it took American money and influence to pacify Sunni areas then in the grip of Al Qaeda in Iraq, the forerunner of the Islamic State. With the so-called Sunni Awakening, former insurgents were paid to switch sides and ally with the government. That required a measure of reconciliation, if not forgiveness, within the Sunni community.
A visual tour of the 126 places that defined the group’s territory.
This time, most everyone agrees, will be different. Without the United States as a mediator, or its money to buy loyalty, score-settling and revenge are likely to rule the day.
Iraq’s Shiites seem to recognize this, and have been keen to essentially outsource the business of determining who is or is not an Islamic State collaborator or sympathizer. When government forces liberate a village from ISIS, they often turn to local Sunnis to determine who should be arrested, according to interviews with officials and Sunni residents. And when allegations of militia abuses surfaced recently, including the torture and executions of men fleeing the fighting around Falluja, a prominent group of pro-government Sunnis came to the defense of the government, emphasizing the importance of taking a hard line.
More than a dozen recent interviews, with Sunnis from areas where the Islamic State has had a presence, revealed the extent to which the terror organization has divided families.
In many cases, they described a familiar pattern of radicalization for their relatives — beginning not with any special interest in religion, but rather the 2003 invasion and the Sunni insurgency that followed. Many spent time in American-operated prisons in Iraq, where they studied the Quran and plotted jihad. In 2013, when Mr. Maliki’s policies sparked nationwide Sunni protests, there was a ready constituency of aggrieved and radicalized Sunnis the Islamic State could exploit.
Alaa al-Jibouri, a Sunni from Salahuddin Province who has joined a government-allied militia, said that his uncle, a member of the Islamic State, was not religious before he spent time in an American prison in Iraq.
“He used to not even pray or fast, and did not like religious subjects,” Mr. Jibouri said.
In Diyala Province, a farmer who asked to be identified as Abu Anas said his younger brother, Hatim, was swayed in 2014 by politicians and clerics calling for an end to the unjust treatment of Sunnis carried out by the Shiite-led government.
“The Sunni youth, among them my brother, were caught up in the swirl of sectarian tensions,” he said. At the time, Mr. Anas said, the movement felt like a tribal revolution against oppression, but was quickly subsumed by the Islamic State.
The Islamic State recently released a video from Mosul that purported to show a fighter executing his older brother, described in the video as a government spy. As the bearded ISIS fighter stood over his kneeling brother, who was dressed in an orange jumpsuit, he addressed his family and tribe and said he was acting in their name to “purify” the shame his brother brought to them.

Thousands of Sunni tribal fighters and local policemen, partly motivated by revenge for the devastation the Islamic State has brought to their communities, have joined government security forces and Shiite militia groups in the fight for Falluja, the third major battle for that city since 2003.
He said that those men were more attuned to the traditional tribal rhythms of life in Anbar, and that their loyalty to Baghdad could be bought.
