WEIL AM RHEIN, Germany — Thousands of objects in the collection of the Vitra Design Museum, including prototypes of 20th-century classics by Charles and Ray Eames and Alvar Aalto, have long been hidden from public view, sealed away in storage for most of the time. But that has changed with this month’s opening of the Schaudepot, a new archive and exhibition space designed by the Swiss architects Herzog & de Meuron.
Herzog & de Meuron has buried the Schaudepot’s storage spaces underground. Perched on top is a 7,000-square-foot gallery with a conventional pitched roof. As visitors approach it, they can see the museum staff at work through the windows of the offices, library and conservation laboratory.
“As well as opening up the collection to the public, we want to make design research visible by exposing the workings of the museum,” said Mateo Kries, co-director of the Vitra Design Museum.
The Schaudepot is the latest addition to the industrial and cultural campus built by Vitra, the Swiss furniture company, in this German town just north of Basel, Switzerland.
 Faced with the need to rebuild the site, Rolf Fehlbaum, now chairman emeritus of Vitra, which was founded by his parents in 1950, decided to work with architects whose work he found most interesting.
One of the plants was designed by Frank Gehry, and another by SANAA, the Japanese architects of the New Museum in New York. Their compatriot Tadao Ando designed a conference center, and the fire station was the first building realized by the Iraqi-born architect Zaha Hadid, who died this year. Her staccato cluster of concrete slabs is in sharp contrast to the mellow red-brick facade of the Schaudepot, which is Herzog & de Meuron’s second building for the site. The first, a furniture showroom, opened in 2010.
The inaugural exhibition at the Schaudepot traces the history of furniture design since the late 18th century in 430 pieces, starting with an anonymously made wooden chair from Britain, and ending with the first chair to be 3D printed in aluminum, by the Dutch designer Joris Laarman.
Hanging on one wall is a dilapidated plastic chair, the first model of the S-shaped Panton Chair, named after its Danish designer Verner Panton.
“Verner had shown it to a couple of companies in Germany, but they’d said no, so he brought it here in 1963 to show my father and I, hoping that we’d produce it,” Mr. Fehlbaum said.
Little did the Fehlbaums realize that plastic technology was still so limited that it would take 36 years of technical experiments to produce the chair as Mr. Panton envisaged it. That version of the chair was introduced in 1999, a year after the designer’s death. Its evolution is illustrated in the earlier versions displayed near the original model.
Among the other exhibits are rare original versions of works by Aalto and the Eameses, as well as one-offs designed in the 1920s by the Irish architect Eileen Gray, and anonymous pieces including a 1930s aircraft seat. A central display explores the Radical Design movement in 1970s Italy. The museum is compiling a digital archive of information on the objects that will be accessible online.
Hundreds more works can be seen through glass walls in storage in the basement, together with a reconstruction of Charles Eames’s office in the Los Angeles neighborhood of Venice. The Vitra Design Museum collection includes the Eameses’ furniture archive as well as those of Mr. Panton, George Nelson, Alexander Girard and other designers.
The collection began in the early 1980s when Mr. Fehlbaum started to buy what were then inexpensive works by his favorite designers.
Mr. Gehry worked on the design for the museum, which opened in 1989, at the same time as the factory beside it. Self-indulgent though Mr. Fehlbaum’s design and architecture patronage might seem, he is convinced that it benefits Vitra, which makes an unspecified annual donation to the museum, a separate nonprofit entity.
The Vitra complex was visited by 350,000 people last year, a third of whom went to the museum, which is now presenting a retrospective of Mr. Girard’s work. Mr. Kries, the museum co-director, hopes that the Schaudepot furniture displays will give the museum more freedom to explore other aspects of design, such as its political impact and relationship to technology, including a robotics exhibition planned for next year.
