417 pp. Metropolitan Books/Henry Holt & Company. $32.
Stefánie is obsessed with Hans Christian Andersen, and initially “In the Darkroom” has the otherworldly menace of a fairy tale. A few months after her father re-enters her life, Faludi visits her in Budapest. Stefánie lives in a chalet with an elaborate alarm system behind a gate in the Buda Hills. The thick drapes seem ­always to be closed. For several days she hardly leaves the house, and is resentful if her daughter tries to go out.
These scenes are both unnerving and politically volatile. Many religious conservatives, as well as some groups of radical feminists, insist that trans women aren’t really women, but men with fetishes. That’s one of the rationales for discriminatory laws like the one in North Carolina, which mandates that trans people use bathrooms and locker rooms matching the gender on their birth certificates.
What to make of this? Faludi searches the canon of transgender autobiography for a story that might offer insight into her father, but ends up frustrated. “The one plotline of I-have-always-been-a-woman was trumping all the other motivations that might reflect the crosscurrents of the human psyche,” she writes. She struggles to square the idea of innate femininity, which she’s not even sure exists, with her memories of her father, who had been violent and controlling in asserting masculine prerogatives.
As Steven Faludi, her father had refused to let his wife work. When her parents separated, Steven smashed through the front door with a baseball bat, then repeatedly stabbed a man that Faludi’s mother was seeing. During the divorce, he turned the incident into proof that Faludi’s mother was unfaithful, which freed him from paying alimony. “As I confronted, nearly four decades and nine time zones away, my father’s new self, it was hard for me to purge that image of the violent man from her new persona,” Faludi writes.
In contemporary popular culture, Faludi writes, you are supposed to take people at their word about their identity: “The womanhood of male-to-female transsexuals was asserted as an inviolable absolute.” For Faludi, however, her father’s new identity is less a truth to be accepted than an enigma to be probed. In doing so, she excavates Stefánie’s past, discovering a person fractured amid the loss and degradation of the Holocaust. Stefánie isn’t even her father’s first new name; before he was Steven Faludi he was István Friedman, only son of an aloof, self-­indulgent Jewish couple in Budapest who lost everything but their lives under Nazism.
Faludi isn’t the first to connect the trans experience to the Jewish one — it’s a major theme of the Amazon series “Transparent.” But where “Transparent” uses Nazi Germany to show how different types of oppression can mirror each other, “In the Darkroom” is after something subtler. In linking the forcible destruction of one of Stefánie’s identities to the willful jettisoning of another, Faludi seeks to understand the limits of self-reinvention. “Could a new identity not only redeem but expunge its predecessor?” she asks.
Penetrating and lucid as it is, Faludi’s book can’t answer this question. By the end, however, it seems less urgent, because Stefánie’s prickly, particular humanity comes to overshadow concern about categories. Faludi even develops some appreciation for Stefánie’s audacious ability to assume new identities, which, Faludi learns, allowed for real wartime heroism. Her father would tell her a story about dressing up as a Hungarian Nazi to rescue his parents from the fascist Arrow Cross; Faludi hadn’t entirely believed this tale, but she comes to learn that her father understated his valor. She never reconciles her conception of gender with that of her maddening parent, but she reconciles with her, which matters more.