The fortunes of Boys and Girls High School, a venerable but long-struggling school that Mayor Bill de Blasio’s administration pledged to revive, took another turn this week, when its principal said he was considering leaving for a different job after less than two years.
The principal, Michael Wiltshire, was appointed in an unusual arrangement under which he oversees both Boys and Girls, in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn, and Medgar Evers College Preparatory School, a selective school in Crown Heights where he was principal before being installed at Boys and Girls.
Should Dr. Wiltshire depart, it would be a setback for the mayor in his effort to transform New York City’s most troubled schools.
As a candidate, Mr. de Blasio criticized the administration of his predecessor, Michael R. Bloomberg, for its practice of closing low-performing schools. Mr. de Blasio promised to infuse such schools with money and social services, with closing a last resort.
The mayor is now under pressure to show that schools are improving before he seeks re-election next year. While the Education Department has cited some progress in the 94 schools it has made its main focus, including increased graduation rates at most of the high schools in the group, enrollment at those schools is plummeting as families move their children elsewhere.
Dr. Wiltshire’s potential departure is not the only indication that the city’s strategy is running into difficulty. The New York Post reported on Sunday that Caterina Lafergola, the principal of Automotive High School, another school that the de Blasio administration has made a top priority, is leaving to become the principal of Baldwin High School on Long Island.
By the time Mr. de Blasio became mayor, Boys and Girls and Automotive had long been among the state’s worst-performing high schools. With the state threatening to close the schools, the city made a deal with the teachers’ union that required staff members to reapply for their jobs, and it named Dr. Wiltshire and Ms. Lafergola as the principals.
Dr. Wiltshire said in an interview on Tuesday that he had interviewed for a job as principal of Uniondale High School in Uniondale, N.Y., and that the district had expressed interest in him, but he had not decided what to do.
Dr. Wiltshire’s tenure at Boys and Girls was troubled from the start. Upon arriving, he began to encourage students who were lacking credits and at risk of not graduating to transfer. On Tuesday, he defended his actions, saying some students lagged so far behind that they had no chance of graduating before turning 21 and aging out of the school system, and that they could be better served at schools designed for such older students.
Dr. Wiltshire also clashed with a social services agency, Good Shepherd Services, that was supposed to provide support for students and their families, resulting in the agency’s ending the partnership, according to a recent report in the education website Chalkbeat. Dr. Wiltshire denied that on Tuesday, saying he had “no problem” with Good Shepherd.
Dr. Wiltshire raised concerns among some Boys and Girls supporters early on when he proposed that it merge with Medgar Evers by having Medgar Evers move into Boys and Girls building.
Some critics saw the proposal as a way to essentially phase out Boys and Girls, which has a larger, better-equipped building, while giving Medgar Evers, which occupies cramped quarters and does not have an auditorium or athletic fields, a better home.
When the city did not support the merger proposal, Dr. Wiltshire suggested moving Medgar Evers into Boys and Girls’ building without combining the two schools. But a committee of parents and faculty members at Medgar Evers recently informed the Education Department that they no longer supported the move.
Dr. Wiltshire said on Tuesday that he had made progress at Boys and Girls. The four-year graduation rate last year was 50 percent, up from 41.9 percent the previous year, according to the department, and Dr. Wiltshire said he expected it to be close to 60 percent this year. The department also said that student attendance had increased by nearly 2 percent this year compared with last year, and that teacher absenteeism had declined 22 percent from 2013-14 to 2014-15.
At the same time, enrollment at Boys and Girls under Dr. Wiltshire’s leadership has declined by half, to 334 students.
Boys and Girls has faced many challenges in its long history. By the mid-1980s, it had one of the highest dropout rates in the city and a reputation as a dangerous place. From 1986 to 2004 it experienced a resurgence under Frank Mickens, a principal who was a tough disciplinarian. The graduation rate increased — to 47.5 percent, from 24.4 percent — and enrollment reached a peak of 4,400 students in the 2005-6 school year.
But Mr. Mickens was accused of achieving that success in part by pushing out difficult students. In 2005, former students brought a class-action lawsuit against the Education Department, saying that they had been deprived of a fair chance at an education. In 2008, the parties reached a settlement under which the department agreed to give some students extra time to earn a diploma and others access to G.E.D. classes, counseling, tutoring and trade-school training.
A spokeswoman for the Uniondale School District said that the district was interviewing candidates and had not made a choice yet. Chalkbeat reported on Tuesday that Dr. Wiltshire was considering taking the job in Uniondale.