UNITED NATIONS — Saudi Arabia should be ousted from the United Nations Human Rights Council for its unlawful killings of civilians in Yemen, Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International said jointly on Wednesday, an unusual demand meant to draw attention to one of the world’s most powerful countries, embroiled in one of the world’s most brutal wars.
The chances of that happening are slim to none. The suspension of any country from an elected body of the United Nations is extraordinary, and it would be all the more so for a country with powerful friends like the United States. The proposal would need a two-thirds majority vote in the 193-member General Assembly.
Libya was the last country suspended from the Council, which is responsible for promoting and protecting human rights. The General Assembly approved its ouster in 2011, after protesters were met with violent reprisals by the government of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi.
Saudi Arabia is another matter. It was elected to the 47-member Human Rights Council in 2013. Since then, it has beat back efforts at the Council to create an independent commission of inquiry to look into human rights abuses in Yemen.
Earlier this month, Saudi Arabia persuaded the United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, to remove the military coalition it leads in Yemen from a list of armies that kill and maim children. Mr. Ban had included the coalition for its attacks on schools and hospitals in Yemen, but agreed to remove it from the list temporarily. Mr. Ban told reporters that he had been coerced — a charge the Saudis flatly denied.
There was no immediate comment from the Saudi mission in response to the call by the human rights groups. Its three-year term on the Council concludes at the end of 2016. It remains to be seen whether it will seek a second term, and how other countries will react.
The coalition began intervening in the Yemeni civil war last year after Shiite rebels known as Houthis drove President Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi into exile. The Houthis are said to be supported by Iran, Saudi Arabia’s bitter rival in the Persian Gulf.
At a news conference at United Nations headquarters, researchers with Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International said the Saudi-led coalition had broken international law with at least 69 airstrikes targeting civilians, some of which could amount to war crimes, and accused it of using banned cluster munitions.
The two groups called for “credible investigations that meet international standards” or an agreement by Saudi Arabia to cooperate with an independent international inquiry.
The groups also say that the United States, which provides refueling and targeting assistance to the Saudi-led coalition, could be liable for war crimes in Yemen. They also cited Saudi Arabia’s treatment of its own citizens, including sentencing people to death for crimes that are not punishable by death under international law.
Saudi Arabia is not the only country on the Human Rights Council with a questionable human rights record. Venezuela also has a seat on the body.
