The lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender community is no stranger to violence.
From the 1969 police raid at the Stonewall Inn in New York City that set off riots and helped touch off the modern gay-rights movement to the 1998 murder of Matthew Shepard to near-epidemic levels of violence against transgender women, the community has been marked by flashes of trauma.
After the massacre at a gay club in Orlando, Fla., that left 49 dead and 53 others injured, Richard Kim, the executive editor of The Nation, wrote on Sunday that gay bars and clubs have often been sanctuaries. And sometimes those sanctuaries have come under siege.
Here are a few significant examples.
Thirty-two people died when a fire swept through the UpStairs Lounge, a gay bar in the French Quarter, on June 24, 1973. After the blaze, some churches refused to bury the victims. The arsonist was never caught.
Five people were injured when a bomb exploded at a lesbian bar, the Otherside Lounge, in February 1997. A second, unexploded, bomb was later found outside.
It was one of four attacks by Eric Rudolph, a right-wing extremist, who also bombed two abortion clinics and the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, where one person died and 111 more were injured. He was sentenced to life in prison in 2005.
A former Marine shot and killed Danny Overstreet, 43, and injured six others in the Backstreet Cafe in Roanoke, Va., in 2000. The gunman, Ronald Edward Gay, 53, opened fire when he saw two men in the bar hug each other.
The mass shooting at an Orlando nightclub early Sunday was the deadliest in United States history. One out of every three people at the crowded Pulse nightclub was killed or injured.
Mr.  He was sentenced to four life terms in 2001.
Musab Mohammed Masmari, 30, poured gasoline on the stairs of a gay club and set it alight shortly after midnight on New Year’s Eve. More than 700 people were in the club at the time, including much of the city’s gay and transgender leadership, but no one was hurt.
Mr. Masmari pleaded guilty to arson and was sentenced to 10 years in prison in July 2014. He told the court that he could not remember setting the fire because he had blacked out after drinking an entire bottle of whiskey.
The Stonewall Inn played a central role in the modern gay rights movement, but it has also seen antigay and anti-transgender violence in recent years.
Two men attacked another man in the restroom in 2010 after he informed them that they were in a gay bar. The assailants were arrested, and one was later charged with hate crimes.
“The reality is, if people are looking to perpetrate anti-gay bias and violence, there are very few places in this world that are safe once that intent has formed,” Sharon Stapel, the former executive director of the New York City Anti-Violence Project, said at the time of the attack.
In March this year, a transgender woman said she was sexually assaulted in the unisex restroom.