WASHINGTON — Representative Steve King, Republican of Iowa, moved on Tuesday to block the Treasury Department’s sweeping plan to represent women and civil rights leaders on American currency, including the placement of Harriet Tubman on the $20 bill.
Mr. King filed an amendment to an annual appropriations bill that would prevent any money from being spent to redesign American currency. It is unclear whether it will ultimately get a vote when the full spending bill, which covers financial services and general government appropriations, comes before the House this week.
The congressman’s motivation for filing the amendment was also unclear. His office did not immediately respond to a request for comment. The amendment was first reported by The Huffington Post.
Mr. King is known nationally for his polarizing stance on illegal immigration. He has introduced legislation to revoke birthright citizenship for the children of undocumented immigrants. In 2013, Mr. King drew ire for saying that such children were likely to be drug mules with “calves the size of cantaloupes” from hauling marijuana.
His brief two-line currency measure comes two months after the Treasury Department announced that Tubman, the former slave and abolitionist, would replace the slaveholding Andrew Jackson on the $20 bill.
That decision capped months of intense debate over Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew’s original promise to make a woman the face of the $10 bill — a change that would have displaced the first Treasury secretary, Alexander Hamilton, just as he is having his own second act as the protagonist of a Tony Award-winning musical.
The Treasury Department’s latest proposal also includes plans to add other women and civil rights leaders to the $5 and $10 notes, including Eleanor Roosevelt and the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
It is possible that the congressman’s amendment will not even be added to the spending bill. After a bitter fight last month over a Democratic amendment on discrimination against gay people effectively derailed an energy and water spending bill, Republican leaders changed procedures so that all proposed amendments must first be reviewed by the House Rules Committee.