Joe Ligon has spent almost 63 years in a Pennsylvania prison for his role in a 1953 murder when he was a 15-year-old boy. At the time, the mandatory sentence for murder was life without the possibility of parole.
Mr. Ligon, now 78, has served more time than anyone else in Pennsylvania, and perhaps in the nation. But he may soon be freed, after the Philadelphia district attorney, Seth Williams, announced last week that his office would seek new sentences for all of the 300 or so prisoners who have been serving sentences of mandatory life without parole for homicides they committed as juveniles. The new sentences would fall between 20 and 35 years, depending on the seriousness of the crime, after which the defendants will have a chance at parole.
“It’s my goal to give all of these individuals some light at the end of the tunnel,” Mr. Williams told The Philadelphia Inquirer. That light is very close for as many as one-third of the prisoners, who have already served several decades and will now be able to make a case for immediate release. With Philadelphia currently having the most juvenile lifers of any county in the nation, Mr. Williams has also decided to stop seeking life without parole for juveniles in all future cases.
In 2012, the Supreme Court, in Miller v. Alabama, barred mandatory sentences of life without parole for juveniles convicted of homicides. The justices ruled that sentencing courts must make “individualized sentencing decisions” for such defendants because they are not as morally culpable as adults, and are more capable of changing over time. A life without parole sentence should be imposed on a juvenile only in the most extreme circumstances, the court said.
In January, the justices voted to apply that decision retroactively, making as many as 2,500 people who were already serving mandatory life sentences eligible for new sentences or a parole hearing.
Now that Mr. Williams has put that principle into practice, district attorneys in other counties with large numbers of juvenile lifers have a clearer path to follow.