Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights from The New York Times. Majd al Waheidi is a Gaza-based “stringer,” a freelance reporter who regularly contributes to The Times. In this piece, she describes a recent — and, for her, a rare — trip to Israel.
As a reporter, I have come to know the Gazan borders very intimately. I once made several reporting trips to a village near the fence for a story about illegal crossings.
But though I live so close to Israel, it is a world away for me.
Last month, I crossed the border and left Gaza for only the third time in my life. I was traveling to Israel to obtain a visa for a summer fellowship in Washington, D.C.
Security on the Gazan side of the border consists of two separate checkpoints: the first (which Gazans call “4/4”) is controlled by Hamas, and the second (“5/5”) is controlled by the Palestinian Authority.
“4/4” and “5/5” are within half a mile of each other, but the two checkpoints represent a lingering division among Palestinians — one that I reported on in 2015.
When crossing here, at Erez, Gazans often post photos of the tunnel on social media to confirm that they’ve made it this far. I took a picture but chose not to share it; it felt unfair to the Gazans who are unable to leave.
Next came the Israeli terminal, which resembles a large glass box.
After the last war, Israel eased some of their restrictions, and hundreds of Gazans crossed every day. Most of the people who obtained permits were either businessmen or local staff members of international organizations.
Fewer than 10 people were sitting on the chairs waiting for the soldier in the glass enclosure to call each name. Many of them were mothers with their children. Most, I assumed, were patients in need of medical treatment.
They called me a few minutes after I arrived. An Israeli soldier, sitting on a tall chair behind the glass, gave me my permit and my I.D.
It is rare that I see an Israeli in person; Israel withdrew from Gaza in 2005, and I was too young then to remember their presence. However, I witnessed three wars in less than six years. The last one was devastating. I remember the warplanes and F-16s and artillery shells.
At Erez, I saw members of the Israeli defense forces, but not the same ones who fought in wars that left people dead and homes destroyed. I saw Israeli soldiers working administrative jobs, soldiers who help people wanting to leave. I used English with them because I felt they wouldn’t understand me otherwise — though they speak Arabic very well.
Everyone who has passed through the tunnel has told me the same thing: The moment we leave Gaza, the air changes. It becomes clean. I noticed it, too.
After a two-hour cab ride, I arrived at the American consulate in Jerusalem, completed my interview and received my visa. I then had several days to sightsee.
Ms. al Waheidi in the Well of Souls, under the Dome of the Rock.
I toured Jerusalem’s Old City and prayed in the Al-Aqsa Mosque — a site of frequent conflict. I visited the Western Wall and watched as people prayed.
Jerusalem was bubbling with life: music, spices, perfumes. The people were of many colors and faiths, and there were many pilgrims. In the Old City, all three faiths — Christianity, Judaism, Islam — commingled, with sacred sites sometimes just a few feet away from one another.
The next day I visited Haifa. It appeared less tense than Jerusalem, and in some places the mixing of different people was beautifully manifest. There you could use shalom and as-salamu alaykum interchangeably.
I also visited the Baha’i gardens, at the heart of which stands the golden-domed Shrine of the Báb, the resting place of the prophet-herald of the Baha’i faith. The gardens were immensely beautiful, but I was reminded that Gaza has only one public garden: the Unknown Soldier’s Square, where jobless and poor people sit and watch each other.
Then came my most poignant experience: A friend drove me to Tiberias, a small city on the shores of the Sea of Galilee. Starving after many hours without food, I ate dinner at a nearby kibbutz’s restaurant for tourists. When I asked why the streets were empty, I was reminded that it was the Jewish Sabbath.
I entered the restaurant and found people eating and laughing together. I was nervous; earlier in the day there had been tensions at the border, between Hamas and Israel.
But my curiosity kept me from leaving. I ate salmon and drank Pepsi. I worried about what everyone would do if they discovered I was a Palestinian. But nobody seemed suspicious.
I exchanged smiles with several people. Maybe they thought I was Korean, as sometimes happens in Gaza.
What I noticed during my meal was a sense of harmony, love and unity. It was overwhelming. I saw maybe one or two tables of big families: children doing their homework, women chatting with each other.
Around this time, my friends and colleagues called to say that three babies had burned to death in their home at a refugee camp in Gaza. The fire was started by a candle that was being used during a power outage. I cried the next morning; it felt too normal.
I interviewed one family who was visiting the place. It was empty and calm. The walls were black, as if they’d been set on fire. I wondered what had happened to the people who used to live and pray here.
Two days after I returned to Gaza, I visited the mobile home of a displaced family whose previous home had been destroyed during the last war.
It was close to the border fence.
The moment I entered, I thought of the Israeli kibbutz. There was a similar sense of harmony.
But here, in the “Caravan Quarter” of Beit Hanoun, in northern Gaza, there were no restaurants, no schools, no nature.