Donald J. Trump’s signature from a letter he sent in 1984 to A. M. Rosenthal, then the executive editor of The New York Times.
In another note, he paid flowery tribute to his young wife, whom he referred to as “my little darling.” “You’re everything I hoped for,” he wrote.
Mr. Trump, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, is a master of modern media, exploiting Twitter and television to punish his enemies, energize his allies and promote himself.
But perhaps his most powerful and memorable form of communication is the old-fashioned ritual of a personal letter, written on embossed paper or scrawled across a newspaper clipping, signed by hand and sent from the 26th floor of Trump Tower.
Churned out prolifically from a computer-free desk, they are letters of gratitude, hate, flattery and revenge, dispatched to teenage admirers and big-city mayors, professional athletes and magazine editors. The tone can range from florid to juvenile, pleading to poisonous.
Tightly clutched and prominently displayed even by those who despise him, the epistles have become keepsakes and mementos for hundreds of people across the country. Viewed as a collection from the 1970s to now, they offer an unusual archive of his emotional ups and downs.
The 2009 letter that Mr. Trump sent to Mike Tollin, a movie director, makes for painful reading: It denounced a film by Mr. Tollin that explored Mr. Trump’s role in the collapse of a football league as “third rate” and “extremely dishonest.” In a fulminating flourish, Mr. Trump wrote: “P.S.  Nevertheless, Mr. Tollin had the letter framed and he keeps it on a shelf in his office, next to photographs of his family.
“People come by and immediately want to see it, touch it and hold it,” Mr. Tollin said with pride.
Today, as Mr. Trump tries to make peace with hostile figures in his party, the candidate renowned for his rhetorical flame throwing is deploying a conciliatory style of letter writing as his chief weapon.
The letters — culled from personal and public archives — reveal Mr. Trump’s insecurities, but also his perceptiveness about power, ego and what motivates people. From early on, he seemed to intuitively grasp the potency of his praise when lavished on like-minded men.
There is never any question about authorship: Mr. Trump’s style of writing sounds virtually identical to his hyperbolic manner of speech, with a healthy sprinkling of the words “great” and “tremendous,” abundant displays of self-regard and over-the-top claims of success or doom.
As a writer, Mr. Trump sometimes reached, awkwardly but earnestly, for eloquence. In a 1983 letter to A. M. Rosenthal, then the executive editor of The Times and a lunch companion, Mr. Trump turned poetic as he tried to capture his reaction to an article that Mr. Rosenthal had written about returning to Poland for the first time in decades.
“It is moving; it is sad; it is hopeful (?); it is devastating,” Mr. Trump wrote, saying that his wife at the time, Ivana, who grew up in Eastern Europe, agreed. “It truly captured the strength, the will and the soul of the Polish people,” Mr. Trump wrote.
He could write with striking tenderness to Ivana, according to notes reviewed by The Times. “I adore and love my little darling,” he wrote to her in one. “I truly believe that you are the greatest,” he wrote in another.
Mr. Trump traces his epistolary habits to his attempt to win over Franklin M. Jarman, who controlled a Manhattan department store that Mr. Trump wanted to buy in the 1970s to make way for Trump Tower. Mr. Jarman rarely replied to Mr. Trump’s letters, but he had, in fact, read them, Mr. Trump wrote in his book “The Art of the Deal,” laying the groundwork for an agreement. “The letters I wrote eventually did have an impact,” Mr. Trump said.
For years, Mr. Trump sent his letters the old-fashioned way, by mail. But over time, members of his staff dragged him into the internet era — sort of. He still writes by hand, brandishing the favored tool of teachers’ corrections and athletes’ autographs, a black Sharpie. Now his aides often turn the letters into digital files, scanning them and sending them by email.
Each letter concludes with his extravagant signature, which resembles a city skyline or “a seismograph,” as Graydon Carter, the editor of Vanity Fair and a repeat recipient of Mr. Trump’s screeds, described it.
Mr. Abdul-Jabbar had to get rid of the letter. “I crumpled it up real nice and tight and skyhooked it into my wastepaper basket,” he recalled, invoking his trademark shot.
