Nick Denton has been relatively quiet since his company, Gawker Media, filed for bankruptcy and put itself up for sale on Friday, posting just a handful of tweets.
But, in typical Denton fashion, his silence did not last long.
On Wednesday, Mr. Denton, the founder and chief executive of Gawker, published a roughly 3,000-word blog post about the state of his company. He waxed poetic about the company’s future, opined on the balance of power between privacy and a free press and took Silicon Valley billionaires to task for trying to control their image. Though the post was at times rambling, Mr. Denton’s message was insistent: Gawker will be just fine.
These were defiant words after what has been a tumultuous month for Gawker. In late May, it was revealed that the Silicon Valley billionaire Peter Thiel was secretly providing financing for lawsuits against the company, including one brought by the retired professional wrestler Hulk Hogan. The company faces a $140 million judgment in that case.
“Whoever buys us,” he wrote, “it will not be for the sort of headline price that Henry Blodget or Arianna Huffington received when selling Business Insider to Axel Springer and Huffington Post to AOL.” Mr. Denton echoed that idea earlier on Wednesday when he was asked on CNBC about a $90 million opening bid from the digital media company Ziff Davis. (Business Insider sold a controlling stake to Axel Springer for $343 million, and Huffington Post was sold for $315 million).
Nick Denton, founder of Gawker Media, discusses on CNBC the company's bankruptcy and sale, and a threat of a lawsuit over a story about Donald Trump's hair.
Lawyers for Gawker and Hulk Hogan, whose real name is Terry G. Bollea, met in bankruptcy court in Lower Manhattan on Wednesday. During the hearing, which lasted about two hours, a judge approved certain business expenses for Gawker. The judge also extended a temporary restraining order to July 13 that barred Mr. Bollea from collecting damages from Mr. Denton and Albert J. Daulerio, Gawker.com’s former editor in chief.
But his assurance was also offset by a sense of uncertainty. When writing about the fate of Gawker’s sites under a potential acquisition by Ziff Davis, Mr. Denton mentioned only one of the company’s blogs by name, the technology-focused Gizmodo. That could further fuel speculation that Mr. Denton himself would try to buy back Gawker.com, which has been criticized at times for publishing articles that embarrassed people publicly while offering little news value.
