College admissions experts breathed a sigh of relief on Thursday when the Supreme Court upheld a University of Texas admissions plan that allows race and ethnicity to be considered as one of many factors in admission.
In its ruling, the Supreme Court noted that the Texas plan — which automatically grants admission to roughly the top 10 percent of students across the state, then uses race as one of many factors in considering the rest — was unique and very much a product of Texas politics, law and demographics.
But what was encouraging about the court decision, experts said, was that in affirming the value of diversity, including race and ethnicity, in higher education, the court recognized that there was not one, immutable way of defining and achieving it.
The decision was made on fairly narrow legal grounds and does not establish any bold new policy, said David Hawkins, the executive director for education content and policy of the National Association for College Admission Counseling. “I don’t expect to see a resounding clarion call for further investment in the use of race and ethnicity as an admissions tool,” he said.
Mr. Hawkins said he expected colleges to react by heeding the court’s call to be introspective — to “engage in constant deliberation and continued reflection” — about how they achieved diversity.
Several states — including Arizona, California, Florida, Michigan, Nebraska, New Hampshire, Oklahoma and Washington — have banned affirmative action, and some education analysts wondered whether the court’s decision would lead to more such backlash.
“Public opinion polling suggests that most Americans don’t like the idea of counting race in deciding who gets into universities,” said Richard Kahlenberg, a senior fellow at the Century Foundation, who has argued for using poverty rather than race to achieve diversity and said he saw the decision as a setback for that cause.
Affirmative action bans have led public universities like the University of Michigan to look for other ways to achieve diversity, like reaching out to minority students after they have been offered admission to persuade them to accept.
Experts also said other affirmative action plans could still face challenges in state legislatures and in cases before lower courts challenging admissions policies at Harvard and at the University of North Carolina.
The lawsuits argue that diversity can be achieved through race-neutral alternatives. The Harvard complaint also argues that affirmative action policies have the effect of discriminating against high-achieving Asian-American applicants.
Lee C. Bollinger, president of Columbia University, noted that Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr., in his dissent, said the Texas plan discriminated against Asian-Americans.
On the campus of the University of Texas, Sergio Cavazos, 20, president of the Senate of College Councils, said he thought students overwhelmingly supported the admissions policy.
Mr. Cavazos, a senior government major, is from Brownsville, at the southern tip of Texas on the border with Mexico. One of four children from a middle-class Hispanic family, he graduated from high school in 2013 ranked 10th in his class of 350 and entered the university under its policy of admitting the top 10 percent of graduating high school seniors. He has a full academic scholarship.
Justice Scalia died in February before he could participate in the Fisher decision.