One of the nobler aspects of the NY Phil Biennial, the New York Philharmonic’s festival of new music, is the involvement of young performers from educational institutions. On Sunday afternoon, high school students of the venerable Interlochen Arts Academy in Michigan, drawn from around the nation and abroad, took the stage of David Geffen Hall with the “Young Americans” program.
The composers represented were oldsters by comparison, and not always writing in any distinctively American style. Except in Ashley Fure’s boldly individual “Bound to the Bow,” influence seemed the order of the day.
With Christopher Rountree as guest conductor, the Interlochen Arts Academy Orchestra (trained by Ara Sarkissian) opened with “Machine” by Jennifer Higdon, 53, in its New York premiere. Composed in 2003 on commission from the National Symphony Orchestra, the brief work, with brass utterances emerging from a swirling texture, had the feel of a fanfare.
Ms. Higdon claimed, in a program note, to be writing in tribute to composers like Mozart and Tchaikovsky. Hannah Lash, 34, took a similarly conservative tack in her attractive “Chaconnes” for string orchestra, here in its premiere.
Mr. Rountree, in remarks from the stage, called “Chaconnes” “post-Mozart, post-Minimalist, post-Shostakovich.” But mainly, episodes of flavorful dissonance aside, it sounded post-Romantic in its lush melodism.
It certainly makes sense to use a symphony orchestra that way, in a fashion to which it is so well suited, but Ms. Fure, 33, had something altogether different in mind. She reimagined Samuel Taylor Coleridge’s “The Rime of the Ancient Mariner” with a live albatross bound to the bow of a ship.
From the outset, the strings are thwacked in a percussive manner, with allowance for birdlike squeals. The largely inchoate texture creaks and twists and rises over oceanic swells.
In keeping with its subject, there is nothing pretty about this piece. But it is as compelling, beginning to end, as the mariner’s lapel-grip and glinting eye.
The program closed with “So Far So Good,” a 2012 work by Nico Muhly, 34, in its New York premiere. It was presented here with choreography by Christopher Williams — “The Good So Far,” he calls his version — rendered by the Interlochen Arts Academy Dance Company.
Mr. Williams was right to find Stravinsky in Mr. Muhly’s music, and he devised a shamanist scenario with animalistic costumes, though the Stravinsky Mr. Muhly emulates is not the primitivist of “The Rite of Spring” but the Neo-Classicist of the later symphonies. Minimalist burbling eventually takes over, and textures remain spare.
All these composers share a familiarity and ease with the orchestra and a flair for instrumentation. They put the young players through their paces, and the Interlochen students responded brilliantly to Mr. Rountree’s lead.