New York|Some Call Legislative Session a Letdown. Cuomo Sees It Far Differently.
Some Call Legislative Session a Letdown. Cuomo Sees It Far Differently.
Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo with John J. Flanagan, the State Senate majority leader, left, and Carl E. Heastie, the State Assembly speaker, right, before the State of the State address in January.
ALBANY — It was mid-January when Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo took to the stage here and delivered his vision of the coming legislative year, unveiling a laundry list of nearly 150 proposals.
Five months later, as the Legislature wrapped up its session in the wee hours of Saturday morning, that list of ideas had an impressive success rate, according to the governor’s office, with about 80 percent being enacted or on their way there.
And yet, on two major issues that often attract much of the public’s attention — ethics and housing — Mr. Cuomo’s accomplishments drew sharp critiques for failing to live up to grand promises. The results were worse for Mayor Bill de Blasio, the governor’s fellow Democrat and frequent sparring partner.
The Republican majority in the State Senate summarily dismissed the mayor’s pleas for a lengthy extension for mayoral oversight of schools, turning his pursuit of a three-year deal against him — wringing out concessions, including new financial disclosures and a shift in oversight of the city’s charter school system.
The humiliation did not stop there. In yet another reminder of the mayor’s lesser reputation in the eyes of the Senate — where Long Island and upstate Republicans hold sway, and have been offended by efforts to oust them — New York City was forced to delay enacting a five-cent fee on plastic bags, a setback for the mayor and the City Council on a seemingly local concern but one with national political appeal.
There was also a mutual disappointment in the governor’s office and in City Hall over the lapsed tax break and development program known as 421-a, which the governor had urged developers and unions to negotiate on last year, and which Mr. de Blasio looked to restart in order to support the creation of affordable housing in the city, a bedrock promise of his first term. The program, however, languished and was not renewed.
Both the governor and, to a lesser extent, the mayor said they were pleased with their accomplishments. Mr. Cuomo, in fact, suggested in an interview on Sunday that no governor in New York had accomplished as much as he had.
But the inability of Mr. Cuomo and Mr. de Blasio to push through several major initiatives underscored how both men failed to sway a Legislature that seemed ripe for change after the corruption convictions of Sheldon Silver, the former Democratic Assembly speaker, and Dean G. Skelos, the former Republican Senate majority leader.
Ethics proposals that failed to get through included bans on outside income — a central feature in Mr. Silver’s conviction — and eliminating the so-called L.L.C. loophole, a source of almost unlimited corporate campaign funds. Mr. Cuomo had offered various solutions on the loophole but did little public campaigning on the subject. A late-session suggestion of eight different bills, including one focused only on the campaign for governor, foundered on the shoals of legislative indifference.
In his first remarks since the end-of-session deal was announced, Mr. Cuomo said that, despite his proposals to close the L.L.C. loophole, it was far-fetched to believe that the Legislature — particularly the Republican lawmakers — would ever agree to it.
Mr. Cuomo added that the only way to solve the problem was a constitutional convention. “The people are going to have to do it,” he said.
The governor also dismissed the notion that he could have fought harder for that issue and defended the five-point package he announced on Friday, including an agreement with the Legislature to strip pensions from policy makers and lawmakers convicted of crimes related to their public office.
Mr. Cuomo also said the lack of a deal to ban outside income was not surprising, considering the Legislature has not had a pay raise in nearly two decades.
There was no doubt that housing was a top-line issue for Mr. Cuomo this year, when he promised to spend $20 billion over the next five years to create thousands of affordable and supportive housing units. But housing advocates were dismayed at the bargain that state leaders struck on Friday night, saying that the $150 million in new state funding amounted to little more than a token of the $2 billion for housing that the governor and legislators approved in the budget in March.
That said, there is nothing that says the agreement had to come by Friday night. In theory, Mr. Cuomo and the legislative leaders — John J. Flanagan, the Long Island Republican who is the Senate majority leader, and Carl E. Heastie, the Bronx Democrat who is the State Assembly speaker — could still negotiate a broader one later this year.
Over the weekend, the governor’s office said the overall commitment — including tax credits and other types of funding — would amount to $570 million in 2016, and would allow the state to fund 1,200 units of supportive housing this year. That schedule is consistent with the plan Mr. Cuomo outlined in January, his aides said, and puts the state on track to open 6,000 units over the next five years and 20,000 units over the next 15 years.
In the interview, Mr. Cuomo called the criticism “a distortion of the facts,” explaining that this year’s funds are only the first installment of a larger, $10.4 billion plan to reduce homelessness through new beds and services. He said new rounds of funding would come as the state worked to open each chunk of supportive housing units, a process that he said was standard for city, state and federal programs.
She also drew a sharp distinction with the mayor.
On Saturday, the mayor’s office returned fire, suggesting that the governor and the Legislature had missed the opportunity to address affordable housing and homelessness in the city.
“When it comes to affordable housing investments and help for homeless New Yorkers, it’s clear the state is doing far too little,” he said in a statement on Saturday.
Mr. de Blasio, of course, had other reasons for consternation, chief among them the one-year extension of his control of city schools — an outcome that could hardly have been worse, given that most legislators did not seriously entertain notions of allowing mayoral control to lapse. The mayor also had to accept two unpalatable concessions just to get the bare minimum: agreeing to publish information about the city’s schools budgeting and changing the way many of the city’s charter schools are run.
Mr. de Blasio’s office noted what it thought were successes, such as protecting neighborhood zoning regulations, stabilizing bus contracting and preventing tinted windows on cars. He thanked Mr. Heastie, but, notably, not Mr. Cuomo or Mr. Flanagan.
The Cuomo administration suggested that the session’s end was anticlimactic because many of its priorities were accomplished at the March 31 budget deadline — most notably an increase in the minimum wage to $15.
