Van Morrison released a live double LP in 1974, “It’s Too Late to Stop Now,” from his 1973 tour with his Caledonia Soul Orchestra. That album, reissued, is now designated “Volume I” because there was far more first-rate, previously unreleased live material recorded at what was a prime moment in Mr. Morrison’s career. By 1973, Mr. Morrison had consummated his fusion of rock, R&B, gospel, jazz, country, blues, folk, Celtic and classical music, and he had built an eager audience with hits like “Moondance” and “Domino.” He had also, crucially, found flexible and attentive musicians, notably John Platania on guitar and Jef Labes on keyboards.
“Volume I” was precisely culled, but the additional volumes are well justified. The newly released tracks barely overlap from disc to disc, harking back to an era when each concert was an experiment. When titles do recur, they have different tempos (“I Just Want to Make Love to You”) and very different vocal performances (“Caravan”). The Caledonia Soul Orchestra included a string section and horns, playing fixed arrangements and rehearsed passages, but every song made room for improvisation. The DVD, from London concerts, shows a young Mr. Morrison smoking cigarettes onstage and doing a few soul-man kicks and jumps. It also shows how grumpy he has generally looked as he performs. But there’s no hiding the passion and joy in this music.
“Tales of Mozambique,” a 1975 recording by Count Ossie and the Mystic Revelation of Rastafari, represents a peaceful negotiation between two languages. One is Count Ossie’s vocal and percussion group, playing the rhythms of nyabinghi — a rhythm arrangement he developed for Rasta gatherings in his various Rasta compounds in Kingston, Jamaica. The other comes from the jazz musician Cedric Brooks’s band: saxophone, bass, organ and occasionally guitar.
Count Ossie, a.k.a. Oswald Williams (1926-1976), was hugely influential in Jamaican musical culture. He and his drummers played on the Folkes Brothers’ “Oh Carolina,” from 1959, the first commercially released record using traditional Rastafarian drumming in popular music and helped welcome Haile Selassie to Jamaica in 1966. Mr. Brooks, who died in 2013, was a Jamaican saxophonist who lived in the United States in the late 1960s, working with Sun Ra and soaking up the sound of John Coltrane and Pharoah Sanders. Together, at their best, they made something that sounded like proto-reggae even when reggae was building toward its commercial peak. In 1973 they produced “Grounation,” a longer, looser and better-known album, but two years later, in “Tales of Mozambique,” they made more tightly spooled work, with a deep, warm, spacious rhythmic weave at a tempo that resembles the top edge of a body’s resting pulse. Streaks of reggae as you know it are here, and of late-’60s American jazz, too.
The album has come out several times over the years, but the English label Soul Jazz’s new reissue, on CD or double LP with new liner notes and photographs, plus both sides of a more overtly ska-like single from 1972, sounds gorgeous. The same label has also reissued “Man From Higher Heights,” an album by Count Ossie & the Rasta Family, released in 1983 after Ossie’s death. This is a straight-ahead reggae record except for two tracks: “Drums for Wise Man,” and “Chanting Higher Heights,” the drums augmented by fuzzed, needling electric-guitar soloing that sounds like the kind of thing Michael Karoli of the German experimental group Can would have done were he invited. Very disorienting. Very good.
Egyptian Lover’s “Dial-A-Freak” begins with a series of squealing push-button phone tones, moves into moist-tongued rapping over spirited electro, then gets punchy by mixing the two while moans and gasps bubble up from the background. It’s sensual, thrusting and lightly comic‚ a peak distillation of the Egyptian Lover sound.
Egyptian Lover is Greg Broussard, who began D.J.-ing, rapping and producing as a Los Angeles teenager in the early 1980s, eventually teaming with that city’s dominant live hip-hop party crew, Uncle Jamm’s Army, and helping shape, for a couple of years — before the dawn of gangster rap — the sound of young, black Los Angeles.
“1983-1988,” the first substantial anthology devoted to Egyptian Lover’s work, is 22 tracks of genial sleaze, throbbing and fantastical and slick. In these songs, he doesn’t vary much from that template. As a lyricist, he’s committed to character (“In pyramids on the Nile/I ride my camels through the sand with style”) and also to kink (“Egyptian Lover, yeah that’s my name/Sexaholism is my new game”). As a producer, he’s partial to saturated, frizzy-at-the-edges drums built on a Roland TR-808. And as a D.J., he manipulates records with a heavy finger, the scratches like smears.
Sometimes the truest measure of greatness lies in the everyday: not a grand stage but a simple one. “Live at Rosy’s” is a vibrant snapshot of Sarah Vaughan, the magisterial jazz singer, at a club in New Orleans in 1978. Recorded for an NPR broadcast but never released or heard in full, it has been released on the Resonance label with the care you’d reserve for a holy relic. Hear the music and you understand why: At 54, Ms. Vaughan is in luxurious, imposing form, working with the nonchalant conviction that any possibility in a song is within her reach. Backed by a superb trio — Carl Schroeder on piano, Walter Booker on bass, Jimmy Cobb on drums — she bends songbook standards to her will, with glacial pathos or quicksilver poise. (At one point, taking a wayward audience request, she basically dunks on Ella Fitzgerald. It’s playful but pointed.) Her scat improvisations are as unerring as her intonation, but some of the most jaw-dropping singing unfolds in slow motion: on “East of the Sun (and West of the Moon),” over a moseying bass line, or “Time After Time,” with just piano, at a gently billowing tempo.