The United States women’s national soccer team is bound by the terms of its collective bargaining agreement with U.S. Soccer, a federal judge ruled Friday. The decision means the players cannot strike before August’s Rio Olympics in their quest for better pay, but it has no effect on a separate federal wage-discrimination complaint filed by five players this year.
Friday’s decision, filed by Judge Sharon Johnson Coleman in federal court in Chicago, was on a narrow matter: whether the team, represented by its players’ association, was bound by the terms of a collective bargaining agreement with U.S. Soccer that both sides acknowledged had expired in 2012. The ruling was a victory for U.S. Soccer, which had argued that the team’s C.B.A. was expired but contended that it lived on in a memorandum of understanding signed in early 2013. The union had argued that the memorandum did not specifically address the players’ rights, including the right to strike, and that the team was therefore not bound by it.
In her 13-page ruling, Coleman was unconvinced by that argument and said that the memorandum of understanding did not need to be as explicit as lawyers for the team, which won the Women’s World Cup in Canada last summer, had claimed.
In the case in Chicago, U.S. Soccer sued the union in February in an effort to hold the players to their contracts. At the time, U.S. Soccer said it had brought the action only after Richard Nichols, the executive director of the union, the Women’s National Team Players Association, threatened to repudiate the agreement during a negotiating session over a new C.B.A.
Coleman’s decision merely ensures that the current agreement will remain in force until a new one is negotiated, but it does not mean there will not be a work stoppage. The sides met twice in May for talks on a new C.B.A., but if a new deal is not reached by Dec. 31, the players can refuse to play.
U.S. Soccer, in a statement released after the ruling, restated its hope that that could be avoided.
“We are pleased with the court’s decision and remain committed to negotiating a new C.B.A. to take effect at the beginning of next year,” the federation said.
