SETTING: This house is in the Hyder Park area of Southeast Albuquerque, a verdant residential neighborhood about four miles from downtown Albuquerque and two miles from the University of New Mexico. The neighborhood is named for a four-acre park a few blocks away; an eight-acre city park is across the street.
INDOORS: The two-story stucco house was completed in the early 1980s and updated about 20 years ago. It is set back from the street behind an intricate iron gate, with a large paved front courtyard, a fountain and benches.
Inspired by traditional Spanish and Moorish architecture, the facade has arched windows on either side of the double front door, which is flanked by tall arched stained glass windows. Upstairs are loggias or colonnaded porches, one on either side of the door. The interior is similarly formal, with black-and-white checkered tile floors, ornate plaster medallions on ceilings and walls, bas-relief columns and hand-painted ceiling murals in several rooms, including an image on the foyer ceiling of a Spanish queen, collecting taxes.
The two-story foyer has two grand staircases leading to the second level. The living room, which measures about 375 square feet, has a fireplace with French doors on either side opening to a veranda and another courtyard. The floor plan is symmetrical, with a family room on one side of the living room and a dining room with a fireplace on the other, both of which have three arched windows facing the back courtyard.
The kitchen was updated in the renovation, receiving new appliances and white-tile countertops and white back splashes with colorful traditional tile accents. A small breakfast area offers an alternative to the very formal dining room.
The bedrooms are upstairs. The master measures more than 350 square feet, with two sets of French doors opening to Juliet balconies. The bedroom is part of a suite with a walk-in closet and a bathroom with a soaking tub.
The guesthouse is past the rear courtyard, which is organized around a second large fountain. This house is anchored by an 800-square-foot living room with a stained-glass dome in the ceiling. This room, with a colonnaded area around the perimeter, is often used for parties. The house has a den and kitchen, as well as two bedrooms. There is an attached two-car garage.
OUTDOOR SPACE: The property is about an acre, formally landscaped, with shade trees, low walls, flower gardens and a hot tub surrounded by columns in one corner of the yard.
SETTING: Altadena is a residential area in Los Angeles County, just north of Pasadena. This house is on a lush, winding road within a couple of blocks of trails leading into the San Gabriel Mountains and national forest. There are a scattering of restaurants and cafes in town, and Old Pasadena, Pasadena’s pedestrian-friendly shopping district, is about six miles away. Downtown Los Angeles is within 20 miles.
INDOORS: The single-story ranch was built in 1948 and given an extensive renovation within the last year. The renovation was done by Kurt Gibbs of Gibbs Architecture in Long Beach, Calif., with assistance from Kirsten Blazek, an interior designer with A 1000 x Better.
The front door leads into a great room that runs from the front to the back of the house. The formal living area, at the front of the house, has a large bay window. It is separated from the dining area by a narrow partial wall, with fireplaces facing both spaces. Beyond the dining area is a sitting area with a skylight and a wall of glass accordion doors opening to the pool and the backyard. Here the floor is concrete tile. Floors in the rest of the house are mostly the original wood, sanded down and given a milky matte finish.
The kitchen has a Bertazzoni range, an Electrolux refrigerator and an LG dishwasher. The floor here is hexagonal cement tile; countertops are concrete. A sliding-glass door opens to the pool and the yard. The custom shelving here and throughout the house is walnut. An original swinging door leads into an office with paneled wainscoting.
The master bedroom is separated from the other two. It opens to the yard and the pool, and has an en-suite bathroom with a subway-tile shower and a walnut vanity. The other two bedrooms are connected by a bathroom, also with custom walnut cabinets, and a small dressing area with a bench seat and an additional vanity. The house has a two-car garage.
OUTDOOR SPACE: The lot is just over a third of an acre, with the house set back from the street. The space behind the house is terraced, with a yard a few steps up from the pool.
SETTING: Carlisle is a borough of about 18,000 in south-central Pennsylvania, about two hours from both Philadelphia and Washington, D.C., and 20 miles from the state capital, Harrisburg. The borough is home to Dickinson College, the Army War College and a sizable historic district covering about a thousand 19th-century structures. This limestone and brick farmhouse is on more than three acres at the outskirts of town, abutting the Appalachian Trail, which can be reached from the property.
INDOORS: The main section of the two-story house was built about 1831, incorporating a springhouse. It was added onto in the late 1940s and extensively renovated over the last 12 years. Original features include 12-inch-wide pine floors, bubbled glass windows, doors, hardware and woodwork throughout. Several of the rooms have built-in cupboards and cabinets.
Water for the house comes from the spring. In addition to new heating and cooling systems, the house has an air filtration system.
Both the living room and an office have brick fireplaces. The kitchen measures about 250 square feet, with a brick floor, Corian countertops and Bosch appliances. There is a butler’s pantry. The kitchen and the dining room open to a large flagstone-floored sunroom facing woods and wetlands. Period fixtures include a salvaged red-and-yellow brass chandelier.
The bedrooms are upstairs. The master measures about 240 square feet, and has its own bathroom. Another one of the bedrooms has a sitting room and a bathroom, forming a guest suite. The walkout basement is finished; the attic is used for storage.
The property’s bank barn is used as a two-car garage and a workshop, with storage space upstairs.
OUTDOOR SPACE: There are a flagstone patio and a porch. The house is on three and a third acres, landscaped with mature trees, perennials, bushes, raised garden beds and a pond.
