All men may be brothers under the skin. But the soccer players Granit and Taulant Xhaka are blood brothers, born and raised in the same family. And both will be playing at the 2016 European Championship in France.
They are not the only brothers who will be at the tournament. There will also be Romelu and Jordan Lukaku of Belgium, the identical twins Vasili and Aleksei Berezutski of Russia, and Jonny and Corry Evans of Northern Ireland.
But what sets the Xhaka brothers apart is that Granit plays for Switzerland, while Taulant plays for Albania. And fate has pitted those two nations against each other in their first group game on Saturday in Lens, France.
Their parents, Ragip and Eli Xhaka, might find it difficult to know which way to turn and which country to support this weekend. Taulant, 25, is the elder brother by two years, while Granit is said to be the more confident one in life and the more dynamic on the field.
They were both born in Basel, Switzerland, where their parents emigrated after fleeing Kosovo for political reasons. In Basel, the father found work as a gardener, and the boys came up through the local junior soccer team, Concordia, before moving up to F.C. Basel, which plays in colors similar to F.C. Barcelona and shares the Catalan club’s philosophy of teaching players from an early age.
The paths of the Xhaka brothers began to diverge in 2012, when Granit moved to the German club Borussia Mönchengladbach. While Granit has just moved again — to the London club Arsenal for a $43 million transfer fee and a reported annual salary of more than $9 million — his brother remains with Basel.
Taulant is battling to overcome injuries in time to take his place in Albania’s defense on Saturday. Granit is a certainty to start the game for Switzerland. And given that the younger brother is what is known as a box-to-box player, with the energy to run where instinct takes him to influence the game, it is more than likely that the two Xhakas will come face-to-face during the contest.
Granit is described as a game-changer, a leader who makes things happen for his team. Taulant is a committed defender, a fighter who tries not to give an inch of ground.
Granit and Taulant Xhaka’s story is singular because they are brothers, but it is not unlike the stories of so many players today. Soccer, like life, is a changing canvas, altered by social and cultural influences, most recently in Europe, after the conflicts of the Balkans drove so many families to seek refuge abroad.
Switzerland, with its traditionally strong defense, is a growing force in soccer, currently ranked 15th in the world by FIFA. Its status in the sport has risen as the country of eight million allowed some 170,000 Kosovo-Albanian refugees into the country over the last two decades. Albania, meanwhile, is playing catch-up, ranked 42nd in the world.
When the match starts in Lens on Saturday afternoon, there could well be five individuals in the Swiss lineup whose roots trace back to Kosovo or Albania: the creative attacking five of Xhaka, Xherdan Shaqiri, Valon Behrami, Blerim Dzemaili and Admir Mehmedi.
They are not the only members of the Swiss team with foreign roots. The family of Haris Seferovic, for example, emigrated from Bosnia and Herzegovina to Switzerland in the 1980s. And there are four players on the Swiss bench who were born in Africa.
In a case like the Xhakas, when one brother opts for his parents’ homeland and the other signs up with the country that gave the family its freedom and economic security, there must be merit to both choices.
There are stories of immigrant players not only in Switzerland, of course. The Napoli right back Elseid Hysaj, 22, is another player in the Albanian lineup whose father fled the Adriatic country two decades ago.
Hysaj’s father, Gezem, traveled by rubber dinghy across the Adriatic Sea to Italy when his son was just a few months old. The father worked, illegally at first, to send money home for his wife and child in Shkoder, in the northwest of the country. He later persuaded an Italian soccer agent to find a club for his son, a blossoming talent.
It makes one wonder how many of the young refugees flooding into Western Europe today might turn out to be sports stars of the future. It also makes one wonder, What might Yugoslavia have achieved in soccer had it not broken apart in the 1990s? There were good judges of talent who then regarded Yugoslavia as the Brazil of Europe, at least in terms of what once was called the Beautiful Game.
On the Yugoslav team a generation ago, there were Serbs, Croats, Macedonians, Slovenians, Montenegrins, Kosovars and Bosnians, and many saw that team as a potential World Cup champion. It qualified for the 1992 European Championship, but it never arrived. Just 11 days before the tournament began in Sweden, Yugoslavia was banned from taking part after the United Nations imposed sanctions on the country for its civil war. A promising team full of players from different ethnic and religious backgrounds was destroyed as the militias and armies of the various groups fought one another.
That opportunist victory, by the smallest country in that tournament (with a population of just over five million), remains to this day an inspiration for the so-called minnows to remind everyone that winning in sports is never a formality.
The Danes, last to the party, ended up taking home the prize. And with team spirit and self-confidence, they proved the truth of the adage that soccer is a game of 11 against 11, no matter how the players got there.