1. Waves of grief, shock and anger spread through the country after the deadliest mass shooting in U.S. history. Most of the 49 people killed at a gay club in Orlando early Sunday were in their 20s and 30s. 
2. The gunman, Omar Mateen, 29, claimed allegiance to the Islamic State over the phone with negotiators before being killed in a gunfight. A survivor told of cowering for hours in a bathroom stall — and hearing two people hiding in the next one being shot dead. Investigators pored over the gunman’s history: born in New York to Afghan immigrants, abusive to his former wife, once claiming a connection to Al Qaeda, two pilgrimages to Saudi Arabia.
Hillary Clinton’s and Donald J. Trump’s responses to the massacre in Orlando, Fla., highlighted their differences on gun control and immigration.
4. The attack loomed over the presidential race. Donald Trump seized on the attack to criticize the president, calling him a “fool.” Mr. Trump continued to question the loyalties of Muslims in the U.S., saying that they should turn in terrorists in their midst and warning that “thousands of people already in our country are sick with hate.” Hillary Clinton called for resolve and political unity, saying that “lone wolves” could be hunted down and that “weapons of war” should removed from the streets.
5. In Orlando, people lined up by the hundreds to donate blood for the victims. “I’ve been here 13 years and never seen a response like this,” a blood center official said.
7. The biggest business deal of the day: Microsoft is acquiring LinkedIn for $26.2 billion. The move is the latest, and biggest, sign that Satya Nadella, Microsoft’s C.E.O., is betting the future on cloud computing, moving away from the traditional software business that Bill Gates started with.
8. The Supreme Court delivered a setback to Puerto Rico’s efforts to handle its deepening fiscal crisis. The justices rejected the territory’s bid to revive a law that would have let it cut billions of dollars in debt at public utilities. Above, New York’s Puerto Rican Day parade, which took place on Sunday.
9. In the N.B.A. finals, the Cleveland Cavaliers beat the Golden State Warriors 112-97, forcing a Game 6 and staving off elimination in the finals. Big performances from LeBron James and Kyrie Irving helped the Cavaliers send the series back to Cleveland.
10. A judge in Oregon has allowed this retired U.S. Army sergeant to legally choose neither sex and be classified as “nonbinary.” Transgender rights advocates called it a landmark ruling. Born male, the petitioner, Jamie, took hormone treatments to transition to female, but discovered that neither sex fit. “I’m at peace with my biology,” Jamie said.
11. Lastly, the most ambitious solar-powered aircraft yet has passed another milestone. The Solar Impulse 2 soared over New York Harbor this weekend, landing at J.F.K. at the end of its 14th leg, its last in the U.S. Next up: crossing the Atlantic, to a destination to be determined by weather and wind forecasts.
Want to look back? Here’s the Weekend Briefing.