Economic policy makers had already turned cautious even before Britain voted last week to leave the European Union. This month, when the Federal Reserve refrained from raising interest rates, chairwoman Janet Yellen cited uncertainty over the outcome as a reason to wait.
The immediate effects of the vote on the rest of the world — a sell-off in global stock markets and gyration in currency markets — have been painful and worrisome, but so far not out of control.
But worse is surely yet to come for Britain itself. Its economy is likely to stumble badly or even to contract as the flow of global capital to London’s vast financial center begins to slow, exposing imbalances in the British economy even as the country’s policy makers are forced to contend with the referendum’s other consequences — among them the downgrading of Britain’s credit standing and the loss of favorable trade agreements.
The question going forward is how severe the spillover effects of a British downturn will be elsewhere, and what can be done to control or contain them.
In the European Union, the disruption of trade with an important partner — amid speculation about which other nations may try to leave — raises real threats to the strength of the underlying eurozone economy. These, in turn, could lead to renewed financial instability and increasing political disarray, echoing earlier eurozone crises.
In the United States, the British vote coincides with slower job growth, feeble business investment and a general slowdown in economic growth. This slowdown does not seem temporary, and Britain’s move could complicate matters further. American exporters would be harmed if the dollar strengthened significantly against the pound and the euro. The broader economy would suffer if the sell-off in the stock market became severe enough to curtail spending by high-end consumers.
Hedge funds and other asset management firms are another source of potential risk. Some of them have undoubtedly suffered losses on the swings in asset prices after the vote. If those losses lead to failures and asset liquidations, asset prices could fall precipitously.
In general, the weaker the economy, the less able it is to absorb shocks. This is especially true now because interest rates are already low, leaving the Fed little room to boost a faltering economy. This much is clear: By deciding to leave the European Union, Britain has become a major source of uncertainty, not only in Europe but in America as well.