The initial reports about Dayshen McKenzie’s death on May 27 on Staten Island seemed to echo the crimes of an earlier era: A black teenager was dead after being chased by a mob of youths yelling a stinging racial slur.
But a week after his death, the police said on Friday that it appeared to have resulted from a preplanned encounter between rival street gangs that ended with Mr. McKenzie running and suffering an asthma attack. Though anguished by the suggestion that her son was in a gang, the boy’s mother, Tisha Richardson, agreed that her son’s condition had caused his death. The racial slur was a casual expression among youth, she said, not evidence of a hate crime.
Robert K. Boyce, the Police Department’s chief of detectives, discussed the continuing investigation at a news conference on Friday, after an article in The Daily News earlier that day drew calls for a federal hate crime investigation. The report compared Mr. McKenzie’s death to that in 1986 of Michael Griffith, 23, of Brooklyn, who was hit by a car and killed, as he fled a violent white mob who chased him onto a highway in Howard Beach, Queens.
Unlike Mr. Griffith’s case, he said, the investigation into Mr. McKenzie’s death has not uncovered any evidence to indicate that racial bias had played a role in inciting the conflict. Bias and hate crimes investigators were assisting with the investigation, he said.
The Daily News report included statements from Diane Fatigati, 53, a retired police officer, who witnessed part of the encounter and rendered aid to the dying teenager. In the article, and again to reporters on Friday, she said she had heard the group of white teenagers using the slur to taunt Mr. McKenzie, 16, and his friends, all of them black.
But the police said that Ms. Fatigati had not mentioned the slur to investigators until they interviewed her a second time on Thursday. The police had also interviewed six people involved in the conflict, and none of them said they had heard the slur, Chief Boyce said.
Ms. Fatigati said in an interview that she had told the police about hearing the slur on the night Mr. McKenzie died. Investigators had planned to interview her a third time on Friday at the 121st Precinct station.
On the evening that Mr. McKenzie died, Ms. Richardson said, he arrived by car to a Checkers fast-food restaurant in the Mariners Harbor neighborhood after one of his friends called and told him there would be a fight. She said that he left his inhaler behind in the car.
Surveillance video shows Mr. McKenzie approaching two people engaged in a dispute, Chief Boyce said. One of them had thrown a punch at the other before Mr. McKenzie stepped into the fray, he said.
“Mr. McKenzie rolled up to the location in support of a friend,” he said.
The dispute traveled a few blocks to Spartan Avenue, where, Ms. Fatigati said, she was sitting outside her home when she saw the commotion on the street. She described seeing six to eight young white men and a Hispanic man chasing three young black men up the street. One of the men in the larger group stopped and grabbed his crotch, yelling the name of a gang and the racial slur at the smaller group, she said.
Ms. Fatigati said her sister called the police while she rushed down the street to get her 11-year-old niece out of potential danger. At the corner of Spartan Avenue and Rosecliff Road, Ms. Fatigati said, she saw the white group slapping one of the black youths about his head.
Members of the larger group dispersed moments later after hearing a police siren, according to Ms. Fatigati, and sped away in cars.
She recalled one of them saying, “I got a gun, I’m going to shoot,” and then concluding his statement with a racial slur.
The men disappeared after more police cruisers arrived in the area, Ms. Fatigati said. She said she went home, and then saw Mr. McKenzie lying in a neighbor’s yard, surrounded by about six other young black men, including the one she had seen being slapped earlier.
She and one of the young men performed CPR on Mr. McKenzie. Ms. Fatigati, who also has asthma, said she gave him pumps from her own inhaler. Emergency workers took Mr. McKenzie to Richmond University Medical Center, where he was pronounced dead.
The medical examiner’s office said it was conducting further tests to determine the cause and manner of Mr. McKenzie’s death.
Ms. Richardson said her son was an aspiring rapper who played basketball and kept a tight circle of friends. But she feared for his life, especially on hot days, when he could suffer as many as three asthma attacks.
He died two months before his 17th birthday.
“What I want to come from this,” she said, “is to get parents to make sure their kids” have their pumps.