Betsy Cox is sort of a planner for those getting unhitched — a divorce concierge — and José Barceló, a scion of the Ron Barceló rum company in the Dominican Republic, is currently her most active client.
Earlier this year, Ms. Cox, 52, escaped the cold of New York City to take a daylong meeting with Mr. Barceló, 53, who has separated from his wife of 23 years. Ms. Cox and he played 18 holes of golf, toured his new properties around Casa de Campo and Punta Cana, and joined him for dinner at an Italian restaurant.
Between golf and rum shots, she took notes, a lot of them, typing away on her BlackBerry as she used her iPhone to do quick searches and to respond to texts from other clients.
This is what Ms. Cox jotted on the digital to-do list: Mr. Barceló wants to travel to a different country every month for the next year. He wants to study philosophy. He wants one daughter to get set up with a cool job in New York and to find for the other daughter a summer camp to attend in Switzerland. He also wants to meet a woman and fall in love.
Ms. Cox, who is laid-back in a very can-do sort of way, and who calls the business Blackbook Divorce, specializes in making it all happen. “He wants to completely remake himself, which makes him a perfect client,” she said.
She is arranging for his travel — to four continents, 12 countries and at least one health spa.  “I was thinking about The Ashram, but I’m not sure he can handle it.”) She’s looking for a monthlong philosophy course for him in London.
“She’s not my wife, but I don’t have a wife anymore and I need someone to take care of me,” said Mr. Barceló, who is paying Ms. Cox $350 an hour.
As technology works to ease so many of life’s quandaries, divorce remains one of the most logistically complicated and emotionally wrought events. But a small marketplace of fixers (mostly, so far, middlewomen) are starting businesses meant to simplify the ancillary processes associated with a marital break-up.
Liza Feiler started a company called Divorce Concierge Group in the Washington area after her own marriage ended in 2012. “I was lost after my divorce, unsure where to begin,” said Ms. Feiler, 44. She is hired, post-divorce, for a starting flat fee of $350, most often by ex-wives. She helps clients with tasks like putting their homes on the market and hiring accountants.
“You come to me and say, ‘I need new health insurance,’ and I will come back to you with two plans to choose and a start date,” she said.
Digital entrepreneurs are also marrying in. Divorceify, a web platform created by three lawyers, pairs members to services that fit their individualized needs: therapists, mediators, parenting coordinators and financial consultants. “Divorce is not a one-size-fits-all process, and you need a holistic approach,” said Sonia Queralt, 34 and a divorced divorce lawyer and coach in Miami, who is one of the founders.
Ms. Cox’s service is also personalized and touches on different facets of her clients’ lives. Her clientele is well-to-do, often international, with multiple homes: the sort of people who frequent Gstaad and Greece if not SoulCycle and Sagaponack.
The services Ms. Cox provides tends to fall into stereotypical silos. For men, she helps them get set up to manage their own homes and to prepare for parenting challenges.
For men and women, she offers herself as a sounding board and friend. She arranges visits to spas and nutritionists for weight loss and to psychiatrists to treat depression.
It was thanks to her own marital breakup that Ms. Cox met the man who has become her closest professional partner, the prominent divorce lawyer Bernard Clair. They regularly refer business to each other.
While Mr. Clair hammered out the legal settlement, Ms. Cox got him settled.
Ms. Cox created a FreshDirect account for the man and put together a list of foods for regular delivery. She taught him how to use Grubhub. She found him a psychiatrist and a girlfriend.
Ms. Cox’s friends and clients say she is suited to this specialized high-end niche, in part because she had worked at a wealth management and investment firm, and as an event planner who traveled abroad extensively, givng her connections all over the world.
She is also nurturing. When Ms. Cox takes on a client, she offers a full-service operation.
Ms. Rego is an old friend and current client: She is long ago divorced (twice, from the same man), but she is just now trying to rebuild her career as a painter and make a new life. A resident of Rio de Janeiro, Ms. Rego wants to move to New York with her daughter Filippa Paulson. It’s Ms. Cox’s job to facilitate that.
