Donald J. Trump called a foreign policy speech by Hillary Clinton “pathetic” while at a campaign stop in California.
SAN JOSE, Calif. — Donald J. Trump unleashed an attack on Hillary Clinton on Thursday in response to her speech earlier in the day criticizing his foreign policy positions.
Outside the event, protesters, some brandishing Mexican flags, clashed violently with Mr. Trump’s supporters.
Videos taken at the scene showed a number of physical confrontations. In one, a supporter wearing a football jersey emblazoned with Mr. Trump’s name was pelted with eggs. Another showed an unsuspecting man being surrounded by protesters and punched in the face.
In a third video, a man who had emerged from the event holding a Trump sign was struck in the head and began to bleed.
The San Jose Police Department said in a brief statement that it had made “a few arrests” after the rally and that one police officer had been assaulted. It said more details would be provided on Friday.
In his speech, Mr. Trump continued his attack on Mrs. Clinton, accusing her of secretly hating President Obama.
He mocked Mrs. Clinton and her husband, saying they bowed to the president’s whims: “Yes, sir, Mr. President, sir. What would you like? What would you like me to say, sir?” The crowd roared.
He argued that Mrs. Clinton was supportive of Mr. Obama only because of the investigation into her private email server.
That line of attack closely aligns with the writing of Ed Klein, the conservative author whose books on Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Obama have been dismissed by critics as including fabricated accounts of events. Mr. Trump recently met with Mr. Klein.
Though he offered some lighthearted jokes about the crowd size being affected by the N.B.A. finals nearby, Mr. Trump seemed to grow angrier during the speech and repeatedly went after Mrs. Clinton.
He did not offer many direct rebukes of Mrs. Clinton’s speech, sticking mainly to mocking the candidate and focusing on her emails, but he criticized her claim that Russia and China were “jealous” of the United States’ relationships with its allies.
“They’re not jealous; they think we’re stupid,” Mr. Trump said.
He also accused Mrs. Clinton of lying when she said he would allow Japan to have nuclear weapons; in an interview this year, though, he said he was open to it.
And he once again proclaimed that he was against the Iraq invasion, although audio from 2002 has surfaced of Mr. Trump supporting the invasion.
He promised to make Mrs. Clinton’s email server an issue on the campaign trail, repeatedly calling her “guilty as hell” and hinting that under a President Trump, “the attorney general is going to take a very good look” at the issue.
Mr. Trump was active on Twitter after the event but did not comment on the violence.