1. This is a more demanding musical than you might remember.
2. Big-stage experience doesn’t necessarily guarantee small-stage success.
In a performance last week, Mr. Colley still had work to do to capture the angst of Charlie Brown. With the exception of Milly Shapiro, who is a spot-on delight as Sally, all of the actors (who are ages 9 through 13) seemed to need a lot more directing from Michael Unger, whose task here is formidable.
When this play first appeared in 1967, no child needed an explanation of the “Peanuts” characters; they were household names in the pint-size world. Today the names may still be familiar, but children have a vast universe of animated and live-action characters to latch onto, and the “Peanuts” figures probably aren’t high on the list. Pulling off this show requires knowing that Snoopy (Aidan Gemme) has to be both cute and somewhat manic; that Lucy (Mavis Simpson-Ernst) is both a bully and a fragile egomaniac; that these characters are both naïvely young and preternaturally adult.
Little of that was in evidence at the performance I saw. Perhaps some of it will come as the show matures — certainly the comic timing will improve as these actors learn where the laughs are. But there is a fair amount of complexity in these seemingly simple characters, which is why “Charlie Brown” is best when performed by adults, or at least by high school students.
The intent here may have been to draw adult-caliber performances out of age-appropriate actors, or to somehow illuminate the show by having it performed by actual children. Instead, the smaller arena magnifies the lack of experience that a big-cast, big-stage Broadway show can hide.
So don’t go expecting to be knocked out, though Jeremy T. Villas draws some extra applause with his dance moves in Linus’s “My Blanket and Me” number. Instead, go if you have young children to bring who will be impressed by seeing actors their own age at close range. And savor the intricacy of this show, whose book, music and lyrics are by Clark Gesner (enhanced here with additions made for a 1999 Broadway run). The songs are a delight. Sometimes, in the group numbers, this young cast even gets the most out of them.