It started as a fairly simple proposition: There were two schools on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, one overcrowded, the other underused. The city’s Education Department proposed to redraw the schools’ attendance zone so that some blocks assigned to the crowded school would be shifted to the emptier one.
But while most of the children at the crowded school, Public School 199, are middle class and white, most of the children at the other school, P.S. 191, are poor, and black or Hispanic. P.S. 191 has much lower test scores, and last year, the state labeled the school persistently dangerous, though many of its supporters argued that this was a mistake.
The proposal became complicated as families in the blocks that would be affected objected to the change. The department ultimately dropped the idea.
The appeal to the Education Department is clear: P.S. 452’s student population closely mirrors P.S. 199’s, and its principal, David Scott Parker, used to be an assistant principal there. Families moved out of P.S. 199 might be more open to P.S. 452 than to P.S. 191, and persuading them to go to P.S. 452 could be easier than getting them to take a chance on a completely new school.
The proposal, to be discussed at a zoning meeting at P.S. 452 on Monday, has already been met with a divided reaction.
The principal of P.S. 191, Lauren Keville, supports the idea of moving to the new building.
“A new school building will come with exciting new technology and expansive resources, so we look forward to discussions about this opportunity,” she said in an email.
P.S. 452 would move 16 blocks, from 77th Street to 61st Street. While Mr. Parker, the principal, and some parents support moving, since it would give the school its own building, other parents say that the longer commute would deprive their children of the benefits of attending a true neighborhood school, such as bumping into classmates on the playground.
Brian Byrd said that his twins, in first grade at P.S. 452, walked to school with their friends, just as he did growing up in New Jersey. He said he was not sure whether he would keep them in the school if it relocated. He might move his family to the Upper East Side.
“For us, it’s almost a 20-block difference in an area that we have no connection to, none whatsoever,” Mr. Byrd said.
Some believe that the opposition is about more than just the commute. P.S. 191’s building is across the street from a public housing complex, where many of its students live. If P.S. 452 moved into that building, its new attendance zone would probably include part of the complex.
But she said she did not understand “why this little school on 77th Street” might be moved 16 blocks south.
She said she supported the proposal.
But Scott Edelstein, who has two sons at P.S. 452 and opposes the relocation, said he did not think that a high-performing school could move into a poor area and not change.
“My limited anecdotal understanding of American society is that a school is ultimately and eventually a reflection of its community,” he said.
“The only idea that makes any sense to me personally is that a school belongs to the neighborhood where it resides,” he said.
The meeting on Monday will be held by the zoning committee for the Community Education Council of District 3, which includes the three schools. The council votes on zone lines, but the building moves would have to be approved by the Panel for Educational Policy, a citywide body.
