What does James Wan want? “I think he’d love to do a romantic comedy,” said the actor Patrick Wilson. “He’s deeply romantic — which might be hard to believe for people who don’t know him.” Or who have seen his movies. And been scared out of their wits.
In 2004, Mr. Wan’s breakthrough, “Saw,” made its debut at the Sundance Film Festival, ushering in the torture-porn era and a franchise that has produced six sequels. In 2011, he and his longtime writing partner, Leigh Whannell, shifted gears, creating the subtly creepy “Insidious,” starting yet another franchise, the fourth installment of which is to be released next year.
Mr. Wan also somehow found time to drift into someone else’s series — “The Fast and the Furious” — directing the well-reviewed “Furious 7” (2015), now ranked sixth in history at the global box office.
On June 10, “The Conjuring 2” materializes in theaters, the second creepfest directed by Mr. Wan inspired by the psychic investigators Lorraine and Ed Warren (the real-life couple associated with the case behind “The Amityville Horror”). Will the series continue? Will ghouls keep jumping out of James Wan’s closets?
Based on the notorious Enfield Haunting in Britain in the late ’70s, “The Conjuring 2” concerns a single mother (Frances O’Connor), her four children and their modest North London home, which becomes possessed by demons. Mr. Wilson and Vera Farmiga reprise their roles as the Warrens in a film that has Warner Bros. muscle behind it, and as such, advances Mr. Wan’s goal: restoring horror films to the status they enjoyed in the ’70s and ’80s.
Mr. Wilson, who has done two “Insidious” films and two “Conjuring” movies, appreciates the difference between making a $1.5 million film (“Insidious”) and a $20 million film (“The Conjuring”).
For all the dread Mr. Wan generates onscreen, he seems to inspire loyalty through energy and mirth.
Many found “Furious 7” and its enormous box office a solid argument against traditional Hollywood attitudes about diversity in casting, even if that casting was based on a model established by six previous movies. Mr. Wan said he was of two minds. “I want whoever is best for my movie, which means it could be anyone,” he said. “If you’re great, I want to work with you.
