A judge in Oregon has granted a petition allowing a person to legally choose neither sex and be classified as nonbinary: an important development for transgender Americans while civil rights and sexual identity are in the national spotlight, advocates and legal experts said.
Though the petition was granted with little fanfare in a two-paragraph decision on Friday, the experts said that, to their knowledge, the ruling was the first of its kind in the country.
The petitioner seeking the new designation, Jamie Shupe of Portland, Ore., is a retired United States Army sergeant born with male anatomy who had successfully battled the military to be given discharge papers that reflected the female sex.
Jamie — who prefers to use only a first name and the pronouns “they” and “their,” instead of singular pronouns — underwent hormone treatments to transition to a woman. But ultimately, neither sex fit, Jamie said in an interview on Friday.
Expecting the judge to challenge the bid for nonbinary status, the petitioner went to court with letters from two doctors attesting that Jamie is neither male nor female.
Instead, the moment was mostly understated. The judge, Amy Holmes Hehn of Circuit Court in Multnomah County, Ore., told Lake Perriguey, the lawyer who represented Jamie, that Mr. Perriguey was “pushing the envelope” with the petition, he said.
Oregon law does not specifically limit gender choices to male or female. For decades, the legal process for a change of sex has been similar to the process for changing a name, Mr. Perriguey said.
A petitioner can submit the paperwork and pay the filing fee, and a notice of the proposed change is posted for 14 days. A judge can approve a change of sex if it is determined that the person has undergone surgical, hormonal or other treatment appropriate for them, according to the law.
Judge Holmes Hehn’s ruling could help call attention to other issues, such as gender-neutral bathrooms, advocates said. North Carolina, for example, enacted a law that bars transgender people from using public bathrooms that do not match the sex on their birth certificates. That drew intense criticism and prompted many businesses and entertainers to boycott the state.
It was the culmination of a nearly 50-year journey. Growing up as one of eight children, Jamie strongly identified as female. That identification was suppressed by Jamie’s mother. An 18-year stint in the Army — when gay men and lesbians were banned from the armed forces, and later under the “don’t ask, don’t tell” policy — offered little relief for Jamie’s gender dysphoria.
It was not until 2013, at the age of 49 and after retiring from the military, that Jamie had to decide whether to “begin living authentically as the woman that I have always been for my remaining years,” according to “Transgender Lives: Your Stories,” a collection of essays that appeared with editorials about transgender experiences in The New York Times.
The next move will be to get the state agency that issues driver’s licenses to change its forms to include a nonbinary choice, Mr. Perriguey said.
Foster Noone, 19, a student at Tulane University in New Orleans and a member of the national youth council for the Transgender Law Center, said the ruling was heartening news for young nonbinary people.
Gender is frequently treated as if “there are two different types of bodies and two types of genders, and that’s the way it’s been since the beginning of time, and that’s just not true,” Noone said.