PARIS — It is soccer’s cruel and unusual punishment, a fate as embarrassing as it is emasculating. The own goal — or o.g., as it is often recorded in the match report — is brutal enough during a regular match on a regular day. But in a crucible like Saturday’s round of 16 match at the European Championships, it is, quite simply, mortifying.
It is impossible to know right now how sports history will ultimately remember Gareth McAuley, the veteran defender for Northern Ireland who turned the ball into his own net with 15 minutes remaining in his team’s 1-0 loss to Wales at the Parc des Princes. He is a well-regarded center back, the player of the year for England’s West Bromwich Albion in 2013 and a rugged presence at the back of Northern Ireland’s formation.
But McAuley is also 36, raising the possibility that this will have been the final match he plays for his country at a major tournament. If it was, he experienced perhaps the most excruciating exit imaginable.
In other sports, the own goal is frequently softened, at least somewhat, by merciful bookkeeping. If a basketball player puts the ball into his own basket, the points are credited to a player on the other team; in hockey, if a player scores into his own net, the opposing player who last touched the puck is awarded the goal. Some face, if only a little, is saved.
In soccer, indignity lives forever. The most memorable own goal is, of course, one by Colombia’s Andrés Escobar, who scored into his own net during the 1994 World Cup and was murdered five days after his team’s elimination. But there are many, many others. Most recently, Laura Bassett, a player for England, scored an own goal in stoppage time of last summer’s Women’s World Cup semifinal and sent her team out of the tournament with a 2-1 loss to Japan.
McAuley’s calamity was not altogether different from Bassett’s. In Bassett’s case, she slid to intercept a cross, and the ball deflected off her foot, popped high in the air, bounced off the crossbar and fell over the goal line. It was tragedy in slow motion.
McAuley’s was similar but quicker. Gareth Bale, the Wales superstar, had the ball on the left side of the field and whizzed a low, hard cross right in front of Northern Ireland’s goal. McAuley, like several of his teammates, was running back toward the end line and was confronted with a question that seemingly had no good answers: Should he let the ball go by (almost certainly allowing a Welsh player to slam it home) or try to make a play on it himself?
He chose the latter. And with all of his momentum going back toward goal, his chances of doing anything other than what he did — turn the ball right into his own net — were slim.
The Welsh players flocked to celebrate with Bale, and McAuley put his head into his hands.
“There’s not much Gareth can do; he’s got to go and try to clear that,” said Michael McGovern, Northern Ireland’s goalkeeper.
McAuley’s misfortune, grim as it was, should not overshadow Wales’s accomplishment. With Bale leading the way, Wales has become one of the best stories of the Euros. Playing in its first major tournament in 58 years, the Welsh finished first in Group B with victories over Russia and Slovakia.
Now, after Saturday’s victory, Wales is in the final eight, with a quarterfinal match against the winner of Sunday’s match between Hungary and Belgium.
There were, frankly, few others, as the play on the field, surrounded by an atmosphere of raucous chanting and singing from two groups of fans just delighted to be there, did not match the electricity in the stands. Three completed passes in a row was an unusual sight. Midfield play was rocky and stunted. There was lots of long, hopeful passing with far, far too many balls skidding over the end line for goal kicks.
It was, some might say, a display of the worst kind of English soccer, although that description also fit in other ways. Other than the sunny, warm day weather, the feeling here Saturday was very British: 19 of the 22 players in the starting lineups play for clubs in Britain, and an English Premier League referee, Martin Atkinson, was assigned to the game.
Political talk, much of it focused on Britain’s vote last week to leave the European Union, was largely put aside, save for a brief “Remain!” chant from Northern Ireland’s fans early in the match. (A majority of voters in Wales cast ballots to leave the E.U., while Northern Ireland voted to stay.) It was a day for sports, an opportunity for both teams to turn an already memorable competition into something truly remarkable.
Wales last played in a major tournament in 1958 and had never played in the Euros; Northern Ireland last played in the World Cup 30 years ago and was in its maiden Euros as well.
That was why the ending stung so much. Northern Ireland defended well, largely containing Bale and his teammate Aaron Ramsey. They had a few chances and, as O’Neill said, certainly felt they deserved the chance to take the game to extra time.
Instead, there was Bale flashing toward the wing, the ball suddenly coming across and McAuley, with nowhere to go, tumbling into infamy as the red end of the stadium roared.
Nearly half an hour after the final whistle, Northern Ireland’s players returned to the field. They walked out together and stood in front of the Wales fans who had stayed in the stadium, still singing. O’Neill was inside at the news conference, but the players wanted to savor one last moment from this tournament, wanted to feel that feeling one more time.
McAuley did not stay behind, did not sulk. Instead, he stood in the middle of it all and nodded as the fans warmly chanted his name. When the players finally began to head back to the locker room, he lingered a bit longer. He did not want to leave.