BRIARCLIFF MANOR, N.Y. — Donald J. Trump, aided by two teleprompters, presented the version of himself on Tuesday evening that Republican Party officials had desperately craved — softer, serious and sophisticated.
Mr. Trump’s disciplined performance was geared at soothing nervous voters and at stopping the flight of high-ranking Republicans. And it came just hours after Mr. Trump reminded them why they had been concerned in the first place.
A series of missteps and vicious attacks — with targets that included former rivals, entire nationalities and religious groups — has led to fears that Mr. Trump has doomed Republican chances of taking back the White House and keeping the party’s hold on the Senate. It was the type of calm performance that Mr. Trump has delivered before, only to revert to form within days.
Mr. Trump’s challenges culminated in a series of destructive episodes over the last two weeks: He insinuated that the federal judge presiding over a lawsuit against Trump University was biased against him because of the judge’s Mexican heritage; he belittled members of his staff on a conference call; and he left his aides scrambling — yet again — to impose discipline on an operation characterized for months by its chaotic, freewheeling ethos.
On Tuesday, after Mr. Ryan said the remarks about the judge were “racist,” Mr. Trump released a statement saying, “I do not feel that one’s heritage makes them incapable of being impartial.” But he did not apologize, as many Republican leaders had asked him to do.
Mr. Ryan maintained his endorsement of Mr. Trump, but Senator Mark S. Kirk of Illinois withdrew his. And Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, who never publicly endorsed Mr. Trump, urged Republicans who had endorsed the candidate to withdraw their support.
On Wednesday morning, Mr. Trump tweeted tauntingly at MSNBC host Joe Scarborough after he said Mr. Trump was “acting like a racist.” His top policy adviser, Sam Clovis, told a Republican group in Iowa that the judge in the Trump University case belongs to an “anti-American” Hispanic group, according to The Des Moines Register.
“Even modest changes would help,” he said.
Though Mr. Trump vanquished a legion of primary opponents without much change in demeanor or strategy, he is entering a race in which he is trailing in polls. His support among college-educated suburban voters in battleground states is especially low, according to polling conducted by Republican groups.
Aides are discussing ways to keep Mr. Trump focused during the next few weeks. Among the options is deploying his three oldest children, who have urged him in the past to act “more presidential,” as well as his son-in-law, Jared Kushner, to travel with him in a rotation.
At the same time, the Trump operation is relying on the Republican National Committee, as well as on several “super PACs” that support him, to handle tasks typically overseen by a presidential campaign. But the party has had its own defections because of Mr. Trump, including by the woman who led efforts for Hispanic media outreach and who is said to have told colleagues she could not stomach defending him on television.
The Trump campaign is also working to ramp up its fund-raising operations, with the candidate holding at least four events this week.
On Thursday, 70 donors are to meet at Trump Tower in New York, followed by lunch at the Four Seasons hotel. Mr. Trump is expected to attend both the meeting and the lunch.
The team has spent weeks working on hiring new members of staff, including Jim Murphy, a longtime Republican operative, as the national political director. Mr. Murphy’s predecessor lasted six weeks in the job.
The Trump team has had trouble filling positions, in part because some Republicans they tried to recruit turned down their offers, worried about how a Trump line on their résumé could affect their job prospects. The campaign has spent two months searching for a communications director, after an early prospect fell through, according to one of the three aides and two people who were approached about possible jobs.
Mr. Trump’s campaign manager, Corey Lewandowski, said that the candidate was always planning for a progression.
Ben Carson, a former 2016 hopeful now supporting Mr. Trump, said party leaders and voters should not expect a different version of Mr. Trump for the general election. “It’s very hard to change somebody,” he said.
