“Making Kosovo Fertile Ground for ISIS” (“Secrets of the Kingdom” series, front page, May 22) is correct in pointing out the past difficulties Kosovo faced with radicalized youths and the Islamic State. But it does not adequately recognize the efforts my government has taken to combat this scourge.
My government’s response to the increased radical interpretation of Islam has been robust. New antiterror laws have made it possible to arrest and convict those who go to fight with ISIS in Syria. There are now fewer than 60 Kosovars participating in the Syrian war, a record drop in Europe.
We are actively contributing to the global coalition against ISIS. Secretary of State John Kerry noted on a recent visit to Kosovo that Kosovars are the regional leaders in combating violent extremism. The United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, also recognized Kosovo’s active role in the promotion of global interfaith dialogue in a report last year.
Kosovo will not be held hostage by a small group of violent religious extremists whose absolutist interpretation of Islam is overwhelmingly at odds with our secular tradition.
Your article provides context for the rise of Islamic extremism in Kosovo but echoes only the dark side of the story, not mentioning recent positive developments.
After efforts by the Islamic community, civil society and the government, the number of Kosovo’s foreign fighters has decreased drastically since 2014. There are now between 60 and 70 in Syria and Iraq (down from 200). About 50 others have been killed in battle; the rest have returned home or can no longer be located.
Comparing the number of jihadists with the total Muslim population (rather than per capita, as the article does) ranks Kosovo 14th among European countries, not first. The article also did not include data about how Kosovars view their place in the world.
According to a recent poll from my organization, the Kosovar Center for Security Studies, 95 percent of Kosovars see the United States and Europe (rather than Russia and Turkey) as their country’s strategic partners.
While it is true that conservative Arab states have helped spread a nontraditional practice of Islam, these groups represent a minority in Kosovo’s Muslim community.
The writer, a Fulbright visiting scholar at Columbia University, is director of the Kosovar Center for Security Studies.
You write that “Saudi money and influence” have transformed Kosovo into “a font of Islamic extremism and a pipeline for jihadists.” So why does our government cling to the fantasy that the Saudis are our allies?
Saudi-funded schools teach jihad throughout the Middle East, Asia and Europe. Saudis carried out the 9/11 attacks; Saudis fund anti-Semitic activities worldwide; and Saudis treat women like cattle.
It’s time to cut the cord. They are not our friends.
