In June 2016, North Korea’s state-run TV broadcast video of the country’s leader, Kim Jong-un, inspecting weapons, including submarine-launched ballistic missiles and multiple rocket launchers.
SEOUL, South Korea — A recent string of unsuccessful missile tests by North Korea, and the release of a video showing the launch of a different weapon, reflected a frantic drive by its leader, Kim Jong-un, to bolster his political standing before a high-profile dialogue with China, analysts said on Thursday.
North Korea conducted the latest of those tests on Tuesday, only hours before its envoy — Ri Su-yong, a confidant of Mr. Kim and a Politburo member — arrived in Beijing. The weapon, an intermediate-range Musudan ballistic missile, exploded as soon as it was fired, South Korean military officials said.
The Musudan, which analysts say was devised to strike United States military bases in Guam with nuclear and chemical weapons, had not had a test flight until April, when North Korea launched three. Each test failed.
Despite having little time to fix the problems, engineers conducted another test on Tuesday, also unsuccessful, an unusual streak of flops even by the checkered standards of North Korea.
Mr. Kim’s apparent eagerness to demonstrate advances in his country’s missile capacity may have added to the pressure for his engineers, whose rockets have seldom worked on the first try, some analysts said.
On Wednesday, North Korea released a video of a recent test flight for a different projectile — its first submarine-launched ballistic missile — shortly before Mr. Ri met with President Xi Jinping of China in Beijing. The footage was included in a documentary shown on the state-run Central Television.
Outside analysts said the timing of the broadcast was as interesting as the footage itself.
After the failed tests, they said, North Korea needed another way to draw attention to its missile threats. The video preceded both the meeting between North Korea and China this week and a planned security dialogue between the United States and China in Beijing next week, where dealing with the North’s weapons program is expected to be a main topic.
North Korea claimed to have successfully tested a submarine-launched ballistic missile in April and released photos of the launch at the time. South Korean officials have said the projectile flew only 19 miles, suggesting that the North was still years away from perfecting it. But they said that such a missile would eventually provide North Korea with a harder-to-detect means of delivering its nuclear warheads.
The documentary released on Wednesday included video clips of the submarine-launched ballistic missile, known as Polar Star, soaring out of the water and flying into the sky, as the narrator extolled the military advances that the North has made under Mr. Kim.
In recent weeks, Mr. Kim has repeatedly urged his missile engineers to conduct more tests with the ultimate goal of developing an intercontinental ballistic missile capable of delivering a nuclear warhead.
North Korea makes few goods that the rest of the world wants, but it does specialize in exporting bombastic, bellicose pronouncements.
The Musudan was mainly intended to target Guam, analysts said. North Korea has more reliable, proven missiles of shorter ranges, like its Rodong, which can target South Korea and Japan, both host to tens of thousands of American troops. In recent military parades, North Korea has also displayed the KN-08, said to be the country’s first intercontinental ballistic missile, though it has never been tested.
South Korean defense officials said that the Musudan was based on the design of an old Soviet submarine-launched ballistic missile. Some of the Soviet missile designers made their way to North Korea in the immediate post-Cold War era, Mr. Schilling of 38 North said in his post.
The renewed efforts by North Korea to demonstrate its missile threats has come at a time when the West is trying to impose sanctions against the country in an effort to curb its nuclear program.
On Wednesday, the United States Treasury designated North Korea as a primary money launderer.
The Treasury said it would seek to cut off from the American financial system any bank or company that conducted banking transactions with the North. Such a measure is bound to unsettle Chinese banks and is expected to be a point of discussion when Secretary of State John Kerry and Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew meet with their Chinese counterparts in Beijing early next week.
For years, the United States has sought to enlist help from China, North Korea’s single largest trade and aid provider, in its efforts to curb the North’s weapons ambitions. But analysts said Beijing was reluctant to enforce sanctions that could destabilize North Korea. China considers the North a strategic buffer between it and South Korea, where Washington has a military presence.
In his meeting with Mr. Xi on Wednesday, Mr. Ri, the North Korean envoy, said his country would continue to expand its nuclear arsenal under Mr. Kim, the North’s official Korean Central News Agency said on Thursday.