Times Insider shares historic insights from The New York Times. In this piece, David W. Dunlap, a metro reporter, looks back at the 50-year career of Rudolph Stocker.
While everyone has been talking about the future of The New York Times, the past slipped out the door.
On May 18, Mr. Stocker, who is 78, said goodbye to his friends around the 11th-floor publishing distribution center — the closest thing to a composing room in the digital age — and left The Times, with no more ceremony than that. Through his colleagues, he made it known that he was not interested in a valedictory interview.
Rudolph Stocker as a young printer. He earned his full-time “situation” at The Times in June 1966.
Mr. Stocker deserves a deep bow, all the same, not just for his 50 years of service, but for what he represents: thousands of blue-collar craft workers who cared as much as any journalist about how The New York Times read and how it looked.
The legacy endures in our printing plant at College Point, Queens. But at the white-collar mid-Manhattan headquarters, we’ve lost a living link to the days when each word was set in molten lead.
That said, computers were threatening Big Six even before Mr. Stocker arrived.
Staggered by their losses during a 114-day strike led by New York Typographical Union No. 6, from late 1962 to early 1963, the city’s publishers resolved to begin automating their composing rooms as quickly as possible. Just as quickly, the union shops, or “chapels,” began pushing back.
Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, newly installed as publisher, tried at first to soothe The Times’s chapel.
Mr. Stocker was the last New York Times employee with a lifetime job guarantee under the New York Typographical Union contract.
In July 1964, however, the general foreman, George Lapolla, announced unilaterally that The Times intended to install an IBM 1620 in the fourth-floor composing room within the month.
Fooling exactly no one.
Into this protracted limbo, Mr. Stocker arrived in October 1965, when he formally began his apprenticeship. On June 5, 1966, he was granted a full-time “situation” in The Times’s chapel — distinct from substitute printers who worked in one shop or another as publishers’ needs dictated.
The steampunk machine that Mr. Stocker mastered was called a Linotype because it cast one line of type at a time. At the stroke of a key on a peculiar-looking keyboard (the first two rows spelled e-t-a-o-i-n s-h-r-d-l-u), little brass molds dropped down chutes in an overhead magazine. Once a full line was assembled, the molds were shunted into a casting mechanism, where they received a dollop of molten lead. As it solidified, the lead line was ejected into a waiting steel tray, while the molds were recycled back into the magazine.
Victorian technology for the space age.
You can understand why The Times was thinking IBM.
But it would not be until July 1974 that Big Six and The Times and Daily News reached a landmark agreement. Their new contract freed the publishers to introduce automation, while effectively guaranteeing lifetime job security to 1,785 situation-holders and full-time substitutes, 810 of whom were at The Times — Mr. Stocker included.
“We’re going to see more changes in the next 10 years than any working men have ever seen,” Mr. Powers said.
Mr. Stocker, in the red sweater, was joined in April by current and former colleagues in the 11th-floor production area: Barbara Natusch, Abby Berg, Rich Bernatovech, Tony Alleyne and Joe Rivera.
Mr. Stocker’s career, however, was just beginning.
He also enjoyed reminiscing about his apprenticeship at The Times, she said, and his involvement in 1971 with the production of the Pentagon Papers. The Pulitzer Prize-winning series, based on a classified government history of the Vietnam War, was produced under such a veil of secrecy that a special mini-composing room was built on the ninth floor of the headquarters at 229 West 43rd Street.
“The retiring of the last, old-hire I.T.U. worker should be a story in the newspaper,” said Kurt Ochshorn, another colleague of Mr. Stocker.
He’s right, of course. If only we had a Linotype machine to set it.
And Mr. Stocker to man the keyboard.
Mr. Stocker was far down the 1969 priority list in The Times’s shop, or “chapel.” There were 800 other situation-holders at the time — most of them ahead in line. William Granat, at the top of the list, had begun his apprenticeship in 1919.