LONDON — Think the fairy tale of Leicester City could not be beaten this year?
Just weeks after the end of a Premier League season where the Leicester Foxes outran the rich and powerful to win England’s top league for the first time in their 132-year history, there came another compelling underdog story. A.F.C. Wimbledon, which was founded only 14 years ago, won promotion to the third tier of English soccer on Monday.
Suddenly, there is not one, but two potential Hollywood movies about little old England and its obsession with soccer. Among the 57,956 who watched Wimbledon beat Plymouth Argyle, 2-0, at Wembley Stadium on Monday to gain promotion was John Green, the American author whose book “The Fault in Our Stars” was turned into a low-budget movie estimated to have grossed more than $300 million worldwide.
Green knows a great story when he sees one, and he grasps the difference between sports in the United States — where franchises relocate without a second thought when a better opportunity arises — and England, where that has been attempted only once in soccer. Armed with that knowledge, he is planning a film about A.F.C. Wimbledon and its incredible rise up the English soccer pyramid.
 It was 14 years ago when the Football Association allowed the financially struggling Wimbledon F.C. to move 56 miles north from its base in west London and be reborn as the Milton Keynes Dons.
On May 30, 2002, two days after the move was allowed, a group of die-hard Wimbledon supporters called on their community to form a new club to replace it, A.F.C. Wimbledon.
A month later, some 230 would-be players for the new team turned up for public tryouts in a park next to Wimbledon Common. Out of that came a team that has ascended from the equivalent of Sunday league soccer to the third tier of the professional leagues — in all, six promotions in 13 seasons.
After the original Dons left, their stadium, Plough Lane, was bulldozed to make room for apartment blocks. A.F.C. Wimbledon now shares a stadium with another club in Kingston upon Thames, west of Wimbledon, but its fans want their own stadium, to be built on a greyhound track close to the original.
On Monday, A.F.C. Wimbledon was playing in Wembley Stadium. That was where Wimbledon F.C., with a squad known as “The Crazy Gang,” defeated Liverpool to win the F.A. Cup in 1988.
Neal Ardley was a 16-year-old academy player for Wimbledon F.C. then, and he later played for them for 11 seasons. Now, he is A.F.C. Wimbledon’s manager, and on Monday he told Green that “you have to include us now” in his movie about the club.

They have followed a fan-owned club that simply wants — and demands — the right to run against the rest.
Wimbledon isn’t yet in Leicester’s league, at least when it comes to the quality it faces. The third tier League One is very far from the Premier League, whose games are televised worldwide and whose clubs are among the most valuable on earth.
But it does play the same game as Leicester, with a similar daring attitude.
A.F.C. Wimbledon’s goals on Monday were scored by players who between them have moved more than two dozen times in their careers as they searched for a permanent home for their talents.
Lyle Taylor, 26, needed some “loving” — at least that’s what his teammates said — to turn his speed into something more than sporadic promise. He scored the first goal, after 78 minutes. Then, 10 minutes into stoppage time, Adebayo Akinfenwa, playing what he expected to be his last Wimbledon game, finished the scoring with a penalty kick.
Big is an understatement when it comes to Akinfenwa. Akinfenwa, a 34-year-old Londoner who had to journey to Lithuania to get his first start as a pro soccer player, is a gym freak who is built like an ox.
He is 5 feet 11, but definitely the widest soccer player around, as broad as the proverbial barn door, tipping the scales at about 220 pounds.
When the chance for the penalty shot came up, Akinfenwa muscled the ball from another player and slammed the penalty shot out of the reach of Plymouth’s goalkeeper.
You sense he is auditioning for a part in the movie. Next season, as it happens, A.F.C. Wimbledon will meet Milton Keynes Dons, the club that stole its identity, on level terms because the Dons have just been relegated to League One.
