CLAIREFONTAINE, France — Like a theater audience demanding to be entertained, French soccer fans can be a fickle lot.
The team will be hoping that the mercurial tradition does not re-emerge on Sunday when it takes on Iceland in the quarterfinals of the European Championships. Iceland, after all, is extremely popular among neutral fans after its 2-1 victory over England in the round of 16.
Les Bleus, as the French team is known, have often endured a fractious relationship with their fans. Relations are better, but still precarious.
Last weekend in Lyon, the players were jeered off at halftime while trailing Ireland by 1-0. In the group game against Albania in Marseille, the vocal frustration was evident until Antoine Griezmann’s 90th-minute goal.
Any frayed nerves among the French contingent on Sunday at the Stade de France just north of Paris will surely contrast with those of Iceland’s devoted fans, who will be shouting their traditional Viking chant and cranking up the pressure on France’s players.
Ideally for France, a quick goal or two would help settle their nerves.
France’s failure to score during the first half in games at the tournament may not be just a coincidence. Players start games nervously, as if trying to avoid mistakes. Chances are snatched at, the body language is tense and cagey, the fans rarely indulgent.
Kchikech said he envied the way Ireland and Iceland supported their teams at the Euros, with prolonged chants and heartwarming songs.
“It’s magnificent, but that’s not the French way,” he said.
Over the years, games have often mapped out the same way at the national stadium. A flag-waving rendition of “La Marseillaise” is followed by some hearty early encouragement and then a tense, watchful silence. If France fails to impress, jeers and boos ring out from the stands.
The French players have often spoken about being upset during games when the fans turn. Speaking after a 2-0 defeat to Argentina in 2009, left back Patrice Evra berated French fans for sarcastically supporting Argentina.
“All the matches we play in France feel like they’re away from home,” Evra said.
There’s little doubt that the French team has not always helped itself — notably at the World Cup in South Africa in 2010, when the players went on strike.
Things have improved, especially in November 2013, when France overturned a 2-0 first-leg deficit against Ukraine to win, 3-0, at the Stade de France and qualify for the World Cup.
Since Didier Deschamps took charge as coach after the Euros in 2012, he has opened up more training sessions to the public.
On Wednesday, about 500 fans attended a training session at France’s base at leafy Clairefontaine on the outskirts of Paris. Deschamps and the players happily signed autographs and chatted with fans before training.
On Sunday, they are likely to be hoping that they remain supportive.