290 pages. Sarah Crichton Books/Farrar, Straus and Giroux. $26.
In her latest novel, Cathleen Schine takes on aging, dementia and grief, but more often than not she mines those themes for comedy. (The title borrows a phrase from Philip Larkin’s poem “This Be the Verse.”) On the Upper East Side of Manhattan, the 86-year-old Joy Bergman tends to her dying husband, Aaron. She refuses help from her son, Daniel, and her daughter, Molly, who “had given up a perfectly reasonable husband so she could be a lesbian in California.” Molly lives with her wife, Freddie, in Los Angeles and dutifully calls her mother every day; even so, she regrets her “act of geographical treachery.” (Joy does little to assuage her daughter’s guilt.) After Aaron dies, the increasingly frail Joy frets that she’ll be sent to a nursing home, where she’ll have to fend off “some senile old goat.” A former boyfriend, Karl, reappears in her life, claiming to have been in love with her for 65 years, and things become fraught with her appalled children, who feel betrayed by their mother’s new relationship. That Ms. Schine wraps up her novel in a courtroom, with Joy defending her grandson’s ticket for public urination, shows how pleasingly resistant the author is to a predictable or sentimental ending.
181 pages. Tim Duggan Books. $22.
This eloquent first novel opens in the sweltering summer of 1984 as the unnamed 6-year-old narrator describes her aimless days in a “blistering” house in Cairo, where she eats grilled cheese sandwiches for dinner every night and watches episodes of “Dallas.” She quietly observes the adults around her, catches snippets of news about President Hosni Mubarak and eavesdrops on her mother’s phone conversations. She notices that people in the city seem to disappear — including her father, Baba, although no one will explain why or whether he’s coming back: “I didn’t know why nobody talked about Baba even though everyone missed him.” Her mother is depressed and withdrawn, and “the unasked questions feel heavy between us.” Over the years — the novel also covers the summer of 1998, when the narrator is a university student, and 2014, after the Arab Spring — she furthers her political education largely through her activist cousin, Dido. He tracks cases of government torture, corruption and abuse, and insists “the revolution would come someday.” Apart from the charismatic, troublemaking Dido, these characters remain hazy and their fates unresolved. Still, Ms. El Rashidi’s portrait of the unrest in her country is brutally vivid throughout.
227 pages. Europa Editions. $17.
Now back in print, Jane Gardam’s 1976 novel features an awkward teenage girl, Marigold Green, living with her widower father, a housemaster at a boys’ school in the north of England. Though Marigold considers herself hideous and introverted, she is drawn to certain boys at the school — notably Jack Rose, whose romantic interests may lie elsewhere. (She notes, perhaps wisely, that “the derangement love seems to cause has actually made me value isolation more as term has followed term.”) Marigold is discomfited by the arrival of the headmaster’s beautiful daughter, Grace Gathering, who returns to the seaside town oddly triumphant after being expelled from two boarding schools. “She’s terribly romantic looking though,” Marigold says casually to Jack. “Sort of pre-Raphaelite, don’t you think?” She seeks Grace’s friendship and approval — “Like a dog I found myself trotting up” — even if it isn’t in her best interest. Readers will recognize signature Gardam-esque qualities of later works: psychological acuity, endearingly peculiar characters, and sly, understated prose. The 87-year-old author is famous for writing about late-in-life characters (as in “Old Filth,” her masterpiece), yet she proves just as sharp-witted in examining the comic and ignominious difficulties of growing up.
240 pages. Coffee House Press. $16.95.
For the 27-year-old Rodrigo Saldivar, ambition doesn’t mean trying to change the world but hoping it will leave him alone. Passing his days with insuperable slothfulness, he lives in Mexico City in a damp apartment overlooking a vacant lot and works a dead-end job at a museum. His inertia is such that he is incapable of making a plan, but it “generally happens” that he masturbates twice on Saturdays. After a “colossal misunderstanding” that Rodrigo can’t bother to investigate, he finds himself engaged to Cecilia — a co-worker who “perpetually has a slight look of disgust.” When he loses his job and is forced to move back home, his misery hits a nadir: “Now all my hours are idle hours,” he says, “and ideas have time to grow inside me until they become monstrous.” He stumbles into an unlikely friendship with Marcelo, his mother’s eccentric boyfriend and is startled to discover that “communion with others was possible.” The novel takes some bizarre turns as Marcelo leads Rodrigo into experiments involving drugs, tequila, hypnosis and more, all in the name of transformation. If the young man’s notion of radical change is to take part in his life rather than observe it from afar, he’s off to a good start.