WASHINGTON — The Supreme Court on Monday made it harder to prosecute public officials for corruption, unanimously overturning the conviction of Bob McDonnell, a former governor of Virginia.
The alternative to the new limits, Chief Justice Roberts wrote, would be to criminalize routine political behavior. “Conscientious public officials arrange meetings for constituents, contact other officials on their behalf and include them in events all the time,” he wrote.
The Supreme Court returned Mr. McDonnell’s case to an appeals court for an assessment of whether prosecutors had presented evidence to satisfy the narrow definition of corruption announced Monday. If so, prosecutors may seek to retry Mr. McDonnell, but under the stricter standard.
In a statement, Mr. McDonnell said that he was innocent and that he expected to be vindicated.
An appeal by his wife, Maureen, who was also convicted in the case, was put on hold while the court heard his case. Her conviction is likely to be thrown out now.
Mr. McDonnell, a Republican who served from 2010 to 2014, was charged with using his office to help Jonnie R. Williams Sr., who had provided the McDonnells with luxury products, loans and vacations worth more than $175,000 when Mr. McDonnell was governor. The gifts themselves were legal, and the question in the case was whether they were part of a corrupt bargain in which Mr. McDonnell reciprocated by using his office to help Mr. Williams.
Mr. McDonnell arranged meetings for and attended events with his benefactor. But Mr. Williams, whose company made a diet supplement, did not have any real success in obtaining support from the state for his product. A jury found that Mr. McDonnell’s actions amounted to corruption, and a federal appeals court upheld the conviction.
Last year, the Supreme Court allowed Mr. McDonnell to stay out of prison while it considered whether to hear his case, McDonnell v. United States, No. 15-474. That unusual order was a powerful hint that the court might rule in his favor.
The hint proved right, though Chief Justice Roberts stopped well short of endorsing Mr. McDonnell’s actions.
In their briefs to the Supreme Court, Mr. McDonnell’s lawyers relied on the Citizens United decision in 2010, in which the Supreme Court said that “ingratiation and access” were “not corruption.” That year, the court ruled in favor of a former Enron executive, Jeffrey K. Skilling, saying that a federal anticorruption law governing “honest services” applied only to bribes and kickbacks.
Chief Justice Roberts’s opinion did not address Citizens United or the First Amendment argument on which it was based. But he did say proof of something akin to bribery was required in corruption prosecutions.
Mr. McDonnell had been a popular governor, but after his trial turned into the “tawdry tale” Chief Justice Roberts described, the public turned against him. Polls showed most Virginians thought he was guilty — and the jury’s decision reflected that, according to Bob Holsworth, a longtime political analyst in Richmond.
At the same time, officials in the state — both Democrats and Republicans — felt some sympathy for Mr. McDonnell because Virginia had no laws then barring what he did. (In 2015, after his conviction, lawmakers imposed a $100 limit on gifts from lobbyists.) Hundreds of people — neighbors, friends, clergy and elected officials including Senator Tim Kaine, a Democrat — wrote letters to the judge who sentenced Mr. McDonnell, asking for mercy.
