As the world’s leading auction houses prepared for their big-ticket contemporary sales in London this week, the question was on everybody’s mind: What will the shock and confusion following Britain’s vote to leave the European Union — not to mention the plunging world financial markets — mean for the art market?
Until now London has been regarded as the capital of the European art market. With many in its commercial art world supporting the position that Britain should remain in the European Union, a pall has unmistakably been cast over the proceedings. Some lots may be withdrawn this week at the last minute by nervous consignors, because uncertainty is not good for any market — including art.
Several experts predicted that fewer pieces would come to market in Britain in the near future because of the fall in the value of the pound.
But people in the art world maintained that previous convulsions, like the collapse of Lehman Brothers and terrorist attacks, had proven that art can persevere as an asset class, even in hard times.
So far, the auction houses seem to be pressing ahead as planned, with their contemporary evening sales — featuring a Rudolf Stingel, estimated at $1.4 million to $1.8 million at Phillips on Monday; a Sigmar Polke at Sotheby’s, estimated at $5 million to $6.5 million, on Tuesday; and a Gerhard Richter, estimated at about $14 million, at Christie’s on Wednesday.
Christie’s is holding a special sale to celebrate its 250th anniversary — “Defining British Art” — on Thursday night, at which Francis Bacon’s “Version No. 2 of Lying Figure With Hypodermic Syringe” (1968) is estimated at about $20 million and Lucian Freud’s “Ib and Her Husband” (1992) at about $18 million.
Art world experts say that while the referendum passed, the changes will not be immediate, and the uncertainty raised by Brexit merely cements an aura of caution that had muted the art market during predictions of a softening.
In 2015, Britain captured 19 percent of the total value of global auction sales of art and antiques, according to the TEFAF Art Market Report, published in March. This was by far the largest share among European countries, with France the next highest at 5 percent.
One of the many questions posed by the Brexit vote is how Britain’s auction houses will be affected in the long term by renegotiated trade arrangements with the European Union. Will lots temporarily imported from the European Union be subject to duties or taxes that might deter sellers and buyers?
At the moment, artworks sourced outside the European Union can be subject to so-called “import VAT” (value-added tax) of as much as 20 percent on the hammer price.
