Pedro Pablo Kuczynski delivered a speech after appearing to win Peru’s presidency, although the vote count is not yet official.
LIMA, Peru — A former Wall Street banker and finance minister declared himself the winner of the presidential contest in Peru on Thursday after narrowly edging out the daughter of an imprisoned former president.
The former banker, Pedro Pablo Kuczynski, 77, appeared to have prevailed against Keiko Fujimori, 41, after a second-round contest on Sunday whose result remained in suspension for much of the week because of a near-even split between the two candidates.
While the election authorities still had not certified a winner, officials said Thursday that 99.7 percent of the ballots had been counted. It appeared unlikely that Ms. Fujimori could surpass her rival with the few outstanding votes despite a first-place finish in the first round and a lead in polls before the vote. The winner will take office July 28.
Ms. Fujimori did not release a public statement on Thursday. Several party members said they would challenge some ballots because of irregularities, which they did not specify.
The margin between the two candidates — roughly 41,000 votes out of 18 million cast on Sunday — was one of the narrowest in recent memory.
Analysts said it underscored a deeply divided electorate. The candidates espoused similar free-market views but came from divergent backgrounds. Mr. Kuczynski, an economist, ran as a technocrat; Ms. Fujimori, a populist, is the daughter of one of the country’s most controversial leaders.
Her father, Alberto K. Fujimori, ran Peru with an iron fist from 1990 to 2000 in an effort to crush the Marxist rebel group Shining Path.
While the insurgency was largely defeated during those years, many argue that his rule, which included eliminating the Constitution, damaged the country’s democracy. He was later sentenced to 25 years in prison for corruption and human rights abuses.
During the campaign, Mr. Kuczynski portrayed himself as a stable alternative to Ms. Fujimori, whom he accused of being a populist eager to return to her father’s authoritarianism.
An Oxford-educated economist who speaks three languages and plays the flute and piano, Mr. Kuczynski is described by those who know him as having an academic personality shaped by years in the United States.
“He has an impressive ability to prioritize the most critical aspects of each problem — he is very pragmatic,” said Felipe Ortiz de Zevallos, a former Peruvian ambassador to the United States who worked with Mr. Kuczynski.
Peru’s economy has been a bright spot in a region suffering from declines of commodity prices, and Mr. Kuczynski has vowed to push its growth through state spending.
He has said he wants to invest in large infrastructure and education projects while lowering sales taxes to create an incentive for businesses operating outside the formal economy to register with the government.
Yet his goals may be difficult to achieve. Ms. Fujimori’s party, Popular Force, won a large congressional majority in the election’s first round.
“What worries me most is that he might maintain a technocratic style that makes governing a difficult task,” said Eduardo Dargent, a political scientist at Pontifical Catholic University in Lima.
Mr. Kuczynski’s work for American banks — he was a chairman of First Boston in the 1980s and 1990s — has been a concern for some. During the election, his critics said that in previous stints in the government, he offered natural gas concessions at terms too favorable to businesses.
Victor Andrés García Belaunde, a congressman from the Popular Action party, said Peru’s president would face difficult decisions over concessions to developers of its natural resources.
“I’m afraid the government loses control or supervision and that big companies that are dedicated to concessions might have more advantages,” he said.
Others saw Mr. Kuczynski’s past in the financial world as an asset.
“He is essentially an executive and an excellent executive,” said Richard Webb, a former president of Peru’s central bank.