With MDExpungement, entering a case number brings it up on Case Search. The software then determines whether the case is expungeable. If so, the program automatically transfers the information from Case Search to the expungement form. All that’s left is to print, sign and file it with the court.
In October 2015 a change in Maryland law made more cases eligible for expungement. Between then and March 2016, people filed 7,600 petitions to have their criminal records removed in Baltimore City District Court. More than two-thirds of them came from MDExpungement.
Stubenberg, 28, who is now a lawyer, developed CLUE — Client Legal Utility Engine — at the Maryland Volunteer Lawyers Service, a civil legal aid organization where he works.
The lawyers at the service run CLUE on Baltimore citizens who walk through their door or request help via phone or the internet. The program automatically searches for their name in government databases to find other problems requiring legal help, so the lawyer can tackle all of them.
Of about 1,000 clients who have used CLUE so far, a third had expungeable criminal records. Others were in danger of losing their homes because of unpaid water bills of more than $750 — the program flagged them so lawyers could help them get onto a payment plan. Other clients were at risk of foreclosure for other reasons. Others were eligible for government benefits they didn’t know about.
If he can get funding, Stubenberg would like to make the program statewide, and allow other Maryland organizations that work with low-income clients to tap into it — for example, those that work with the homeless.
The phrase “a passion for online legal forms” might seem incongruous. Not for Johnson. “Sometimes technology is the only thing that can level the playing field,” she said.
Johnson moved to the United States from El Salvador when she was 14. Pro bono legal work runs in her family: Her mother’s family met her father’s family originally when her great-grandfather, a Supreme Court justice in El Salvador, took her great-grandmother’s legal case pro bono and helped her save her land.
She is well on her way to making online legal forms ubiquitous. She took over LawHelp Interactive, which is part of Pro Bono Net, in 2008 when it was in use in 11 states. Now legal services groups in 39 states, Guam, and Ontario, Canada, are using it daily to produce about a half-million legal documents a year. Each group creates documents according to state requirements. LawHelp is the web host and trainer.
Michigan Legal Help is one partner. It has 15 self-help centers across the state. But for those who can’t walk in, the group worked with LawHelp to create a website that takes people step by step through legal processes and completes all necessary forms.
The website was introduced in August 2012, and the next year users filled out 12,000 forms. That number more than quintupled in 2015.
The first thing people do is click on a legal problem: for example, “I Need a Divorce and I Do Not Have Minor Children.” Instead of filling out the legal forms, individuals answer a plain-language questionnaire — for a no-kids divorce, that takes about 20 minutes. The software uses the answers to automatically fill out all the forms. The tool kits and questionnaires also help people with issues that don’t require court — writing letters to a landlord, for instance.
The questionnaire allows individuals to provide the information courts require without having to understand the law, said Angela Tripp, who is co-director of the Michigan Poverty Law Program and program director of Michigan Legal Help. You don’t have to retype your address 15 times for 15 forms. The questionnaire can also screen clients: If you answer “yes” to whether you have misdemeanor convictions on an expungement form, more detailed questions come up. And this method ensures that forms are complete — you can’t print the form unless all the required information is there.
These tools are mainly used by people with no lawyer, but lawyers use them, too. Experienced legal aid attorneys use them to make the process faster and more accurate. And they can be useful for volunteer lawyers who may not have expertise in a particular field. Doing the back-and-forth online also allows clients to work with a lawyer at any hour, from their own homes.
Last year, Michigan Legal Help evaluated how well people did with the organization’s divorce forms in 2014. In Michigan, as in the nation as a whole, two-thirds of LawHelp’s users are seeking a divorce. The group looked only at whether divorces were granted and how fast — a test of whether litigants were legally prepared. They found that people who used Legal Help’s questionnaires concluded their cases faster than other self-represented individuals, and faster than those who used lawyers. This was true even when controlling for the complexity of the case.
What else could technology do? “There’s a lot of low-hanging fruit that hasn’t been grabbed yet,” said Stubenberg. “Foreclosure, for instance, deals a lot with whether certain papers were filed at the right time. Banks have to file certain papers in the right order and on the right date.” It’s a significant issue. One study of the behavior of mortgage companies in consumer bankruptcies found that in a majority of cases, the mortgage companies had not complied with the law.
