CHARLESTON, S.C. — A federal judge on Tuesday scheduled a November trial for Dylann S. Roof, a white man accused in the massacre of nine African-American worshipers at a prominent church here a year ago, and suggested that up to 1,500 prospective jurors might be called statewide to fill out a panel.
With the decision, Judge Richard M. Gergel of Federal District Court turned down an earlier request by the state prosecutor, Scarlett A. Wilson, to allow the state trial, which was scheduled for January, to go first. The death penalty will be sought in both trials. The effect on the state’s case is unclear.
During Tuesday’s hearing, Mr. Roof sat impassively in front of members of the victims’ families, as well as journalists and spectators as Judge Gergel questioned his lawyers and the Justice Department on whether they would be ready for a Nov. 7 trial.
Jury selection is expected to take two to three weeks, the trial and deliberations another two weeks, the judge said, and then, after a break, another two weeks is expected for the penalty phase — which would determine whether Mr. Roof will face execution if he is convicted.
Judge Gergel methodically read through a litany of expectations, which included a list of expert witnesses, providing reports on mental health evaluations for Mr. Roof by June 24, and beginning initial jury selection efforts by July.
He suggested the use of a standard juror questionnaire for the initial screening. “It does tend to screen out the hotheads,” he said.
After the initial screening, Judge Gergel said, he expects the lawyers to submit a more detailed list of screening questions. He also raised the possibility of pulling a statewide pool of up to 1,500 jurors for screening in federal court in Columbia, which is more centrally located and larger, instead of Charleston, which is in the southeastern part of the state. Mr. Roof’s lawyer, David I. Bruck, then said he believed a more regional, coastal jury pool would be adequate.
“I do it on the notion of a more diverse pool of jurors,” the judge replied, before adding that he would consider Mr. Bruck’s suggestion.
Outside the courtroom, Andy Savage, who represents several of the victims’ families, pointed out that the trial would occur during the holidays, lending a particularly heavy burden.
Mr. Savage will face Ms. Wilson on Oct. 31 as the lawyer for a white North Charleston police officer, Michael T. Slager, who is accused of killing of an unarmed black Charleston motorist, Walter Scott.
