HANOI, Vietnam — As Nguyen Quang A dressed the morning last week when he was to meet with President Obama, he was pretty confident he would never make the session. The president, who had agreed earlier to a contentious weapons deal with the country’s leaders, wanted to speak with leading Vietnamese democracy advocates, among them Mr. Quang A.
Mr. Quang A went ahead anyway, choosing his best suit and a fresh shirt. He uploaded a photo of himself in his smart attire to Facebook. Then he stepped outside onto a narrow street in the Vietnamese capital.
They drove for the next seven hours, first to Hung Yen, a city of historic temples east of the capital, and then back to his home, just as President Obama’s plane was lifting off for the next stop.
“I told them: ‘I don’t blame you. I blame your bosses,’ ” Mr. Quang A said, describing his conversation with his temporary jailers. Two other dissidents were similarly blocked by the government from attending the session arranged by the American Embassy.
Mr. Quang A, 69, a computer scientist, a former businessman and, for a decade since his retirement, a full-time critic of the Communist government, takes the long view on how to open up Vietnam’s repressive political system. American human rights activists criticized Mr. Obama for agreeing to sell Vietnam lethal weapons without winning any concessions, particularly the release of political prisoners. But Mr. Quang A said he believed the president did the right thing.
Mr. Quang A is not the classic outsider. He was a member of the Communist Party, though never an official, and left the party 23 years ago.
From his experience studying telecommunications in Hungary before the Communists there began to soften a bit in the late 1970s and early 1980s, then becoming the chairman of the IT association of Vietnam in the 1990s and, later, as a businessman dealing with the Vietnamese government, he has an almost innate understanding of how party functionaries think. Sometimes they need coaxing, he said, other times confrontation.
In 2013, in response to Decree 72, a party document that limits what citizens can post online, he and a group of like-minded friends founded the Civil Society Forum. Some of the members, while intellectuals, writers and scholars, retained ties to the government and kept track of what was going on inside. The forum has since taken on wider interests, organizing protests against environmental damage and running independent candidates for Parliament.
In some ways, the political environment in Vietnam is more repressive than it was a decade ago, he said. It seems particularly so now that Myanmar, once ruled by the military with an iron hand, has opened up, with debate in Parliament and a freer news media universe. In 2014, Freedom House listed Vietnam’s news media as the least free in Southeast Asia after tiny, Communist-ruled Laos.
The chapter on Vietnam in last year’s State Department Human Rights Report is littered with accounts of security officials attacking or threatening journalists. In March, a friend of Mr. Quang A’s, Nguyen Huu Vinh, a former police officer, was jailed for five years for posting antistate writings on the internet. “His website is like Reader’s Digest; he got five years for running a website,” he said, with a tone of incredulity.
His latest approach to bring change is to mobilize popular outrage against huge fish kills in the sea off central Vietnam. The fish appear to have been killed by the untreated effluent from a new steel plant owned by a company in Taiwan. “We take the fish crisis as an opportunity,” he said, chatting at a cafe near his house, and not far from a military post.
Security forces have brutally put down protests against the plant, beating some protesters and hauling many into detention. On two consecutive Sundays last month, the police outside his house stopped him from showing up at the weekly protests.
By studying in Hungary in the late ’60s and early ’70s, Mr. Quang A, a warm personality who is easily accessible at all hours by email, phone or his popular Facebook account, stayed out of the Vietnam War. When he came home he was assigned to a military research institute working on computer science and became an army officer.
He returned to Budapest in 1982 as a research fellow at the Academy of Sciences, and on his flight back to Hanoi in 1987, he ran into Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap, the legendary leader of the Vietnamese military and an old friend.
 “General Giap helped me escape from the army,” he said. He was assigned to a civilian job at an informatics branch of the government, but he stayed only briefly.
It was the period of a slight opening in the economy, and Mr. Quang A started a joint venture selling Vietnamese-assembled computers to Russia. It was while dealing with the government as a businessman, he said, that he became disenchanted with the Communist Party and decided to try to undermine its power.
As he assumed the role of activist, he first translated books by the Hungarian economist Janos Kornai and the Austrian philosopher Karl Popper, both critics of Communist rule.
By the time he retired in 2005, he began to concentrate his studies on successful political transitions: South Korea, South Africa, even the 1989 transition of his old redoubt, Hungary.
He has used China, Vietnam’s much bigger neighbor, and centuries-old foe, as a way to foster fresh thinking among young people. During a recent border dispute with China, Mr. Quang A promoted a slogan — “No to U Line, Yes to UNCLOS” — that was emblazoned on T-shirts and worn by soccer clubs. What appears like hieroglyphics to outsiders was easily interpreted in Vietnam as a criticism of China’s U-shaped claims over most of the South China Sea and support for the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
