247 pp. Random House. $28.
It says something about our food-obsessed times that the chef’s memoir has become a genre in its own right. A mere three decades ago, cooking was the fallback career for high-school dropouts and ex-cons, hardly considered the stuff (pace Orwell) of literature. Now, however, chefs are not merely respected professionals; they’re the celebrated producers of our fetishized, farm-to-table hopes and dreams. So celebrated, in fact, that their stories have acquired narrative conventions no less rigid than that of your average romantic comedy. Here, then, is the troubled child who finds refuge in a female relative’s kitchen; here the brutal apprenticeship punctuated with much shouting and projectile cast iron; here the grim determination to master a hollandaise and, finally, the starry triumph.
In “32 Yolks,” Eric Ripert hews closely to the template. The chef and a co-owner of New York’s much acclaimed Le Bernardin, Ripert owes his unhappy childhood in southern France and Andorra to his parents’ divorce and his mother’s subsequent boyfriend, an abusive and insecure man who nevertheless shared Ripert’s mother’s love of good food. A stint in culinary school was followed by a position as commis at one of France’s most storied restaurants, La Tour d’Argent, where the young cook committed the requisite gaffes, including scalding himself with a pot full of lobster stock and burning two dozen ducks in one go.
That these tales are enjoyable despite their general familiarity is a tribute to the vividness with which Ripert (aided by his co-writer, Veronica Chambers) conveys them. Young Eric’s first scoop of caviar, so rich and salty, is all the more seductive for the winking nods to its aphrodisiac powers made by the men who introduce him to it. The astonishing succession that has him spilling drinks on a single table multiple times (and thereby ending his career as a waiter) induces delicious cringes.
What distinguishes a good chef’s memoir from the forgettable ones, after all, are the anecdotes. And Ripert has one very big anecdote in the form of Joël Robuchon. At 19, he went to work at Jamin, the tiny Parisian restaurant where Robuchon was noisily overturning French tradition with innovative flavor combinations and a near maniacal quest for perfection. For the great chef, that meant not only using the very best ingredients but employing a savantlike precision that was as likely to drive a cook mad as it was to inspire him. A lobster salad, with its crystalline bouillon, its separate cookings of claw and tail, its garnishes of apple and tomato and avocado balls and its multiple sauces, was challenging enough even before the young cook given the unfortunate job of preparing it began squeezing onto the plate the 90 perfectly spaced dots of sauce that were one of Robuchon’s signature flourishes. So nightmarishly consuming was the work, Ripert says, that he regularly dreamed of dots.
The stories of his efforts to keep up with his chef’s unreasonable demands — and the sulky, unrelenting tirades unleashed by his failures — make for the funniest passages in the book. Ripert recalls hiding pre-made rabbit terrines in the refrigerator lest Robuchon reject one as it went over the pass and insist he make another on the spot (an impossibility, since the terrine took six hours to prepare). Then there was the need to cook a meal for the chef’s dog each night — and withstand the animal’s critique, as conveyed by its owner. Throughout, Ripert conveys the terror and dread the great chef cultivated; Robuchon wanted his cooks to fear him.
Ripert is not the first to tread on this terrain; in his own memoir, Gordon Ramsay described his time in Robuchon’s kitchen as similar to a stint in the British special forces. But Ripert is a more introspective soul, and we can see him still struggling, some 30 years later, to reconcile his conflicting images of Robuchon as genius and jackass, and to assess what the anxiety and pressure did to him as both a chef and a man.
We never get to see that for ourselves. “32 Yolks” ends abruptly with the 24-year-old Ripert about to depart for a new job in the United States. The happy ending that most readers know to expect never materializes. (Le Bernardin had already been awarded four stars by The New York Times by the time Ripert became chef there in 1994, and it has held them ever since.) Perhaps it’s being saved for a second volume. But like the first glimpse of Buddhism that captures the young chef’s attention in an airport bookstore, the question of what he will make of all that training and abuse, that terror and creative vision, once he has his own restaurant remains unaddressed. It’s a curiously frustrating end to a book that, until this point, had been satisfying indeed.