The evil eye hasn’t got a chance when Pasquala Colasuanno, known as Patsy, is in the vicinity. The central character in Janice Maffei’s new play, “How to Bury a Saint,” Patsy has a procedure for combating the malign effects of what she calls the “malocchio.” She has other talents, too. She dispenses couples therapy, culinary tips, tarantella lessons and the occasional shot from a bottle hidden in her yard — all dished out with warmth and high style at the Schoolhouse Theater in Croton Falls, where this sprightly comedy is having its world premiere under the direction of Bram Lewis, Schoolhouse’s artistic director.
Punctuated by familiar Italian songs like “Funiculì Funiculà” and “Volare” and with less familiar Italian-American terms like “chooch” (a fool) and “mollica” (milk-soaked breadcrumbs, pronounced “mooleeg”), as well as the click-clack of caroming bocce balls, “How to Bury a Saint” has both a loving, steeped-in-spaghetti-sauce authenticity and a defiantly abstracted theatricality. This double-edged approach is instantly evident in Brian T. Whitehill’s design for Patsy’s yard, where the play is set. Her personal bocce court, pots of kitchen herbs and webbed lawn chairs are real as can be; but the sky above is filled with a colorful array of giant bocce balls. Another whimsical touch is a hidden niche that opens at key moments to remind us that we’re looking at a theater stage dramatically lit by Dennis Parichy, not the suburban yard of an Italian-American grandmother.
The visitors who do turn up regularly in Patsy’s yard are her likable but unsettled grandson, Louis, played by the appealing Matt Biagini; her prickly daughter, Lucy, whose bristling resentments are sympathetically rendered by Bethany Caputo; and Louis’s inamorata, Ashley, whose good-natured warmth is nicely conveyed by Megan Mekjian. Their visits to the domineering Patsy, and their varied relationships with her, come across in pithy blackout scenes that run the gamut from lightly droll to distinctly sad. Charming though Patsy can be, in the wise and winning performance of Verna Pierce, with an unruly halo of gray hair and a flowery multipurpose apron (the well-observed costumes are by Alison Hublard Hershman), she also has a more contentious side, revealed in her scorn for Lucy’s live-in boyfriend, Javier, and for the leader of the local bocce club, Sal.
Patsy’s distaste for Javier, an all-around good guy deftly played by O. V. Daniels, results from pure bigotry — he was born Hispanic instead of Italian. Sal, however, has earned Patsy’s antipathy. Despite the expertise she brings to a game she plays every day on the court she built with her husband, who recently died, Sal objects to her becoming a voting member of the club, although she’s welcome to play there.
The play could have become just another ethnic comedy with a bit of feminist pleading thrown in. But now and again, Ms. Maffei takes “How to Bury a Saint” into unexpected territory, with subplots touching on the divergent needs of different generations, the existence of vanishing twins absorbed early in pregnancy, and the ways in which tradition can forge either connection or separation, depending on how it is used. Sal’s rules may keep Patsy out of the bocce club, but Patsy’s rules — and there are many, just as nonsensical — bond her to her grandson.
The tradition alluded to in the play’s title turns out to be a real-estate tool: the Italian-American custom of burying a statuette of St. Joseph upside-down in the garden of a house to ensure its sale. Patsy’s house may or may not be for sale, depending on whom you ask. But “How to Bury a Saint” doesn’t need any time-honored rituals to help attain its goal. It’s got good writing, a winning cast, and expert direction and design. Even the malocchio can’t hurt it.