In 1975, John MacKenzie shot and killed a police officer named Matthew Giglio after a burglary in West Hempstead, N.Y. He was convicted and sentenced to the maximum term available under the law, 25 years to life.
Mr. MacKenzie, now 70, has served more than 40 years in New York prisons. He has been eligible for parole for the past 16 years. At every hearing, the State Parole Board has refused to release him.
The board’s response? “Parole denied.” Because Mr. MacKenzie’s crime showed “a serious disregard for the law” and for “the sanctity of human life,” the board wrote in its brief, boilerplate decision, his release would “undermine respect for the law.” The decision did not say Mr. MacKenzie posed any risk to society, and it made only glancing reference to the many letters supporting his release.
This response is, unfortunately, typical for the Parole Board, which routinely ignores state laws and regulations that require it to consider an inmate’s rehabilitation, and to use a sophisticated risk-assessment tool to help determine whether it is safe to return that person to the community. But because the board members have broad discretion, it has been difficult to hold them accountable.
Judges across the state have long complained about the board’s intransigence, and recently some have begun to take action. Last month, Justice Maria Rosa of State Supreme Court in Dutchess County held the board in contempt for refusing to give any specific reason for denying Mr. MacKenzie’s release beyond his original offense.
Justice Rosa had thrown out the board’s previous rejection of Mr. MacKenzie, in 2014, and ordered a new parole hearing. The board’s decision after that hearing, in December, was “virtually the same” as the earlier one, which was “entirely unsupported by the factual record,” the justice said. She imposed a $500 fine for every day that the board remains in contempt.
This is the second time a state court has held the board in contempt for refusing to follow the law. If the courts of appeals uphold these rulings, it could help force the board to use parole as intended: not to minimize the seriousness of a crime, but to acknowledge that the person who committed it can change and deserves a chance to rejoin society. Under the New York Parole Board’s kneejerk approach, this is far too often an empty promise.
Gov. Andrew Cuomo is also taking steps to increase the board’s transparency and accountability. Among other things, the administration is proposing new regulations to require detailed explanations of parole denials, and it plans to videotape hearings for the public to see.
