In 1966, a B-52 bomber on a Cold War nuclear patrol exploded over Spain, releasing four hydrogen bombs. Fifty years later, Air Force veterans involved with the cleanup are sick and want recognition.
INTRO I don’t think the majority of americans realize that this even occurred. [00:00:13.15] We were told you don’t talk about this kind of stuff. [00:00:17.22] I said something’s wrong. My chest feels like it’s splitting open. I am trying my best to make sure that somebody listens to me [00:00:25.25] Here’s at least one person that is not going to shut up and die. ACT 1 I entered the Air Force in September 00:03:30 of 1960,//(00:04:10) And I w as then transferred to Moron Airbase in southern Spain. My wife and I were transferred to Moron Spain in ‘62. We were very happy there, I had it made, I got to travel a lot... [00:04:16.13] There was nobody shooting at us. This wasn’t Vietnam. We had friends who were really getting killed. Overall, I have to say the Air Force is a great way of life//but// 01:27:00 there were things that happened down there that I would just as soon forget about. TITLE? [00:00:40.19] On the morning of January 17th, 1966, I had reported for work at Maron Air Base, when sometime between 10:30 10:45, I received a telephone call that I was needed down at the base command post. [00:01:00:00] There was an aircraft accident, involving nuclear weapons. [00:01:06:03] The B-52 and the KC 135 were refueling and they crashed and there were four bombs aboard the b-52. [00:01:44.29] I was the first responder from Maron Air Base. When I arrived there, I merely had the clothes on my back//It was going to be a large scale operation because of the amount of wreckage that was strewn over such a large area//we knew we were going to need a lot more personnel at the scene. [00:01:18.02] So, we loaded up on the buses and pretty soon we were all headed south. [00:01:36.27] First of all, we couldn’t find the stinking place. There was no highway, into that village. [00:02:16.01] The people who came with us, they weren’t trained in this. You didn’t know where you were going? I didn’t know what we was doing, you know, we’s going to a plane crash. [00:04:50.06] I remember a couple of the officers holding up a map and talking about heavy radiation, It was theorized//that there was this stuff you can’t see floating around across the valley. 00:03:03.19] BUT//We weren’t told there was radiation. //That’s somehting that I never would have thought of. [00:01:54.29] The first weapon we located was just// off the beach. And we were told that there was another weapon in one of the local residents backyards. And then we were told another weapon was located outside the village. [00:02:24.14] And so we combed the area, looking for a bomb. Stick one arm out, and touch the next guy’s shoulder, then spread out a little further. [00:02:50.20] I was located in the open fields. There were a lot of other military guys with me. None of us were issued any protective clothing, we had no respiratory equipment.//I would say it was around midday that we had plotted the location of the weapons. We knew exactly where they were. [00:05:27.22] There were 55 gallon drums that were brought to the area and then we were using shovels to put the soil into the barrels. [00:05:43.10] Work process was on//24 hours a day, night and day. [00:05:53.05] It must’ve been pretty bad. Because I’ve seen a picture of that area. And it’s just drum after drum and it just goes on for...and I’m going holy cow! That ... I don’t know. It just makes me wonder. [00:04:31.18] As far as the village is concerned, it was decided, bring those people back home as fast as we can. [00:04:36.07] We were in the detection phase, immediately. Where was the contamination? [00:04:42.22] I think we washed five houses that were in that vicinity of bomb three and the crater that were really hot. [00:03:21.15] And as we were exiting the field, there was a guy standing there with a geiger counter. He said we need to check you for radiation. First time I heard of it. [00:03:34.13] The geiger counter went off with that crackling noise that it makes and the guy said, you got radiation on you. And the only way to get it off is to go in the ocean and let the salt water wash it off your clothes. [00:03:51.20] And I went in, and he said, at least we got it off your clothes. [00:03:56.08] The atomic energy tech said he had to confiscate my uniform because it was contaminated. And I had to scrub myself to look like a lobster. [00:04:08.01] This is not good. But these people they are the technicians they are the experts, they know what they’re doing. I’m going to do what they tell me to do. [00:05:07.03] We had been told that the local residents were reluctant or refused to eat their own fruits and vegetables, for fear that they were contaminated with radiation. [00:05:16.02] This was harvest time, and they were getting ready to go put those tomatoes on the market. And we then ate tomatoes. And we were filmed eating tomatoes. And we had tomatoes for breakfast noon and night. Oh god they were good tomatoes. Did it ever cross your mind that it was dangerous then? We didn’ t really know nothing about it. ACT 2 (00:00:29) I was commander of the Radiological Health Laboratory at Wright Patterson Air Force Base. //We knew there was an accident. And when it became obvious that there was plutonium involved,// I felt // that we were going to have to tool up and do some analysis. [00:22:05] [00:27:07] //I made the recommendations and forwarded to my bosses and it was up to them to say yay or nay. Some said yes. Others said no. [00:27:19] And the nays won out. [00:07:31.07] I noticed a lump in my testy.. And it was cancerous. It was called seminoma. And. I was 28 years old at the time. [00:07:46.01] I got a cancer tumor in my bladder in 1979. [00:07:49.12] I retired in 1981 and two years later I had this blood disorder that was detected. 00:01:35 And then when Nolan was diagnosed with with kidney cancer and there was no history of cancer at all in his family// THEN I STARTED DOING RESEARCH ON THIS ...// This has been over 50 years, and no one has ever acknowledged the fact that there could have been a danger of radiation exposure to the 1600 responders to the accident.//I want the Air Force to acknowledge the possibility that these responders could have been exposed to dangerous levels of radiation! [00:07:56.28] My next diagnosis was mantle cell lymphoma, which is an aggressive type of cancer. I decided I’m going to the VA and filed a claim and see. Because I was exposed to the radiation there. I had never thought about that. [00:08:16.06] And I got a denial back. [00:08:18.11] They had no record of me being exposed to any radiation. [00:08:22.16] And then I went through carefully looking for something about me being in Palomares. Nothing was there. [00:08:31.13] In terms of medical records, I was never there. [00:08:34.26] Our existing records do not have any radiation exposure information on Sgt. Garmin. [00:08:41.15] There is a period of time in my medical records where documentation is missing. It’s not there [00:08:46.02] Why did my air force, our air force deny existence? [00:08:59.19] The records were there, After 5 and a half years of researching and everything I’ve gone through, all the ups and downs, There’s no doubt in my mind whatsoever that the Air Force is trying to cover this up.//They’re waiting for these guys to die. ACT 3 NONA AND NOLAN B-ROLL W DUCKS. THE FIRST TIME WE WENT TO THE VA AND ASKED ABOUT HIS, IT WAS NOT A GOOD EXPERIENCE. IT MADE HIM FEEL BAD. IT’S LIKE YOU’RE TRYING TO GET SOMETHING FOR NOTHING.  WHEN I WENT TO GET THAT CLAIM, IT WAS LIKE I WAS TRYING TO STEAL FROM THEM. IT BOTHERS (NOLAN) HIM THAT THE AIR FORCE THAT HE CARED SO MUCH ABOUT, DOESN’T CARE SO MUCH ABOUT HIM. I think we should have followed up.//There’s a tendency, not only in the military, but in any human endeavour, if you don;t recognize a problem, or pay attention to it, It may just wither away. [00:09:06.18] I’m not looking for financial gain. I’m looking for an acceptance of responsibility. [00:09:13.19] We don’t exist. You know, the politics. We’re not supposed to be talking about this. [00:09:20.03] But if I have something to share, and I die before it comes out, crying, I failed.
Alarms sounded on United States Air Force bases in Spain and officers began packing all the low-ranking troops they could grab onto buses for a secret mission. There were cooks, grocery clerks and even musicians from the Air Force band.
In the decades since, the Air Force has purposefully kept radiation test results out of the men’s medical files and resisted calls to retest them, even when the calls came from one of the Air Force’s own studies.
Many men say they are suffering with the crippling effects of plutonium poisoning. Of 40 veterans who helped with the cleanup who The New York Times identified, 21 had cancer. Nine had died from it. It is impossible to connect individual cancers to a single exposure to radiation. And no formal mortality study has ever been done to determine whether there is an elevated incidence of disease. The only evidence the men have to rely on are anecdotes of friends they watched wither away.
“John Young, dead of cancer ... Dudley Easton, cancer ... Furmanksi, cancer,” said Larry L. Slone, 76, in an interview, laboring through tremors caused by a neurological disorder.
Monitoring of the village in Spain has also been haphazard, declassified documents show. The United States promised to pay for a public health program to monitor the long-term effects of radiation there, but for decades provided little funding. Until the 1980s, Spanish scientists often relied on broken and outdated equipment, and lacked the resources to follow up on potential ramifications, including leukemia deaths in children. Today, several fenced-off areas are still contaminated, and the long-term health effect on villagers is poorly understood.
Many of the Americans who cleaned up after the bombs are trying to get full health care coverage and disability compensation from the Department of Veterans Affairs. But the department relies on Air Force records, and since the Air Force records say no one was harmed in Palomares, the agency rejects claims again and again.
The Air Force also denies any harm was done to 500 other veterans who cleaned up a nearly identical crash in Thule, Greenland, in 1968. Those veterans tried to sue the Defense Department in 1995, but the case was dismissed because federal law shields the military from negligence claims by troops. All of the named plaintiffs have since died of cancer.
The toxic aftermath of war is often vexing to untangle. Damage is hard to quantify and all but impossible to connect to later problems. Recognizing this, Congress has passed laws in the past to give automatic benefits to veterans of a few specific exposures — Agent Orange in Vietnam or the atomic tests in Nevada, among others. But no such law exists for the men who cleaned up Palomares.
If the men could prove they were harmed by radiation, they would have all costs for their associated medical care covered and would get a modest disability pension. But proof from a secret mission to clean up an invisible poison decades ago has proved elusive. So each time the men apply, the Air Force says they were not harmed and the department hands out denials.
A 23-year-old military police officer named John H. Garman arrived by helicopter at the crash site on Jan. 17, 1966, a few hours after the bombs blew.
He was one of the first on the scene, and joined a half-dozen others to hunt for the four missing nuclear weapons. One bomb had thudded into a soft sandbank near the beach and crumpled but remained intact. Another had dropped into the ocean, where it was found unbroken two months later, after a frenzied hunt.
The other two hit hard and exploded, leaving house-size craters on either side of the village, according to a secret Atomic Energy Commission report that has since been declassified. Built-in safeguards prevented nuclear detonations, but explosives surrounding the radioactive cores blasted a fine dust of plutonium over a patchwork of houses and fields full of ripe, red tomatoes.
Atomic Energy Commission scientists soon arrived and took Mr. Garman’s clothes because they were contaminated, he said, but told him he would be fine. Twelve years later, he got bladder cancer.
Plutonium does not emit the type of penetrating radiation often associated with nuclear blasts, which causes immediately obvious health effects, such as burns. It shoots off alpha particles that travel only a few inches and cannot penetrate the skin. Outside the body, scientists say, it is relatively harmless, but specks absorbed in the body, usually through inhaling dust, shoot off a continuous shower of radioactive particles thousands of times a minute, gradually exacting damage that can cause cancer and other diseases decades later. A microgram, or a millionth of a gram, in the body is considered potentially harmful. According to declassified Atomic Energy Commission reports, the bombs at Palomares released an estimated seven pounds — more than 3 billion micrograms.
The day after the crash, busloads of troops started arriving from United States bases, bringing radiation-detection equipment. William Jackson, a young Air Force lieutenant, helped with some of the first testing near the craters, using a hand-held alpha particle counter that could measure up to two million alpha particles per minute.
Today the two exploded warheads would be known as dirty bombs, and would probably cause evacuations. At the time, in order to minimize the significance of the blast, the Air Force let villagers remain in place.
Fearing that the bombs could damage the tourism industry, Spain insisted the mess be cleaned up before summer.
Within days, troops were hacking down contaminated fields of tomato vines with machetes. Though scientists overseeing the cleanup knew plutonium dust posed the greatest danger, military commanders had the troops throw thousands of truckloads of vines into chipping machines, then burned much of the debris near the village.
The Air Force bought tons of contaminated tomatoes from local fields that the Spanish public refused to eat. To assure the public there was no danger, commanders fed the tomatoes to the troops. Though the risk from eating plutonium is much lower than the risk from inhaling it, it is still not safe.
In all, the Air Force cut down 600 acres of crops and plowed under the contaminated dirt. Troops scooped up 5,300 barrels of soil from the most radioactive areas near the craters and loaded the barrels on ships to be buried in a secure nuclear waste storage site in South Carolina.
Spanish and American authorities assured villagers that they had nothing to fear. The villagers, accustomed to living in a dictatorship, did little to protest. “Even if some people here might have wanted to know more, Franco was in charge, so everybody was too scared to ask anything,” said Antonio Latorre, a villager who is now 78.
To assure villagers their homes were safe, the Air Force sent young airmen into local houses with hand-held radiation detectors. Peter M. Ricard, then a 20-year-old cook with no training on the equipment, remembers being told to perform scans of anything locals wanted, but to keep his detector turned off.
During the cleanup, a medical team gathered more than 1,500 urine samples from the cleanup crew to calculate how much plutonium they were absorbing. The higher the level in the samples, the greater the health hazard.
The records of those tests remain perhaps the most prominent artifact from the cleanup. They show about only 10 of the men absorbed more than the allowed safe dose, and the rest of the 1,500 responders were not harmed. The Air Force today relies on the results to argue that the men were never harmed by radiation. But the men who actually did the testing say the results are deeply flawed and are of little use in determining who was exposed.
“Did we follow protocol? Hell, no. We had neither the time nor the equipment,” said Victor B. Skaar, now 79, who worked on the testing team. The formula for determining the contamination level required collecting urine for 12 hours, but he said he was able to get only a single sample from many men. And others, he said, were never tested at all.
He sent samples to the Air Force’s chief of radiation testing, Dr. Lawrence T. Odland, who started seeing alarmingly high results. Dr. Odland decided the extreme levels did not indicate a true health threat, but were caused by plutonium loose in the camp that contaminated the men’s hands, their clothes and everything else. He threw out about 1,000 samples — 67 percent of the results — including all samples from the first days after the blasts when exposure was probably highest.
Now 94 and living in a rambling Victorian house in Hillsboro, Ohio, where a photo from the Greenland crash hangs in his hall, Dr. Odland questioned his decision.
He said he never got accurate results for hundreds of men who may have been contaminated. In addition, he soon realized plutonium lodged in the lungs could not always be detected in veterans’ urine, and men with clean samples might still be contaminated.
Convinced that the urine samples were inadequate, Dr. Odland persuaded the Air Force in 1966 to set up a permanent “Plutonium Deposition Registry Board” to monitor the men for life.
The plan was to have Dr. Odland’s staff follow the men. 
“He is not able to get the support from the Department of Defense to go after the remaining people or set up a real registry because of the sleeping-dog policy,” an Atomic Energy Commission memo from 1967 noted.
Dr. Odland did not know who gave the order to terminate the program, but said since the board included all the military branches and the veterans agency, it likely came from top-level officials.
The Air Force officially dismantled the program in 1968. The “permanent” board had met just once.
Troops started to get sick soon after the cleanup ended. Healthy men in their 20s were crippled by joint pain, headaches and weakness. Doctors said it was arthritis. A young military policeman was plagued by sinus swelling so acute that he would bang his head on the floor to distract himself from the pain. Doctors said it was allergies.
Several men got rashes or growths. An airman named Noris N. Paul had cysts severe enough that he spent six months in the hospital in 1967 getting skin grafts. He also became infertile.
“No one knew what was wrong with me,” Mr. Paul said.
A grocery supply clerk named Arthur Kindler, who had been so covered in plutonium while searching the tomato fields a few days after the blast that the Air Force made him wash off in the ocean and took his clothes, got testicular cancer and a rare lung infection that nearly killed him four years after the crash. In the years since, he has had cancer of his lymph nodes three times.
The United States promised to pay for long-term monitoring of health in the village, but for decades it provided only about 15 percent of funding, with Spain paying the rest, according to a declassified Department of Energy summary. Broken air-monitoring stations went unfixed and equipment was often old and unreliable. In the early 1970s, an Atomic Energy Commission scientist noted, the Spanish field monitoring team consisted of a lone graduate student.
Reports of two children dying of leukemia during that time went uninvestigated. The lead Spanish scientist monitoring the population told American counterparts in a 1976 memo that, in light of the leukemia cases, Palomares needed “some kind of medical surveillance of the population to keep watch for diseases or deaths.” None was created.
In the late 1990s, after years of pressure from Spain, the United States agreed to increase funding. New surveys of the village found extensive contamination that had gone undetected, including some areas where radiation was 20 times the permissible level for inhabited areas. In 2004, Spain quietly fenced off the most contaminated land near the bomb craters.
Since then, Spain has urged the United States to finish cleaning the site.
Because of the uneven monitoring, the effect on public health is far from clear. A small mortality study in 2005 found cancer rates had gone up in the village compared with similar villages in the region, but the author, Pedro Antonio Martínez Pinilla, an epidemiologist, cautioned that the results could be because of random error, and urged more study.
At that time, a United States Department of Energy scientist, Terry Hamilton, proposed another study, noting problems in Spain’s monitoring techniques. “It was clear the uptake of plutonium was poorly understood,” he said in an interview. The department did not approve his proposal.
Spanish officials say the fears may be overblown. Yolanda Benito, who heads the environmental department of Ciemat, Spain’s nuclear agency, said that medical checks showed no uptick in cancer in Palomares. “From a scientific point of view, there is nothing that allows us to draw a relationship between the cases of cancer in the local population and the accident,” she said.
About a fifth of the plutonium spread in 1966 is estimated to still contaminate the area. After years of pressure, the United States agreed in 2015 to clean up the remaining plutonium, but there is no approved plan or timetable.
On a recent rainy morning, Nona A. Watson, a retired science teacher in Buckhead, Ga., held open the door of a veterans medical center in Atlanta for her husband, Nolan F. Watson, who hobbled in, his shuddering hand unable to steady his cane.
As a 22-year-old dog handler, Mr. Watson slept in the dirt just feet from one of the bomb craters the day after the blast. A year later, he was racked by blinding headaches and hips so stiff he could barely walk. At the time, he asked the Department of Veterans Affairs for help. He said he was turned away.  In 2002, he was diagnosed with kidney cancer, and one of his kidneys was removed. In 2010, more cancer showed up in his remaining kidney. Recent abnormal blood tests suggested leukemia.
Mr. Watson, now 73, had filed a claim with the veterans agency that was denied and he was in the process of appealing. Other veterans of Palomares had warned him that it was a waste of time. Only one Palomares veteran they knew of had succeeded in claiming harm from radiation, and it took 10 years, at which point he was bedridden with stomach cancer. But Mr. Watson wanted to come to the medical center to give personal testimony about his plutonium exposure.
In the center’s waiting room, his nose began to bleed.
A few years ago, after his first claim was denied, Mr. Watson’s wife began hunting down old government documents, hoping she might find something to prove the Air Force was covering up Palomares. Maybe, she thought, she could discover evidence that would make the authorities reconsider.
She turned up reports going back 40 years that confirmed the men’s stories of high radiation levels and poor safety standards. But her most striking find was an Air Force study from 2001 that reassessed the contamination in Palomares veterans. The study determined that the old urine tests were so flawed that they were “not useful” and the Air Force should retest the men.
Mrs. Watson knew no retesting had been done, so she called the Air Force Medical Service to ask why. When she could not get a clear answer, she asked her congressman at the time, Paul Broun, Republican of Georgia, to send a letter to the Air Force. When the congressman could not get a clear answer, either, he proposed legislation, which the House passed in 2013, requiring the Air Force to answer to Congress.
In 2013, the Air Force provided its legally required response in a letter to the House Armed Services Committee. To Mrs. Watson’s dismay, it echoed what she and the congressman had already been told: New testing recommended in the 2001 report “was not necessary” because troops had worn protective equipment, and the original urine tests showed that almost no one had been exposed to radiation. Declassified documents and witness accounts raise serious questions about the accuracy of the Air Force’s report to Congress.
After issuing the letter, the Air Force Medical Service quietly took down from its website the only public copy of the 2001 report.
“I had gone into this thinking it was just an old mistake, but then I found they were still trying to cover it up,” Mrs. Watson said in an interview at her home.
“We have a large number of veterans we believe were not exposed,” he said.
Radiation levels at Palomares were low, he said, and men wore safety equipment. Retesting them with more precise modern techniques, as the 2001 report suggested, could reveal even lower contamination levels, making it even less likely that the veterans would get compensation from the department.
In the interest of giving Palomares veterans what he called “the benefit of the doubt,” he said, the Air Force stopped relying in 2013 on the old urine test results and instead assigned all troops who cleaned up the site a “worst-case scenario” dose based on ambient air readings of radiation from the time.
It gave them a dose of 0.31 rem — a very small dose too low to qualify veterans for department benefits. The Greenland veterans who cleaned up a similar crash have been assigned a dose of zero.
As she waited at the medical center with her husband, she explained how they expected their appeal to fail. They had no proof. No matter what he said in his testimony, the department would refer to old urine samples to determine who was harmed. And Mr. Watson had never given a urine sample. He could not offer a new urine sample because cancer had taken most of his kidneys.
If successful with the appeal, Mr. Watson would have all of his medical costs covered and get modest monthly disability payments.
He doubted he would live long enough to collect much. More than anything, he wanted the record straight. He wanted to tell the Air Force that he and the men he served with mattered enough to be told the truth.
