In the fraught final hours of the legislative session on Friday, the Republicans in the State Senate agreed to give Mayor Bill de Blasio control of the New York City schools for one more year, but in return they demanded two provisions related to charter schools.
One made it easier for the schools to switch between charter-granting organizations. The second gave the charter schools committee of the State University of New York’s board of trustees — one of the two entities that can currently grant charters — the power “to promulgate regulations with respect to governance, structure and operations” of the schools it oversees.
The broadness of the language at first left something of a mystery as to what the provision was intended to accomplish and who might have wanted it.
A few days later, the mystery cleared up a bit.
Families for Excellent Schools, a charter school advocacy group that is closely tied to Eva S. Moskowitz, the founder of the Success Academy charter school network, sent an email to the leaders of several charter networks on Tuesday calling the provisions “a massive victory.” In particular, it said in the email, the SUNY-related bit of legislation meant that SUNY would be able to waive current requirements that limit the number of uncertified teachers that charter schools can employ.
In fact, the Senate had pushed for a provision that would have done that directly, by giving teachers at charter schools three years to become certified, but the Assembly, which is controlled by the Democrats, rejected it. After that explicit provision on teacher certification was taken out, the broader language appeared.
The three-year allowance had been a top priority for Ms. Moskowitz, who faces difficulty hiring enough teachers as she rapidly expands the number of Success Academy schools. Currently, under the state’s charter school law, a charter school cannot have more than 15 uncertified teachers. Success hires mostly young teachers. Many of them are uncertified when they begin and attend a master’s program managed by Success while they are teaching.
Stefan Friedman, a spokesman for Success Academy, expressed support for the idea of giving charters flexibility on the certification rules. “To continue to deliver the strongest academic results for children, as well as exceptional chess, debate and art programs, schools must hire the most highly qualified teachers available and give them extensive training and support,” he said in a statement.
The one-year extension of mayoral control was a major defeat for Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat who had originally asked for a seven-year extension. The Senate’s opposition to a longer time period was largely seen as reflecting hostility to Mr. de Blasio — who mounted an effort in 2014 to create a Democratic majority in the Senate — rather than substantive concerns about his stewardship of the city schools. The Senate majority leader, John J. Flanagan, declined repeated requests to discuss his concerns about Mr. de Blasio’s management of the city’s schools. His spokesman did not respond to questions about the language regarding the SUNY charter school committee.
The Republicans currently hold a slim majority in the Senate, which they will have to defend in elections this November. Wealthy supporters of charter schools spent $4.2 million in 2014 to help the Senate Republicans win their majority and are expected to spend a substantial amount this year as well.
Whether the language on SUNY is as powerful as Families for Excellent Schools claims is a matter of debate. Spokesmen for Mr. de Blasio and for the Assembly speaker, Carl E. Heastie, a Democrat, said they did not believe the provision would allow SUNY to do anything contrary to the state’s charter school law, like increasing the number of uncertified teachers a charter school could have.
But Senator Liz Krueger, a Manhattan Democrat who said she had not seen the provision until a reporter read it to her, said she was concerned by it.
She and others noted that Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, a Democrat who has received millions of dollars in donations from backers of charter schools, has considerable influence over the SUNY board and the committee, because he appoints most of their members with the consent of the Senate.
The chair of the SUNY committee, Joseph Belluck, said in an interview that he had not learned about the provision until after it passed, and that the committee was still analyzing the law to try to figure out what it meant.
