They were a 1960s power couple, two hypertalkative showmen: Muhammad Ali, the African-American boxer born with a slave name, and Howard Cosell, the Jewish Brooklyn lawyer who found his calling in sportscasting.
Ali, who died Friday at 74, recited doggerel, danced in the ring, taunted his opponents and converted to Islam. And, as he told us, he was pretty.
ABC Sports, Cosell’s employer, carried a lot of Ali’s fights, so Cosell was at ringside, inside the ring interviewing Ali and his opponents after fights, or in the network’s studio interviewing Ali. Their camaraderie produced an entertaining union of spirited opposites and a well-suited black-white pairing for the times.
One man, Ali, understood racism; the other, Cosell, experienced anti-Semitism. And neither could stop talking.
Ali spoke to many other journalists, but he and Cosell seemed inseparable: teasing and challenging each other, and mock-sparring in suits and ties. Ali often threatened to strip off Cosell’s toupee du jour, and in their jokey back-and-forth, each man said the other would have been nothing without him.
Beneath the stagecraft of their relationship was Cosell’s support of Ali, whether by no longer calling him Cassius Clay when others, like his opponent Ernie Terrell, persisted, or by excoriating the New York State Athletic Commission for stripping him of his heavyweight title in 1967 after he refused induction into the Army.
They were so tied in the public mind that the columnist Dave Kindred wrote a dual biography of the men, “Sound and Fury,” in 2006.
Outside the boxing ring, Ali fought his battles with his mouth.
Indeed, when Ali brought up Frazier’s hospitalization after their first bout, Frazier grew enraged, rose to his feet and asked Ali why he called him ignorant.
“Sit down, Joe,” Ali said, but Ali got to his feet and they began wrestling on the studio floor, as stagehands and the fighters’ entourages tried to restore order.
Cosell never got out of his chair, narrating the set-to as if it were a prizefight and trying to determine who was clowning and who was serious.
Frazier left angrily, leaving Ali alone with Cosell.
Ali was petulant afterward and tried to rationalize why he had called Frazier ignorant. Cosell kept prodding Ali back to analyzing the first epic bout. Cosell sounded annoyed, yet paternal, as he tried to bring Ali back to the day’s goal.
“I’m going to represent Joe, as a devil’s advocate,” Cosell said.
“You have to be a devil to represent Joe,” Ali said.
Both men’s health declined, Ali from Parkinson’s disease, Cosell from multiple problems. In 1992, when Ali celebrated his 50th birthday on a television special, the ailing Cosell offered his greetings in a prerecorded segment that showed his emotional side, without bombast or gibes.
