Adam Arenson, director of the urban studies program at Manhattan College, has spent six years documenting the banks, mostly part of the Home Savings and Loan chain, along with other public artworks by Mr. Sheets. Mr. Arenson’s book, “Millard Sheets and Home Savings: Mid-Century Modern Corporate Art and Urban Identity for Southern California and Beyond,” is due next year.
The projects of Mr. Sheets, who died in 1989, are scattered from Honolulu to Detroit and Boston. Mr. Arenson keeps hearing about discoveries from people who are researching them and protecting them from demolition.
Mr. Sheets, a native of Pomona, Calif., was tireless, traveling widely to paint scenes of Africa, Asia, the South Pacific and the Middle East. At his studio in Claremont, Calif., he supervised teams of designers to produce mosaics, murals, stained glass, sculpture and fountains.
Mr. Sheets also designed calendars and movie sets, and he collaborated and socialized with celebrities like Walt Disney and the abstract artist Hans Hofmann. Still, Mr. Sheets’s output has not much interested art historians. It is often considered “art of the establishment” rather than avant-garde, Mr. Arenson said.
Mr. Sheets and his wife, Mary, raised four children. One of their three sons, the artist Tony Sheets, runs a website, millardsheetsart.com, and tracks his father’s artworks. When murals and mosaics are endangered, he helps transfer them to new homes.
“We keep a close eye on them,” he said.
Gilded mosaics of birds and deities from a Dallas bank have been moved to the Joule hotel in Dallas. (Other mosaics from the bank have sold for thousands of dollars each.) A tableau of industrial workers made for a Los Angeles department store was taken to the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County. Paintings of California hills from a Hollywood home’s dining room have been hung at the Huntington Library, Art Collections and Botanical Gardens in San Marino, Calif. A mural of a 19th-century parade, painted on walnut panels, has been transferred from a Pasadena bank to the gym at Pasadena City College.
Mr. Arenson is still determining the fate of some Sheets works, including an abstract mosaic in fiery colors that filled a lobby wall at the former headquarters of Interpace, a ceramics manufacturer in Parsippany, N.J. It is no longer visible, and no information has emerged about when it was taken out or covered up. The original drawing for the project is priced at $5,000 at Alan Wofsy Fine Arts gallery in San Francisco, which has a large inventory of Sheets sketches, paintings and prints.
Paul Bockhorst Productions in Monrovia, Calif., released a documentary a year ago, “Design for Modern Living: Millard Sheets and the Claremont Art Community 1935-1975.” A sequel in progress, “Claremont Modern: The Convergence of Art + Architecture at Midcentury,” will explore Mr. Sheets’s contributions to Home Savings branches.
The painter Anna Mary Robertson Moses, known as Grandma Moses, became a celebrity in the 1940s, soon after her 80th birthday. She prolifically painted her memories of 19th-century New York and Vermont towns and farmsteads, and she sometimes incorporated forms copied from magazines, books, greeting cards and prints. With her Manhattan dealer, Otto Kallir at the Galerie St. Etienne, she licensed her nostalgic works to be reproduced on textiles, tiles and dinnerware.
