OSLO — As maritime fender-benders go, this one couldn’t help attracting attention: Noah’s ark crashed into a Norwegian Coast Guard patrol boat in the Port of Oslo on Friday morning.
It was not, of course, the actual ark, but one of two reconstructions that a Dutch carpenter named Johan Huibers painstakingly built over seven years, based on the biblical description. More than a million people have visited the replicas to see domesticated animals like llamas, ponies and rabbits, and to hear, as Mr. Huibers intended, a message of God’s love.
The smaller of the arks was being towed on Friday when the crew lost control, which led to the collision. No animals were on board and no one was injured, but the ark’s wooden cladding was damaged. A small crane on the patrol boat was also damaged, Lt. Rune Svartsund, a coast guard spokesman, said.
Ole Herman Kjernsby, the head of travel at Stena Line, a ferry company based in Oslo, said his staff members did not witness the accident but could see the damage to the ark afterward, including what he called “a huge rift” in the side.
Jokes soon began flying on social media. “It is unclear what happened to the 8.7 million x 2 animals on board,” Tom Egeland, a crime novelist who lives in Oslo, wrote on Twitter, using one estimate of the number of species on the planet.
“The 900-year-old captain has been detained,” Jon Are Rakvag, a software security architect for the Norwegian Police Service, wrote in a Twitter post, alluding a bit imprecisely to the account in Genesis that Noah lived 350 years after the flood and died at 950.
But the accident was no laughing matter for Mr. Huibers or for Aad Peters, a Dutch puppeteer, television producer and philanthropist who bought the smaller ark in 2010. Mr. Peters has taken it for visits to towns across the Netherlands, and was preparing to do the same in Norway when the collision occurred.
The smaller ark was the first one he built, between 2005 and 2007, Mr. Huibers said, which helped prepare him to tackle the second one at a more biblical scale — about 410 feet long, 95 feet wide and 75 feet tall. The bigger one has five decks and can accommodate 5,000 people at a time; it moved to Rotterdam earlier this year from its previous mooring in the Dutch port of Dordrecht. Both arks are built on steel barges, and neither has an engine; they must be towed wherever they go.
An American charity, the Ark of Noah Foundation, based in Pasadena, Calif., was established to take charge of the larger ark, which it hopes to take to Rio de Janeiro in time for the Paralympic Games in September.
