LONDON — On Friday the world’s most popular modern art museum, the Tate Modern, opens a new 10-story wing designed by the Swiss architects Jacques Herzog and Pierre de Meuron. Called the Switch House, the extension will show off contemporary work, including film, installation and live performance, and will add 60 percent more space to the already enormous former power station on the banks of the Thames.
Few anticipated when the Tate Modern opened in 2000 that it would transform both the idea of a museum and the nature of museum-going. Its director, Nicholas Serota, hoped for two million annual visitors. More than five million have passed through its doors each year. They have flocked to its gigantic Turbine Hall to watch a glowing “sunrise” from hundreds of tungsten lights in Olafur Eliasson’s “The Weather Project,” sifted Ai Weiwei’s hand-painted sunflower seeds through their fingers and heard actors telling intimate stories in Tino Sehgal’s “These Associations,” among many highlights.
What will be in the new space? And what should you see first? Here is a user’s guide to planning your first trip.
NAVIGATING THE SWITCH HOUSE The new extension adapts parts of the original power station that the 2000 renovation by Herzog & de Meuron didn’t touch. Adjacent to this older layer is a pyramidal tower 212 feet tall, clad in perforated brick that the architects have described as looking like “knitwear.” You can enter from the huge Turbine Hall in the older building, passing through the subterranean Tanks, which once held a million gallons of oil to power the refinery.
The rehabilitation of the Tanks was the first phase of the new building, in 2012. They are dedicated to performance art and experimental film. A sculptural concrete staircase curves up to three levels of exhibition space. A bridge on Level 4 connects back to the older building (now called the Boiler House). Higher floors are devoted to education, offices and a members’ room. So after gorging on art, head for the new restaurant on Level 9, and, for dessert, savor the wraparound balcony on Level 10, with a 360-degree view of London.
AT WHAT COST? The new building cost 260 million pounds (about $370 million) from public and private funding, with the largest donation (£50 million, or $71 million) from the British government.
Levels 2, 3 and 4 present individually themed exhibitions.
Level 3 offers “Performer and Participant” — how artists began to engage audiences in participatory activities.
On Level 4, in “Living Cities,” artists comment on their experiences in urban centers. “Artist Rooms: Louise Bourgeois” demonstrates a renewed interest in narrative themes. “Minimalism denuded the artwork of its storytelling potential. The artists, from Bourgeois onward, started putting personal experience and gender identity back in,” Ms. Morris said.
WHAT AND WHERE IS LIVE ART?
Live art, or performance-based work, has been a swelling current in the art world during the last decade, with roots in the 1960s. The Tate will showcase six pieces throughout the new and old buildings from Friday to July 3. In Tania Bruguera’s piece, mounted police will perform crowd control techniques on horseback.
WHAT’S NEW IN THE OLD PART?
“I think doing it in this way is novel and different from Paris or New York, and corresponds to the way artists think,” Mr. Serota said.
Mr. Serota: You can’t visit the Tate without going to the Rothko Room (Level 2 of the Boiler House). Then look at a wonderful room of work by the German artist Rebecca Horn, on Level 3 of the Switch House. Next door, Ana Lupas, a Romanian artist who has been working from the mid-1960s, embalmed rural straw sculptures; it’s very striking. Then go up to the Louise Bourgeois room on Level 4, where you can see some of the most important work of her career, made in the last 10 years of her life.
Ms. Morris: In the Boiler House, the new introductory “Start” gallery offers Matisse’s “Snail.” “In the Studio” features work by a great group of British artists: Antony Gormley, Anish Kapoor and Bridget Riley. Then head to the Switch House, begin in the Tanks and walk up the staircase to the “Between Object and Architecture” exhibition. Finally, take the elevator to the 10th floor, look at the view of London and remind yourself that it’s the most cosmopolitan city in the world.