In his letter, obtained by BuzzFeed, Mr. Biden expressed his “furious anger” over the sexual assault — for which a former Stanford student, Brock Turner, 20, was convicted in March — and his disappointment in a culture that “continues to ask the wrong questions” of victims.
The Santa Clara County government released the more-than-7,000-word statement read by the victim in the courtroom. She detailed the shock of finding out what happened to her after the attack, and the wrenching aftermath.
“I do not know your name — but your words are forever seared on my soul, words that should be required reading for men and women of all ages,” he wrote, referring to the powerful statement the 23-year-old woman read in court during a sentencing hearing in Santa Clara County Superior Court last week.
The case spurred national outrage when Mr. Turner, a former Stanford swimmer, received a six-month sentence and three years probation by Judge Aaron Persky after being convicted of three felony counts of sexual assault for his attack on an intoxicated and unconscious woman behind a Dumpster.
Critics of the judge’s sentencing have begun an effort to recall him, even as others have defended his decisions, and threats of violence have flooded the California court’s phone lines.
Representative Jackie Speier, a Democrat from California, speaking from the House floor on Thursday, called the six-month sentence a “travesty” and said that she was working on “several pieces of legislation” to aid the survivors of sexual assault and harassment.
In his letter to the judge, Mr. Turner blamed a “party culture” and drinking at Stanford University for his actions in the sexual assault case.
The victim’s statement, published by BuzzFeed on June 3, was also read on the air by a CNN anchor on Monday. Chirlane McCray, the wife of Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York, along with a group of celebrities and government officials, read it aloud on Wednesday in a video that was posted to Facebook.
Representative Ted Poe, a Republican from Texas who also read an excerpt from the statement on the House floor, said that Judge Persky should be removed from the bench.
“Victims like this remarkable woman must know that society and the justice system are on their side,” Mr. Poe said Thursday.
• Two of the women who had written character statements on behalf of Mr. Turner apologized Wednesday for supporting him. Leslie Rasmussen, the drummer for the band Good English, which had several of its shows canceled after news of her support became public, posted her apology on Facebook.
“I did not acknowledge strongly enough the severity of Brock’s crime and the suffering and pain that his victim endured, and for that lack of acknowledgment, I am deeply sorry,” she wrote.
• In her speech, Ms. Speier noted that Mr. Turner will most likely serve half of his sentence.
Online records show that Mr. Turner, who was booked on June 2, is expected to be released from the Santa Clara County jail on Sept. 2.
It is not uncommon for county jail inmates to serve 50 percent of their sentences if they keep a clean disciplinary record. Calls to the county Department of Corrections weren’t immediately returned Thursday.