Pro Basketball|The N.B.A. Fashion Runway: The Stars, the Styles ... the Trash?
The N.B.A. Fashion Runway: The Stars, the Styles ... the Trash?
OAKLAND, Calif. — The beautiful millionaires arrive in couture. Cameras are there to greet them as their fans stand by on social media, craving glimpses of their custom-fitted ensembles. Suddenly, however briefly, the bowels of basketball arenas are turned into the shabbiest fashion runways in the world.
For all their dazzling feats on the court, N.B.A. stars have somehow made an event out of simply showing up at games. The sports world and the fashion world cannot look away, even if the setting is an underground tunnel in, say, Oracle Arena — approximately nine million miles from Milan.
“Oh, it’s beautiful,” Sarah Oliphant, an artist who designs backdrops for fashion shows out of her studio in New York, said. She would not stage these N.B.A. arrivals any other way.
The N.B.A. finals between the Golden State Warriors and the Cleveland Cavaliers are shaping up as one of the season’s biggest stages — for fashion, of course. The basketball has been decent, too, although not overly competitive. The Warriors will look to build on their two-games-to-none lead when the series resumes in Cleveland on Wednesday night.
But those 30 seconds are important. Important to broadcast partners like ESPN and Turner Sports, who have filmed these entrances throughout the postseason to help fill pregame airtime. Important to viewers at home, who want to see their favorite players behind the scenes. Important to fashion designers, who benefit from mainstream exposure. And important to the players, who have come to delight in the strange pageantry of it all.
It is an oddly blue-collar environment for high fashion. Nobody made a bigger splash in recent weeks than Russell Westbrook of the Oklahoma City Thunder, whose team fell to the Warriors in the Western Conference finals. Westbrook’s bursts of sartorial pyrotechnics — denim overalls one game, zebra-print blazer the next — were offset by an obstacle course of trash cans, ladders and heating ducts.
Banakis has been a fan of Westbrook’s since they were students together at U.C.L.A., where Westbrook played basketball and Banakis played trombone in the marching band. (They were once on the same charter flight to the Final Four, Banakis said.) Banakis said it made sense for high-profile players to embrace their opportunities to flash some individual style, even if their milieu is a loading dock.
Curry said he did not realize that he needed to care about his 30-second pregame walk to the locker room until he made his first playoffs appearance with the Warriors in 2013. All of a sudden, camera crews were waiting for him. He knew then that he had to put more effort into his attire. It has become an important part of his game day ritual.
While television has used player arrivals as pregame fodder for years, social media has given these small moments greater currency. They have also become much more involved productions. Nian Fish, a creative director and producer of fashion shows and events, said she was struck by the work of the film crews.
All for a few seconds of video. There are other logistical hurdles, said Tim Corrigan, a senior coordinating producer for ESPN. Because home and visiting teams often arrive at different entrances, Corrigan assigns crews to camp out at each location. Players also show up at various times. When the Warriors are on the road, for example, they have three buses that leave for the arena in 30-minute increments. By now, ESPN’s crew knows that Curry tends to take the last bus, which usually pulls in about two hours before the game.
Once he arrives, Curry takes measured steps past the assembled masses, his strides slow but purposeful.
Other players are more elusive. Corrigan recalled how Ray Allen, the former N.B.A. player, liked to show up so early for games that he often took a taxi from the team hotel.
Marreese Speights, a reserve forward with the Warriors, tries to avoid the cameras altogether. His strategy? Take the last bus to road games and be the last player to disembark, his hope being that everyone will have vacated the premises then. Besides, Speights has no illusions that the cameras are there for him.
“People want to see their favorite players all dressed up,” he said.
Others take greater pains to be more fashion forward. James Michael McAdoo, a second-year forward, has friends who send him news clippings and video snippets of Curry that just happen to feature McAdoo standing in the background. McAdoo does not want to look like a slob.
Curry has become an active participant in the whole process. He goes so far as to watch clips of other players making their arena entrances.
