Finding new ways to teach the digital generation, bringing down the cost of a college education and ensuring that more students graduate are among the biggest challenges facing institutions of higher learning today — and meeting those challenges has never been more crucial than it is now.
That was the clear consensus among some of the nation’s top educational leaders who gathered at a two-day conference sponsored by The New York Times on Monday and Tuesday.
The Higher Ed Leaders Forum was among a series of conferences organized by The Times throughout the year. It convened some of the nation’s top educators to discuss the future of higher education.
Technology, for good and bad, is now firmly entwined in all grades, while lectures are becoming a thing of the past, educators on a panel on “The Digital Future of Education” acknowledged.
That means a major “rethinking of how we spend time in the classroom,” he said. “We need to engage them in something that would be difficult to do online,” such as working together in person to solve problems or complete projects.
One example, Mr. Ryan suggested, was to throw a question out to the class, have students respond, and then put them in groups to try to persuade one another that they are right.
“It’s amazing how many people care if a hole in the middle of metal expands or contracts when heated,” he said.
John Palfrey, head of the Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass., an elite residential secondary school, said his school had successfully teamed up with the Khan Academy, a major participant in online K-12 education, to teach high-level calculus.
One of the major challenges is overcoming digital inequality, Mr. Palfrey said. The problem is not so much the devices themselves — most students these days have access to computers and smartphones — but the level of sophistication in using these devices to conduct research.
One way to address that, he said, is to incorporate the issue into existing class curriculums, such as by examining how a Wikipedia page is created and how it differs from, say, an article in Nature or Smithsonian magazine.
Inequality dominated much of the discussion about the direction of higher education.
“Completion is a huge national challenge,” said John B. King Jr., the secretary of education. His statement was confirmed by the many hands that were raised by administrators and educators in the audience when asked how many students at their institutions take longer than two or four years to obtain a degree.
Secretary King pointed out that many students take out loans and end up in debt without ever getting a degree.
Also helpful for students will be the reinstatement of summer Pell grants, federal financial aid for low-income students, which President Obama ended four years ago as a wat to reduce the federal budget deficit.
Legislation to reinstate those grants, so students can afford to take summer classes, is wending its way through Congress.
But Pell grants, which now are a maximum of $5,815 annually, are just too low, said Harold Levy, executive director of the Jack Kent Cooke Foundation, which offers scholarships, counseling and support services to outstanding low-income students from eighth grade through graduate school.
It’s also time to rethink programs that benefit poor students that end in 12th grade, such as free and reduced-price lunches, he said.
“It’s silly. These kids still need to eat,” he said.
Few appeared eager to discuss the ideas of Donald Trump, the presumptive Republican nominee, except to disparage the now-defunct Trump University. Randi Weingarten, president of the American Federation of Teachers, touched on the competing higher education proposals of Hillary Clinton and Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, saying she believes that the country will end up with a hybrid of Mrs. Clinton’s proposal that students be able to graduate from universities without debt from loans, and Mr. Sanders’s proposal that all public colleges and universities should be tuition-free.
“The next president has to be serious about college affordability,” said Joni Finney, director of the Institute for Research on Higher Education in the Graduate School of Education at the University of Pennsylvania.
She said that too many higher education institutions used their money to offer merit aid rather than needs-based aid and that “the federal government needs to develop a public compact” by stepping in and offering substantial money for such aid, with an expectation that states will match it.
The government offered such matching funds until they were phased out by the Obama administration, but even when the program existed, the amounts offered were so paltry, Professor Finney said, that states had no real incentive to match them.
A psychological shift as well as a financial shift is needed, Ms. Weingarten said. “We now believe college is as vital as high school,” she said, yet still accept that it is increasingly unaffordable and inaccessible to many Americans.
Although these concerns have been whirling around higher education for years, the attention during the presidential campaign to skyrocketing student debt indicates that the public is becoming increasingly aware — and concerned — about the problem.
“I think this is an inflection moment,” Mr. Levy said.