PARIS — Many different words have been used to describe Cristiano Ronaldo’s face.
On Saturday at Parc des Princes, however, there was only one way to accurately define the features of one of soccer’s biggest stars: pained.
This was a poor night for Ronaldo, a maddening night for Portugal. Is it critical? It is not. At this nearly all-inclusive version of the European Championships, in which only eight of 24 teams are eliminated in the group stage, a 0-0 draw against Austria means only that the fates of Ronaldo and the Portuguese will come down to their last group game, against Hungary. Ronaldo’s 63 million Instagram followers can relax: one win, and Portugal will go on.
But this match was, nonetheless, an exercise in agony for Ronaldo, a steady stream of unclaimed opportunities followed, immediately, by a varying slate of expressions indicating disappointment in the most obvious way.
One could match the actions with the reactions in almost any way possible. Ronaldo missed the goal from 6 yards out. His point-blank header was right at the goalkeeper. His free kick sailed over the goal. He grimaced. He frowned. He put his head in his hands.
Those were just the warm-ups, though. For all his frustration, Ronaldo did not pout and continued to play with passion and verve, driving into the penalty area and getting yanked to the ground by an Austrian defender to draw a penalty kick with about 10 minutes remaining. This was his chance, his moment. On a night when nothing was working, a free shot from 12 yards out should have been — had to have been — the panacea.
Except it wasn’t. Ronaldo, who has scored more than 500 goals for club and country, jogged toward the ball, waited to see which way Austria goalkeeper Robert Almer would dive and then coolly smacked the ball the other way.
Right off the post.
He stood. He stared. He looked to the sky. He looked at the ground. He laughed, in that way someone laughs when he feels bird droppings land on the shoulder of his new jacket. The nightmare continued.
The only segment of the population that was more excited about the miss than the Austrian fans — who immediately began taunting Ronaldo with chants of “Messi, Messi” — was, it seemed, the entirety of the internet. Seconds after Ronaldo’s shot ricocheted off the post, Twitter exploded. Memes emerged from everywhere. Captioned GIFs sprouted like crab grass.
It was, on many levels, idiotic, not least because Ronaldo’s celebrations after he scores a goal against, say, Levante in the Spanish league are not exactly button-down. Even more, it showed a haughtiness and an arrogance that were neither becoming nor necessary. It was a silly thing to say. One would like to think that in retrospect, even Ronaldo knows that.
Yet that is Ronaldo. Lionel Messi, who will be forever linked to Ronaldo in the discussion of who is the greatest player in the world, is a closed book.  There is focus in Messi’s eyes but rarely a picture. With Ronaldo, the colors are forever pouring out.
To some, it is too much. To others, it is what makes him appealing. If nothing else, it ensures there are never any secrets. On Saturday, Ronaldo screamed at his teammates, shouted at the referee and shrieked at the heavens (and himself) when chance after chance was somehow missed.
It has been this way for a long time. The game against Austria was Ronaldo’s 128th for the national team, moving him past Luís Figo into the top spot on Portugal’s career list. As other stars of a similar age are fading away — Wayne Rooney and Robin van Persie among them — Ronaldo, 31, is still here, still standing at, or at least near, the top of his sport. He scored 51 goals for Real Madrid last season. He scored the decisive penalty kick in the shootout that won the club its 11th European title. He raised the trophy to the biggest cheer.
But on Saturday, he missed. Success with his national team has been the bugaboo for Ronaldo, and part of his exasperation is surely that now, in his fourth Euros, he has a strong supporting cast. This is not a one-man team: Nani, William Carvalho and João Moutinho give Portugal a legitimate chance to make a run.
Portugal will still need Ronaldo, and not the Ronaldo from Saturday. Not long after his missed penalty kick, Portugal pressed the ball forward and, after a foul, was awarded a free kick near the touchline. The ball was floated into the area, and Ronaldo leapt high and, with a snap of his neck that a viper would appreciate, rifled his header into the net. The fans exploded. The Portugal bench erupted. Ronaldo started to run away in excitement.
The assistant referee raised his flag. Offside.
Ronaldo stopped in his tracks, gazing — but not glaring — at the official. He did not look angry. At the end of a long, long night, the most famous face in this tournament just looked hurt.