“Greenleaf,” a sudsy family saga with Oprah Winfrey as both an executive producer and a cast member, exposes sinful deeds in a Memphis megachurch. “Person of Interest” ends with a war of artificial intelligence. And undertake some extreme adventures from the safety of your couch.
GREENLEAF 10 p.m. on OWN. Following the mysterious demise of her sister, Grace Greenleaf (Merle Dandridge), a preacher turned journalist, returns home after 20 years — and to the Memphis megachurch of her father (Keith David), where at least seven deadly sins run rampant. “Promise me you’re not here to sow discord in the fields of my peace,” her mother, Lady Mae (Lynn Whitfield), snarls. Well, duh. Oprah Winfrey, an executive producer of this soapy new series from Craig Wright (FX’s “Tyrant”), plays Grace’s favorite aunt, Mavis, out to expose misdeeds like sexual abuse and a corporate jet that’s funded by parishioners like the Powerball winners who donate $250,000 to the Lord instead of giving into temptation. Fly commercial? “Never again, thank you, Jesus,” Mae says. Amen.
INTOLERABLE CRUELTY (2003) 7:15 p.m. on Starz. George Clooney’s incisors gleam in his role as Miles Massey, the crème de la crème of divorce lawyers, in this Joel and Ethan Coen film. Catherine Zeta-Jones is Marylin, a silken beauty who is represented by Miles’s latest adversary when she becomes mired in a vicious divorce after she catches her husband (Edward Herrmann) cheating yet again. Billy Bob Thornton is her millionaire beau and Miles’s rival for her money-hungry affections. “The Coens, bless their hearts, are too smart to apologize for avarice — it’s what gave screwball comedies a kick, and sends this movie straight to your head,” Elvis Mitchell wrote in The New York Times.
PERSON OF INTEREST 10 p.m. on CBS. The team embarks on its final mission as the series ends — this time, to prevent Samaritan from destroying the Machine and controlling mankind.
WOMAN 10 p.m. on Viceland. Gloria Steinem’s show examines sexual assault in the military.
EXTREME ADVENTURE on SundanceNow Doc Club. Stuck at your desk? Travel the globe, armchair-style, with this collection of heartstoppers, which will make you glad that you’re simply watching. The lineup includes “Deep Water,” about an around-the-world yachting race; “Keep the River on Your Right,” which retraces Tobias Schneebaum’s yearlong embed with a tribe of Peruvian cannibals; “Blindsight,” which follows blind Tibetan teenagers up a peak that’s near Mount Everest; and “Encounters at the End of the World,” Werner Herzog’s exploration of Antarctica.