PARIS — In tennis, where shouting fiery self-exhortations after nearly every point has become nearly Pavlovian, Yulia Putintseva’s intensity may burn most searingly of all.
The 5-foot-4 Putintseva has largely muted the language-leaping shouts of “Allez! Davai! Come on!” for which she quickly became known as a junior, but her outsize exuberance smolders on. It helped push Putintseva across the finish line against 12th-seeded Carla Suárez Navarro on Wednesday at the French Open with a 7-5, 7-5 win that put her in her first major quarterfinal.
Putintseva, 21, has been her own harshest critic along the way, comparing herself to teenage phenoms of the past like Maria Sharapova and Martina Hingis, each of whom had won multiple Grand Slam titles by her age.
Since a precocious junior career, Putintseva has had slower, but steady, professional success. Last year, Putintseva played in the main draw at all four Grand Slam events for the first time and finished the year inside the top 100. This year, she reached the third round of the Australian Open; beat Venus Williams en route to the quarterfinals at the Charleston, S.C., event; and arrived in Paris ranked 60th. With her run to the quarterfinals, Putintseva will be ranked safely inside the top 40.
Born in Moscow, Putintseva switched to representing Kazakhstan in 2012 after she felt slighted that the Russian Tennis Federation had not granted her a wild card into the previous year’s Kremlin Cup. Putintseva has since received financial and technical support from the Kazakh federation, and several other Russian and Eastern European players have made a similar move for the same purpose.
Beneficial as the arrangement has been, Putintseva said it would not necessarily be permanent.
Citing a need “to grow up a little bit,” Putintseva stopped traveling with her father, and she now lives and trains in Delray Beach, Fla. Her father lives with her brother, Ilya, a member of the Halifax Mooseheads of the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League.
Putintseva took to Florida life immediately.
Putintseva’s favorite rest destinations come with their own high velocity: the roller coasters of Orlando’s theme parks, particularly Universal Studios. The adrenaline rush, she said, compares well with tennis’s.
“Maybe before going on a roller coaster I have the same feeling as before going onto a tennis match,” she said.
But in tennis, the initial rush disappears, Putintseva said. Then a player must settle down to the real work of dealing with the situations the game presents.
Putintseva’s past rides against Williams have been over quickly. The two have met twice, in Madrid in 2013 and in Indian Wells, Calif., in March. The matches followed similar scripts, with Putintseva pushing Williams into a first-set tiebreaker before Williams overwhelmed Putintseva in the second set.
They share a tennis connection: Putintseva previously trained at the Paris academy led by Williams’s coach, Patrick Mouratoglou.
Although Williams rarely delves into specifics on coming opponents, Putintseva’s feistiness left a clear impression.
Putintseva reciprocated the praise.
