“Cosmos,” Andrzej Zulawski’s first film since 2000, is both a comeback and a swan song. Mr. Zulawski, 75 when he died in February, was an important figure in the history of Polish cinema and in the emergence of a borderless, cosmopolitan European style of filmmaking during the Cold War and after. His last work pays tribute to his roots and to his subsequent wanderings. Based on a novel of the same name by the Polish writer Witold Gombrowicz, this French-Portuguese co-production is a witty and energetic — if also somewhat labored — mélange of languages, tones and ideas.
The protagonist is a sensitive law student — alternately sulky and stormy — named Witold (Jonathan Genet), who explains that his parents gave him the name because they were Gombrowicz fans. That’s far from the only self-referential moment in the film, which chronicles Witold’s increasingly bizarre experiences at a Lisbon boardinghouse. He and a fellow student, Fuchs (Johan Libéreau), are welcomed by the eccentric and effusive Mme. Woytis (Sabine Azéma), who may be the sanest member of the household.
Her husband (Jean-François Balmer) is a pompous professorial type who festoons his speech with nonsensical Latin flourishes. Their niece, Catherette (Clémentine Pons), lives with them, as does their daughter, Lena (Victória Guerra), who is married. Catherette, who has a deformed lip, seems to be in love with Witold, who conceives a feverish, possibly reciprocated passion for Lena. Fuchs goes out cruising at night, returning with fresh welts and bruises that don’t dampen his exuberance.
The film unfolds with a madcap energy that nonetheless carries a whiff of fatigue. Mr. Zulawski, following Gombrowicz’s lead, blithely discards narrative logic, and delights in finding images that will do justice to this writer’s manic inventiveness.  Sometimes a simpler pictorial whimsy seems to be at work, a desire to shoot something crazy.
It is possible to appreciate Mr. Zulawski’s perverse ingenuity, and to miss his eye and voice, without quite succumbing to the strenuous charms and overcooked provocations of “Cosmos.” The film — which is opening in New York at the Metrograph, a young art house with a studied, old-fashioned vibe — feels more like a revival than a new release. It can inspire you to think fondly back on the work of Alain Resnais (Ms. Azéma’s presence is a cue for that) or Raúl Ruiz, or, for that matter, on earlier films of Mr. Zulawski’s in which the vision felt more urgent and inspired.
“Cosmos,” for its part, leaves a curiously paradoxical aftertaste. It’s an exercise in nostalgic avant-gardism, a retro-modernist trip down aesthetic paths that have long since been blocked off, overgrown or paved over.
“Cosmos,” which is not rated, is in French with English subtitles. Running time: 1 hour 43 minutes.