As Barbara Cook concluded a dreamy rendition of “Send in the Clowns” at Feinstein’s/54 Below on Tuesday night, a wave of love swept through the club, where she had come to promote her just-published autobiography, “Then and Now: A Memoir.” Here for a moment was the Barbara Cook her fans know and love, conveying the emotional essence of a great song with her customary generosity. As though waving an invisible wand, she evoked a profound mixture of resignation, reassurance and understanding.
Since the mid-1980s, Ms. Cook has reigned as a kind of sibyl channeling the wisdom and humanity of the American songbook, particularly as embodied in the work of Stephen Sondheim. But at 88, she is a much-diminished performer. Unable to walk because of multiple ailments, she sang from a wheelchair, reading lyrics from a stack of manuscripts by her side, and confessed that she found her physical situation embarrassing. Her once near-perfect intonation is gone, along with the phrasing that not so long ago enabled her to spin out notes like jet trails seemingly into infinity.
After “Send in the Clowns,” the most effective number was a jolly talk-sing performance of “Makin’ Whoopee,” the dry assessment of the troubles brought on by passion, marriage and starting a family. After a rollicking version of “Georgia on My Mind,” she declared the song was a lie; from almost as far back as she could remember, she longed to flee her hometown, Atlanta, for New York. There were conspicuous errors. She gave an improvisatory monologue about Rodgers and Hammerstein, prompted by a performance of “This Can’t Be Love” — a Rodgers and Hart standard.
But over all, Ms. Cook’s mood was joyous. She still couldn’t believe she had actually written a book. Her accomplishment, she said, made her feel she could do almost anything. A subtheme of the book and of her often rambling patter was her lifelong sense of intellectual inferiority.
The most important person to boost her confidence, she said, was the Canadian actor Arthur Hill, with whom she had a secret love affair and whom she names in the memoir as the love of her life. Mr. Hill, who was married, won a Tony Award for his portrayal of George, opposite Uta Hagen, in the original Broadway production of “Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf?” He died in 2006.
Ms. Cook’s remarkably simpatico musical director and pianist, Lee Musiker, led a band that included Tony Tedesco on drums, Dave Riekenberg on woodwinds and Jay Leonhart on bass.
Sixty-one years later, there were just enough glimpses of the old magic to make you glad to be in attendance.