DUBLIN, Ohio — The top three players in the world came into the Memorial Tournament fresh off victories. A lot of good that did them. Rory McIlroy, the world’s No. 2 golfer, backed into a tie for fourth. Top-ranked Jason Day finished tied for 27th, and Jordan Spieth was tied for 57th.
The top three, who had combined for 15 top-10 finishes in 32 starts this season, were no match for William McGirt and Jon Curran, who came into the week with a combined six top-10 showings in a combined 38 starts. McGirt closed with a one-under-par 71, and Curran a 70, to finish regulation tied for the lead at 15-under 273.
In the playoff, only one outcome was certain: a first-time PGA Tour winner would be crowned. With a par on the second extra hole, McGirt broke his maiden in his 165th tour start while Curran extended his winless streak to 55 tour appearances.
McGirt’s closing round consisted of one birdie, at No. 5, and 19 pars, including the playoff. But there was nothing routine about his last par, in which he chipped from thick rough over the green to 7 feet and made the uphill putt while the tournament host, Jack Nicklaus, looked on.
“It’s a pretty darn cool feeling right now to get win No. 1, and for it to be here at the Memorial in front of Mr. Nicklaus,” McGirt said.
McIlroy was the leader in the clubhouse for a good portion of the afternoon after signing for his 68 before a weather front moved in. His round included bogeys on the par-3 12th after his tee shot found the green and the par-4 14th after his drive found the fairway. Those two bogeys represented the margin separating him from McGirt. “All things considered, it’s been a decent week,” said McIlroy, who finished tied with J. B. Holmes (69), Gary Woodland (73) and Matt Kuchar (73) at 13-under 275.
Blame the wind for the tumult on the Memorial Tournament leaderboard. The sweltering heat earlier in the week gave way to electrical storms over the weekend that caused weather delays totaling almost three hours. After the last of the interruptions, a 1-hour-27-minute delay on Sunday with the leaders on the back nine, the wind picked up and the players returned to what seemed a different course.
The final holes were playing downwind, which brought into play fairway bunkers that Curran, making his Memorial Tournament debut, had not even noticed were there. He hit into two of them down the stretch — on the penultimate hole in regulation and on his drive at the 18th on the second playoff hole.
On No. 17, he hit out to 7 feet and made the birdie to grab a share of the lead, at 15 under, with McGirt, whose final round included one birdie, at No. 5, and 19 pars, including the extra holes. Curran’s approach on No. 18 on the second hole of extra death sailed the green. Looking back, he said, he probably should have used his 9-iron out of the sand instead of trying to take something off an 8.
Neither Curran nor McGirt said they felt comfortable off the tee. McGirt took advantage of the weather delay to work on his swing in the clubhouse. He described the break as ‘huge.” His career-high finish before this week, a tie for second at last fall’s Sanderson Farms Championship, was marked by numerous weather delays, necessitating a Monday finish.
As was made plain Sunday, sometimes the winner is the one who plods along and lets everyone else self-destruct. “I won half of my golf tournaments watching everyone else self-destruct,” he said as a wide-eyed McGirt hung on Nicklaus’s every word.