On a cool and sunny Thursday afternoon, the cast of “Tumacho,” a new play with music by Ethan Lipton, gathered at 440 Studios in the East Village to rehearse. It’s a western tale with country-influenced songs, and Celia Keenan-Bolger and her husband, John Ellison Conlee, were singing on horses.
“And I will learn … ” the ensemble crooned.
 Except for the part where a jaguar, played by Jennifer Lim, roared into the scene and pounced on Ms. Keenan-Bolger.
Also, the horses were cardboard heads on sticks, and the ensemble a team of cardboard cacti (with sad faces drawn in black Sharpie).
Running from June 27 through July 9, it’s the final production in Clubbed Thumb’s annual Summerworks festival of new plays, held at the 89-seat Wild Project theater on East Third Street. For a month and a half, three world premieres are mounted, each with 10 performances and, at most, a running time of 90 minutes. For new-play aficionados, Summerworks is a must-see stop, especially since tickets are a budget-friendly $18.
For Ms. Striar, it’s a juggling act.
On the day of the interview, after dropping in on the “Tumacho” run-through, she walked over to the Wild Project to watch the tech rehearsal of the second Summerworks play, Olivia Dufault’s “The Tomb of King Tot,” which would open to solid reviews. Ms. Striar was also preparing for a remount of Jaclyn Backhaus’s “Men on Boats,” which played to sold-out houses at last summer’s festival; Playwrights Horizons is co-producing the show uptown, with performances beginning July 20.
Clubbed Thumb holds a special significance for Mr. Lipton, since it produced his New York debut, “100 Aspects of the Moon,” in 2005. He has since won an Obie and has a new work scheduled to have its premiere at Joe’s Pub in February, but he considers Clubbed Thumb, which commissioned “Tumacho,” an artistic home.
Six Tony nominees, including the director Leigh Silverman and the Tony-winning set designer David Zinn, have followed along, choosing to work in a tiny black box.
Mr. Lipton is not the only dramatist who got an early start at Clubbed Thumb. Since the company’s founding in 1996, it has been an incubator for many of today’s hottest playwrights, who made their professional or New York debuts there: Sarah Ruhl, Jordan Harrison, Lisa D’Amour and Clare Barron, among others.
“They are very influential,” Tim Sanford, Playwrights Horizons’ artistic director, said by phone. He noted that many writers produced by Clubbed Thumb have eventually made their way to his theater. That is partly why, when Playwrights announced the start of its company residency program (which comes with free office and rehearsal spaces), Clubbed Thumb was the first beneficiary.
While the company’s financial situation is modest, this is a good year: Clubbed Thumb has a budget of $717,000 and three full-time staff members; 74 percent of the budget comes from grants and donations, and 70 percent goes toward productions and artistic programs. While Ms. Striar ruefully acknowledges that the artist pay is low — Summerworks participants, both cast and crew members, get $1,500 apiece — she’s aiming to do better. “We raise our budget and pay every year,” she said.
What a Clubbed Thumb production lacks in budget, it often makes up for in ambition. “Tumacho” has a cast of nine and a live musician. “Men on Boats,” about the 1869 Powell Expedition down the Colorado River into the Grand Canyon, has a cast of 10 — all women playing male historical figures.
Ms. Backhaus said that not many theater companies would have championed the play. “I feel like they produce plays because of how weird they are,” she said. “And they really try to expand the weirdness, and the uniqueness of a piece, rather than try to make it fit into a mold that’s more producible or palatable.” Ms. Backhaus holds a residency at Clubbed Thumb, which is financed by a $75,000 grant from the Tow Foundation.
Considering Clubbed Thumb’s track record, that strategy has been successful. Ms. Striar’s next goal is to start producing more outside of Summerworks. And to continue supporting artists, both new and — like Mr. Lipton — returning.
