Eight years ago, I was thrilled that the Democratic Party overcame racial prejudice and selected the first black man to be its presidential nominee. I am thrilled today to read that the first woman has clinched enough delegate votes to be its presidential nominee. How very proud I am of my party.
These past years have been transformational, and the Democrats have proved that anyone can be president, be they black, female or perhaps, one day, L.G.B.T. Yes, this is a historic mark, and as an American, I am so excited to support Hillary Clinton for president of the United States.
I am writing to deplore, first, the cynicism of The Associated Press for releasing its poll of Democratic superdelegates precisely on the eve of the last primaries, and, second, of The Times for not merely reporting the A.P. poll — as you were bound to do — but running it as a banner headline.
This could have the effect of voter suppression — something that, on other occasions, The Times rightly disapproves of. Let the people decide? Not without the intervention of The A.P. and The Times.
Congratulations to Hillary Clinton for making history as the first woman to become the presumptive presidential nominee of a major party! Mrs. Clinton deserves credit for her relentless spirit, hardly dampened after losing to Barack Obama in the 2008 primaries.
Mrs. Clinton’s clinching of the required number of delegates was hard-earned. Thanks to Bernie Sanders for a vibrant and tireless campaign, propelled by the youth, that voiced concern about big money in politics and social and economic inequality.
I hope that Hillary Clinton addresses these issues forcefully and candidly at this critical time when core American values, imperiled by Donald Trump’s unabashed campaign of divisiveness, bigotry and xenophobia, are at stake.
The Times’s absurd assertion, based on an A.P. poll, that Hillary Clinton has captured the Democratic nomination on the eve of Tuesday’s important primaries sends a crystal clear message to voters: The voices of superdelegates outweigh the voices of ordinary citizens, and if you do not support the presumptive nominee, you might as well not vote.
Such a message privileges the superdelegate, whose very role is contrary to the ideals of our democracy. To clarify: As of this writing, Hillary Clinton has not secured the nomination. The superdelegates who support her have not voted. These appointed individuals are free to change their minds between now and the Democratic Convention.
