OVER the course of the past two months, Donald J. Trump has assailed Hillary Clinton as “a world-class liar,” suggested that she had a role in the death of a White House aide while Bill Clinton was president, darkly referenced Mr. Clinton’s marital affairs and said — in a 41-minute rip of a speech on Tuesday — that Mrs. Clinton had “perfected the politics of personal profit and theft.” Once again, the nation seems to be marching toward another brutally nasty presidential campaign, with Mr. Trump leading the parade.
But in a year when so many staples of American politics have faltered — television advertisements, polling, big-ticket endorsements, to name a few — will the negative campaign, whether wielded by Mr. Trump or Mrs. Clinton, be the reliable weapon it has proved to be in presidential campaigns over the course of American history? Is there anything left to say about two candidates who are so well known and so polarizing?
Mrs. Clinton is already viewed unfavorably by 55 percent of the American public, according to an ABC News/Washington Post poll released June 15. She has been in public life for a very well-examined quarter of a century. Even accounting for the Clintons’ tendency to serve up the unexpected damaging revelation (no one was talking about Mrs. Clinton’s emails 18 months ago), it seems fair to wonder how much could be left in the opposition research pantry.
And Mr. Trump, whom Mrs. Clinton hammered with a series of hard-hitting television advertisements about his temperament over the past week, is in even worse shape in that poll: 70 percent of Americans hold an unfavorable view of him. He has been pelted with damaging information. That did not stop him from sweeping aside a packed Republican field and briefly leading Mrs. Clinton in some national polls.
Still, Mr. Trump is where he is today because he has not only embraced the negative campaign, but in many ways has rewritten the rules of how it is conducted. There is little reason to think he is about to change. His attacks are searing and personal, delivered with the humorous patter of a late-night insult comedian, more reminiscent of 19th-century Federalists denouncing Thomas Jefferson as the AntiChrist — or Confederates calling Lincoln a buffoon and a drunk — than the more conventional Barack Obama advertisement showing Mitt Romney singing an off-key “America the Beautiful” as headlines recounted how Mr. Romney had overseen the outsourcing of jobs to Mexico and China.
In the process, Mr. Trump has often barged past the boundaries of propriety and truth, and at no apparent cost, at least among his supporters. In recent years, presidential campaigns have made it a practice to release detailed documentation of the charges they make in negative advertisements or speeches: a list of votes, transcripts from interviews, legal documents. Media organizations have become increasingly rigorous in policing advertisements, calling out errors and falsehoods that could prove an unwanted embarrassment for the campaign making the accusation.
His approach, attention-grabbing and arguably entertaining, served him well in the crowded field of a Republican primary. But Mr. Trump is now competing for support among a much broader electorate, and against a candidate who has far more experience in presidential campaigns — and in being the target of all kinds of attacks.
Indeed, many analysts said, there is a strong argument that he is vulnerable to a negative campaign in a way that Mrs. Clinton is not. Opinions on Mrs. Clinton seem set in cement at this point; short of her being indicted, it’s hard to imagine information that could dramatically change voters’ opinions of her.
By contrast, Mr. Trump may be one of the most famous people on the planet, but his life off the public stage has not received much scrutiny, as became clear with the revelations about Trump University, described by some of its students as a fraud.
Negative campaigning, as much as voters say they disapprove of it, tends to work. With its dark and detailed invocations of a candidate’s votes and quotes, a negative campaign can provide voters with the type of information they need to make an informed choice.
The most effective attacks portray a candidate as ideologically or culturally alien, unqualified for the job or a threat to national security or the economy.
In 2004, President George W. Bush lampooned his Democratic opponent, Senator John F. Kerry of Massachusetts, with a video clip of Mr. Kerry in a wet suit that made him appear to be windsurfing back and forth across the water. It made Mr. Kerry seem slightly effete, while reinforcing a central Bush critique of Mr. Kerry’s candidacy: that he was a flip-flopper.
Four years later, during the Democratic primary in Texas, Mrs. Clinton broadcast an advertisement showing a young girl sleeping peacefully in bed as a telephone rings in the background at 3 a.m., presumably with bad news. Supporters of Mr. Obama were riled, but it raised legitimate questions about the ability of Mr. Obama, a first-term senator from Illinois, to deal with a breaking foreign crisis.
And with their high unfavorable ratings, Mr. Trump and Mrs. Clinton have considerable strategic motivation to go on the attack.
COREY LEWANDOWSKI, who was Mr. Trump’s campaign manager until he was forced out last week, said in an interview before his departure there was still much left to tell voters about the former secretary of state.
Joel Benenson, who is Mrs. Clinton’s senior strategist, was similarly bullish on Mrs. Clinton’s prospects for making the case against Mr. Trump. Mr. Benenson said Mr. Trump had largely been spared during the primaries.
“Everything he represents and that he is showing day after day is how dangerous and divisive he is and how that undermines our national security and will crash our economy,” he said.
And if Mrs. Clinton attacks Mr. Trump on his business record — and Mr. Trump finds something disconcerting in Mrs. Clinton’s years in the Senate to share with voters — is that really such a bad thing? That kind of unflattering information is arguably more helpful to voters than, say, the uplifting “Morning in America” advertisement that helped carry Ronald Reagan to a second term in 1984.
