PARIS — There is a back story to the strikes that have made life miserable for millions across France in recent weeks, and it isn’t about high unemployment, immigration or the other issues confronting the country and its increasingly unpopular president, François Hollande.
It has to do with raw labor politics — and the disproportionate role played by the General Confederation of Labor, France’s oldest union, which has ties to the once-powerful Communist Party, from which it has kept a Marxist-Leninist call to class struggle.
With just under 700,000 members, most of them in the public sector, the C.G.T., as it is commonly known, has moved its fight against a proposed labor law beyond the streets.
It has spearheaded mass demonstrations, and small numbers of militant strikers have blocked the gates of oil refineries, nuclear power stations, wholesale food markets and waste treatment facilities.
Joined by smaller, more radical unions, the strikes have spread, as rail workers and Air France pilots piled on with narrow demands unrelated to the labor law.
Fueling the unrest is widespread dissatisfaction with a Socialist government seen as having betrayed its leftist principles, which explains recent vandalism against local party headquarters.
At the heart of it all is the C.G.T., which is now battling to hold its place as France’s No. 1 union, a position it has traditionally used to face down successive French governments on the right and on the left.
This time, the union has resorted to strong-arm methods that have been described as terrorist by Pierre Gattaz, president of the Medef, the main business lobbying group in France.
The most striking example came on May 26 when the union shut down publication of France’s largest newspapers after they refused to publish a full-page opinion piece written by Philippe Martinez, the union’s recently elected general secretary.
“The C.G.T. is going for broke,” wrote Michel Noblecourt, the labor correspondent at Le Monde, the French newspaper. “It has been weakened in its historic bastions and ahead of union elections in March 2017, there are strong risks that it will find itself” in second place.
The paradox is that France is one of the least unionized countries in Europe. According to a government study issued last month, only 11.2 percent of French workers, about 2.9 million, belonged to the country’s eight main unions in 2013, more than two-thirds in the public sector.
In 2014, the C.G.T. had 676,623 members, down 2 percent from the previous year, according to the union’s figures.
At union elections in 2013, it earned 26.7 percent of the votes, just ahead of the 26 percent received by its moderate rival, the French Democratic Confederation of Labor, which did not join the strikes this spring.
After his election last April as leader of the C.G.T., Mr. Martinez was open about his agenda.
The question is whether these militant tactics will pay off. The French are traditionally tolerant of labor action, but this time, as the garbage piles up and commuters fight their way onto crowded trains, there are signs that the union may have overplayed its hand.
But it has already exacted a price. Seeking to end the social unrest, the government has stripped the proposed labor law of most of its consequential elements.
Little is left of the original ambition to loosen France’s rigid labor market, but with an exception that is a source of extreme concern for the C.G.T.: a rule that would allow employers to negotiate with unions at the factory — rather than the sector — level.
The union’s influence has always come from its role as an actor on the national stage, capable of going head-to-head against the government. A devolution to the local level would be a blow to its disproportionate power, which could mean that these last weeks of chaos might end up being the C.G.T.’s swan song.