With an imposing stance, the astronaut Gordon Cooper towers over visitors to the Frances Lehman Loeb Art Center at Vassar College. Everything about him glows: his metallic spacesuit, the soles of his shoes, the helmet he clutches in the crook of his arm. 
Mr. Cooper was one of the seven astronauts who participated in Project Mercury, America’s first manned space program. His giant image, at the entrance to the museum’s atrium gallery, is a site-specific mural created by Mungo Thomson, who manipulated the colors in a photograph from NASA’s public archives. Part of the Los Angeles-based artist’s continuing series “Negative Space,” the mural covers a 23-foot-high wall where, near the ceiling, a small circular window suggests a celestial orb in the distance.
Mr. Cooper is an apt ambassador for “Touch the Sky,” an exhibition of 51 works by 19 artists, each responding to the awe-inspiring mysteries of the universe. The show presents an array of approaches, on a spectrum from factual to imaginary, in media including paint, pencil, printmaking, video, assorted photographic techniques and a bit of powdered cocaine.
That desire is manifest throughout the galleries. It is there in a grouping of astrophotographs, shot through telescopes. The oldest, “Moon in First Quarter,” was taken by Lewis M. Rutherfurd, an amateur scientist in New York, who invented the device he used. It shows the moon’s maria (lava plains) in remarkable detail, considering it was made in 1865.
Technological leaps are evident in the images of much higher resolution produced by two contemporary artists. Four black-and-white photographs by David Malin, an Australian astrophotographer, include a similar view of the moon’s maria as well as other dramatic — and beautiful — interstellar events. Michael Benson, an artist and writer in New York, stitched together raw digital data collected by NASA to create his composite version of Jupiter’s moon Io. The dazzling gold sphere, pockmarked with craters, pops against a black background, red flames from two volcanic eruptions visible near the top.
Like Mr. Benson and Mr. Thomson, other “Touch the Sky” artists mined the expressive potential of appropriated imagery. The source materials for a suite of 10 lithographs made by Nancy Graves in 1972 were NASA’s color-coded geologic maps of Earth’s moon. Using pointillist marks, Ms. Graves abstracted the maps into dotted expanses of color.
“Touch the Sky” was organized as part of a yearlong, campuswide celebration of the sciences. Ms. Lombino dedicated the exhibition to Maria Mitchell, one of America’s first professional female astronomers and the first professor hired at Vassar. All of the works challenge visitors to the museum to reconsider, and perhaps expand, their conceptions of the cosmos.
This is what Sharon Harper aimed to do when, in Clearmont, Wyo., in 2005, she brought her large-format camera outside nightly to photograph the sky. She chose different locations, shifted the orientation of her camera, altered her exposures from eight seconds up to 30 minutes and repeatedly re-exposed the same sheet of film.
In the resulting print, which is part of a body of work titled “Moon Studies and Star Scratches,” a cobalt blue sky is flecked with radiant orbs, fingernail moons and slender white lines tracing the paths of stars. In a second piece from the same series, gleaming spheres and crescent moons seem to be frolicking among smears of light. During a telephone interview, Ms. Harper, a professor of visual art at Harvard, described her process as a “call and response” and a “partnership” incorporating her movement, the astronomical movement, the camera’s optics, the film’s properties and, ultimately, the viewer’s perspective.
