Illustrated. 853 pp. Little, Brown & Company. $32.
Fans of old white guy passive aggression will love the prologue to “Paul Mc­Cartney: The Life.” As perhaps you’ve heard, McCartney has been famous since 1963, and in response to multiple biographies and decades of scrutiny he’s made himself as reclusive as the corner mailbox. At 73, he plays his Beatles’ hits joyfully and answers questions about John, Yoko, Linda and “Sgt. Pepper” without offense at the implication that his life ­peaked before the moon landing. His current “One on One” tour stops in Sioux Falls, S.D., Hershey, Pa., and quite possibly your living room.
Philip Norman acknowledges all this yet insists that “this seemingly most open and approachable of all ­mega-celebrities is actually one of the most elusive.” And at least in Norman’s experience it’s true. Norman is a prolific writer best known for “Shout! The Beatles in Their Generation” (1981), an indispensable history of the band that had one notable dissenter: a guy named McCartney. “Shout!” had a few too many snarky asides about Paul’s money lust and a particularly cutting and unwarranted line about John’s superior talent. McCartney was hurt, and made sure Norman knew about it by freezing him out.
“Paul McCartney” opens with Norman’s confession that, in hindsight, the offending passages in “Shout!” were fueled by a lifelong case of Paul envy: “All those years I’d spent wishing to be him had left me feeling in some obscure way that I needed to get my own back.” This is weird territory. It gets weirder as Norman, also 73, details the very slow, very British détente that led to McCartney’s tacit approval of the current book. The prologue is just a few cliché-clogged pages, but the messiness is tense and exciting. It teases a biography prepared to reckon with the lifetime of co-dependence between a thin-skinned icon and his covetous baby boomer fans.
The book that follows is vastly more conventional. “Paul McCartney” is an 853-page cinder block of facts in which we learn that young Paul enjoyed condensed milk and every kind of meat except tongue. Early letters and school assignments are reprinted and mined for future irony. Cats are named. Later, there are lengthy sections about McCartney’s sex life and drug preferences — but then, there are lengthy sections about everything. Real estate transactions, management squabbles, vegetarianism and seemingly every Wings rehearsal. Even Mum and Dad’s daily inquiries about little Paul’s poops get a mention.
As the Beatles conquer the world and McCartney is hailed as a genius, Norman’s weaknesses are exposed. He can tell you that “Hello, Goodbye” was invented on the spot when an executive asked how Mc­Cartney wrote a song, or that “Good Day Sunshine” was inspired by Ike and Tina Turner’s “River Deep, Mountain High.” He has a harder time describing music and its meaning. Once he compares Lennon and McCartney’s harmonies to vinaigrette, another time to oil and vinegar. When the salad dressing bottle of metaphors runs dry, he reaches for puns. Of McCartney’s contributions to the White Album, Norman writes, “Only in ‘Blackbird’ does his talent fully show its glossy wings and golden beak.” Caw.
The descriptions of McCartney’s love life aren’t much better (“His sexual antenna as keen as his cultural one, he could always tell in advance which one it would be”), but at least bad writing about sex still has sex going for it. Other biographers have noted Paul’s infidelity during his engagement to the actress Jane Asher, but Norman uncovers a Bieber’s-worth of girlfriends, groupies and pregnancy scares that Brian Epstein, the Beatles’ manager, became expert at hiding. At one point three different girlfriends were living at McCartney’s bachelor mansion, until the arrival of Linda Eastman scattered the competition.
“Paul McCartney” is full of things that happened to Paul McCartney, and through absurd fame and a few tragedies he appears to be an unusually decent man with few regrets. But facts aren’t insight, and readers won’t emerge with any real idea what it was like to have lived one of modernity’s most amazing lives. At least in that sense Norman’s subject remains elusive.