• Gunman’s wife under scrutiny.
The authorities are said to be investigating the second wife of Omar Mateen, the gunman in the gay nightclub massacre in Orlando, Fla., to see how much she had known about his plans.
The F.B.I. opens and closes thousands of investigations into people suspected of having terrorist ties, a routine process that is getting renewed attention.
• Mourning across the world.
In Orlando, at the United Nations and in cities across the world, tributes to the 49 lives lost have been held. Ninety percent of those killed were Hispanic or of Hispanic descent, including 23 Puerto Ricans.
“The guilt of feeling lucky to be alive is heavy,” says one woman who was shot in the legs and saw her friend die. A trauma care hospital was blocks away, but the mass shooting illuminates new challenges facing emergency medicine.
• What the gun laws say.
Federal law doesn’t disqualify those on the terrorist watch list from buying a gun from a licensed dealer. In states where mass shootings lead to legislative action, guns often become more available, a study shows.
A lawsuit brought by relatives of the victims in Newtown, Conn., argues that the AR-15 — a rifle similar to the one used in Orlando — is a weapon of war and should never have been marketed to civilians. A hearing is scheduled for next week.
• Denunciations of Trump.
President Obama strongly criticized Donald J. Trump for his comments about Muslims after the rampage, warning that the presumptive Republican nominee had a “dangerous” mind-set that recalled the darkest and most shameful periods in American history.
Speaker Paul D. Ryan, the nation’s highest-ranking elected Republican, said that Mr. Trump’s proposed ban on Muslim immigrants was not in the country’s interest.
• Rival Democrats explore an alliance.
Hillary Clinton won the party’s last primary, held Tuesday in the District of Columbia, where she and Bernie Sanders met to try to bridge their differences. Mr. Sanders hasn’t endorsed her, and he’s pushing for some of his policy goals to be included at next month’s national convention.
Russian hackers penetrated the computer systems of the Democratic National Committee and gained access to emails, chats and research about Mr. Trump.
A spending bill that covers the F.B.I. and other federal law enforcement programs is the subject of heated partisan debate and wrangling over proposed restrictions on gun sales.
Congress is moving slowly to provide money to combat the Zika virus, alarming some lawmakers who fear that their colleagues do not recognize the risks.
• Alligator attacks toddler.
A search is on for a child who was with his family at Disney’s Grand Floridian Resort and Spa in Lake Buena Vista, Fla., when he was dragged away. “We’re not likely now to find a live body,” the sheriff said.
• Moving to make amends.
The president of Georgetown University, which used some of the profits from the sale of 272 enslaved African-Americans to help ensure its survival in 1838, met with a descendant of two of the slaves.
• The Federal Reserve wraps up a two-day meeting and is likely to leave the benchmark interest rate unchanged.
But investors will be watching Chairwoman Janet L. Yellen’s afternoon news conference for signs of a future rate rise.
• North Dakota voters have rejected a move that would have eased the ban on corporate farming.
• Department store customers, taking advantage of policies on returns set by retailers competing with e-commerce, are playing havoc with sales commissions.
• Big hearts.
The total amount of donations to U.S. charities and nonprofits is at a record high, a new report says, averaging $1 billion a day.
• Climate change casualty.
The Bramble Cay, a rodent that lived on a tiny outcrop in the Great Barrier Reef, is extinct.
Scientists say it’s the first documented extinction of a mammal because of man-made climate change.
Margaret Vinci Heldt, 98, was a Chicago beautician who built the beehive hairdo, thanks to aerosol spray and a favorite hat.
We’re also remembering the deaths of Jorge Luis Borges and Tim Russert.
For a fine vegetarian meal, seaweed salad with a simple traditional dressing of sesame oil, ginger and soy is the way to go.
The presidential primaries and caucuses are over, but the candidates’ final tally of delegates to claim each party’s nomination for president is still subject to change.
The breathless reporting of the count since Feb. 2, the day after the Iowa vote, reminds us of a time when winning each state wasn’t everything.
Consider Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey in 1968. He didn’t capture a single Democratic primary because he didn’t enter the nominating contests.
Voters in the spring didn’t have a lot of say back then.
For example, when a Minnesota senator, Eugene McCarthy, won the Pennsylvania primary with 72 percent of the vote, the state’s Democratic leader simply steered most delegates toward Humphrey.
Humphrey’s nomination — he worked behind the scenes and adroitly swayed party bosses and regulars — pushed Democrats to create a more representative system.
The new rules also meant that a candidate could lose a state but take almost as many delegates as the winner.
In 1984, party leaders introduced procedures to create a more predictable process favoring mainstream candidates and policies.
They reserved spots for older, more experienced, more moderate and more loyal party delegates than the ones chosen by primaries and caucuses.
In the 2016 race, many of these “superdelegates” committed to a candidate before a single vote was counted, and that custom is being questioned anew.
