“The Kind Mama,” by Alicia Silverstone, and “Your Self-Confident Baby,” by Magda Gerber. My wife and I are expecting twin boys in a matter of weeks — possibly even days, our doctor has warned. We will obviously take the little cubs at any point, but we really hope “Itsy and Bitsy” will hang in there for a tad longer so we can finish a few more things on our to-do lists. One being: read more books about how to raise children and what to do with babies and whatever else we can get our hands on to help shape us into fit parents.
“John,” by Cynthia Lennon. Somehow I had no idea this book existed until a few months ago. I, like every other John Lennon fan, am extremely familiar with his story with Yoko and their son, Sean, but I was also always really interested in John’s earlier years with his first wife, Cynthia, and their young son, Julian. I had always had this vague idea about that time, and Cynthia’s book was such a compelling read about a period that is certainly less romanticized than the Yoko years, but I feel like I got a much more pieced-together story of the man’s life.
I have the luxury of being friends and working with some of the greatest writers out there today, people that truly impress me with their use of words. Always David Sedaris, but also love, love, love author Stef Willen; playwright/screenwriter Kate Robin; journalist/critic Sascha Cohen; and poet Andrea Gibson. All varying degrees of experience and success, but each one is at the top of their game as far as I’m concerned.
How was writing a book different from writing for stand-up and for TV?
My TV show, “One Mississippi,” is rooted in reality and uses the skeletons of the stories and ideas that go into my stand-up, but we completely made up story lines and characters for entertainment — it will be fun to see people try to guess what is real and what is fiction. All of my stand-up is based in truth, but it is very much a live editing process that depends on an audience. Each time I work on something, I perform it a series of times for an audience before I know how I want to ultimately perform it. I very much rely on the moment of telling it before an audience to help guide me. The book seemed to ask me for the worst moments. It also allowed for me to not focus so much on comedy. I feel endlessly grateful to have been able to write this book and think everyone should write one of their own. Even if it never gets published. It was by far one of the most therapeutic experiences of my life, since it was through writing that I was able to really understand my story, to really tell it to myself for the first time.
I’m embarrassed to admit that it was my own. There was this part about my father that I thought might be an emotional read, and then when I went back and reread it before turning it in to my editor, I sobbed on my couch for a good few minutes.
“Quick Shots of False Hope,” by Laura Kightlinger. There’s nobody darker, drier, more honest or twisted than Laura. She has always been a favorite of mine, and her book is something I lend to anyone who crosses my path.
I was by no means a bookworm, but I enjoyed reading for the most part. As a small child I loved all things Beverly Cleary, as well as all of the Amelia Bedelia books. I’ve actually always felt like Amelia was a huge influence on my comedy. She was the master of irony and wordplay, which is something I’ve always found entertaining. If you ask someone to draw the drapes, you really should be specific, otherwise you’re going to end up with a beautiful sketch of your window and curtains. Something I wouldn’t mind if they came from Amelia. Aside from that, in my teens I got really into rock biographies and any music magazine I could get my hands on. Those are all actually still my favorites.
What’s your favorite book to recommend to children?
“Ribsy,” by Beverly Cleary. I have read that book probably one billion times. It never disappoints. I still have it on my bookshelf at home.
Any and all textbooks.
“I’m Just a Person,” by Tig Notaro. But I imagine he already pre-ordered it. Thanks, Obama!
You’re organizing a literary dinner party. Which three authors (dead or alive) would you invite?
David Sedaris, Anne Frank and Chrissie Hynde. And if I can brag for a second, I have already had dinner with David for close to four hours. Now to loop in Chrissie. . . .
Oh my gosh, I wouldn’t be able to show my face in the comedy community again if I said. I can’t bring myself to call this book out, but I will say that it was wildly popular amongst my peers, and I just didn’t feel it in the slightest. Not enough heart. I’m sorry to be so vague. But I will say it was written by a man over the age of 50. And that’s all I’m willing to reveal.
My wife, Stephanie Allynne. She knows it all and has tremendously impressive perspective when it comes to me, my family and life in general. She’s a writer on my TV show, so in a sense she’s writing a fictitious version of my life story already.