HONG KONG — To buy a tiny but coveted apartment in the vertiginous towers of South Horizons, a middle-class housing development overlooking the South China Sea in the world’s most expensive real estate market, would cost a family about a million United States dollars.
These modest homes on Ap Lei Chau, Cantonese for Duck Tongue Island, are a reason that a seemingly far-off date — July 1, 2047 — is in fact pressingly close in Hong Kong. Under the Sino-British Joint Declaration governing the British colony’s return to Chinese rule on July 1, 1997, China agreed that Hong Kong would retain a high degree of autonomy, and its capitalist financial and legal system, for 50 years.
“The current social and economic systems in Hong Kong will remain unchanged, and so will the lifestyle,” the Joint Declaration said.
A simple calculation shows the problem: After July 1, 2017, a 30-year home mortgage cannot be paid off before July 1, 2047, when the declaration runs out and China’s promises expire along with it.
Hong Kong’s housing prices are as vertiginous as its towers, and many people struggle just to afford a mortgage — even the 30-year ones that banks increasingly offered as property prices rocketed over the past decade, said Lee Wing-tat, a former legislator and the chairman of Land Watch, a land and housing think tank.
News outlets in Hong Kong have reported that most banks have yet to formulate policies for beyond 2047, and calls for the Hong Kong and Chinese governments to address the problem are mounting.
Uncertainty is back, that bugbear of Hong Kong for decades amid the epochal changes surrounding the end of British colonial rule and today’s tensions over China’s plans for Hong Kong’s political future, which some say are too like the Communist system that is widely disliked here.
Just as in the 1980s, when the capitalist city looked nervously ahead to Communist rule, there is, once again, a focus on land and finance.
 All land in Hong Kong is leased by the government to a buyer, a colonial government practice retained by the post-handover government.
That demand for financial certainty led to the Joint Declaration and the legal framework, known as the Basic Law, that Britain and China agreed to for post-handover Hong Kong, which described the city’s rights for 50 years after 1997.
The decision is entirely up to China, he said. “At the moment I think it is fair to say that no one in the world knows what will happen in 2047,” Mr. Chan said.
