Alan Tony Schatz, 72, who has been cutting meat for 60 years, initially in his father’s shop in the Bronx, is better known by his nickname.
“Schatzie, that’s my name, Schatzie the Butcher — nobody knows me by anything else,” said Mr. Schatz, who last year opened a place on Broadway near 101st Street that is both butcher shop and restaurant.
On one side is Schatzie’s Prime Meats, a butcher counter with display cases full of flesh. On the other is Richie’s Burger Joint, named for and run by Mr. Schatz’s son Richie, 33, who resembles his father in stature and personality.
Mr. Schatz is constantly grinding meat in the back to send into the kitchen for burgers. He uses a refurbished machine that has been cutting meat even longer: since more than 80 years ago in his grandfather’s shop on Jerome Avenue in the Bronx.
To Mr. Schatz, a good burger is made with freshly ground prime beef. He will tell you that the rage over all the fancy foodie add-ons — grass-fed this, free-range that — is unprintable nonsense.
As for the veggie burgers on his son’s menu, “Who would want to eat a veggie burger?” he said on Monday evening as he sat in the restaurant, a stained white butcher’s shirt draped over his hulking frame.
He bantered with customers while polishing off a plate of veal and stuffing.
An hour later, a waiter brought Mr. Schatz two hefty lamb chops sizzling on the plate, with no sides. The waiter wore a T-shirt with Mr. Schatz’s familiar observation printed on the back, “That’s a beautiful piece of meat.” Mr. Schatz said he spent $3,500 to establish legal control of the expression.
Mr. Schatz has used much of the same equipment — the band saw, the meat grinder, the cash register — that has served his family since before he was born. On the wall is a wooden freezer door that dates back to his grandfather’s old shop, along with old photographs of men in hats and white aprons standing in front of storefronts, or behind counters with cleavers.
Many are relatives or employees of the Schatz meat-cutting empire that Mr. Schatz said stretched back to his great-great-grandfather in Germany.
Mr. Schatz recalled a childhood in Upper Manhattan and the Bronx. He said he delivered meat for his father by bicycle, and by 11 was running the register and cutting meat in the Jerome Avenue shop, which his grandfather Max opened. That business was taken over by Mr. Schatz’s father, Harold, and then Mr. Schatz himself. In the 1970s, he moved it to Madison Avenue, and 35 years later to Amsterdam Avenue.
Young Schatzie tried other ventures briefly, including boxing. That did not please his father, who knew Maxie Rosenbloom, the light-heavyweight champ from the 1930s who was known as Slapsie Maxie. They found a tough fighter, who knocked the boxing dream out of Mr. Schatz’s head.
When he was offered the chance to become a debt collector for the mob, his father asked him, “You want to be an animal or a human being?” Mr. Schatz recalled.
He said he served during the Vietnam War as a military police officer guarding a brothel in Germany to keep troops from patronizing it. “I had so much fun, you have no idea,” he said.
Mr. Schatz always fancied himself a singer and at 21, decided to drive to California to pursue a singing career. He turned back after receiving word that his father had died. He took over the butcher shop and shelved the singing career.
He settled for crooning to customers from behind the counter and occasionally booking performances at nightclubs for friends and patrons. His plan is to build a small stage in the shop to give performances after the meat counter closes.
“I could have retired long ago, but I just love this,” said Mr. Schatz, who owns a couple of apartments in Manhattan and a farm in Pennsylvania.
“No, I’m his cousin,” he replied unconvincingly.
The women cracked up, and Schatzie the Butcher walked back behind the counter.