The classic folk song “This Land Is Your Land” may literally belong to you and me.
That’s the case being pressed by the same law firm that persuaded a federal judge last year that “Happy Birthday to You” belongs in the public domain.
The suit was filed on behalf of the Brooklyn band Satorii, which recorded two versions of the song. It argues that the music belongs to the public and not to the Richmond Organization and its subsidiary, Ludlow Music, the publishing company that collects licensing fees to use the composition. Ludlow did not return phone calls or answer an email message seeking comment on Thursday.
The law firm seems to be developing a specialty in liberating classic musical works. An earlier lawsuit, also filed against Ludlow in April, focused on “We Shall Overcome,” a song long associated with the folk singer Pete Seeger, who died in 2014. The firm also successfully liberated the “Happy Birthday” copyright from Warner Music Group.
Interestingly, Seeger may have performed Guthrie’s song more than anyone else over the decades, including the so-called forgotten verses, in which the narrator ignores a “Private Property” sign. Those lyrics are not in the versions cited in this lawsuit.
As with the earlier cases, the “This Land” suit, filed in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York, traces what the firm calls a winding path of missed or illegitimate copyright claims.
In 1945, he published the song with a copyright notice that was never renewed, Satorii and their lawyers say. As a result, that copyright would have expired — and the song would have entered the public domain — 28 years later, in 1973, they say.
Despite Guthrie’s publication, Ludlow filed for its own copyright of the song in 1956, according to the suit. It asserted that copyright in 2004, when it threatened to sue JibJab Media over its now-famous “This Land” parody of that year’s presidential contest between the Democrat John Kerry and the Republican George W. Bush.
The groups reached a settlement that summer in which JibJab was allowed to continue distributing its parody.
But Satorii and its lawyers argue that Ludlow never had a right to claim the copyright in the first place.
And even if he or Ludlow had rightfully secured the copyright to the lyrics, the band and firm note multiple occasions in which the words were printed in album liner notes without a copyright notice, in effect forfeiting rights to them, they argue.
The band is not only seeking a judicial declaration that the song belongs in the public domain, but also that the publisher return all fees related to the licensing of the song paid by any individual or group since 2010.