As the Mets meander through June and weigh their options for improvement, their offense remains an issue. The Mets have produced the second-fewest hits in the major leagues and sit third-to-last in runs per game, not enough to support their talented pitching staff. But in one telling offensive category, the Mets were the best in baseball entering Saturday.
Exactly 53 percent of the Mets’ runs this season had come from home runs, according to the Elias Sports Bureau. The next-best teams — the Baltimore Orioles, the Tampa Bay Rays, the Toronto Blue Jays and the Seattle Mariners — were all slugging American League clubs. Three of those teams were scoring more than the major league average of 4.4 runs per game. At 3.7 runs per game, the Mets were far behind.
“We’ve proven you can’t just rely on home runs to get offense over the course of a season,” Mets General Manager Sandy Alderson said.
The Mets, who are sixth in the majors with 90 home runs, were not constructed to be a homer-happy team. Alderson said the Mets had focused on building a lineup that reached base well and hit the ball hard. But the results have revealed an inconsistent offense that has feast-or-famine tendencies. They were fifth in strikeout rate entering Saturday.
The Mets’ lineup has taken many forms this season, destabilized by injuries. Outfielder Yoenis Cespedes and Walker have been the brightest spots, with help from right fielder Curtis Granderson and shortstop Asdrubal Cabrera.
Cespedes has collected 17 home runs and 43 R.B.I. while also leading the team’s qualifiers with a .284 batting average, a .356 on-base percentage and a .572 slugging percentage.
Walker, hitting .269, has 14 home runs and 28 R.B.I. Granderson, hitting .226, has 13 home runs and 21 R.B.I. Those R.B.I. totals — low relative to the home run totals — are reflections of the offense.
But to Mets officials, the process is troublesome. The Mets have not produced many base runners — their .311 on-base percentage ranked 22nd in baseball entering Saturday. Part of the disconnect lies in their inability to convert chances. The Mets were last in baseball with a .214 average with runners in scoring position.
“I don’t think we want them to get away from their strength all the time, but under the right circumstances, being able to make adjustments is important,” Alderson said.
Manager Terry Collins, Alderson and Kevin Long, the team’s hitting coach, all pointed to Wednesday’s 11-2 win over the Pittsburgh Pirates as a sign of a changed offensive approach. The coaching staff reminded players to hit the ball up the middle or to the opposite field. The Mets produced 19 hits, only two of which were home runs. Collins wants his players to focus on a calmer approach with runners on base.
Even when healthy, the Mets’ lineup did not possess many high average hitters, but it did have some capable contact hitters. David Wright, Cespedes and Walker all have career averages of at least .270. James Loney, picked up to replace the injured Lucas Duda, does as well. Perhaps targeting a high-contact, high-on-base-percentage hitter ahead of the Aug. 1 trade deadline could make a difference.
Although Travis d’Arnaud was expected to return Tuesday, Duda may not come back from his back injury until the second half of the season. Wright’s timetable was unclear, and he may miss the rest of the season. The Mets will have to make do for now with Loney at first base and Wilmer Flores at third, with some help from Kelly Johnson.
The Mets trailed the Washington Nationals by six games entering Saturday. Last season’s Mets never trailed the Nationals by more than four and a half. Although the 2015 Mets also had offensive troubles, they ranked 10th in the majors with 39.7 percent of their runs scored via homers and did better than this year’s team with runners in scoring position.
