A researcher at the University of Pittsburgh contracted the Zika virus after accidentally sticking herself with a needle, becoming what appeared to be the first known case of an infection in a lab, officials said.
The Allegheny County Health Department said the infection was unusual because the woman had not contracted the virus after traveling to an affected area or through sexual transmission. The unidentified researcher stuck herself on May 23, developing symptoms, including a fever, about a week later, said Joe Miksch, a university spokesman.
The presence of the virus was confirmed in a blood sample, Mr. Miksch said, and the researcher returned to work on June 6. She has to wear long sleeves and pants, and use insect repellent for three weeks, Mr. Miksch said, to minimize the chance that a mosquito would get the virus from her and spread it to others.
Mr. Miksch declined to answer further questions about the researcher’s condition.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention lists four known ways the virus has been transmitted: through mosquito bites, from a mother to her fetus, through sexual contact and via blood transfusion. But it does not mention any confirmed cases related to research.
“We do not know of any others,” Dr. Karen Hacker, the director of the Allegheny County Health Department, said in a telephone interview Friday.
There is no vaccine or medicine to treat Zika. In rare cases, the virus has caused paralysis and sometimes fatal complications in adults. In addition to fever, common symptoms include rash, joint pain, and conjunctivitis, although there may be no symptoms at all.
The virus has been linked to abnormally small heads and brain damage in newborns, a condition called microcephaly.
The University of Pittsburgh’s Graduate School of Public Health announced in April that it had started a program with the Brazilian Ministry of Health’s Fundação Oswaldo Cruz Foundation to study the Zika epidemic.
The researcher’s infection was the fourth confirmed case in Allegheny County, in the southwestern part of Pennsylvania. The other three people had contracted the virus abroad, according to the Health Department, which sought to calm fears of additional infections in the region.
A statement from Allegheny County urged residents to use insect repellent containing DEET and to remove standing water, where the insects can breed.
Dr. Hacker also warned that those traveling to countries affected by Zika should be cautious: The virus is primarily transmitted through the bite of an infected species of mosquito that is common in warm climates. Pregnant women, in particular, should avoid traveling to those countries, she said.
The researcher’s infection was reported by The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette on Thursday.
This week, new World Health Organization guidelines acknowledged that, with no vaccine available and mosquito eradication efforts failing to stem the spread of the infection, delaying pregnancy may be the best prevention for women in affected areas.
So far, the hundreds of Zika cases reported in the United States appear to have been people who contracted the virus in Central and South America and in the Caribbean, where mosquitoes carrying the virus are widespread. But experts say mosquito transmission in the United States is inevitable and almost certain to begin in Southern states during the summer.
The federal government is preparing to release a proposal for responding to the first homegrown cases of the Zika virus, health officials said Friday.