James Wan narrates a sequence from his film.
More possessions, more sinister creatures and more Patrick Wilson and Vera Farmiga are in “The Conjuring 2,” which is based on the paranormal investigations of Ed and Lorraine Warren. In this scene, Ed conducts an interview with Janet Hodgson (Madison Wolfe), a young girl who may be possessed. The film’s director James Wan recently discussed the sequence. Here are excerpts from that conversation.
Tell me a little about this scene.
This scene is one of two interviews with Janet Hodgon, the little girl that is supposedly haunted and possessed by the entity that lives in this house.
And was this close to the actual interview that happened with Ed and Janet in the ’70s?
It was inspired by that. But of course to fit into my movie, I took some creative license. But at the end of the movie, I have a scene where I play a big chunk of Ed’s actual recording with the little girl.
What were your goals for the scene?
I wanted to shoot this scene in a different way [from] the first interview, where a BBC documentary crew questions her. That was more traditional shooting and editing. But with this one, I really wanted to tell the whole sequence with just one shot.
We start the focus on the little girl sitting in the background. Then the camera racks focus to Patrick Wilson in the foreground and the entire interview is conducted this way. He’s talking to her with his back to her. Throughout the sequence, we first hear the little girl’s voice, then slowly it starts to cross over and becomes the old man character she’s supposedly possessed by.
Visually, with her out of focus in the background, you start to question: is that still the little girl in the background or has she now transformed? I thought this would be an interesting way to shoot the sequence and let it play out.
And so the little girl does morph into the old man in the background of the scene? How did you shoot it?
I have Patrick talking to the little girl and she’s sitting in that chair, but off-camera, for timing purposes, I have someone reading the lines of the old man. Once I’ve done one pass with Patrick and the little girl, I remove both of them and I bring in the other actor, put him in the chair and we run through the whole sequence with him again.
And what were some ideas for the sound design?
Because visually, it’s a very controlled shot, one of the things I had to make really captivating was the sound design.
I wanted to create the feeling that the whole house is alive during this interview. I wanted the house to be responding to the questions. So it’s creaking all over the place. It sounds like we’re in the bow of a ship. And it’s breaking apart. I thought it would be fun to play with something like that.