Among the city’s million unseen threads, this one starts at B & K French Cuisine, a tiny Harlem counter with a few metal stools and a kitchen bereft of gas, and leads across the ocean to Restaurant Alain Ducasse at the Plaza Athénée Paris, where the ceiling rains down Swarovski crystals.
Mr. Kebe moved to Harlem and fulfilled his uncle’s prophecy, downshifting to a mellower mode of French cooking at the neighborhood bistros Yatenga, Cédric (since shuttered) and Lenox Saphire.
In December, he opened B & K French Cuisine as a mostly takeout spot, with plans to make crepes, bake his own focaccia and serve classics like chicken forestière.
Shortly after, the gas went out. It has not yet come back, despite Mr. Kebe’s efforts. The menu remains unchanged, hopefully and defiantly, although only half of it is available now. We get just glimmers of what Mr. Kebe can do, with the help of hastily bought hot plates and an electric grill, but it’s enough to make me wish for more.
The food is simple, and so are its pleasures. I was not excited to order the chicken sandwich until I pried it open and found the underside of the baguette soaked in green: olive oil steeped with basil often harvested from a local garden and still bright from the earth. This is almost pesto, with Parmesan shaved separately and left to melt over long planks of grilled chicken, and stray leaves of arugula wilted just enough to tame their bite.
Another baguette arrived unpromisingly closed around a brown line of beef, revealing only a tongue of Cheddar. Then came the clarifying heat, from four to five hours of braising with Dijon mustard. This is a serious time commitment, an argument that a sandwich can be as important as boeuf bourguignon.
There are fish and chips, great wedges of mahi-mahi dredged in a batter of flour, beer and thyme, which swells up in the fryer until it looks like armored air. The crisp shells keep the fish tender.
Burgers are less successful, or perhaps just true to a different cultural standard. Mine was sharply seasoned but flat and cooked beyond any blush; I wanted a little blood, or at least juiciness.
Mr. Kebe notes that he hand-cuts potatoes for French fries every morning, a detail that may be taken for granted elsewhere but is notable at a shop of this size and humble mission. “Fast food doesn’t mean bad food anymore!” the takeout menu says.
And at times B & K does feel like a restaurant. The menu is handwritten on a patchwork of chalkboards hung from nails on the wall, with loose sketches of the Eiffel Tower and a map of France. (“Where would you go?”) Mr. Kebe doubles as waiter, bringing food outside, where two tables teeter in the sun between potted plants.
Hibiscus are blooming. Someone is selling watermelons on the curb, and the neighborhood is wandering by. It may be time for bissap, the one item on the menu that reaches back to Mr. Kebe’s Malian heritage. It is somewhere between juice and tea, made of dried hibiscus steeped in boiling water, with a crumple of mint.
Then there are Mr. Kebe’s frankly rich desserts: dark depths of chocolate mousse; tiramisù with strata of Nutella, mascarpone buoyed by whipping cream, and crushed speculoos, Belgian shortbread biscuits laced with cinnamon, cloves and Christmas. The glass case up front is stacked with custard tarts under shining heaps of strawberries, raspberries and blackberries, and macarons barely the size of quarters, as they should be.
They sink under the teeth, sighing a little. They, too, have flown in from Paris, a long journey.