He played the role of press analyst and critic, offering clipped replies and a knowing smirk in response to questions about politics, motivation and Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo.
For a combative but contained 17 minutes, Mayor Bill de Blasio on Thursday offered terse answers to an abundance of questions from reporters, mostly dealing with the fallout from overlapping federal and state investigations into his administration, in a performance that in recent weeks has become a kind of house style for his embattled mayoralty.
Seated at a blue table, the mayor restated the mantra that his administration would eventually be found to have done everything appropriately. He laid out dots but no names — referring to “a particular reporter” at one point, a state official with “a particular employment history” at another — and asked reporters to connect them, arguing by insinuation that they would lead back to Mr. Cuomo, a fellow Democrat.
“A lot of good questions to follow up on there,” Mr. de Blasio said, suggesting as he has for weeks that an investigatory report from the State Board of Elections highly critical of his fund-raising on behalf of Democrats in the State Senate had been leaked by those close to the governor to damage him.
The back and forth, at the tail end of an hourlong news conference on crime statistics at Police Headquarters in Lower Manhattan, came on the second day of an increasingly open war of words between Mr. de Blasio and Mr. Cuomo, whose deepening feud has shown little sign of being repaired.
Mr. de Blasio instead appeared to stick with the story of a state investigatory apparatus aimed unfairly at him, complaining of a “double standard” as he had in previous news conferences, and observing that party affiliation may not preclude the hand of the governor in the leak.
“The lines between Democrats and Republicans often blur in Albany,” Mr. de Blasio said.
Over the past two days, both men also took their swipes when asked about supporting the other for re-election.
“I’m not a city resident,” Mr. Cuomo said on Wednesday.
“I’m focused on 2016,” Mr. de Blasio replied on Thursday when asked about endorsing the governor.
Flanked by top police officials, Mr. de Blasio spoke as much through facial expressions that, at times, revealed his frustration: a pinched smile, a smirk, the movement of his eyes upward to the ceiling as he batted back questions.
As Mr. de Blasio spoke, two top aides to the governor posted their own thoughts on Twitter, seemingly emboldened by the inspector general’s report and Mr. Cuomo’s words a day before to attack the mayor more directly.
“I’m sure saying ‘I was wrong’ is one of the hardest things to do in politics, but continuing this charade at this point is just silly,” wrote Richard Azzopardi, a spokesman for the governor. “Deflect is a lesser known river in Egypt as well,” he said in another post.
As if to underscore that point, Mr. de Blasio remained seated at the blue tables — with paper nameplates in front of each official — that in recent weeks have become a hallmark of his news conferences. The blue tables have appeared at police events and at those related to housing; uptown in Washington Heights and downtown at City Hall.
Another New York politician also, at times, favors the sit-behind-a-table approach: Mr. Cuomo.