ISLAMABAD, Pakistan — Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif of Pakistan had successful open-heart surgery in London and is expected to return to his country by the end of this month, family members and government officials have said.
Mr. Sharif, 66, underwent four bypasses on Tuesday at a hospital in London and was in stable condition, said his daughter, Maryam Nawaz Sharif. Ms. Sharif said in a series of messages on Twitter that the surgery, which lasted over four hours, required arteries to be grafted.
It was the second open-heart operation for Mr. Sharif, who has been treated for heart problems over the past five years.
Last week, Mr. Sharif went to London for medical treatment, for the second time since April, as political controversy brewed over revelations that his family had amassed wealth offshore. Opposition politicians have pressed Mr. Sharif to resign or step down until an inquiry into the accusations clears his name. Mr. Sharif has resisted those calls but has offered to be investigated.
There was an outpouring of sympathy for Mr. Sharif as news of his surgery spread here, and officials and opposition politicians wished him a quick recovery. Local television news reports featured surgeons and heart specialists discussing the procedure. Government ministers and officials from Mr. Sharif’s political party, the Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz, arranged special prayers, while sacrificial animals, including cows and goats, were slaughtered to seek blessings for the prime minister’s health.
Mr. Sharif, an affluent businessman, took power after winning a majority in the 2013 general elections. He had twice served as prime minister in the ’90s. In 1999, his government was toppled in a bloodless coup by the army chief at the time, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, who then forced Mr. Sharif into exile.
In the prime minister’s absence, Ishaq Dar, the finance minister, who is also related to Mr. Sharif, is looking after the day-to-day operations of the government. Ms. Sharif, who does not hold elected office but is believed to be the heir to her father’s political dynasty, is also playing a role in overseeing the government and the party’s affairs.
The Pakistani Constitution does not have a provision for a deputy or an interim prime minister, and Mr. Sharif’s prolonged absence has met with criticism from the political opposition. On Monday, Mr. Sharif presided over a cabinet meeting via Skype, which government officials insisted was done through a secure connection, to approve the country’s coming budget.
Some analysts here say that Mr. Sharif is expected to weather the political storm over the revelations of his family’s offshore wealth, as the opposition is fractured, and claims of corruption have tainted most politicians equally. The so-called Panama Papers — the leak of documents from a Panamanian law firm — disclosed that three of Mr. Sharif’s children controlled shell companies through which they owned expensive residential properties in London.
As the next election, in 2018, draws closer, the national focus is likely to shift to issues like the economy and regional stability.
