STONE RIDGE, N.Y. — Apple trees have blossomed, and soon fruit will begin emerging at Elizabeth Ryan’s orchard in the Hudson Valley. Before long, her harvest will head south to Manhattan, where Miro Uskokovic, the pastry chef at Gramercy Tavern, will use it to create an apple and carob cake, while Michael Anthony, the executive chef at the Studio Cafe inside the Whitney Museum of American Art, will turn it into an apple compote spread over pie dough and covered with a streusel.
Ms. Ryan’s apples are also on school-lunch menus and sold at farmers markets all over the city. Her farm, Stone Ridge Orchard in Ulster County, is part of a rapidly expanding pipeline that carries fruits and vegetables from farms across New York State to consumers clamoring for fresh ingredients grown in soil not far away.
But the demand for locally grown foods is colliding with another powerful force: a booming real estate market, particularly in the Hudson Valley, driven by waves of newcomers from New York City, perhaps drawn by the region’s natural beauty, more relaxed pace and less expensive housing. The boom is gobbling up family farms as owners choose to cash in on the surging value of land rather than grapple with the perennial challenges of slim profit margins, high taxes, long hours and fickle weather.
The number of farms in New York State has been declining steadily, to 35,537 in 2012 from 38,264 in 1997, according to the most recent five-year census conducted by the Department of Agriculture. And since 1982, real estate development has swallowed more than 471,000 acres of the state’s farmland, according to data compiled by the American Farmland Trust, a preservation group.
Now a group of New York City lawmakers has teamed up with another preservation group, the Scenic Hudson Land Trust, to create a plan to preserve the region’s existing food system. As part of the initiative, lawmakers are seeking for the first time to set aside money in the municipal budget for the preservation of farmland in the Hudson Valley.
“The risk to farmland is a risk to healthy food for New York City residents,” Councilman Daniel R. Garodnick, Democrat of Manhattan, said. He said that many farmers markets were in neighborhoods that have few stores, if any, that sell high-quality produce.
Mr. Garodnick has proposed spending $50 million for a conservation easement program that would pay farmers the development value of their land and impose a deed restriction to permanently protect their land from development. Some farmers might use the money to make improvements, while others could lease or sell their land to other farmers.
“It’s been here for 300 years,” she said.
Before she bought the farm two years ago for $1.25 million, a 450-unit condominium project had been proposed for the 113-acre site, which grows 150 varieties of apples and other types of fruit.
Ms. Ryan, 62, said she could easily sell Stone Ridge Orchard for several million dollars and retire. Instead, she is working with several conservation groups in hopes of having it permanently protected. She also plans to invest more money and expand her operation by establishing a bakery and selling hard cider.
The economic impact of fresh food is also growing in the city. The number of farmers markets in New York City has nearly doubled, to 146 in 2015 from 79 in 2006, according to city officials. In the 2014-15 school year, the city spent over $27 million on locally produced food, a nearly $2 million increase from the previous year.
But a study Mr. Haight’s group released in April found another ominous trend: Farmers in the state are aging, with nearly 30 percent of them age 65 or older. “So another big threat is the number of farms that are going to be up for grabs as senior farmers will be getting out of farming,” he said.
Proponents of farmland preservation point to the growing number of aging farmers in arguing that it is critical to pay for conservation programs now. Mr. Garodnick’s proposal is similar to conservation programs paid for by the federal and state government and by private foundations. In early May, the state announced a $20 million award to preserve 5,600 acres on 28 farms in the Hudson Valley.
Mayor Bill de Blasio, who has emphasized the need for improved access to affordable fresh fruits and vegetables, especially in low-income schools and neighborhoods, is reviewing Mr. Garodnick’s proposal, a spokeswoman said, and recognizes the importance of preserving farmland. The city’s budget has to be finalized by June 30.
A group of State Assembly members wrote a joint letter to Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, urging him to support the conservation plan.
