Gerald Walpin, a former inspector general for the Corporation for National and Community Service whose 2009 firing by President Obama was harshly criticized by Republicans, died on Friday after being struck by a vehicle while crossing the street in Manhattan. He was 84.
Mr. Walpin was walking home from a doctor’s appointment when he was hit in the crosswalk on 79th Street and Lexington Avenue by a sport utility vehicle making a left turn, his family and the police said. The vehicle’s driver, Milton Kazi, was arrested on Saturday and given a desk appearance ticket for a failure to yield. He was released later in the day.
A lawyer with a long career, Mr. Walpin was appointed by President George W. Bush as the watchdog of the agency that runs AmeriCorps, which provides living allowances and education grants to volunteers for community groups. He was sworn in in January 2007 and continued to serve after Mr. Obama became president in 2009.
By then, an investigation had begun into the use of $800,000 in federal AmeriCorps money at a school run by an Obama supporter, Kevin Johnson, a former National Basketball Association player who became mayor of Sacramento. Mr. Walpin said some of the money was used improperly and recommended that Mr. Johnson and Dana Gonzalez, who both had run the school, the St. Hope Academy of California, face criminal charges.
The United States attorney in Sacramento at the time, Lawrence G. Brown, determined that no criminal wrongdoing had occurred. The school paid $424,000 in April 2009 to settle accusations over its use of grant money.
After Mr. Walpin was dismissed in June of that year, he suggested that the firing had been related to reports in which he was critical of programs receiving money from AmeriCorps, including St. Hope. “I can only say that I became a thorn in the side of someone, because I was doing my job,” Mr. Walpin told the conservative commentator Glenn Beck on Fox News.
The White House said Mr. Walpin was incompetent and had behaved bizarrely, and it pointed to an ethics complaint about Mr. Walpin’s actions related to the case.
Mr. Walpin’s daughter Amanda Leath described her father as a staunch conservative. In 1999, he wrote a letter to The New York Times that cited a Supreme Court ruling to defend Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York for his criticism of an exhibition at the Brooklyn Museum. He was active in the Federalist Society, and, after he left the inspector general’s post, wrote a book, “The Supreme Court vs. the Constitution,” critical of what he saw as judicial activism.
Gerald Walpin was born on Sept. 1, 1931, in the Bronx, the youngest of three sons of Michael Walpin, who ran a business fixing fire extinguishers, and the former Mary Gordon. He attended DeWitt Clinton High School and studied at the City College of New York. He graduated cum laude from Yale Law School in 1955, where he was managing editor of the law journal.
He married Sheila Kainer in 1957. They lived in Buzançais, France, when Mr. Walprin’s worked for the judge advocate general for the United States Air Force from 1957 to 1960.
When they returned to New York, Mr. Walpin was an assistant United States attorney in the Southern District until 1965. He went on to work in litigation for the firm Rosenman Colin Freund Lewis & Cohen.
Since his firing in 2009, Mr. Walpin had been writing, speaking and giving legal advice, Ms. Leath said.
In addition to his wife and Ms. Leath, he is survived by a son, Edward; another daughter, Jennifer Tananbaum; and six grandchildren.