Romantic scheming that a Brooklyn teenager hid from her parents in the 1810s will be exposed this month when three binders filled with letters go on sale in Manhattan. On June 21, Swann Auction Galleries will offer Jane Schenck’s correspondence with an unsuitable suitor named Ralph Malbone. Their letters, estimated at $2,000 to $3,000 for the lot, solve some mysteries about the couple’s relationship.
The two, who eventually married, wrote to each other under fake names during their courtship. Apparently they had met in Brooklyn around 1810, although it is not known how.
Mr. Malbone was jobless and seven years older than Miss Schenck; she warned him that her relatives, prosperous landowners and slaveholders of Dutch descent, would consider him “low company.” She wrote to him in secret until he earned enough money to present himself as a viable potential fiancé.
The Brooklyn Museum owns a diary kept by Miss Schenck as a teenager along with roomfuls of other artifacts from her family’s ancestral homes. It does not mention Mr. Malbone until their wedding day, in 1815. Kevin Stayton, the deputy director of the Brooklyn Museum, who has studied the family for decades, said that before the Swann lot emerged, he had never understood why Miss Schenck had married someone seemingly out of the blue.
In her journal, “she talks about everyone else,” Mr. Stayton said. She vividly describes dances, beach outings, church services, weddings, suicides and accidental deaths, as well as reports of skirmishes with the British during the War of 1812.
Soon after he and Miss Schenck began corresponding, a woman from his hometown sued him for child support. He paid off that debt while asserting that the paternity claim was “cruel and falce.” (He was not a good speller.) “My mind has been most powerfully agitated,” he wrote to Miss Schenck, worried that she would not believe him.
During the War of 1812, Mr. Malbone traveled in New York, Ohio, New Jersey and Pennsylvania in search of work; Miss Schenck worried that he would end up “a bleeding sacrifice to the cruel, cruel weapons of a mad-brain’d war.” She offered to disguise herself as “a young boy of 12 or 14” to join him on the road.
He addressed letters to her alias, a fictional man named Enaj Werter, whom he asked to give his regards to Miss Schenck. She signed her letters “Enaj Enoblam” (her hoped-for married name, backward). When her young sister Maria died, Miss Schenck sent a grieving letter to Mr. Malbone with a lock of the girl’s honey-colored hair.
Mr. Malbone found work selling smallpox inoculations. The correspondence includes an ad for his vaccination services and a recommendation letter from Jabez B. Hyde, a missionary and linguist who worked with Seneca Indians.
Jane and Ralph Malbone raised four children and remained married until her death in 1843. He made a fortune in real estate; part of his property was on what is now Malbone Street, east of Prospect Park. He also sold insurance, carriage cushions, paving stones and groceries — his customers included Walt Whitman.
Mr. Malbone eventually remarried, and he and his wife had a son, also named Ralph, who exhausted the family fortune and ended up working as a stableman for a Brooklyn hotel.
A few artifacts that belonged to the Malbones are in institutional collections. The Metropolitan Museum of Art owns a pair of creamy silk shoes that Miss Schenck may have worn for her walks to the post office to mail letters from Enaj Enoblam.
The historian Danielle Shapiro researched her new book, “John Vassos: Industrial Design for Modern Life,” through a process that she describes as “gritty, dirty, messy and exhilarating,” tracking down boxes of files from Mr. Vassos’s offices in and around New York that no other scholar had opened.
Although Mr. Vassos was a prolific industrial designer and artist during the rise of mass broadcast media from the 1920s to the ’80s, many histories of industrial design have left out or played down his accomplishments, Ms. Shapiro said. And “I just couldn’t believe how much was wrong” in scholarly texts, including his birthplace and birth year, she added.
Mr. Vassos, a Greek immigrant, settled in New York City in 1921 and died in 1985 at 87. His résumé includes radio and television receivers and cabinets, training brochures for military spies, elegantly tapered subway turnstiles and bookshelves with built-in stereos. Theater chains, RCA, Nedick’s fast food and the photographer Margaret Bourke-White were among his clients.
On June 14, Ms. Shapiro will give a lecture on Mr. Vassos at the New York Public Library’s Stephen A. Schwarzman Building.
Although Mr. Vassos wrote an autobiography, it was never published. Batches of his archives were sent to Syracuse University and the Smithsonian Institution’s Archives of American Art. Institutions have begun acquiring his work. His portable aluminum record players are in the collections of the Brooklyn Museum, Yale University Art Gallery, the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, and the Wolfsonian museum at Florida International University in Miami Beach. Record players and microphones he designed can sell for thousands of dollars each at auction.