The Success Academy charter school network is canceling its prekindergarten program for next year as it continues to battle with New York City over a contract, the network announced on Wednesday.
When it started the universal prekindergarten program, the city required all providers to sign a contract, saying it was necessary to ensure a consistent level of quality. But the Success network, whose chief executive is Eva S. Moskowitz, has refused to sign, arguing that the city does not have the authority to regulate programs at charter schools. The 13 other charter school organizations that offer prekindergarten classes have signed the contract.
Success had asked the State Education Department to intervene in the dispute, and in February, the education commissioner ruled in the city’s favor, saying it could indeed require charter schools to sign the contract in order to receive public financing for their programs. Success is challenging the decision in a lawsuit in State Supreme Court.
But on Wednesday, in a strongly worded statement, Success said that the court’s decision would not come in time to allow it to prepare for the next school year and blamed Mayor Bill de Blasio for “forcing” the network to cancel its program.
Success currently has 72 students in prekindergarten at three schools and was planning to expand the program to two other schools next year.
The dispute over prekindergarten is the latest skirmish in a continuing feud between Ms. Moskowitz and the mayor. Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, is a critic of charter schools who pledged during his campaign to end the practice of giving such schools space in public school buildings. After taking office, he sought to block three Success schools from getting space, but backed down after the network’s supporters unleashed $5 million worth of television advertisements attacking him.
In a letter sent on Tuesday to parents of students accepted into prekindergarten classes at Success school for next year, the network blamed Mr. de Blasio for the decision to cancel the program and urged parents to sign an open letter to the mayor accusing him of hypocrisy and of putting politics above children’s education.
The city’s Education Department said it would help the students who were accepted into prekindergarten classes at Success find placement in other programs.
Devora Kaye, a spokeswoman for the department, said of Success’s decision, “The state upheld our important standards to ensure all programs are high quality, and we look forward to welcoming more charter schools and organizations” to the prekindergarten program.