OJAI, CALIF. — Peter Sellars hugs everyone: friends, strangers, people he’s seen just a few hours before, people he hasn’t seen in years.
Embrace is his ethos. As an artist — a stage director and multifaceted cultural curator — he seems to hug his collaborators and hug his audiences. The results can sometimes veer toward the sentimental, even the saccharine, but they always have wide-ranging warmth and inimitable gusto. To hear him talk, everything he touches is the best piece he’s ever heard, the most important project he’s ever worked on.
As the music director of this year’s Ojai Music Festival, which ended Sunday, June 12, he included both Carnatic singing from southern India and French Spectralism, voices from Cairo and from Mexico, a toy piano and a block party. While Mr. Sellars, 58, has been an impresario many times over — one devotee here this weekend wore a T-shirt from the raucous Los Angeles Festival he led in 1990 — the directorship at Ojai gave him perhaps the purest and most concentrated possible vessel for his dizzying range of enthusiasms.
In part because this 70-year-old festival’s musical leadership changes each year, its audience — loyal and attentive, with a bourgeois-bohemian vibe that aptly reflects the sheltered, fragrant Ojai — is unusually open to variation and exploration. And just four days long, the event is compact enough to give the sense that its offerings are the product of a single mind rather than a committee. This was Mr. Sellars’s personal playlist, leave it or — more often — take it.
Most striking about the program he created was that almost all of the music was by women. When I noted this in a review of opening events on Thursday, June 9, the composer, vocalist and pianist Leila Adu added on Twitter that women of color were especially prominent.
For Mr. Sellars, this was clearly not a matter of meeting quotas or checking demographic boxes. He has been promoting the full diversity of world music for decades, freely juxtaposing traditions in a way that can sometimes seem designed to flatter liberal pieties about multiculturalism, but more often simply feels vibrant. His Ojai wasn’t set up to prove the influence of, say, classical Indian singing on contemporary American a cappella vocalism; the weekend’s performances and styles seemed to inform one another without imposing themselves on one another.
Rare even in the most progressive new-music circles, Ojai’s robust helping of female composers seems not to have been the outcome of a particular goal, and it went mostly unmentioned over the weekend, unsurprising for a festival modest about its self-presentation and inclined to let audience members reach their own conclusions.
As the people filed into the outdoor Libbey Bowl on Friday afternoon, June 10, Mr. Sellars stressed this point: “No one has to say, ‘Good evening and welcome to a concert written by men.’ No one needs to say that about women, either.” Thomas W. Morris, who as Ojai’s artistic director is a constant as music directors come and go, added, “We never had a meeting where we decided not to emphasize” the festival’s gender breakdown.
The Finnish master Kaija Saariaho, whose “L’Amour de Loin” arrives at the Metropolitan Opera this fall, was a focus this year and has long been resistant to being classified as a “woman composer”; Mr. Sellars said her feelings were taken into account, too, in underplaying talk of gender. Two concerts devoted to decades of her shimmering chamber music were highlights of the weekend.
“Terrestre,” an intimate kind of flute concerto for five players, begins with quivering in the solo instrument, here played by Claire Chase, the fearless founder of this year’s house band, the International Contemporary Ensemble. “Kesapaiva” (“A Summer Day”), five songs for a cappella voices — members of another resident ensemble, Roomful of Teeth — combined plainchant simplicity with tumbling, overlapping commotion.
“Adjo” finds keening, percussive synchronicity between voice (Martha Cluver), flute (Ms. Chase) and guitar (Dan Lippel). The iridescent, aqueous “Nymphéa” surrounds a string quartet (here the Calder Quartet) with a barely detectable electronic humidity, setting in motion cycles of sounds evaporating and condensing. In the surging “Solar,” the birds audible around the bowl flickered in and out of the instrumental textures, as did the quaking flute line (Ms. Chase, yet again, and peerlessly vivid).
A stream of harp (Bridget Kibbey) lent a mystical vibe to “Sombre,” settings of Ezra Pound cantos. Camilla Hoitenga played the bass flute with unnatural lightness one moment, caramel liquid weight the next; Davóne Tines’s baritone floated through the text like a dense fog.
With the premiere of “A Portrait,” the festival produced something with the heart — if not quite yet the proportions — of a masterpiece. Mr. Sorey, a brilliant avant-jazz composer and musician, has arranged a set of songs once performed by Baker, the celebrated singer, dancer, French Resistance operative and civil rights activist, as if he’s channeling the composer Morton Feldman. It’s a landscape of glacial melancholy, shot through with glinting fragments from an ensemble of six players, solemn resonances in the piano and shudders of drums.
Her soprano mellow and flexible, somber yet with a crucial undercurrent of youthful hopefulness, Ms. Bullock was a magnetically still presence — until a sensational climactic break into sinuous Baker-esque choreography (by Michael Schumacher). The pitiless words of “Bye Bye Blackbird” and “Terre Sèche” were caressed, yet starkly clear.
One problem, however, is the interstitial spoken text, newly written by the poet Claudia Rankine (“Citizen”) and recited by Ms. Bullock. Dully underlining points about Baker’s relationship with race, it’s more obvious and stolid than the ambiguous music. And it keeps pulling us out of Mr. Sorey’s hypnotic textures and tempos, making the piece — at 90 minutes already too long, with a particularly unwieldy, cloying late instrumental interlude — feel even longer.
It might be advisable, in what I hope will be many future performances, to flesh out the visual element. Perhaps fractured or slowed footage of Baker dancing could convey her artistry without sacrificing Mr. Sorey and Ms. Bullock’s elegantly spare stylization. But “A Portrait” is already, in this early form, a work that demands to be heard and wrestled with, a space of pain and contemplation.
Mr. Sorey, who alternated between piano and drums, was far from the only dual composer-performer over the weekend. Caroline Shaw, a member of Roomful of Teeth, sang the music of others as well as her own Pulitzer Prize-winning “Partita for Eight Voices,” as blissed-out as ever but also with an exhilarating recklessness in her performance on June 10. Her new “This might also be a form of dreaming,” set to enigmatic texts by Ms. Rankine about connection, requires many of the same techniques as in “Partita”: grand, plush harmonies; droning on tangy, bendable pitches; sighing, exhaling babble.
Carla Kihlstedt, a violinist-vocalist, led a group from Roomful of Teeth and the International Contemporary Ensemble in a series of pensive numbers with texts drawn from dreams. Ms. Adu, who sings and plays the piano, offered a late-night set of her earnest, intimate songs, her voice trembling with childlike vulnerability.
A relaxed, sunny presence, Dina El Wedidi and her Cairo-based band explained little about their music or their Arabic texts, making their entertaining show on June 10 — ostensibly an evocation of the revolutionary sounds of Tahrir Square — feel oddly glib. The next night, Aruna Sairam was a more informative, therefore more rewarding, guide to the fundamentals of Indian song, her improvisations witty and joyful.
On June 12, in the wake of the shooting in Orlando, Fla., Mr. Sellars’s longstanding vision of art as social justice, and a way to think and feel slowly and carefully in a time of superficial rushes to judgment, was deeply consoling. A morning concert on a hilltop high above the Ojai Valley featured International Contemporary Ensemble members playing from Pauline Oliveros’s “Sonic Meditations,” the musicians moving around the audience, leaving passing fragments of sound as they passed.
An even more poignant meditation came back in town, when Phyllis Chen performed an enchanting recital of music for toy piano in the courtyard of the Ojai Art Center, the audience full of children. Young musicians from the Los Angeles Philharmonic’s youth orchestra program, modeled on Venezuela’s El Sistema, performed later at the bowl. That concert also showcased the orchestra’s talented teenage composer fellows.
Vivier’s “Kopernikus,” a cult classic from the 1970s getting a belated American premiere, charts a transition from life to something after in a surreal mixture of astronomical facts and invented languages — too politely staged by Mr. Sellars, with the performers all in eerie, cultish white. Death-embracing, the work also felt life-affirming in its proud strangeness.
Mr. Sellars’s most characteristic move of all was to close the weekend with a street party in Santa Paula, a gorgeous half-hour drive through the mountains. It was the first time organizers could remember the festival venturing beyond its hometown, and a large crowd gathered in the mild evening, singing and dancing, for a taste of the year’s artists.
As the sun went down, Mr. Tines dedicated a roaring spiritual to the victims in Orlando. Mr. Sellars watched from the side of the stage, his eyes wet, then pressed Mr. Tines back onstage for another selection, and another.
