Offer students a less confusing array of courses.
Require fewer remedial classes to improve students’ basic math and English skills. Or find a way to pair these not-for-credit courses with others that would provide progress toward a degree.
Provide more personal advice.
And lower the cost.
While some of these steps might seem more obvious than others, they are among the changes community colleges across the country are making in hopes of ensuring that more students graduate.
“Confronted with evidence built up over years of research that community colleges are too often failing their mission of educating all comers, college leaders are embracing a reform movement that calls for a fundamental overhaul of the structure of community colleges and the way students choose and follow a route to a degree,” said Thomas Bailey, a professor of economics and education at Teachers College at Columbia University and director of the Community College Research Center.
That research makes a compelling case for change. Studies show that the traditional way the country’s thousand-plus community colleges have operated — by offering a wide “cafeteria-style” mixture of classes and majors, and by placing large numbers of students into noncredit remedial classes to bolster their basic skills — is failing.
Nationally, only about 25 percent of first-time, full-time students entering public community colleges graduate within the traditional three years, according to the National Center for Education Statistics.
Some experts say that figure is misleading because two-thirds of students attend community colleges part time, and many take six or more years to graduate. But most would agree that too many students aren’t reaching the finish line.
As researchers and administrators analyzed the reasons and the point at which students were dropping out, it became clear that small changes weren’t enough to ensure that more students graduated. Rather, it was time to “rethink everything about their institutions,” said Suzanne Walsh, deputy director of postsecondary education at the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, which has contributed heavily to community colleges.
That meant revamping community colleges into more structured environments, combining fewer courses with far more intensive help from advisers to ensure that students moved along guided pathways to complete their degrees.
Community colleges in the United States serve 45 percent of the nation’s undergraduates, many of whom are historically underrepresented in higher education: minority, low-income and older students. According to the American Association of Community Colleges, the average student is 29 years old, and two-thirds attend part time.
Thirty-six percent are the first in their families to attend college. With average annual tuition of $3,430, the association said, community colleges are about one-third the cost of in-state tuition at a public four-year university.
Still, money can be one major reason community college students drop out. Bills are pending in congressional committees to carry out President Obama’s America’s College Promise proposal to make community colleges free to responsible high school graduates. While that legislation will be a tough sell, Kentucky, Minnesota, Oregon and Tennessee already mandate free or near-free community college tuition to eligible high school graduates; 11 other states have similar bills pending, according to the National Conference of State Legislatures.
But financial aid is only one problem. Remedial classes, which students often pay for but usually aren’t included in graduation credits, are “the single most deadly issue for students of color,” said Eloy Oakley, superintendent-president of Long Beach City College in California. “They use up their financial aid eligibility, and it keeps them from ever getting a degree.” Studies have shown that more than 50 percent of students at community colleges take at least one remedial course because they didn’t score high enough on entry assessment tests for math, reading or writing.
A number of community colleges, including Long Beach City College, are no longer relying solely on assessment tests; they use the tests as only one part of an entire picture, which also includes high school transcripts and standardized test scores.
Four years of data have shown that those who were placed in the higher-level classes “were succeeding just as well as those who had to go through development,” Mr. Oakley said.
Tennessee’s system of 13 community colleges revamped its remedial program, putting in place a corequisite model in which students who need, say, help in math are enrolled in a math class for which they receive credit and a remediation class to help them complete the course.
In fall semester 2015, 52 percent of students passed a credit-bearing math class, compared with 12 percent for the entire 2013-14 school year, said Tristan Denley, vice chancellor for academic affairs at the Tennessee Board of Regents.
“We are the first system to fully implement this kind of change, and we see improvement across academic levels, age, income and race,” Dr. Denley said.
Another major impediment to graduation is too much choice and too little guidance.
The City University of New York system has been at the forefront of the movement to confront the high dropout rate, starting its Accelerated Study in Associated Programs at nine of its colleges in 2007. It offers a multipronged approach of financial resources and comprehensive student support; the graduation rate is double that of CUNY students who are not in the program — 53 percent versus 23 percent, said Donna Linderman, dean for Student Success Initiatives and executive director of the program.
CUNY as a whole has been hit by budget cuts, and the program does cost more per student, Ms. Linderman said. But the cost per degree is actually lower because so many more students graduate.
Comprehensive support through staff and peer advisers on academics, financial needs and careers is one of the key elements at Stella and Charles Guttman Community College in Manhattan. It opened in 2012 — the first new college established by CUNY in over 40 years — with a mandate to reimagine the community college experience.
It requires all first-year students to be full time and to attend orientation and a two-week summer program; it has a mandatory curriculum in the first year and no remedial classes.
It has a 49 percent three-year graduation rate.
At places like Guttman, it’s not just how the courses are taught but what they teach. All students must take a yearlong course called Ethnographies of Work. They study works as diverse as those of Karl Marx and Barbara Ehrenreich and learn about modern workday issues like the gig economy and work-life balance. They also observe and interview people in an occupation that interests them.
For Jovanni Lezama, a second-year student at Guttman, that kind of support gave him the ability and courage not just to earn his associate’s degree but to go on to a four-year college in the fall.
