I deplore B.D.S., the movement to boycott, divest from and sanction Israel. At the same time, I view boycotts by private citizens — whatever the cause, including B.D.S. — as representing the highest expression of liberty. But when it is the government that orchestrates a boycott of particular groups, it is a pernicious assault on free association and free speech.
The Hollywood blacklisting of those perceived to have Communist ties in the 1950s might have been a laudable boycott, but it was evil to the extent that it resulted from government pressure. Mayor Bill de Blasio’s suggested boycott of Chick-fil-A based on the views of its chief executive on same-sex marriage is the same.
And yet another example: Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo’s boycott of groups that advocate B.D.S.
What Daniel Sieradski misses is that it is already illegal under New York State and New York City law to boycott a business based on its owner’s religion or nationality, just as businesses cannot refuse customers based on such considerations.
Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo’s action holding institutions and companies that unlawfully boycott Israeli businesses accountable for their discriminatory conduct is commendable and morally compelling.
The indignation of B.D.S. advocates at being subject to what they perceive to be an unfair, state-sanctioned boycott is hypocritical and, I hope, a cause for reflection on the legitimacy of their movement to economically strangle and socially stigmatize the people of a vibrantly democratic country whose political and social views on the Palestinian issue run the gamut, a movement that often focuses on Jews who aren’t even Israeli.
Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo’s action is unconscionable but not unexpected.
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel and his large following in our country have done a very successful propaganda job of convincing so many Americans, especially political leaders, that their oppression of the Palestinians and the occupation of their lands is justified and that any criticism of Israel’s actions amounts to anti-Semitism.
