A doctor treating people who were shot at the Pulse nightclub on Sunday gave an update on the victims' conditions, and a survivor explained his current health.
“This was the largest disaster that we probably could have imagine and we went ahead and we implemented the plan that we have designed over the years and perfected through practice, and I think it worked. I think that the fact is Gary alluded to that the victims were literally three or four blocks away and made a tremendous difference in their outcome” 5. WIDE OF NEWS CONFERENCE 6. (SOUNDBITE) (English) ANGEL COLON- SHOOTING VICTIM SAYING: “If they weren’t here, I don’t I don’t know I would be right now. I mean I’m I’m doing pretty well...I still can’t walk, but as long as I have a smile on my face I have that love that I feel I’m OK. ” 7. (SOUNDBITE)(English) CHADWICK SMITH, SURGICAL AND INTENSIVE CARE UNIT DIRECTOR SAYING: “I tried to, I shared with them how I was feeling this morNING, I was on call again last night and I was walking out of the hospital and and walking out I saw team members walking into work crying, ,and I just I just couldn’t express how. It’s hard to describe how how you feel.
ORLANDO, Fla. — With dozens of survivors of the massacre at a gay nightclub here still hospitalized, some of the wounded on Tuesday gave gripping accounts of terror and pain on a night that turned in an instant from joyous to deadly.
The survivors told of fleeing, hiding, using their phones to plead for help, watching friends die — and thinking that they would also — as a man with an assault rifle and a handgun went through the Pulse nightclub, firing more shots than they could count. The slaughter early Sunday left 49 victims dead, in addition to the gunman, and 53 wounded — the worst mass shooting in American history.
More than 30 of the wounded remained in hospitals on Tuesday, including at least six who were in critical condition. All of the dead had been identified, and most of the autopsies were completed.
As the injured and the doctors who treated them told their stories, the F.B.I. continued looking into the actions of the gunman, Omar Mateen, 29, who died in a shootout with police, seeking evidence of a motive and any possible accomplices — in particular, whether his wife may have known he was planning the assault. His wife, Noor Zahi Salman, has told investigators that she once drove him to the nightclub, that she was with him when he bought ammunition, and that she tried to talk him out of mounting an attack, law enforcement officials said.
Mr. Mateen had voiced hatred of gays, minorities and Jews, and had claimed links to Islamist terrorist groups; during the siege at the nightclub, he declared allegiance to the Islamic State. But investigators were also looking into reports that he might have been gay himself.
His ex-wife, Sitora Yusufiy, said that Mr. Mateen had told her that he had frequented nightclubs before their marriage, but had not described them as gay clubs.
Angel Santiago, a survivor of the Orlando shootings at the Pulse nightclub on Sunday, reflected on how the ordeal has affected him as a gay man.

In Washington, President Obama on Tuesday reiterated that investigators had found no evidence that Mr. Mateen had actual contact with a larger terrorist group like the Islamic State.
“It is increasingly clear, however, that the killer took in extremist information and propaganda over the internet,” Mr. Obama said. He appears to have been an “angry, disturbed, unstable young man who became radicalized,” the president said.
On Sunday, there were about 320 people, most of them Latino, in Pulse shortly after 2 a.m. when Mr. Mateen entered with an assault rifle similar to an AR-15 and a semiautomatic handgun.
Angel Colon was exchanging goodbye hugs with friends when the shooting began, and like much of the panicked crowd he ran for the door. But three bullets hit his leg and he fell.
He heard more gunshots and screaming as the gunman apparently went to a back room and then returned.
Patience Carter, who was in the bathroom of the Pulse nightclub on Sunday during the shooting there, talked about her ordeal.
Ms. Murray, 18, arrived in Orlando on Saturday from Philadelphia with her friends, Ms. Carter and Tiara Parker, on a trip to celebrate her high school graduation, and they had just ordered an Uber car to take them back to their hotel when they heard a barrage of gunfire. Ms. Carter said that she and Ms. Parker fled the club, then realized Ms. Murray was not with them and ran back inside to get her.
By then, the way out was blocked, she said, and the three of them ran deeper into Pulse. Like a number of other people, including Angel Santiago Jr., they took shelter in a bathroom; several including Ms. Carter and her friends, cowered in a large handicapped stall. She and Mr. Santiago told their stories to reporters on Tuesday at Florida Hospital, where they were being treated.
Then the gunman entered, spraying the room with bullets, aiming primarily at the walls of the toilet stalls.
A bullet went through her right thigh, shattering the femur, and lodged in her left thigh; both of her friends were also hit. Lying on the floor in a spreading pool of blood, she looked under the divider into the next stall.
Unable to walk, Mr. Santiago dragged himself out of the bathroom, past prone and broken bodies, to the front room of the club, where he found police officers waiting. “I yelled, I said, ‘There are people shot, people who are killed in the bathroom, we need help,’” he recalled.
He got angry when people’s cellphones beeped or rang, and demanded that people turn them over, she said, and he made comments like “we’ve got the snipers outside” indicating that he was not alone, or that he was talking with accomplices.
After a three-hour standoff, she heard explosions as the police started their final assault on the club, trying to blow a hole in an outer wall. His rifle had apparently jammed, she said, and he used the pistol to resume firing, shooting three people who lay on the floor. Someone — she did not know who — got between her and the gun, and was shot.
“It wasn’t for that person shielding me, I would have been shot, I wouldn’t be here,” she said.
Doctors at Orlando Regional Medical Center said they ordinarily would get some warning that wounded were coming, as well as information about the number of patients and their conditions. But not in this case, with a chaotic mass shooting just blocks away. Patients arrived in trucks and cars, and on foot, as well as in ambulances.
Forty-four patients were taken to the medical center, the region’s only trauma center, and nine of them died quickly. No other patients have died since that night.
On Monday night, thousands of people gathered on a grassy knoll in downtown Orlando for a candlelight vigil that was by turns defiant and melancholy.
“We have come together as a force here in Orlando that cannot be broken,” said Terry DeCarlo, the executive director of the L.G.B.T. Center of Central Florida.
But moments later, during about 10 minutes of silence, tears flowed and embraces tightened as the crowd lifted candles into the air and a church bell tolled.
