Is your retirement plan set up to benefit you, or your employer?
Such a question may seem out of place. After all, the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, known as Erisa, requires overseers of 401(k) plans and other benefit programs to ensure they are run safely, soundly and in participants’ best interests.
But class-action lawsuits against retirement plan sponsors in recent years have generated significant payouts, and legal experts say some employers are responding by modifying the terms of their plans. The goal? To help shield them from litigation.
Changes that companies have made to their programs include reducing the amount of time a participant has to bring a legal action and requiring that such an action be brought in a court that is convenient to the plan sponsor but not necessarily to a beneficiary. This is known as forum selection.
Such requirements do more than make it harder for beneficiaries to receive the benefits they are owed, said Norman Stein, a law professor at Drexel University and a senior policy adviser at the Pension Rights Center, a nonprofit consumer organization in Washington. They also prevent participants from holding plan overseers accountable.
Such immunization is possible because of how Erisa was written and how courts interpret it, Mr. Stein explained.
On most of the work done by entities overseeing retirement or health benefit plans, the law imposes a fiduciary duty, requiring them to put participants’ interests first.
But some plan sponsor activities — creating and designing a plan, for example, or deciding to terminate one — are not governed by a fiduciary standard. These are known as “settlor” functions.
Plan sponsors, therefore, wear two hats: one as a settlor, another as a fiduciary. And when a sponsor changes a plan’s terms — a settlor function — it may not be required to put its beneficiaries’ interests first.
In legal circles, this is known as the settlor/fiduciary doctrine. And federal courts have ruled in favor of plan sponsors who have changed the terms of their programs in ways that some lawyers say are inconsistent with the fiduciary standard.
Benefit plans offered to employees of Kodak are an example. In its materials, Kodak outlines numerous procedures a participant must follow to bring a legal action against the plan. These include a requirement that all suits be filed in federal court near Kodak’s headquarters in Rochester, unless the plan administrator agrees to a different forum.
Lawsuits must also be filed within 90 days of a claim’s being denied, and if litigants lose a case, they must pay all the Kodak plan’s fees and expenses incurred defending against the suit.
Law firms have also begun advising plan sponsors on how to protect themselves against lawsuits involving their benefit programs.
Among the tools described in the article are those employed by Kodak, including shortening the time a participant has to bring a suit and specifying the forum in which legal action can be brought.
Officials at the Labor Department, whose Employee Benefits Security Administration unit enforces benefit plan rules, say they are concerned about companies erecting barriers that make it harder for participants to receive what they are due. They call it a growing problem that hurts participants with limited financial resources, among them people who are already retired, on disability or in ill health.
Forum selection clauses like the one in the Kodak plan are among the Labor Department’s concerns. In “friend of the court” briefs, the department has argued that these clauses are inconsistent with Erisa’s goal of removing obstacles for plan participants seeking their full benefits. The arguments have not always been successful, however.
A further appeal of these litigation-protection measures is that companies face little downside when they add hurdles to their plans. Participants who must pay to bring legal challenges have much more to lose.
Jerome J. Schlichter, a partner at Schlichter Bogard & Denton in St. Louis, has scored numerous victories for beneficiaries in recent suits against retirement plan sponsors. Most of his cases involved breaches of fiduciary duties, such as offering only high-fee investment options in a plan.
In some of these suits, plan sponsors have argued that because such investment options were written into plan documents — a settlor function — they had no liability for choices that were not in the best interests of beneficiaries.
Mr. Schlichter has prevailed against these arguments. But the legal process is onerous for plan participants.
Mr. Stein of the Pension Rights Center agreed. And he noted another risk to plan participants: a race to the bottom in benefit programs.
