HAYWARD, Calif. — For an additional $1,000, a family can have a loved one buried near the chardonnay vines glistening in the sun, or if they prefer, near the pinot noir vines at a cemetery here in an East Bay suburb of San Francisco.
The grapevines serve another purpose. “The cemetery doesn’t seem like such a sad and fearsome place when you go there and see the vines,” Bishop Barber said.
American cemeteries have developed creative ways to draw visitors, holding horror movie nights, concerts in mausoleums, fun runs and yoga classes in chapels. Cincinnati’s Spring Grove Cemeteries hosts bird walks, twilight tours, family fun nights, an annual dog day and designated times for Segway riders. In Bridgeport, Conn., people still stroll the pathways around the pond at Mountain Grove Cemetery to admire the flowering dogwood trees in the spring or the brilliant foliage in the fall.
When Bishop Barber was a student at the Jesuit novitiate, a training seminary in Los Gatos, Calif., he picked grapes with a small cutting knife in the college’s vineyards, planted in the 1880s, as did Jerry Brown, the current governor, who was once a student there. During the first hour of picking, they would pray in silence until “the field boss blew the whistle,” the bishop said.
Planting cemetery grapevines in 2006 was a small part of Mr. Seelig’s solution for a money-losing operation.
“I wondered if there was a disconnect where cemeteries were no longer relevant to the modern world,” Mr. Seelig said. “What I learned is that the model had changed.” The Catholic church’s model “needed to be updated,” he added.
In 2013, church officials approached Shauna Rosenblum of Rock Wall Wine Company to process the cemetery grapes for altar wine, which need not be “that good,” Mr. Seelig said. She worked with Jim Ryan, a wine consultant who had been with Firestone Vineyards and Concannon Vineyard, two well-known winemakers. Mr. Ryan is now the general manager at Rock Wall.
They approached Mr. Seelig with their idea: Why not make serious wine?
And so the cemetery wines have become a start-up business. Unlike most, it is a nonprofit, giving most of its products — 7,200 bottles of altar wine — to 45 churches. It has donated $35,000 in scholarships to parochial schools. Like most start-ups, it is not yet turning a profit, but the church is investing in the wine business and expects to break even this year. The annual costs run up to $150,000. Mr. Seelig considers it a good investment.
“It’s like dynamic pricing of a baseball game,” Mr. Seelig said. You pay for seating “in the bleachers,” but it is more expensive “to be by home plate.” People, he said, “like ambience.” It costs $5,000 to $6,000 for a burial plot near the grapes, $1,000 more than those across the street.
“At our cathedral gift shop, we sell rosaries, statues of Mary and, oh, by the way, bottles of our wine,” Bishop Barber said.