Prince Be, the frontman for the psychedelic pop-rap group P.M. Dawn, which in the early 1990s was both popular and maligned — and since then has been both underappreciated and quietly influential — died on Friday at a hospital in Neptune, N.J. He was 46.
The cause was renal failure resulting from complications of diabetes, his wife, Mary Sierra-Cordes, said.
Prince Be had suffered from diabetes for more than two decades, and had various health problems over the years, among them several strokes, including one in 2005 that left him partly paralyzed, and gangrene, which led to the partial amputation of one leg. He had been in nursing homes for the last several years.
Prince Be was born Attrell Cordes on May 15, 1970, in Jersey City. He and his younger brother, Jarrett, known as DJ Minutemix, formed P.M. Dawn there in the late 1980s. The group’s first demo was made with $600 Prince Be earned as a night guard at a homeless shelter.
The next year, P.M. Dawn released the elegant ballad “I’d Die Without You,” which reached No. 2 on the Hot 100. In 1993 the group released its entrancing second album, “The Bliss Album…? (Vibrations of Love and Anger and the Ponderance of Life and Existence).” Like its predecessor, it went gold.
As a producer, Prince Be drew on a wide range of material, sampling everything from the Monkees to Deep Purple. P.M. Dawn’s sound was singular — rooted in hip-hop but unafraid of softness. The group’s experimentation was not always embraced, though, leading to one of the early public schisms between hip-hop’s pop- and street-oriented wings.
P.M. Dawn released three more albums between 1995 and 2000, but they were more abstruse than their predecessors and were coolly received.
During those years, Prince Be was producing songs for other artists as well. He was also a well-regarded record collector.
In addition to his brother and his wife, his survivors include his mother; two sons, Christian and Brandon; a daughter, Mia; and four half brothers, Sylvaneous, Jason, Chris and Johnny Cordes.
In 2005, P.M. Dawn appeared on the NBC reality show “Hit Me, Baby, One More Time,” on which nostalgia acts competed against one another by performing both their own songs and other artists’. Prince Be, who had suffered a stroke, had to be assisted onto the stage and performed from a seat.
But P.M. Dawn won the competition. The group donated the $20,000 prize to the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation.