Art & Design|She’s Her Own Artist. And a Daughter’s Muse.
She’s Her Own Artist. And a Daughter’s Muse.
The filmmaker Beth B was 13 in 1969, the year the fraught event occurred that would become a family secret. That was when her mother, Ida Horowitz, checked herself into the mental ward of Mercy Hospital in San Diego. Ida was then a Chevy-driving mother of four and a struggling artist who kept a suicide contingency plan — a plastic bag just the right size to fit snugly over her head — at the bottom of her purse.
Incoherent, Ida spent much of her six weeks at Mercy Hospital drawing what would become her salvation: over 100 fantastical images in which abstract forms — some recognizable as Ida — collide, float, somersault and are engulfed by others, an emotional reckoning in India ink, watercolor and pastel. Her daughter Beth struggled to understand the sudden disappearance of the mother she knew.
Five years later, Ida Applebroog, as she christened herself, burst onto the New York art scene at the age of 45, eventually becoming a feminist boundary-breaker. Her technical prowess as a painter has been accompanied by a fierce commitment to questioning business as usual: the clichéd concepts of female beauty and sexual pleasure; the power dynamics between men and women; the violence that percolates, like bubbling lava, through ordinary life. Anchored in dark humor, her work resides in the collections of the Whitney, the Guggenheim and the Museum of Modern Art.
For her daughter, whose film career grew out of the East Village 1970s punk era, her mother’s demons and eventual breakthrough from the chrysalis of depression are the underpinnings of her moving new documentary, “Call Her Applebroog,” at the Metrograph theater through Thursday, June 23 (a schedule is at callherapplebroog.com). Fifteen years in the making, the film is an intimate portrait of a formidable artist who continues to innovate at 86, in fuzzy slippers at her SoHo studio. But perhaps more than anything, it is the story of a mother and a daughter exploring the tumultuous years of their shared past.
For Beth — the “B” is a homage to B-movies — the process has finally brought an appreciation for her own difficult history. “I think I spent a lot of my childhood protecting my mother,” she said, sitting in a white room at the School of Visual Arts, where she teaches. The backdrop set off her vivid blue hair.
“There’s not a peaceful day as a child, when you are shaking in your boots and afraid to enter the house,” she said. Her mother, who was illiterate, was a “crazed creative figure,” Ms. Applebroog recalled, who added fur accents to her daughter’s hand-sewn clothes.  “Did I mention she was depressed?” Ms. Applebroog inquired.
Attuned to gender expectations early on, Ms. Applebroog recalled working for her father modeling fur coats for buyers. “Those sons of bitches would feel me up, pretending to stroke the pelts,” she said.
Her gift for drawing has always been effortless. (She compares the ease to making instant coffee.) She attended commercial art school and after moving to Chicago with her young family, she made the bold decision to go back to school at the Art Institute, a renegade move in an era when finding a balance between motherhood and being an artist was next to impossible.
In 1968, the family moved San Diego, where Ms. Applebroog’s mental health began to unravel. Like many women who had nipped their creative potential in the bud, she felt trapped — “like an empty house inhabited by hungry tenants,” she would write.
The film by Beth B takes a nuanced look at her mother’s triumph over depression, combining a daughter’s impressionistic images with her mother’s journal entries to convey the depths of her harrowing descent. It was triggered in part by Ms. Applebroog’s residual grief over Frieda’s death from rheumatic heart disease 20 years earlier.
In a series of devastating poems called “The Green Dress,” Ms. Applebroog recalls the dress she wore the morning everything started to fall apart as she drove her two young sons to the zoo — unable to distinguish traffic lights and guided by two tiny voices in the back seat. She committed herself to Mercy Hospital that day.
When Ms. Applebroog left the hospital for good, she moved alone into an apartment. Her priority became her art. “There was of course a sense of loss and confusion,” Beth B said. “My mother was searching for herself in a place that was foreign to me.” Yet on some deeper level, she understood and supported her. She, too, knew she wanted to be an artist.
Women’s gender roles and the tipping points of power remain searing touchstones of Ms. Applebroog’s work. “Mona Lisa” (2009), sketches of her vagina, have the delicacy of Asian brush painting, and “Modern Olympia Scrolls” (1997-2001), a five-panel riff on “Olympia,” Édouard Manet’s controversial nude, celebrates women’s freedom to revel in the pleasures of their bodies.
As a filmmaker, Beth’s major challenge was to capture her mother’s tenacity and fearlessness as an artist, while persuading her to be open about her past. At times, tension crackles between the women. Yet the painter knew that Beth B’s talent for revealing the melancholy truths beneath life’s placid veneer was learned at the foot of the master.
Ms. Applebroog’s increasing physical frailty is poignantly illustrated. She no longer climbs ladders to paint, relying on assistants to position the canvases. Yet she continues to enthusiastically embrace new media and is steeping herself in taxidermy for her current project — an Applebroogian twist on John James Audubon’s “Birds of America” series, to be called “Angry Birds of America.” She is poring over taxidermy catalogs full of long needles and other tools. “I haven’t told anybody because it would be laughed out of the art world,” she said.
But like a hawk, she is circling.