Although the outcry over sexual assault on college campuses has intensified recently, the issue has a long history.
February 1957: One of the first published studies about campus sexual assault, “Male Sex Aggression on a University Campus” appears in the American Sociological Review (Vol. 22, No. 1, pp. 52-58).
1985: Ms. Magazine and Mary R. Koss, then a psychology professor at Kent State University in Ohio, survey more than 6,100 undergraduate women and men for one of the largest scientific studies of date rape at that time. The survey reveals that one in four female college students had an experience that met the legal definition of rape or attempted rape. In 1994, the results of the study became the basis for the book, “I Never Called It Rape,” by Robin Warshaw, published by HarperPerennial.
May 2011: CBS News Magazine “60 Minutes” features the story of Beckett Brennan, a woman attending the University of the Pacific in Stockton, Calif. — on a full basketball scholarship — who was raped in May 2008 by three men on the school’s basketball team.
April 2014: Twenty-three Columbia University students file complaints with the federal government charging systematic mishandling of sexual assault claims and mistreatment of victims by the university.
April 2014: The White House Task Force to Protect Students From Sexual Assault releases its first report, “Not Alone.” The report defines the problem of campus sexual assault and offers the White House’s first set of action steps and recommendations.
January 2015: Two Vanderbilt University football players are convicted of raping an unconscious woman in a dorm room in June 2013. In June 2015, a Nashville judge declares a mistrial in the case. In April 2016 in a new trial, one of the players, Corey Batey, is found guilty once again. Three other former Vanderbilt football players have been charged in that rape.
February 2015: The documentary, “The Hunting Ground” about rape on American campuses, is released.
April 2015: Erica Kinsman, a former Florida State student, files a lawsuit against Jameis Winston for rape in 2012, when he was the football team’s quarterback. Mr. Winston won the Heisman Trophy during the 2013-2014 season. He was never questioned by the Tallahassee Police Department. In January 2015, Ms. Kinsman sued Florida State, which had cleared Mr. Winston.
August 2015: The football player Sam Ukwuachu is sentenced to 10 years of felony probation, six months in county jail and 400 hours of community service for second-degree sexual assault of a student in 2013.
May 2016: Baylor University fires its football coach, Art Briles, and removes Kenneth W. Starr as its president after an investigation finds that the university mishandled accusations of sexual assault against its football players.
June 2016: The former Stanford University student and swimmer Brock Allen Turner is convicted of sexually assaulting an unconscious woman and sentenced to six months in county jail and three years of probation; he is also required to register as a sex offender. The sentence is decried by many, including the victim, as too lenient. The district attorney, Jeff Rosen, said, “The punishment does not fit the crime. Campus rape is no different than off-campus rape. Rape is rape.” The San Jose Mercury News called the six-month sentence, “a slap on the wrist.” Mr. Turner was first charged with raping an unconscious woman in January 2015.