Arthur Brooks: What a week, Gail. The Brits decide to leave the European Union. Anyone who doubts that major nations can take a big populist turn just got a wake-up call, to put it mildly. Everyone wonders who’s next. The Dutch? The French? I’ve been seeing a lot on Twitter about “Texit,” which Greg Abbott, the governor of Texas, apparently felt the need to explain won’t be happening.
Gail Collins: Arthur, they are already at it. At this very minute, they’re sewing Texit flags in Lubbock.
You know, I once wrote a book about Texas in which I pooh-poohed the whole secession thing. At the time, a poll had 18 percent of the citizenry favoring the idea. I pointed out disparagingly that that was about the same as the proportion of Republicans who said it might be a good idea to nominate Donald Trump for president.
Arthur: Is that a nervous laugh or a mirthless chuckle? I can’t tell.
What do you make of it? Is Brexit an expression of British Trumpism?
Gail: I’m still trying to get past Trump’s victorious press conference at his floundering Scottish golf course. During which he stated that running a golf course is very much like running a nation.
The British get-out leaders are now spending all their time retracting the promises they made about the wonderful benefits of exiting. And I’m imagining a victorious Trump explaining how the Mexican wall was just a figure of speech.
But how do you think this is all going to work out — terrible international economic disaster or life goes on as usual except for the poor suckers in Britain who thought their E.U. subsidies were going to magically continue without the E.U.?
Arthur: The immediate effects of Brexit were clear: Markets tanked worldwide and the pound temporarily fell to a 30-year low. Markets despise uncertainty.
The long-term effects are much less clear. Tony Blair had a piece in The Times on Saturday predicting fairly apocalyptic results for Britain. My American Enterprise Institute colleagues are on both sides. Some were more supportive of the Leavers, and argue that new agreements could ensure that trade and people still flow freely without the drawbacks of E.U. membership. Others agree with Blair and fear this could trigger a global economic crisis.
Gail: You and your colleagues are certainly a beacon of cheer.
Arthur: They don’t let many optimists join the Dismal Science Union.
Judging by the early commentary, many are eager to blame the Leave result on reactionary, anti-immigrant bigotry. But I think it’s important for Americans to remember that there were also a lot of good people with no anti-immigrant sentiment whatsoever who favored Leave — like Michael Gove, an M.P. who is a rising star in the Conservative Party. It wasn’t foreigners they resented, but the stultifying socialist mediocrity of Brussels and the dreaded inevitability of bailing out Greece and others. The referendum seemed to reflect widespread dissatisfaction with European governance, not some simple xenophobia.
Gail: Our colleague Paul Krugman has always warned us about the euro. People should be able to devalue their currencies if they get in trouble.
Arthur: You know, people always tell me, “You sound just like Paul Krugman!” Actually, I think that’s the first time ever.
But Krugman has a point about the problems of the euro, which took monetary policy away from countries so they couldn’t devalue their currencies after living ruinously beyond their means. Britain managed to keep the British pound, of course, but still feels the increasing burden of arcane E.U. rules and regulations.
Gail: As an observer from afar, I have noticed a tendency for “E.U.” and “arcane rules and regulations” to appear in the same sentence.
Arthur: But back to your question. I think there will be economic and political consequences from leaving, but the doomsday predictors overplayed their hand a little. The union is less than 25 years old, before which Britain and its economy were doing just fine. To argue that leaving the E.U. would lead to plagues and locusts just didn’t ring true to a lot of voters.
As to the political effects here in the States, I sort of doubt this will help or hurt Trump. As a rule, foreign events capture the American imagination for about nine seconds. It gave Trump a great opportunity to promote that golf course, though.
Gail: Which, he tastefully assured the world, will benefit from Brexit. Who cares about auto workers when the caddies are doing well?
Arthur: Just as long as they’re native-born caddies, I suppose.
Before we leave this topic, tell me how you would have voted if you were British.
Gail: I’d have voted to remain. I’m dubious of separatist movements in general. Although I must admit that when I covered the state capitol in New York, I had a fling with the idea of New York City secession.
Arthur: I tend to be more of a separatist, especially after living for several years in Catalonia. Hey, how about we start a movement for New York City to secede and become part of the E.U.? Win-win.
Gail: By the way, I noticed your favorite congressman, Paul Ryan, finished releasing his multipart Republican platform. I did have sympathy for the way every one of his unveilings was overshadowed by a Trump catastrophe until the end, when of course Britain conspired to make the last press conference … muted.
All in all, I found the whole thing bland in the extreme. Sort of a vague wish list. What say you?
Ryan and the Republican committee chairs unveiled their health plan at A.E.I., actually. It focuses a lot on the fiscal sustainability of entitlements and trying to make coverage more portable — a good start on laying out what they could do if Republicans ever got control of the White House. More to the point, it belies the cliché that conservatives have no ideas and only criticize Obama and his fellow Democrats.
Gail: Its economic assumptions are way too optimistic to make sense. I’d argue that Hillary Clinton does a much better job of showing how she’s going to pay for the changes she’s pushing. That of course is one of the reasons she was so much less exciting than Bernie Sanders.
Also, it’s too general to be meaningful. It’s hard to argue with mush. You need more specifics — stuff like “eliminating the death tax.” Now that’s a specific statement which I would be happy to excoriate. My kind of Republican platform.
Arthur: I like almost all sentences that start with “eliminating” and finish with “tax.” In any case, as the resident policy wonk, I have never met a proposal where I wouldn’t have liked more specifics.
Before we close on a note of agreement, one last question: What’s on the top of your summer reading list?
Gail: Arthur, I love conversing with you but I hate questions about my summer reading. I’ve got a book due. I don’t know about you, but when I’m writing books I never get to read books. Except for research. Right now if you looked on my nightstand you’d see a biography of Millicent Fenwick. A wealthy Republican congresswoman of yore who fought for civil rights and never twittered. Those were the days.
Arthur: I bet you just spiked sales of Millicent Fenwick’s biography. I admit I had to look her up and found that she smoked a pipe. So there you are. See you next week, Gail.