The classical music played at Penn Station is meant to soothe harried travelers. Some commuters consider it part of the station’s hustle-and-bustle ambience, while others did not hear it until it was pointed out to them.
It is one of the incongruities of life in New York that some of the most appealing music ever written, a Beethoven trio, for example, or a Mozart sonata, is played in one of the most unappealing public spaces ever built — Pennsylvania Station.
The timeless music is meant to make the life of the modern traveler more pleasant, a word not typically associated with Penn Station. It is even considered a crime deterrent.
But the three people who decide what travelers in Manhattan will hear are actually about 1,500 miles away and have never set foot in the train station, the busiest in the country.
Working from a windowless office in Austin, Tex., the three women do their best to channel their inner commuter — harried, frazzled and stressed out — and choose the right overture, concerto or pop-song arrangement to soothe another hair-pulling train ride.
Amy Frishkey, one of the programmers, understands the otherness of picking the music that people hear between the train-boarding announcements. There is the place itself: “It’s like a basement,” she said, a description she has gleaned from her readings about the much-disliked terminus.
Unlike her two colleagues, Ms. Frishkey has strolled through Grand Central Terminal, whose monumental hall seems a far more appropriate setting for classical tunes.
The puny-sounding speakers at Penn Station play a stream of classical pieces along with “easy instrumentals” that sound like dentist-office arrangements, mostly contemporary piano and guitar solos — and, one afternoon last month as the evening rush was approaching, a Sinatra hit that seemed to have been arranged for French horn. The result is a Beethoven quartet one minute, something vaguely New Age the next.
The volume varies, as do the tempos — louder and bouncier during the morning and evening, less so at other times. There are interruptions — “Now boarding, east gate, Track 9” cuts off the zippiest allegro, right at the climax — and there is the buzz of people on cellphones, calling to warn whoever is expecting them that their train is late or, more irritating, canceled.
“It’s almost as if you’re trying to D.J. the world’s largest wedding reception,” Danny Turner, Ms. Frishkey’s boss, said. But it is a reception without a bride or groom, and the 650,000 people who pass through Penn Station every day do not dance to the music.
Amtrak, which operates Penn Station, was not looking for a party when it decided to pipe in music in the 1990s. Amtrak wanted “to subtly help promote a peaceful and calm environment,” Craig S. Schulz, an Amtrak spokesman, said. So it enlisted Muzak, which was bought by Mood Media, a programming giant, in 2011.
But, in a city in which the 1990s began with 2,200 murders in just one year, Amtrak had another objective: using music to deter crime.
Norman Middleton, who worked as a concert producer at the Library of Congress until his retirement, has described this theory of policing as “Halt, or I’ll play Vivaldi,” a term he said he got from a newspaper headline. In a panel discussion several years ago, he said the police in West Palm Beach, Fla., had installed speakers on the roof of a bar and played classical music — “I think it was Beethoven’s string quartets,” Mr. Middleton said. Drug dealers who frequented the neighborhood went elsewhere.
So Penn Station is a place where workaday commuters and long-distance passengers seek the shortest sally to the boarding gate, some running, some preoccupied with how to drag too much luggage across the floor and then down the escalators, some simply happy their train is leaving close to on time.
The music designers, as Mood Media calls them, vary the playlist. “We spread it out so you’re not hearing all symphonic pieces and then a piano piece and then some chamber pieces,” Janica Chang, one of Ms. Frishkey’s colleagues in Austin, said.
In Penn Station, there is always the chance. It is a place where the critics are tough. Hannah Greenberg, who works in a Manhattan art gallery and was on the way home to Montclair, N.J., gave the music a thumbs-down review.
