Soccer will experiment with video replay in league and cup competitions in six countries this year, FIFA and the body that governs the rules of the game announced on Thursday, with the intention of approving full use of the technology in matches over the next year.
The leagues and organizations approved this year for experimentation with the replay system, known as video assistant referee, include Major League Soccer in the United States, the Bundesliga in Germany and the A-League in Australia, as well as selected competitions in Brazil, Portugal and the Netherlands, according to FIFA and the rule-making body, the International Football Association Board.
Video assistant referee will be used only in match-changing situations: goals, penalty decisions, direct red cards and cases of mistaken identity in which a referee cautions or sends off the wrong player. Routine fouls would not be subject to review, and the system would supplement existing goal-line technology.
The association said it was permitting online and live testing in several countries to get more data before approving video assistant referee worldwide. It will conduct live testing in December at the FIFA Club World Cup in Japan with the intention of approving more live use of the technology in 2017. Full testing and approval is not expected to be completed until at least 2018.
While the introduction of technology in soccer still has many opponents — the widespread use of goal-line technology took years to approve despite several major disputes over calls — M.L.S. has been a leading advocate for it in recent years, and the league said that it had conducted testing with video assistant referee since 2014. The M.L.S. experiments, and others in various leagues, helped persuade the association that in-game mistakes on important decisions could be corrected without interrupting the flow of the game.
“We believe the time has come for a mechanism that helps referees avoid clearly incorrect decisions that change the game,” M.L.S. Commissioner Don Garber said in a statement.
M.L.S. said it would conduct its tests at United Soccer League matches at M.L.S. sites this summer, with the intention of trying it at M.L.S. games in the future. Other countries could soon be added to the list.
