In a speech last week to a group of New York lawyers, a federal judge from Brooklyn assailed the criminal justice system in which he has worked for more than 40 years, saying that the country had to “jettison the madness of mass incarceration” and find an alternative to overly punitive sentencing to address the problem of crime.
The speech by Judge Raymond J. Dearie of the Federal District Court in Brooklyn, at an event sponsored by the New York Criminal Bar Association, may not have struck new ground in its critique of the justice system. But it did put him in the company of other federal judges in Brooklyn who in recent months have come forward with scathing appraisals of things such as mandatory sentencing guidelines and the disregard paid to the socioeconomic roots of crime.
Last month, for instance, Judge Frederic Block wrote an extraordinary ruling saying that courts should pay closer attention to how felony convictions affect peoples’ lives with “collateral consequences” such as ineligibility for public housing and the denial of government benefits. And in March, just before he moved into private practice, Judge John Gleeson used his final decision from the bench to reiterate his own preference for handing down sentences other than prison time to some nonviolent offenders.
All three judges were, in some sense, working in the mold of Jack B. Weinstein, one of the longest-sitting judges on the federal bench in Brooklyn, which is formally known as the Eastern District of New York. In 2011, at age 87, Judge Weinstein went on a walking tour of the Louis Armstrong Houses in the Bedford-Stuyvesant neighborhood before issuing a novelistic ruling in a gang case. The nearly 130-page decision discussed the housing project’s paltry median income, its crumbling infrastructure and the effects of segregation and discrimination on its residents.
Judge Dearie, a former prosecutor who once served as the United States attorney in Brooklyn, gave his speech on June 13 at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park. He started by touching on themes that would not be unfamiliar to most criminal-justice reform advocates.
Judge Raymond J. Dearie of the Federal District Court in Brooklyn, who, in a recent speech, delivered a critique of mandatory sentencing guidelines.
Insisting that his words were not a cry for a broad application of leniency — “Retribution and deterrence have their place in sound sentencing jurisprudence,” he said — Judge Dearie nonetheless questioned the practice of prosecutors and law enforcement officers to gauge their success by how many years a defendant spends in prison.
“Why this love affair in this country with lengthy incarceration, to our great embarrassment as a civilized nation?” he asked, according to a transcript of the speech.
Other judges across the country have also taken issue with the system that they serve. In a case that drew on one of Judge Gleeson’s orders, a federal judge in Oklahoma agreed last September to the early release of a cocaine smuggler who was sentenced to life in prison, ruling that the time he had already served — 30 years — was sufficient punishment. And Judge Alex Kozinski of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in California wrote an article last year in the Georgetown Law Journal questioning why so few criminal defendants are acquitted at trial.
In general, Brooklyn leans toward the left (five of the six United States congressional districts that include the borough are Democratic). It is also a busy federal district with a diverse and bustling caseload that happens to sit across the river from the media capital of the country, so its judges’ rulings receive a level of national attention.
One reason for the “Eastern District Effect,” as Daniel C. Richman, a law professor at Columbia, called it, could also have something to do with the insularity of judicial life.
