Even in the best of worlds, which we cannot pretend this to be, France is taking on an awful lot over the coming month.
In simple sporting terms, the 2016 European Championship starting Friday has to live up to the legacy of 1984, when France last hosted and won the Euro, with Michel Platini, the team’s most inspirational player and leader, as the star.
We can discuss who, if anyone, might step into the shoes of Platini and Zidane this year. But France being France, a scandal is often not far away. To begin with, there are many opinions as to why Karim Benzema, the nation’s top striker and a winner of the Champions League in two of the last three years with Real Madrid, has not been selected by France for this Euro. And, after the terror attacks of the last 18 months in France, there are safety issues.
The tournament runs through July 10, and most people will be grateful and relieved if it ends up as a safe, secure and sporting event. We can hope the last part — the game itself — will be the greatest focal point of all.
When France bid for the event in 2009, no one could have foreseen the security challenges that France now faces.
In 2007, Platini became president of UEFA, the sport’s European governing body, and he oversaw the procedure that led to his country winning the hosting rights in 2010. Now, he is barred from office and all of soccer for receiving unauthorized payments from Sepp Blatter, the former president of FIFA, who also has been banished from the sport.
Under Platini, the Euro has been expanded. Eight teams played a total of 15 games in 1992. Four years later, 16 teams played 31 matches. This year, 24 national squads will play a total of 51 games.
France has used the tournament as an opportunity to build four new stadiums and refurbish five others, meaning the whole of the country’s soccer infrastructure has been updated. Of the 10 stadiums that will host games this tournament, only Stade de France, in St. Denis north of Paris, is not new or overhauled.
France needed this because even though it is still producing good players, its top domestic league has fallen behind other top leagues in Europe. Its finest talent migrates abroad to play professionally, notably for the greater salaries paid in England and Spain, and, at one point, Italy.
The plan was to use this Euro to re-establish France at the heart of the sport. France had, after all, dreamed up the first World Cup in 1930 and the first European Championship in 1960.
UEFA endorses this positive message. Its executive committee said in May that people should go to the stadiums to watch the games, or, if they lack tickets, enjoy the “safe and festive fun” of fan zones in designated areas of the cities.
In addition to the 6,500 volunteers — the unpaid and often overlooked enthusiasts who make these events run smoothly — at this year’s Euro, there will be 90,000 police officers, soldiers and private security agents deployed across France during the event.
In the attacks that killed at least 130 in November, terrorists tried to get into Stade de France while France and Germany were playing a friendly.
Maybe there won’t be a repeat of the attacks over the next month. Maybe the hooliganism that has returned to soccer — notably in Britain, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, the Netherlands, Poland, Russia and Turkey — will stay away.
But as the UEFA delegates drive past in their limousines, they will be passing overstretched law enforcement officers and fans who will need plenty of patience and understanding to deal with enhanced security.
England vs. Russia in Marseille (Saturday), Turkey vs. Croatia in Paris (Sunday), England vs Wales in Lens (Thursday), Germany vs. Poland at St. Denis (Thursday) and Ukraine vs. Poland in Marseille (June 21) have all been classified by officials as high-risk matches.
But no matter the challenges, the purpose of this whole venture — soccer — is generally in relatively good health.
The French philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre once said that “in football, everything is complicated by the presence of the opposite team.” So it is.
But this has been the year of the underdog, with Leicester City’s championship in the Premier League reminding everyone that nothing can be taken for granted.
Cristiano Ronaldo and Gareth Bale might have cost their club, Real Madrid, nearly $100 million dollars each to acquire, but after winning the Champions League last month, they will lead relatively small teams (Portugal and Wales) at the Euro. So will Zlatan Ibrahimovic, who at 34 is still a box-office draw as a player. He will lead the 100-to-1 long shot Sweden in his last hurrah at this competition.
Then there is Belgium, which has so many attacking talents that one day it must surely be expected to meld them all together into a team that can win a tournament like the Euro or World Cup.
With a population of 330,000, Iceland is the smallest country to have reached the finals. Albania, Northern Ireland and Slovakia also are first-timers in the finals. While some criticize Platini’s expansion as a watering down of quality, others see it as offering fresh hope and new blood in the tournament.
Who will win this newly bloated marathon? France, Spain, Germany, Belgium and England — in that order — are favored by the bookmakers.
But on and off the field, it is up to the French, Les Bleus, to set the standards. The team has plenty of potential. Its defense has been weakened by injuries to Raphaël Varane, Jérémy Mathieu and the holding midfielder Lassana Diarra, while Mamadou Sakho was ruled out after a suspected doping violation.
But France still has the powerful Juventus midfielder Paul Pogba blossoming in midfield. It has Dimitri Payet, whose ability to bend a ball on free kicks seems to defy gravity. It has speed and youth on the flanks in Anthony Martial and Kingsley Coman. And the strikers Antoine Griezmann and Olivier Giroud are in good form.
Benzema, with 27 goals in 81 games with the national team, has better figures than them all, but he was left off the roster because of his alleged involvement in an extortion scam over a sex tape that involved a French teammate, Mathieu Valbuena.
Another headache France and the Euro could do without.