LONDON — It’s almost summer in London, the season when things happen mostly outdoors. But there is also a fierce fight for attention indoors, as the city’s museums, galleries and seasonal fairs work to lure art lovers — and buyers — inside.
Tate Modern promises a strong kickoff to the season on June 17, with the opening of a new building and three days of events. On the first night, open late, curators aged 15 to 25 will show their vision of the future. Throughout the weekend, the gallery’s staff will be leading 10-minute tours of their favorite pieces of the museum’s well-known collection.
The summer’s buzzwords are clearly new, young and emerging. After a winter of skyrocketing prices fueled by sales of trophy artworks, and revelations in the Panama Papers of the way the superrich build their collections, London’s niche fairs and galleries are turning to new art for new buyers.
Art16, in its fourth year, has gained a reputation for treading off the beaten path and bringing together young contemporary artists and their galleries from around the world at its temporary home in the Olympia exhibition center in Kensington.
Alongside established names, the fair invited galleries not yet seen in London or little known internationally.
Among this year’s exhibitors from May 20 to 22 was Valerie Kabov, a French art historian who founded the First Floor Gallery in Harare, Zimbabwe, in 2009, with the idea of giving local artists a new platform. She has been traveling with their art internationally ever since.
“We don’t have a local market in Zimbabwe, so if we don’t travel we don’t sell,” she said at her booth showing works by Wycliffe Mundopa and Gresham Tapiwa Nyaude, ranging in price from 2,000 to 2,500 pounds, around $3,000 to $3,600.
Both artists use loud and vivid colors to chronicle the lives of the most underprivileged communities in Zimbabwe. As in Mr. Mundopa’s “Girl With a Dog,” the hues that convey joy at first sight draw the viewer’s attention to painful realities: in this case, growing up as a woman on the margins of society.
“This fair is important because it is democratic,” said Ms. Kabov, who sold to two new collectors before the last day. “For us to be playing into the hands of the 1 percent would be almost indecent.” Other events she had attended include Berliner Liste, an annual fair in the German capital that features moderately priced contemporary artworks, starting at 500 euros, or $555.
Nathan Clements-Gillespie, director of Art16, said the event had built a local following of young professionals in the well-to-do Kensington area, on the venue’s doorstep. The fair, he said, aimed to connect this public with galleries around the world in a single space each year.
“We are there to make that bridge and help them find the right work that they love and start to grow their collection,” he said.
Art16, like the fairs that will follow this summer, is designed to blend entertainment with art deals, and to appeal both to art lovers and collectors. For £75 the organizers this year offered a personalized tour of the fair, to introduce newcomers to collecting.
And reaching new audiences comes with new platforms, like the photo-sharing app Instagram, which has become a digital space of choice for art dealers. “If somebody really cares about the fair and wants to engage with the fair, then we’re there,” Mr. Clements-Gillespie said, referring to Instagram and pointing to his smartphone.
Browsing Instagram can also help map the highlights of the 50 or so galleries in St. James’s and Mayfair that will team up for a fourth year for London Art Week, from July 1 to 8. The event is popular with collectors and museum representatives, who last year bought work valued at more than £1 million.
This year the art week will welcome under its umbrella newcomers like the gallery Lullo-Pampoulides, whose inaugural exhibition will be unveiled on July 1. “Classicism Reimagined: Master Paintings and Sculptures 1700 — Circa 1950” will show how classical masterpieces influenced early modern art. It will also give the public a taste of this new space, which aims to dust off the idea of collecting classical art.
Andreas Pampoulides, co-owner of the gallery, promised to present works for a wide range of prices, to encourage young buyers to start a collection.
“You need to get rid of that stuffy old sensation that you have when walking into a gallery,” he said, adding that browsers as well as buyers were welcome at his booth.
“I don’t think that you need to be ramming down people’s throats the need to buy something,” he said.
“Fishing Boats in the Harbour at Brusc,” by Eugène Narbonne, part of the offering at Olympia, the grande dame of London summer art fairs, now in its 44th year.Credit...Eugène Narbonne, via Constantine Lindsay Ltd.
The Royal Academy of Arts, a short walk away from the galleries, continues a centuries-old tradition of Summer Exhibitions stretching back to its very first show, in 1769, of contemporary artists of the day.
This year’s exhibition, open until Aug. 21, honors 15 quirky artist duos — described as “men, women, man and woman, women who have been men, twins, siblings, friends, lovers, ex-lovers, spouses” — in a selection coordinated by the sculptor Richard Wilson.
Among the tandems, the Singh Twins, from London, known for their political works, are showing a mixed-media work, “London’s Burning: Read All About It,” inspired by historical fires in the city. The Berlin couple EVA & ADELE, who dress identically in campy and grotesque-looking frocks, brought a colorful canvas, “Double Act, 2015,” based on a backdrop of the contour of their bald figures. Most works at the exhibition are for sale.
Started in May and running until early September, graduates of the University of the Arts London, including Central Saint Martins and the London College of Fashion, will present their degree works. The shows are an opportunity to spot and sponsor new talent. Artists like Mona Hatoum, on show at Tate Modern through Aug. 21, exhibited at the degree shows early in their career.
Even Olympia, the grande dame of London’s summer fairs, taps into new talent for the first time in its 44-year history with a dedicated section. Dealers in business for seven years or less will take part in the event, whose full name is the Art and Antiques Fair.
“The idea is to promote emerging dealers and we also see that as an investment in the future of the fair,” said Mary-Claire Boyd, director of the fair, which runs June 27 to July 3.
“The heartbeat of the fair are our loyal customers and clients who keep on returning,” she added.
In this showcase of antique design and fine arts, meant mostly for clients’ homes, this year Howard Walwyn Antique Clocks will bring some of England’s earliest timepieces. Constantine Lindsay will display “Fishing Boats in the Harbour at Brusc” by the French painter Eugène Narbonne.
As in past years, the talks program contains references to exhibitions running in major museums at the same time. Among them will be a talk on “Painting With Light” at Tate Britain, examining the relationship of photography and the canvas in the country’s favorite artists’ works. The curator of “Undressed: A Brief History of Underwear” at the Victoria and Albert Museum will speak of the different roles undergarments have played in history.
“If you’ve got any interest in art, whether it’s modern, or antiquities, or 19th century or whatever, it’s a good time to be walking around the streets of London,” said Mr. Pampoulides, the Mayfair gallerist.