Alessandra Ferri, returning to the role of Juliet at 53, on Thursday, was recognizably the same dancer she was 10, 20, 30 years ago — and unmistakably different. The performance was of Kenneth MacMillan’s “Romeo and Juliet,” at the Metropolitan Opera House; the company was American Ballet Theater, with which Ms. Ferri, for over 20 years (1986-2007), enjoyed her greatest triumphs. Though she is an Italian who began her career in London, it’s here in New York that she has been most loved.
The plasticity, liquidity and effortless eloquence of her movement seem unchanged. Her stage persona remains vivid, ardent, rapturous, impulsive and compelling. And in the miraculous Herman Cornejo, she finds a Romeo who shares those virtues. Both have charm; neither cultivates it. The youthful intensity they share in this ballet has nothing sweet about it; it does have tremendous pathos.
Her vividly particular acting on Thursday, more than in any of the Juliets I have seen her dance — from her 1984 debut in the role with the Royal Ballet, to her 2007 Ballet Theater farewell performance — keenly brought lines from Shakespeare’s play to mind. The dilemma of “My only love born from my only hate,” when the Nurse explains to her who Romeo is; the passionate declaration of “My bounty is boundless as the sea/My love as deep” in the balcony love scene; and the anguish of “Then, window, let day in and let life out,” as she sends Romeo from her bedroom into exile: Ms. Ferri piercingly evoked those moments. The movement of her thought was evident in every movement of her body.
The famous arches of her feet, however, have grown yet more strangely pronounced. Though they were part of her beauty, they are now part of her frailty. She has lost both security and speed. Yet I was reminded of what the opera critic Michael Scott wrote of the great soprano Lotte Lehmann: “And her faults, what of them?” He added, “One may as well complain that the Venus de Milo has no arms.” Ms. Ferri today, though physically more vulnerable than before, is so complete an artist that this becomes part of her whole stage persona. When she was young, she was inspiringly reckless; but today she is more touching.
Mr. Cornejo — now in his prime, an artist yet more versatile, resourceful and bewildering than she — devoted himself selflessly to her. Though his technique is exciting, it’s all subordinated to expression. His jumps’ height and his turns’ speed matter less than their windblown, tilting ecstasy and shining, boyish fervor. How can this paragon of adolescent lyricism also be the mature prince or witty imp we see in other ballets? We do and we don’t know him; he dissolves his immense energy and skill differently into each role.
Ms. Ferri and he interacted brilliantly. Familiar moments — the way they, motionless, as if transfixed, gazed at each other across the space at the start of the balcony scene — seemed newly potent. Other moments — the suggestion of a fleeting disagreement in the bedroom scene — seemed their own invention, superbly judged.
Ms. Ferri’s new quality of pathos is matched by another new gift for expressive stillness. MacMillan’s choreography has always been punctuated by moments of immobility, but only now did those all seem to point the way to the final great stasis of death.
Earlier in the week, I caught two other Ballet Theater casts. Diana Vishneva’s Juliet, ravishing in the past and still superficially exquisite, on Tuesday tipped over into a study in narcissism. Sadder yet is a loss of freshness in her Romeo, Marcelo Gomes. Conscious charm rather than poignancy pervaded all their scenes.
The partnership of Isabella Boylston’s Juliet and James Whiteside’s Romeo (Wednesday afternoon) was entirely dewy, affecting, spontaneous. Few dancers anywhere have the springing ease of Ms. Boylston’s feet; they, like everything about her, caught the impetuousness essential to MacMillan’s conception of Juliet. Mr. Whiteside sometimes lacks dance polish, but he and she share the same focus and immediacy.
MacMillan (1929-92), having made this “Romeo” for the Royal Ballet in 1965, made several adjustments when he staged it for Ballet Theater in 1985 — principally, giving the mandolin dance lead role to Mercutio, for whom it becomes here the high, soon before the crash of his death scene. One or two misguided adjustments have arrived in recent years, however: notably, the unnecessary, even coy, moment when Juliet kneels beside Romeo during the balcony pas de deux. Here my memories stretch back. This “Romeo” in the years 1974-76 was part of my own conversion to dance.
As for Ms. Ferri, I realize — having watched her dance with the Royal Ballet School in 1980 and having seen the world premieres of one-act ballets MacMillan made for her in 1983 and 1984 — that there is no artist I have watched longer or through so many stages. And yet greedily, I ask for more. May she return as Juliet and in other roles.