Almost a year ago, the curtain rose for “Hamilton” at the Richard Rodgers Theater. Since that day, everyone involved in the production has had many wonderful experiences to cherish — from the performance when we hosted President Obama and the first lady to the heartfelt stories we hear from theatergoers outside the stage door.
But we share one regret: the lack of availability of tickets means that many people who want to see “Hamilton” can’t. Part of this problem, as it is for many Broadway shows, is simple economics: The demand for tickets exceeds the number of seats in the theater on a given night.
But there is another significant factor exacerbating this problem that is unfair to customers, and that lawmakers in Albany can help us solve.
Many would-be customers complain that tickets to their favorite shows, concerts and sporting events are sold out within minutes — if not seconds — after they are posted for sale.
So how is it that you can’t get through to Ticketmaster on the phone or online, and yet resale sites like StubHub or Vivid Seats instantly have tickets available at sky-high prices? Are they luckier than you or your neighbor? Can they dial faster? Is StubHub the lucky Sky Masterson to your hapless Nathan Detroit?
No. The issue is the widespread use of special automated software called “ticket bots” by third-party brokers, which Eric T. Schneiderman, the New York attorney general, discovered earlier this year during an investigation. His findings are detailed in a report called “Obstructed View: What’s Blocking New Yorkers From Getting Tickets.” Brokers use bots to connect at lightning speed and gobble up as many hot tickets as possible, then offer them on legal resale sites like StubHub.
The investigation confirmed that tens of thousands of tickets to New York events are acquired each year using such software. Brokers who buy tickets using bots substantially mark up the prices — sometimes by more than 1,000 percent — yielding enormous profits.
Incredibly, ticket bots are already illegal under New York law and their use is subject to civil penalties (the attorney general recently announced that large fines were leveled against six brokers). But the markup on resale tickets is so lucrative, earning brokers millions of dollars per year, that they happily risk prosecution and treat civil penalties as the cost of business.
To use another metaphor from “Guys and Dolls”: Big Julie is using loaded dice, and you and I do not have a chance. Tickets are taken out of circulation, punishing people who can’t afford to pay more than face value. The extra money doesn’t provide a better concert or show experience for you, the fan. Instead, it goes straight to the broker’s bottom line.
The problem will persist until we strengthen the existing law and make this recurrent illegal behavior a felony. In late April, Mr. Schneiderman proposed a bill to address rampant illegal use of bots.
In response, the full State Senate unanimously passed a bill making it illegal for ticket brokers to knowingly resell or offer to resell tickets purchased using bots and requiring ticket resale platforms like StubHub to post the price they paid for tickets on their platform so that consumers can easily see the markup price. Most important, since brokers don’t seem dissuaded by fines, the bill creates criminal penalties, including imprisonment, for repeat offenders.
The New York Assembly is discussing these measures for a similar bill sponsored by Marcos Crespo, a Democratic assemblyman from the Bronx. The Assembly should pass the bill and Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo can sign it into law.
I want the thousands of tickets for shows, concerts and sporting events that are now purchased by bots and resold at higher prices to go into the general market so that you have a chance to get them. I want theatergoers to be able to purchase tickets at face value at our box office and our website, rather than on a resale platform. And if you do go to a resale platform for tickets, I want the markup you must pay to be clearly displayed.
Most of all, I want you to be there when the curtain goes up. You shouldn’t have to fight robots just to see something you love.