Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights from The New York Times. In this piece, Jonathan Weisman, The Times’s deputy Washington editor, explains his recent decision to quit Twitter.
For weeks, I had been barraged on Twitter by rank anti-Semitic comments, Nazi iconography of hooknosed Jews stabbing lovely Christians in the back, the gates of Auschwitz, and trails of dollar bills leading to ovens. It all started after I linked to an essay, on my Twitter account, by Robert Kagan — one that discussed the emergence of fascism in the United States. At first, I let it flow, determined to preserve my Twitter time line as a shrine to hate and incontrovertible evidence of rising anti-Semitism. But last week, I had begun reporting the most egregiously abusive accounts to Twitter — and I’d received no response.
Then Ms. Bevacqua assembled the worst of the missives and images, forwarded them to Twitter and requested action. On Monday night, she was informed none would be forthcoming. The next morning, I logged on to see a new user calling me a “kike,” declaring that Jews should have their assets seized and hoping for a revival of the ovens.
I had enough. I proclaimed on Twitter that I would be leaving it behind — along with my 35,000 followers.
The racists, anti-Semites and broader world of so-called White Nationalists protest that any move to censor their hate would be an assault on free speech (orchestrated by Jewish overlords, they add for good measure). But that argument holds no water on Twitter, which is a private company, not a public forum — and one that has explicit rules.
Harassment: You may not incite or engage in the targeted abuse or harassment of others. Some of the factors that we may consider when evaluating abusive behavior include: if a primary purpose of the reported account is to harass or send abusive messages to others; if the reported behavior is one-sided or includes threats; if the reported account is inciting others to harass another account; and if the reported account is sending harassing messages to an account from multiple accounts.
It is not a close call when a user named “Holololocaust” tweets out beautiful women in Nazi uniforms, “Honorary Aryan” broadcasts portraits of Adolf Hitler, “Cato Maior” pursues his agenda under a confederate flag, and “NSRevolution” (presumably for National Socialist) uses a swastika as his logo.
Other things I have learned on Twitter: Taylor Swift has been adopted as the patron saint of the White Nationalists, apparently an icon of Aryan purity; racists and anti-Semites are obsessed with something called the “14 Words” — “We must secure the existence of our people and a future for white children” — and are particularly fond of holding Jews responsible for their own historical misfortunes, perpetually demanding that I explain why, throughout the history of the diaspora, the Jews keep getting exiled, brutalized and nearly annihilated. Message: We brought it on ourselves.
But Twitter appears determined to ignore its own terms of service, which also include a blanket prohibition on pornography. I can assure you that this, too, is flouted, since “Trutherbot Spawn” sent me a lovely and explicit GIF to illustrate his opinion of my behavior.
When I announced Tuesday that I would leave Twitter to the anti-Semites, racists and misogynist “Bernie Bros” who had been threatening female reporters covering Hillary Clinton, something clicked in Twitter headquarters. Almost immediately, I began receiving emailed notices informing me that many of the accounts I had flagged had been suspended. I could not determine what criteria Twitter was using, why @thebadgoy, @annudahshoah and @grandpalampshade were determined to be abusive, yet @CapoReturns, @wolfe_fan (A.K.A. Terminus Est) and @goyimist were just fine.
Mr. Goyimist has a point. The blocking or deleting of accounts on Twitter is a pointless exercise if Twitter won’t police itself for flagrant violations of its terms of service. As I wrote this, I took time out to open a new account on Twitter. My handle: @Jew_Hater, my Twitter name HitlerAnew (I_Hate_Jews, Josef_Goebbels, Heinrich_Himmler and Hitler_Returns were already taken) — and, hey, no problem!
Facebook users can make up names, but they at least have to sound legit. Twitter, not so much. Yes, Twitter’s free-for-all has advantages: parody accounts, anonymity for the persecuted and such. But that only means Twitter assumes more responsibility for policing its accounts.
I have been encouraged to return to Twitter, and told that I should continue to fight, that my exit was cowardly, that I let the haters win. And I might. I miss the quick rush of a scan through my time line.
But the fact is, giving up one social media space wasn’t exactly martyrdom. It wasn’t much of a loss at all. I have found myself reading whole articles through The New York Times and Washington Post apps on my phone — imagine that. I can actually look at the profiles of people requesting to be my friend on Facebook to see if they are, in fact, trolls. If one slips through, I not only can “unfriend” him but can delete his posts. It feels liberating.
And I am awaiting some sign from Twitter that it cares whether its platform is becoming a cesspit of hate. Until then, sayonara.