ST. PETERSBURG, Russia — When a global governing body for sports barred Russia’s track and field team from the 2016 Summer Olympics on Friday over a wide-ranging doping scandal, it was greeted in Russia, as is so often the case here these days, with a deep sense of victimhood.
But here, the decision only added support for a narrative in Russia’s political culture of grievances that revolves around perceived slights and anti-Russian conspiracies taking place in the outside world, particularly in Western countries.
The ban is the latest setback in Mr. Putin’s efforts to shed Russia’s pariah status on geopolitical issues like the Ukraine crisis and the war in Syria. When the news broke, Mr. Putin was seeking to win allies among European politicians Friday at an economic forum, where he recited in a speech a long list of grievances against Russia, including the expansion of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization after the breakup of the Soviet Union.
Russia, he said, expected an “era of benevolence,” but was double-crossed.
In 2014, the European Union and the United States imposed sanctions on Russia over the conflict in Ukraine. Russia annexed Crimea in March of that year and intervened in the war in the east of Ukraine, the bloodiest in Europe since the Balkan conflicts of the 1990s.The sense of bottled-up humiliation over the post-Soviet period has been felt in sports, too, and the Olympic ban prompted some Russians to uncork their anger.
The decision caps a glum week for Russian sports, during which soccer hooligans rioted in Marseille, France, after Russia and England played to a draw. Videos showed fans streaming through the streets, wielding the weapons of choice of soccer hooligans — beer bottles and folding chairs — in running melees that left property smashed and dozens injured.
Officials also found themselves on the defensive when it emerged that a prominent extreme rightist, Aleksandr Shprygin, who has been photographed raising his hand in a Nazi salute, led a formal Russian fan club, the Union of Supporters, to France. Groups that monitor hate speech regard Mr. Shprygin as someone who has played a leading role in introducing neo-Nazi ideals into Russia’s soccer hooligan culture.
The global governing body for track and field, the International Association of Athletics Federations, announced the Olympics ban on Friday, ruling in a unanimous vote that Russia had not done enough to restore global confidence in its athletes’ integrity.
Speaking before the announcement, Mr. Putin said the allegations of doping against his country’s athletes were part of a politically motivated “anti-Russia policy” by the West.
Russia’s sports ministry, which has alternatively stonewalled investigators and conceded that abuses had taken place but said they had been addressed, issued a statement saying it would appeal the decision and expressed disappointment.
A Russian champion pole-vaulter, Yelena Isinbayeva, 34, said that she would sue the I.A.A.F. for “a breach of human rights” for barring her from the Olympics, and that the ban was particularly painful as the 2016 Games would be the last for her.
Russian commentators said the sporting scandal could be seen as a microcosm of Russia’s broader struggles in the world today.
“Officials share this view of Russian society, a society on the defensive,” Sergei Markov, a former lawmaker with the ruling United Russia party, said of the soccer riots in Marseille. “Why should we trust the French authorities that these Russian hooligans are more guilty than the British hooligans? No. If we believe we are under attack, then we believe that Russian soccer hooligans are under attack. They had a right to defend themselves.
“Partly, they fought for Crimea on the Marseille streets,” Mr. Markov said.