Indeed, a similar kind of deliberate intention can be seen in Simon’s own life in rural Windsor County, Vt., where he and his wife Pia have lived and worked for the past 35 years. They originally settled into the company’s flagship location — a 200-year-old woolen mill situated on the Ottauquechee River in the sparsely populated village of Quechee — in 1981. There, they quickly opened a glassblowing studio and retail shop — and soon after, an on-site restaurant, while living in a loft space upstairs.
“The three things I wasn’t prepared to compromise on was somewhere beautiful to live and work and raise a family. Second was somewhere we could have our own hydroelectric power, and the third was somewhere you could have a good retail business,” Simon says.
The hydro-powered turbine he installed is the 30,000-square-foot mill’s sole energy source, providing enough power for the glassmaking studio’s furnace, which produces temperatures as high as 2,400 degrees Fahrenheit, as well as the brand’s flagship store and its adjacent restaurant. Some might consider Simon’s pursuit of alternative energy a visionary notion for its time, but for the quiet-mannered glassmaker, it just made sense. The same could be said of his restaurant, which has become a tremendously popular destination for its seasonal, locally sourced menu featuring produce grown within 40 miles of it. “We’ve been working with local farmers since we opened 30 years ago. So I laugh now at this whole fad of farm-to-table,” says Simon, adding that locavore cooking was simply a way of life in Ireland.
In 1984, the couple moved from the mill’s loft to a 120-acre property in nearby Hartland. There, they constructed a house converted from a barn, which they purchased in New Hampshire and reassembled on the land. “Simon wanted ‘character,’ of course, being from Ireland and England. Houses with Sheetrock weren’t his thing,” Pia says, explaining the impressive undertaking and house’s authentic rusticity.
As the family grew, a new wing was added on to the house’s original structure, including a living room showcasing Simon’s predilection for Scandinavian modern design: neutral tones, natural materials and simple, streamlined furniture pieces contrast with a bright green tapestry from Aubusson, France, that had been made for his parents in the ’70s. It was his parents’ artistic tastes, and the Vogue-worthy collection of mostly Danish design pieces throughout their southeast Ireland home that first influenced Simon’s own fondness for the style. His appreciation deepened during his early adult years spent at glassmaking factories in Denmark and Sweden. “That’s where I really learned to blow glass,” he recalled.
Over the decades, the company has grown to include a larger production facility in Windsor where its design and creative teams are based. Meanwhile, other local artisans and spinoff businesses have emerged nearby, including son Andrew Pearce’s own wooden bowl making studio. “More’s happening around the area,” says Simon, who, at 69, hasn’t slowed down much himself. This fall, “Simon Pearce: Design For Living” ($50, Rizzoli) will debut, a book featuring the glassmaker’s most iconic handblown pieces and classic designs.