Now, after decades of behind-the-scenes influence, Mr. Müller is the subject of a retrospective, “Master of Light — Robby Müller,” that opened Saturday and runs until Sept. 4 at the Eye film museum here. Directors and fellow cinematographers revere him for what they describe as an intuitive sense of rhythm and framing, the lyricism of his camera movements — he always operated his own camera — and his ability to use available light to extraordinary effect.
For Mr. McQueen, Mr. Müller developed a visual language to capture what appear to be men falling to their deaths in slow motion — a reference to the 1651 suicides of Carib Indians who leapt off a cliff rather than submit to their French colonizers on the island of Grenada, where Mr. McQueen’s parents were born. “Caribs’ Leap’’ is included in the exhibition.
Mr. Müller, 76, is suffering from vascular dementia, a degenerative disease that has prevented him from speaking and walking, although he is still responsive and understands what is going on, said his wife, Andrea, who opened his archives for the exhibition. “It was a good moment to do it now and not later,” said Mrs. Müller, a photo editor for a Dutch art magazine who married Mr. Müller in 1993.
The exhibition includes excerpts from Mr. Müller’s Hi8 video diaries, about 150 of some 2,000 Polaroids he shot while traveling to locations for film shoots, video interviews with directors, letters and other papers, and clips and screenings of his films, including the “Caribs’ Leap’’ installation.
In one display, scenes from “Down by Law” (1986) show the three jail escapees, played by Tom Waits, John Lurie and Roberto Benigni, paddling a skiff through the bayou as Mr. Müller’s camera slowly navigates through thickets of trees that both reveal and conceal the men.
Born in Curacao in 1940, then a Dutch colony, Mr. Müller moved to the Netherlands at age 13. After shooting experimental films, he began his professional life working with Wim Wenders in the 1960s, and they went on to make more than 40 movies together.
Mr. Guldemond credits them with pioneering the road-trip movie in the 1960s and 70s, with low-budget, black-and-white films like “Alabama” (1969) “The Wrong Move” (1975) and “Kings of the Road” (1976). The partnership culminated in “Paris, Texas,” (1984), which won the Palme d’Or at Cannes that year.
Directors describe Mr. Müller as not just an important collaborator, but also something of a personal guru.
Mr. Jarmusch said in an interview for the exhibition with Claire Pijman, a Dutch cinematographer, that Mr. Müller thought of himself more as a painter than a photographer.
Mr. Wenders described Mr. Müller’s working method in another interview with Ms. Pijman: “We would dream it up a little bit, the atmosphere of the film, and then I would leave it completely to Robby to find the light,” he said.
Mr. Müller worked on only a few Hollywood productions, including William Friedkin’s “To Live and Die in L.A.” (1985) and “Mad Dog and Glory” (1993) with Robert De Niro, but he was always disappointed with the process in the end, Mr. Guldemond said.
