TWENTYNINE PALMS, Calif. — Kilo Company of the Third Battalion, Second Marines was deep in a simulated firefight on a recent morning here in the high California desert.
A group of Marines on the aptly named Machine Gun Hill unleashed round after round of live fire as another group of Marines tried to seize the surrounding valley from an imaginary enemy.
After 15 years of fighting terrorists, the United States military is learning how to fight big armies again.
From the Middle East to South Asia to Africa, American forces for the past decade and a half have fought counterinsurgency and counterterrorist campaigns — essentially smaller-scale guerrilla warfare — rather than the large land wars of the past. But Russia’s invasion of Crimea, a surging China and an unpredictable North Korea have led American military commanders to make sure soldiers, sailors, airmen and Marines are trained in conventional warfare.
It is part of learning how to fight what the Pentagon calls the hybrid wars of the future, envisioned as a mix of conventional battles, insurgencies and cyberthreats.
In recent months the Army has held training exercises with hundreds of troops, tanks, drones, missiles and armored vehicles clashing against a supposed enemy force with similar abilities. The exercises are far different from what the United States faced in Afghanistan in 2001, when Qaeda insurgents and Taliban fighters disappeared into the hills and mountains and pulled the American military into a counterinsurgency guerrilla campaign that continues to this day.
Iraq, which began in 2003 as a classic movement of state-versus-state warfare with tanks and a big invading force, evolved into another counterinsurgency campaign. Today American forces are fighting yet another counterinsurgency against the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria.
On the recent morning at Twentynine Palms, General Neller was joined by Adm. John M. Richardson, the chief of naval operations, to watch the training exercise — the first time a Navy chief had traveled to the Marine base to do so. Defense officials say the changing nature of war calls for closer cooperation between the services.
After the morning’s live-fire mortar pounding from Machine Gun Hill, the two chiefs drove 30 minutes down the road to observe another exercise, the retaking of an occupied urban area. Marines had built a small city in the desert, complete with advertising for cellphone companies on the sides of empty apartment buildings.
The town in the simulation looked straight out of Iraq, and could have been Falluja or Ramadi, except without people. The buildings were sand-colored, with a distinctive Iraqi look to them.
The interchange and the exercise showed that as American forces learn conventional warfare, they continue to train in counterinsurgency tactics to take on the Islamic State, Al Qaeda, the Taliban — or some other group.
