The United States, a nation that once prided itself on pulling together when faced with tragedy and crisis, seems increasingly prone to factionalism even in the most somber of moments.
Over the last week, as the country processed the horror of the massacre in Orlando, Fla., it became clear that the dead there would receive no period of mourning before being appropriated by the proponents of identity politics, who all but picked over the bodies to advance their own agendas and viewpoints.
Barely had the shooting stopped when a furious battle to claim the victims began. It was wrong to frame the attack as being on gays. It was wrong to “straightwash” an attack on gays. The “Latinx” identities of the victims were being “diluted.” Trans people were being left out of the picture.
Some Americans seemed to have their favored one thing of what they wanted the victims to be, and for them the depth of the mourning seemed to depend on the elevation of that one thing above the rest.
It recalled the medieval criminal codes in which the penalty for murder depended on who was killed and who killed them.
To some, it was a situation in which everyone always already knows what they think about everything, and any calamity instantaneously becomes a canvas for those thoughts.
Those who already knew that America had a Muslim problem knew at once that this was a Muslim problem.
Those who already knew that America had a gun problem knew at once that this was a gun problem.
Those who already knew that America had a toxic-masculinity problem knew at once that this was a toxic-masculinity problem.
Those who already knew that America had an immigrant problem knew at once that this was an immigrant problem.
Those who already knew that America had a mental-health problem knew at once that this was a mental-health problem.
Donald J. Trump, who tried to appropriate the moment to advance his argument that national security requires banning Muslims from entering the country and increasing surveillance of those, including citizens, who are already in the United States, has never been shy about promoting factional grievance.
“We don’t have a country anymore,” he once said. With Mr. Trump, the “we” is arguably not American society as a whole but the subset of voters who share his view that the United States has become weak and a captive of identity-obsessed political correctness.
But perhaps not having a country anymore should instead be taken to mean civic bonds so frayed that a death will be fought over for gain.
If having a country means having some kind of deliberation about what the problem is, absorbing new facts, being moved by them on occasion, becoming alive to problems that might have blossomed in blind spots — if this is having a country, it is hard work having a country.
The Orlando tragedy brought together some of the most compelling, complex and divisive issues in American society: guns, immigration, national security and gay rights. It is hardly surprising that politics would break out around it, or that strong views would be expressed.
But the ensuing discourse was also a reminder of what’s lost when Americans obscure what binds them together and elevates what sets them apart.