For a golf course considered one of the most arduous in the country, the 18 holes at Oakmont Country Club, which will host the United States Open for a record ninth time starting Thursday, lack many of the most fundamental golf-design elements.
There are no ponds, lakes, streams or brooks adorning the holes at Oakmont, in western Pennsylvania. In the last dozen years, more than 14,000 trees have been removed from the grounds. A majority of the holes are straightforward, arcing neither left nor right in traditional doglegs.
There is, however, one idiosyncratic feature of Oakmont that is unlike any other regularly seen in American major championship golf. Since the course opened for play in 1904, Oakmont has had deep, quirky and vexing drainage ditches that can affect the play on as many as 10 holes.
The ditches, waist high in some places, were a functional and architecturally strategic element of the original layout, funneling rainwater off the course while simultaneously ensnaring the wayward golf ball into a shadowy abyss.
Technically, the ditches are considered Oakmont’s only water hazards, even if the fast-moving groundwater rarely remains in the trenched channels long enough to puddle. But a golf hazard can come in many forms as long as it lurks to unnerve and exasperate an inattentive golfer. And for 112 years, many a pleasing round has lost its promise in the bottom, or sloped side, of an Oakmont ditch.
“I don’t know if there’s any golf course that has anything quite like these ditches,” said Mike Davis, the executive director of the United States Golf Association, which conducts the United States Open. “They’re water hazards, but unlike most water hazards, you can see your ball and maybe get your ball out.
Undeniably, it is the riddle of the nonwater water hazard that makes an Oakmont ditch such a distinctive golf conundrum.
Most balls that land in typical water hazards are submerged, so the golfer is routinely forced to take a stroke penalty and play on. But Oakmont’s virtually dry water hazards, while rugged and often steep, are covered in a layer of fine fescue grass that can invite a player to ponder a penalty-free recovery.
Why waste a stroke if it is possible to knock the ball to a better spot on the golf course — if not the green?
Azinger conceded that most times the wise choice at Oakmont would be to take the punishment of a one-stroke penalty. But he also said that the ditches could be especially irksome.
The fescue in the ditches is wispy and unpredictable. The lie, most likely uneven, is treacherous. One swing might send the ball into another section of the ditch and bury it deeper still. Now what?
Oakmont’s roughly 700 members have learned their lesson.
That may be the course chosen by recreational golfers, but golfers on the PGA Tour have exceptional skills and will not be so quick to turn away from a challenge.
Davis, in fact, said he believed that in some cases a player whose ball tumbled into a ditch would still be able to advance it 100 or 150 yards. When was the last time that happened from a water hazard?
Curtis Strange, the last golfer to win back-to-back United States Open championships and who will be a Fox Sports on-course reporter during this month’s tournament, said the players were indeed cognizant of the placement of every prominent ditch because they are so punitive.
“They’re narrow enough that if you get into one, and get lucky enough for a lie, you never have a stance,” said Strange, who finished fourth at the United States Open held at Oakmont in 1994.
While the Oakmont ditches were plainly drawn on the earliest sketches of the golf course, many remain in places that might capture the drive of only a hacker, not a top professional golfer. But on many other holes, the ditches are unquestionably in play for anyone trying to navigate Oakmont’s layout, which is punishing for a variety of other reasons, most notably for lightning-fast greens and, perhaps, the most intimidating bunkers in American championship golf.
Asked to list certain holes where a ditch or ditches would most likely come into play, Davis last week mentioned the second and ninth holes, where there are ditches alongside the left side of the fairway; the 12th hole, where balls in the drive zone and the layup area may have to skirt a ditch; and the 18th hole, where there is a ditch left of the drive zone.
In general, Oakmont’s ditches, some of them cut across fairways, will have to be contemplated, respected and avoided in every round at the 116th United States Open.
That has been the case since golf was first played on the site, a former pasture until teams of mules and horses reconfigured the landscape.
At a golf course that is not overly devious, the ditches are the places where an apparently decent shot can trickle into a seemingly benign position. Nevertheless, what follows is often a thorough unraveling.
The last time the United States Open was at Oakmont, in 2007, Stephen Ames, a four-time winner on the PGA Tour, shared the lead in the opening stages of the final round. On the par-4 No. 7, Ames hooked his tee shot into a ditch, tried to hit his ball out and eventually walked away with a triple bogey.
Ames never threatened the tournament leaders again, eventually shooting 76. He tied for 10th.