NAIROBI, Kenya — Islamist militants stormed a hotel in central Mogadishu, Somalia’s capital, on Saturday afternoon, killing at least six people in what has become a well-established tactic to sow terror.
According to witnesses and government officials, the attack started around 4 p.m. with a car bomb at the gates of the Naso Hablod Hotel, before fighters ran in and shot at guests.
The Shabab militant group, which has been terrorizing Somalia for nearly a decade and claimed responsibility for the attack, has struck at least four other hotels in Mogadishu in the past year. A deafening car bomb at the hotel gates is typically how such attacks begin.
American-trained commandos from Somalia’s security services killed all four attackers after a shootout that lasted several hours, said Abdikamil Moalim Shukri, a spokesman for Somalia’s Internal Security Ministry. Witnesses said the attackers appeared to be tactically proficient, fighting their way into the hotel and then firing on government security forces from the rooftop.
Mohamed Mohamud, the hotel’s bookkeeper, said he was locking up his office and about to perform evening prayers when he heard a huge explosion outside. He looked up to see several gunmen rush into the hotel, and he hid near his office.
“I’m shocked but thank God I’m safe,” he said.
Somalia has been synonymous with chaos and bloodshed since the central government collapsed in 1991, sending the country into a tailspin of clan violence and widespread destruction. The government controls little territory and struggles to maintain security even inside the capital.
Many security specialists had predicted that the Shabab militant group, an affiliate of Al Qaeda, would step up attacks during the holy month of Ramadan, which began in early June and continues until early July. In previous years, Shabab fighters staged suicide missions and offensives against government positions during Ramadan, believing that it was especially auspicious to be martyred during the Muslim month of fasting.