OAKLAND, Calif. — The mayor came into office promising a “Safer Oakland” and greater trust between the residents of California’s most crime-ridden city and a police force notorious for abuse and misconduct. Until a few weeks ago, the mayor, Libby Schaaf, a lawyer who took the post in January 2015, seemed to be delivering. Burglaries, robberies and murders are down, as are complaints of police misconduct.
But in recent weeks, Oakland has been rocked by a cascade of sordid revelations that have left the city without a police chief and have surprised even a citizenry inured to police scandals.
An 18-year-old prostitute, the daughter of a police dispatcher, claimed that she had had sex with officers and said the police had routinely tipped her off to raids. More than a dozen officers are under investigation, Ms. Schaaf said, and at least one of the relationships began while the prostitute was a minor.
“It’s tragic that this scandal has overshadowed the incredible progress that Oakland has made,” Ms. Schaaf, 50, said in her wood-paneled office above the streets that are being transformed by what has been called Oakland’s renaissance.
This city of about 400,000 has long had a reputation for not only rampant crime but also police abuses. The Police Department has been under court monitor since 2003, when the city settled a civil suit claiming that rogue officers known as the Riders had used excessive force and planted evidence on suspects.
But the sex scandal and other controversies come at a time of brightened prospects for the city. Formerly dilapidated downtown neighborhoods are filling with restaurants, shops and yoga studios catering to the overflow of technology workers, hipsters and other economic refugees from San Francisco.
Like a present waiting to be unwrapped, a large white canopy envelops the Oakland building where Uber, the ride-sharing company, is renovating its future headquarters.
While the sex scandal grabbed the attention of the nation, so, too, did Ms. Schaaf’s slapstick succession of leadership changes — she announced the departure of three chiefs in less than two weeks — that culminated with an empty seat at the top.
Paul Figueroa, the department’s assistant chief, was then given the job, but he left after two days, without explanation.
She vowed to “root out a toxic, macho culture” and did not name a chief. Instead, she put the police under the control of the city administrator, Sabrina Landreth. A search for a chief would probably take six months, Ms. Schaaf said.
Officials here are also awaiting details of an investigation into racist text messages sent by officers. The messages are an echo of the scandal across the bay that contributed to the ouster of San Francisco’s police chief last month.
John Burris, a civil rights lawyer in Oakland who was involved in the 2003 settlement and has monitored police overhauls, said the scandals had been bewildering and disheartening because the force appeared to be on the cusp of emerging from more than a decade of court-mandated oversight.
One striking change has been the reduction in searches without probable cause. A decade ago, the police conducted an average of 3,000 a year. Last year, that number was down to 280, Ms. Schaaf said.
As part of the settlement, the city adopted a list of changes, including restrictions and conditions on when officers are allowed to use force. Out of 51 points in the settlement, Mr. Burris said, the police force is close to complying with the final three — racial profiling, the consistency of discipline and the effectiveness of the department in policing itself.
Mr. Burris said the latest problems revealed a culture of collusion and an unwillingness to report wrongdoing.
“It’s disturbing because people knew about it and did nothing,” he said.
Hints of the sex scandal began to filter out last year with the suicide of an officer, Brendan O’Brien, in September. Details of Officer O’Brien’s suicide note, which set off the investigation into sexual misconduct and in which he mentioned the prostitute, were reported in the Bay Area news media, and were highlighted in an exposé in The East Bay Express.
In recent days, the scandal has spread beyond the police force. The head of the Alameda County district attorney’s office, Nancy E. O’Malley, known for her aggressive prosecutions in prostitution and human trafficking cases, announced that one of her investigators had been placed on administrative leave for becoming friends with the prostitute on Facebook. A second investigator was placed on administrative leave for possible involvement in the racist text message scandal, said Teresa Drenick, a spokeswoman for the district attorney’s office.
Ms. O’Malley’s office is leading the investigation into the sexual misconduct. No officers have yet been charged.
The scandal has already affected the overhaul of the Police Department. One of Ms. Schaaf’s campaign pledges was to speed the recruitment of officers. But the City Council agreed last week to delay the start of the next police academy class by two months.
The force has 778 officers, well above the level in the aftermath of the recession, when layoffs brought the number of officers around 600.
Efforts have been made for more than a decade to make the police force more diverse. Police academy classes under Oakland’s previous mayor, Jean Quan, increased minority hiring and reduced the number of whites recruited to fewer than 50 percent.
“We hired a police force that looked more like the city,” said Ms. Quan, who also required the police to wear body cameras, a move that Mr. Burris called crucial in curbing abuses.
Crime is down — 26 homicides have been reported so far this year, compared with 40 at the same time last year. Robberies have declined 14 percent and burglaries 29 percent, according to police statistics through June 19.
But many streets here remain unsafe. Oakland is the most dangerous major city in California, according to 2014 F.B.I. data, the latest available. Stockton and Compton were in second and third place in terms of violent crime.
The police estimate that Oakland has 55 gangs. In more affluent neighborhoods, residents have banded together and hired private security guards.
Black residents say racial profiling is still common. Gilbert Cross, a maintenance technician who works across from the building that Uber is renovating, said friends and family members were sometimes stopped by the police for no apparent reason.
