Hedge fund titans once ran their firms like elite private clubs, picking who made it past the velvet rope and how much they would pay for access to supercharged performance.
Years of poor performance have now led a number of funds to consider something more like general admission.
Some big-name investors — MetLife, American International Group and the New York City pension plan, among them — have recently begun to withdraw their money from hedge funds in larger numbers. And the investors who stay are getting a chance to sit at the negotiating table and dictate lower fees and better terms for sharing in the returns that managers make.
It’s an unusual position for many hedge fund managers, who as a group are not known for sharing well with others.
For decades, hedge funds operated on a “2 and 20” model: Investors paid fees of 2 percent of assets under management and 20 percent of any gain in any year. When performance was good, the founders of the biggest firms were catapulted to the top of global wealth rankings.
Now, in a bid to persuade investors to stay, some managers are sweetening the deal by lowering fees in return for locking up investor money for a longer period of time and setting certain performance targets that if exceeded, investors would pay a fee. For newcomers, managers are even offering the favorable terms once exclusively offered to longtime loyal clients.
In recent years, investor criticism of hedge fund underperformance against a roaring stock market was met with frustration by managers who complained that investors couldn’t have their cake and eat it, too. A hedge fund manager’s job was to protect in down years but not outperform in good years, the industry argued. But when markets began to fall last summer, so did hedge fund returns, rendering the point moot for many investors.
Over the last 18 months some of the best-known managers — including William A. Ackman of Pershing Square Capital Management and Larry Robbins of Glenview Capital Management — have consistently lost money. Others that made bets on macroeconomic trends were caught off guard by wrong-footed bets and had to shutter their firms.
And many hedge fund managers found themselves crowded in the same stock. That meant big returns as everyone piled in but even bigger declines when everyone sold out.
Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, for example, was one of the most popular stocks held by hedge funds in 2015, and its stock price soared to more than $260 a share at one point. But when news of a government investigation came to light and issues with the company’s pricing strategy became apparent, the stock came crashing down. On Friday, Valeant’s share closed at a low of $24.
Mr. Ackman, who has been Valeant’s biggest cheerleader, has lost billions of dollars so far on his bet on the company. His Pershing Square Holdings is down 17.5 percent so far this year through June 7, in large part because of the Valeant position.
Other hedge fund titans including Paulson & Company and Viking Global Investors have collectively lost billions of dollars on the Valeant trade.
All of this has prompted some self-reflection within the industry.
“We are in the first innings of a washout in hedge funds,” Daniel S. Loeb, the founder of the hedge fund Third Point, wrote to investors in a recent letter, describing a “catastrophic period” for the industry.
But for some investors, acknowledgment of poor performance is not enough. In September 2014, the nation’s biggest pension fund, the California Public Employees’ Retirement System, or Calpers, announced plans to liquidate its $4 billion hedge fund holdings on concerns that the investments were too expensive and too complicated. In April this year, the pension fund for New York City civil employees voted to exit its portfolio of $1.5 billion in hedge fund investments.
Some insurance companies have shown their displeasure, too.
“We had a very negative experience in hedge funds,” Peter D. Hancock, the chief executive of A.I.G., told investors earlier this year. The insurance group plans to pull about half of its $11 billion in hedge fund holdings.
MetLife, another insurance giant that has roughly $1.8 billion invested in hedge funds, has been sending out redemption requests to those managers. Steven Goulart, its chief investment officer, recently told shareholders that the exit was prompted by inconsistent performance. The market environment will “continue to be challenging for hedge funds,” he added.
Investors pulled $15.1 billion from the industry in the first quarter of the year. But these exits are a drop in the ocean compared with the $2.9 trillion the industry manages. Other institutional investors, meanwhile, continue to pump money in.
Still, the pressure is mounting.
“Now the fact that people are willing to cut, you’re going to see pressure on managers who are not at the top of the pyramid are going to have to cut,” said Mark W. Yusko, the chief investment officer of Morgan Creek Capital.
In a move that is largely unheard-of in the industry, Mr. Robbins recently apologized to investors in an attempt to stem the outflow of investor money from his firm. He pledged to “right the ship as quickly as possible” and even offered investors the opportunity to put more money into a new fund that would waive fees.
Mr. Robbins has continued to lose money this year. Investors in his flagship fund have lost 6.5 percent as of the end of May. So Mr. Robbins is now offering more favorable redemption terms, allowing existing investors that add more money into the fund to step into the shoes of investors that have left, according to three people briefed on the firm’s plans who were not authorized to speak publicly about them.
As long as performance continues to lag, hedge funds will be scrutinized and hedge fund giants will be at a disadvantage.
