Philip W. Majerus, a biochemist who was credited as being the first to theorize that taking small doses of aspirin regularly can prevent heart attacks and strokes in vulnerable patients, died on June 8 at his home in St. Louis. He was 79.
The cause was prostate cancer, his wife, Dr. Elaine Majerus, said. He had taught at the Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis for almost 50 years.
Even before his findings were confirmed in a study by other researchers a decade later, Dr. Majerus was taking aspirin daily.
Later studies found that for people in their 50s who are vulnerable to heart disease, taking daily doses of aspirin reduces the risk of heart disease.
In 1998, Dr. Majerus received the Bristol-Myers Squibb Award for Distinguished Achievement in Cardiovascular Metabolic Research for his findings, which were credited with saving countless lives.
He later theorized that aspirin could also be effective in preventing some forms of cancer, pointing the way to recent studies indicating that daily doses of aspirin also reduces the risk of colon cancer.
Philip Warren Majerus was born in Chicago on July 10, 1936, the son of Clarence Majerus, a manufacturer who owned a five-and-dime store in Quincy, Ill., and the former Helen Mathis.
He received a Bachelor of Science degree from the University of Notre Dame in 1958, graduated from Washington University School of Medicine and did postdoctoral training at the National Institutes of Health. He joined the Washington University faculty in 1966 and retired in 2014 as a professor of medicine and biochemistry and molecular biophysics.
In the 1970s, Dr. Majerus and his postdoctoral research fellow, Gerald Roth, focused on the impact of aspirin on platelets, small cells that precipitate clotting when a blood vessel is injured. They clump together and a clot forms and seals the wound.
He studied patients who were being treated for kidney failure and, to facilitate dialysis, had shunts, which can cause clotting, inserted in their arms. After six months, 18 of the 25 patients who were taking a placebo developed a blood clot, compared with six of the 19 who were given aspirin.
Investigating how aspirin inhibited clotting, Dr. Majerus concluded that the medicine modified an enzyme that leads to the formation of a platelet-made molecule that constricts blood vessels and aggregates platelets. The pills’ effect lasts for the platelets’ life span, typically about two weeks.
“Phil Majerus, more than any other individual, has produced the most original body of work on biochemistry of platelets as it relates to thrombosis,” Prof. Joseph L. Goldstein, a Nobel laureate at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas, said when the Bristol-Myers Squibb Award was announced.
Harvey Weiss and John Vane were among the other scientists who pioneered research into the efficacy of aspirin in preventing heart attacks. Dr. David Sackett, who died last year, conducted clinical trials that confirmed their findings as he developed what became known as evidence-based medicine.
Dr. Majerus’s first marriage, to the former Janet Brakensiek, ended in divorce. In addition to his wife, the former Elaine Flansburg, he is survived by three daughters and a son from his first marriage — Suzanne Thompson, Mary Juliet Del Valle, Mary Karen Majerus, and David Majerus — four grandchildren and two sisters, Diane Brewer and Kathy Burke.