On Sunday, just three days after Britain’s shocking vote to leave the European Union, Spanish voters returned to the polls for the second time in six months to elect a government. In December, two upstart parties, Podemos and Ciudadanos, buoyed by a wave of voter frustration with the political establishment in a country hit hard by economic crisis and austerity, turned Spanish politics upside down, ending more than three decades of alternating governance by Spain’s two major parties, the conservative Popular Party and the Socialists. The resulting Parliament was too fractious to form a government, forcing new elections.
Sunday’s vote again denied any one party the 176-seat majority required to form a government. But there was no surge in support, as polls had predicted, for Spain’s populist upstarts. Instead, Spanish voters delivered 33 percent of the vote and 137 seats — up from 123 in December — to the conservative Popular Party of caretaker prime minister Mariano Rajoy. The Socialists won 85 seats, five fewer than in December. As for the upstarts, left-wing Podemos held steady at 71 seats, the same number it won in December. The other new party, the centrist Ciudadanos, saw its support drop; it won 32 seats — down from the 40 it won in December.
The results leave Spain where it was before Sunday’s vote: in debilitating political deadlock, with Mr. Rajoy still in charge as a caretaker prime minister who must now cobble together a workable coalition. He is not particularly popular. While his austerity measures last year improved economic growth and reduced unemployment, his party has been rocked by corruption scandals.
Still, the bottom line is that Spain needs a functioning government. Creating one requires cooperation from the Socialists, who vigorously oppose Mr. Rajoy. Given the widespread anxiety and instability elsewhere in Europe, the Socialists should think twice before rejecting any accommodation with Mr. Rajoy’s party, Sunday’s clear front-runner. Mr. Rajoy should also put the welfare of Spain above personal ambition, and consider stepping aside to allow a party member more palatable to the Socialists to lead a government that will address Spanish citizens’ deep yearning for political renewal, transparency and equity.