CHICAGO — Women with early-stage breast cancer could benefit from taking an estrogen-suppressing drug for 10 years rather than the standard five, researchers reported here on Sunday, citing the results of a new study.
In the study, postmenopausal women who took a drug known as an aromatase inhibitor for an additional five years lowered the risk of their cancer returning or of a new case of cancer occurring in the other breast.
The study is being presented Sunday at the oncology society’s annual meeting here and is being published by The New England Journal of Medicine.
But some experts noted that the women who took the drug an extra five years did not live longer on the whole than those in the control group. They said it was far from clear that the benefit of 10 years of an aromatase inhibitor outweighed the risk of side effects like bone loss and joint and muscle pain.
Most breast cancers are hormone receptor-positive, meaning tumor growth can be fueled by the hormones estrogen or progesterone. Even after the initial tumor is removed by surgery, women with this type of cancer are thought to have a risk of recurrence, albeit low, that lasts indefinitely.
“There isn’t a point at which we look at the woman and say ‘You’re done, it’s not going to come back,’ ” said Dr. Lisa A. Carey, a breast cancer specialist at the University of North Carolina who was not involved in the study.
So women typically take pills, either tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor, to block or suppress estrogen in hopes of keeping the cancer from returning. The aromatase inhibitor used in this study was letrozole, which is sold as Femara by Novartis but is also available as a generic.
The question is how long women should continue to take these drugs. Guidelines from the oncology society recommend women take tamoxifen for 10 years rather than five, because studies have shown this prevents cancer recurrence and improves survival. Or they can take five years of an aromatase inhibitor after five years of tamoxifen.
But the majority of postmenopausal women now start on an aromatase inhibitor, not tamoxifen. For those women, there has been insufficient evidence to recommend continuing beyond five years. The new study provides some such evidence.
The trial involved about 1,900 postmenopausal women in Canada and the United States who had already received about five years of treatment with an aromatase inhibitor. Many of the women had also taken tamoxifen for about five years before that, meaning they were entering the trial about 10 years after their diagnosis.
Half the women were randomly assigned to take letrozole once a day for five years and the other half a daily placebo.
After a median follow-up of a little over six years, 67 women in the letrozole group, or 7 percent, had experienced either a recurrence of their cancer or development of a new cancer in the opposite breast. That was lower than the 98 women, or 10.2 percent, in the placebo group. Using a statistical measure known as the hazard ratio, the risk of a recurrence or of new breast cancer was reduced by 34 percent.
The strongest effect of letrozole was to prevent a new cancer in the other breast. Only 1.4 percent of those taking the drug developed one compared with 3.2 percent of those on the placebo. In terms of recurrence of the original cancer — most of which occurred in bones, livers and other places outside the breast — there was a smaller difference between the groups, 5.7 percent for the letrozole group versus 7.1 percent for the control group.
Dr. Winer said it was most important to prevent recurrence outside the breast because that is what kills people. The small effect of the drug on such recurrences could explain why there was no difference in mortality, he said.
Some 93 percent of the women in the letrozole group were alive after five years, compared with 94 percent in the control group.
The drug increased the onset of osteoporosis, with 133, or 14 percent, of the women taking the drug suffering a bone fracture, compared with 88, or 9 percent, in the placebo group.
Over all, the extra therapy was tolerable. There was no difference in the quality of life between the two groups, as measured by questionnaires. However, the women in the trial had previously had five years of treatment with aromatase inhibitors, meaning they were already likely to tolerate the therapy. Many women do not stay on the drugs for even the first five years because of side effects like joint and muscle pain.
The study received funding from the National Cancer Institute, the Canadian Cancer Society Research Institute and Novartis.