Before the bisexual threesome, the kick line of cross-dressed nuns, the near-naked game of Twister and the yogurt feast, LoftOpera’s production of Rossini’s riotous “Le Comte Ory” begins with a relative whisper.
Rossini’s overture is the work of a composer with a sly poker face. Restrained and short, it ends quietly, with some demure plucks in the strings. It’s a sign of this young company’s skill that its orchestra, led on this occasion by Sean Kelly, is as persuasive in the score’s subtle moments as in its slapstick ones.
That slapstick is hardly stinted: The production, running through Saturday at the packed-to-the-gills Muse warehouse in Bushwick, Brooklyn, makes much hilarity, for one thing, of men scrambling for pink nun habits.
But the polish and panache of the staging, directed by John de los Santos, keep the farce from ever seeming amateurish. It’s a perfect union of New York’s most raucous and delightful opera company with one of the most raucous and delightful works in the repertory, a salacious look at libidos run amok on the home front during the Crusades.
If the city’s audiences know “Comte Ory,” it’s likely from a Metropolitan Opera production that opened in 2011 with an all-star cast: Juan Diego Flórez, Diana Damrau and Joyce DiDonato. The high spirits in that Bartlett Sher staging often seemed forced, but in Bushwick the simplicity and immediacy of the presentation (seen last Saturday) make the jokes and gags land without thudding.
This modern-dress vision of the work could hardly be pared down further: some creaky platforms, more or less; a bench; and, for the sensationally sensual second-act trio, a four-poster bed. But for all the efficient bareness of the setting, the show has a brightly colored, everything-but-the-kitchen-sink exuberance. Before the overture, aerialists dressed in yet more nun habits twirl high above the audience, a reminder that this space spends much of its time as a circus school.
But never does it seem as if the company is mugging; the director and performers have created characters, not clowns. Thorsteinn Arbjornsson, his tenor slender yet true, is tasked with the brutally high register of the title role — one of opera’s most tireless Casanovas — but grins and winks his way through the opera with easy charm.
The other sides of the central love triangle are even better. Silky, plangent lines flow from the mezzo-soprano Elizabeth Pojanowski, as the lovesick page Isolier. And as the countess Adèle, Sharin Apostolou’s clear, penetrating high notes don’t feel out of place with the general mellowness of her smooth soprano.
The supporting cast is strong, with Jeff Beruan booming as Ory’s put-upon tutor; Steven Eddy robust as the count’s henchman, Raimbaud; and Shirin Eskandani dusky-voiced as Ragonde, Adèle’s attendant.
The climactic three-way — one of Rossini’s most inspired, shape-shifting ensembles, with lines tumbling over one another like lovers — throws off genuine sparks. This is less because everyone’s stripped down to underwear than because the irresistible music is executed with such stylish confidence.