If you have long complained that “Gilligan’s Island” needed a lot more crotch humor, your voice has finally been heard. “Wrecked,” the latest effort by TBS to secure a lowbrow-humor beachhead, gives us castaways stranded after a plane crash. These thematic grandchildren of the “Gilligan” misfits are noticeably raunchier than their forebears. Or, if you prefer, these thematic children of the “Lost” crowd are noticeably less earnest than John Locke and company.
The show, which begins on Tuesday night, may be a sort of homage to both, and don’t be surprised if a Wilson volleyball turns up at some point as well. Like “The Detour,” another recent (and not as good) TBS comedy, this one is gleefully unsophisticated, full of caricatures and gags that are just a notch above frat-house humor. One plotline in the early episodes involves the discovery of a suitcase full of sex toys. Another focuses on angst among some castaways over where to go to the bathroom.
There’s nothing wrong with this kind of humor if it’s done with some originality, and “Wrecked,” after an unimpressive premiere, gradually finds an amusing groove. The bathroom plotline is pretty funny for potty humor, and a thread involving which of two movies to watch with the last bit of battery in a DVD player is also good for laughs. Episode 5 even works in an election-season parody.
The characters may be cardboard, but they grow on you. There’s Danny (Brian Sacca), who, with visions of playing the hero, tells everyone he’s a police officer. Pack (Asif Ali) is the obligatory tech-obsessed guy, struggling with electronic-device withdrawal. Jess (Ally Maki) and Todd (Will Greenberg) are a mismatched couple who have been together for years, she hoping in vain that he might put a ring on it. Best of all is Karen (Brooke Dillman), an assertive woman with no social filters but an ability to kill boars with her bare hands.
By Episode 3, “Wrecked” is what it wants to be: An enjoyably mindless comedy well suited to the carefree months.