PARIS — Journeymen get a bad rap. Heads down, they perform with efficiency the tasks they are handed, take the check and go home. Seldom are they known for diva tantrums.
In the case of Kim Jones, home is merely a stopover, a place (actually, there are two, one in London and another on the beautiful Place des Victoires in Paris) to stow the luggage he carries on his continual travels.
And his job as the creative director for men’s wear at Louis Vuitton, which he’s held for the past five years, is the paycheck that lets him indulge his wanderlust. That doesn’t mean he phones it in, any more than that his travels are part of a fashion thematic. They define him, as a human and as a designer. His restless spirit and eye inform what he brings to the workroom.
And so the many journeys he has made over the past year to Africa (“It’s an easy flight and it’s on the same time zone,” he said backstage before his show on Friday, held in the sculpture garden of the Palais Royal. “I can go to South Africa for a weekend.”) logically informed a collection that fused the spirit of the Punk clothes and memorabilia Mr. Jones avidly collects with motifs from both traditional black African cultures and the hybridized multiracial urban one so vividly evident in contemporary Cape Town.
On paper, those elements would not be obvious choices for goods produced for a global luxury-good behemoth. Yet Mr. Jones’s success at the house — he has produced one unexpected hit collection after another; notably that based on designs of the obscure British designer Christopher Nemeth — requires a workmanlike understanding of the brief.
A Vuitton customer in Dallas or Kuala Lumpur has no particular need to know that the fine lightweight mohair sweaters in the show, patterned like the skins of zebra, giraffe, hartebeest or nyala, were woven with technical yarn and knit on machines so expensive that few exist. And he may not get the references intrinsic to accessories like dog collars, D-rings, kinky rubber raincoats (shades of Sex, the King’s Road shop run by Vivienne Westwood and Malcolm McLaren). The designs sell themselves, no back story needed.
True, it might enrich one’s understanding of the covetable bags (the mainstay of a house founded as purveyor of luggage) to know that the drawings adorning them are adaptations by the artists Jake and Dinos Chapman of early Dutch etchings that Mr. Jones found at a shop near Boulders Beach on one of his South African trips. Then again, maybe not.
“They messed them up a bit,” Mr. Jones said of the Chapman brothers’ drawings, using a more vivid turn of phrase. With workaday professionalism, Mr. Jones reined it all in and elevated the goods a notch or two.
Of course, there are things of outright ugliness; there often are at Vuitton. A trench coat in what appeared to be albino crocodile seemed designed exclusively for a Bond villain, the bag of obscene-looking ostrich skin perhaps a place to stow his golden gun. At this end of the market, “exotics” are expected. As Mr. Jones has pointed out in the past, there’s an oligarch out there for every astronomically priced specialty item. He cranks them out dutifully and shifts his attention to more compelling aspects of design, like finding ways subtly to introduce Punk tartans and patterns derived from Masai blankets into a collection whose shapes are otherwise safely restricted: narrow-cut trousers, shorts, safari jackets, sleeveless sweaters, heavy soled sandals and lots of bags. Then he launches it all onto the runway, dashes home to collect his bags and heads for the airport.
Andrea Incontri is another of the unsung and gifted journeyman designers now at work (one is tempted here to cite, too, Maria Grazia Chiuri, the untemperamental Valentino designer who reportedly is to be tapped as the first woman designer at Dior). For the past several years Mr. Incontri, a trained architect, has been producing men’s wear for Tod’s, the family-owned Italian leather-goods house based in that country’s Marche region and best known for its gommino shoes.
Tod’s presentation, held last week in a pavilion set up over the tennis court at the Villa Necchi Campiglio in Milan, involved a series of tableaux vivants reminiscent of the images of elegant locals, mainly nobles, photographed for “Italian Portraits,” a volume commissioned some years ago by Diego della Valle, chairman and owner of Tod’s Group. Translated, those images embodied the aspirational consumer whom Tod’s as a brand lays claim to, and for whom Mr. Incontri implicitly designs.
He interprets the casual way rich Italians of a certain social stratum wear costly things by making pricey sportswear that looks vaguely offhand. Perfectos, field jackets, bombers with low slung bellows-patch pockets, linen shirts in abstracted leaf patterns, neatly pleated trousers and driving shoes, of course — they all have the quality of something you probably already have in your closet or should. That is, if you are the type of person who actually wears driving shoes and not a pair of ratty Vans to drive down to the hardware store.
About a million universes away from the cozy manly lairs that Tod’s created in Milan were the scuzzy corridors and cabins in a gay bathhouse in the Marais neighborhood of Paris where Hood by Air chose to stage its latest presentation Friday afternoon. Though a sign over the door called the place a hammam, a kind of communal bathhouse common in Islamic countries, the actuality was a little closer to one’s idea of purgatory.
Dimly lighted, labyrinthine, reeking of Clorox and other odors, the place was no deterrent to the determined fashion flock, which turned out in force — crowding stairs, corridors hung with condom dispensers and dank cabins in each of which a plasticized mattress occupies most of the floor.
Silly as it was in a way, the Hood by Air show was also bracing, renegade in a way that felt legitimate, not secondhand or referential —actually, kind of Punk.