Opinion|Reasons Behind the British Vote to Leave the E.U.
Reasons Behind the British Vote to Leave the E.U.
As a British expat of nearly 50 years standing, I am shocked and appalled at the small-mindedness of my countrymen and women. When I was growing up in the United Kingdom, at a time when the British Empire was waning, our collective view was always outward, not just to the network of Commonwealth countries but also to other countries with whom Britain had forged links.
It was a tolerant and friendly view. Immigrants entered Britain without rancor. They took jobs the British didn’t want to do and became responsible, taxpaying citizens. Now that view has turned inward. It has become narrow, suspicious, introverted and intolerant. It has diminished the country not only for its own citizens but also in the eyes of the world. The “Brexit” vote was a sad day for Britain and the British.
Your excellent articles about the British vote to exit the European Union alerted me to read other reports from the American and international press, which seem frustrated and puzzled by our democratic vote.
Imagine for a moment that American citizens were asked to vote to be governed by unknown and unelected officials based in Canada. Imagine that a foreign president had flown to New York and told the American people how to vote and how they would be punished by going to the “back of the queue” on trade deals if they didn’t agree?
Well, that is why I, and many of my friends, voted Leave despite having a higher education and being financially better off than most voters — and knowing that my vote might make me poorer for a few years.
A reset for the Brexit referendum is possible. You note that the vote was “not legally binding,” and Prime Minister David Cameron has said that he himself is unwilling to invoke Article 50, which would start Britain’s irrevocable withdrawal from the European Union.
Let the prime minister take one more step: Call for a snap election. Then let the voters decide in a way that is binding and that could supersede what appears to be a catastrophic blunder.
As a former Londoner, and an American citizen since 1980, I heartily agree with Tom Whyman’s analysis of the mainly older Britons who feel safer in the cocoon of the old England, in which Britons ruled themselves (“Hell Is Other Britons,” Sunday Review, June 26).
However, time marches on. We must all adapt to globalization and learn to live with peoples of all races and religions. On visits to family and friends in Britain, it seems that only those younger and urban have acclimatized to this fact, and now they will have to live with the consequences of the vote.
That is one of many reasons my family became Americans. It’s not just a change of address but a change of outlook toward ideas, possibilities and the world in general.
Your June 25 editorial “A Cry of Anger and Frustration” lacks historical perspective. The United Kingdom was never a full-fledged supporter of postwar European unity. It was not an original signer of the Treaty of Rome of 1957, which established the European Economic Community.
It indeed made a halfhearted attempt to join in 1963 and 1967, but was blocked each time by the French president, Charles de Gaulle, who at the time was harshly criticized for uttering his now prophetic statement that the British government lacked commitment to European integration. He was right.
The writer is beginning work on a book about the European Union after Brexit.
Throughout the campaign, depicting Leave with such grotesquely apocalyptic rhetoric most likely pushed many decent people who don’t fit Mr. Bittner’s caricatures into the Leave camp. Arrogance is repaid with resentment, and resentment moves the world (usually not in good directions).
Many prominent elites pushing to stay never took seriously the legitimate resentments of the 17.4 million who voted to leave, which is why they lost.
