From the revitalizing Financial District to Brooklyn’s trendy Williamsburg, here are seven new New York City hotels to check out this summer.
The Financial District has its first luxury all-residential hotel. AKA Wall Street occupies a restored century-old building on the corner of William Street and Maiden Lane. “Affluent travelers want more than a bed and a minibar,” said Larry Korman, the president of AKA. The hotel’s 132 modern studios, one- and two-bedroom suites and penthouses all feature living rooms and fully equipped kitchens with stainless-steel Celador countertops, custom cabinetry and Fisher Paykel cooktops, ovens, microwaves and refrigerators. A glass-enclosed lounge shares the 20th-floor rooftop with an indoor screening room and outdoor movie theater overlooking 1 World Trade Center. Now open; introductory rates from $428.
A New York skyscraper built in 1881 will reopen as the Beekman, a Thompson Hotel. A mix of old and new, the landmark building maintains its original nine-story Victorian atrium and pyramidal skylight. Martin Brudnizki designed the hotel’s 287 guest rooms and suites and two penthouses with turret terraces overlooking the Financial District. The Beekman will feature a Keith McNally restaurant, the three-meal Augustine serving French fare, while Tom Colicchio dishes up American classics at Fowler & Wells and cocktails at the Bar Room. Opens in July; rates from $619.
The Los Angeles-based hospitality group, sbe, is putting the finishing touches on the Redbury New York (formerly the Martha Washington Hotel), a bohemian-inspired boutique hotel in Manhattan’s NoMad neighborhood. The creative director, the well-regarded photographer Matthew Rolston, took design cues from the neighborhood’s legendary Tin Pan Alley, where music publishing flourished in the early 20th century. Historic black-and-white photos and gramophones decorate the 265 rooms. Danny Meyer’s popular ground-floor restaurant, Marta, an upscale Roman pizzeria, and the lobby lounge, Bar Marta, will be unchanged. Now open, renovation is to be completed late summer; rates from $299.
The Bernic, in Turtle Bay near the headquarters of the United Nations, is a new 22-story hotel close to the Chrysler Building and Grand Central Terminal. Drawings by the Brooklyn-based artist Ian Sklarsky decorate the 96 guest rooms, which also feature floor-to-ceiling windows, Apple TV, Strand book collections and glass-encased balconies. The street-level restaurant Allora has a menu of homemade pasta and other Italian-American specialties, while the rooftop bar serves cocktails topped off with skyline views. Opens Aug. 1; introductory rates from $199.
Channeling Williamsburg’s industrial past and the hip enclave it has become, the Williamsburg Hotel features an eight-story facade of Corten steel, brick and glass topped with a retrofitted water tower that houses a cocktail bar. Designed by Michaelis Boyd and run by hospitality veterans Evan Altman and James Stuart, the property will feature a vegetable-focused restaurant, three bars, a rooftop pool and lounge, a seasonal outdoor eatery and a double-height grand ballroom. Half the 150 guest rooms and suites come with private terraces overlooking Brooklyn and Manhattan, while a chauffeured tuk-tuk will shuttle guests. Opens July; introductory rates from $250.
The William Vale is reshaping Williamsburg’s skyline with a contemporary 21-story high-rise, and adding 20,000 square feet of retail space covered by a sweeping public park overlooking Manhattan. The hotel will offer a resortlike atmosphere that includes a 60-foot pool — the longest hotel pool in the city — a 24-hour gym, an oversize ballroom and upscale shopping. Each of the 183 guest rooms opens onto a glass balcony with panoramic vistas. The chef Andrew Carmellini and NoHo Hospitality Group will operate the restaurant Leuca, featuring Southern Italian, wood-fired fare and Westlight, the hotel’s rooftop bar with 360-degree city views. Opens in August; introductory rates from $350.