Of all the 20th-century master composers, Gyorgy Ligeti, who died at 83 in 2006, may be the most empowering model for a new generation.
This came through during three exhilarating concerts last weekend at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. Called Ligeti Forward, this series, the brainchild of the brilliant, insatiably inquisitive young cellist Jay Campbell, was presented as part of the NY Phil Biennial.
Early in 1944, Ligeti, a Hungarian Jew, was conscripted into a military labor battalion. His parents and brother were sent to concentration camps; only his mother survived. After the war, his cultural isolation in Budapest, in a curious way, enriched his development as a composer.
Initially, in 1945, Ligeti enrolled in the Liszt Academy in Budapest and studied with leading Hungarian composers. By the time he graduated in 1949, however, the country had fallen under Stalinism, a grip that included severe cultural repression, especially of modern composers like Stravinsky and Schoenberg.
But if Ligeti was then far removed from the centers of avant-garde music in Germany and France, he was also shielded from the weighty dogmas of that period. In 1956, as the Soviets cracked down on Hungary, Ligeti fled and settled in Cologne, Germany, at the invitation of Karlheinz Stockhausen, who had arranged a fellowship for him at an electronic-music studio.
Now, having had a cloistered training, Ligeti could dip at will into the full range of modernist styles. He followed his instincts, borrowing elements that intrigued, challenged, baffled and even amused him.
Ligeti’s approach make him an inspiration for many who have come after him. Composers and performers today care little about the stylistic battles that raged for decades in contemporary music. Instead, they pick over the past and boldly draw from disparate techniques, mixing in rock, jazz, medieval chant, whatever.
It was inspiring to see the mostly young musicians involved with this series, including the impressive players of the Lucerne Festival Alumni ensemble, so swept up in these challenging programs. Mr. Campbell’s concept for Ligeti Forward was centered on performances of this composer’s pathbreaking concertos for piano, cello and violin, featuring the pianist Conor Hanick, Mr. Campbell and the violinist Pekka Kuusisto.
The concertos were performed along with works by composers variously influenced by Ligeti. At 49, Alan Gilbert, who conducted the concertos, may have been a little older than the other participants. But he exuded youthful enthusiasm.
The opening program, on Friday, began with some chamber works by the composer Alexandre Lunsqui: Three Short Pieces and Kinetic Study No. 2. These inventive scores abound in squiggly dialogues between the instruments and cyclic spinning figures in a tart musical language. It was a Ligeti hallmark to explore unusual instrumental textures, as Mr. Lunsqui does here, and as Unsuk Chin does in her riotously colorful quintet, “Fantaisie mécanique,” led by the skillful conductor David Fulmer.
With Mr. Gilbert conducting, Mr. Hanick then gave an arresting account of Ligeti’s idiosyncratic Piano Concerto, completed in 1988. This astonishing 25-minute work, structured in five movements, is on one level an exploration of polyrhythms, in which musical strands, inner lines, melodic fragments and oscillating riffs sometimes seem to be unfolding simultaneously at different tempos, enticingly out of sync. During this performance, I was swept away by the piece’s sheer inventiveness and mood swings, from episodes of Bartok-like nocturnal music to bursts of cartoonish wildness.
The Cello Concerto, completed in 1966, is at once radically experimental and wondrously mystical. The first movement begins with the cello playing a sustained pitch so softly as to be almost inaudible. Gradually, the sound blooms, and other instruments (here an ensemble of 14) join in, like a cosmic exercise in tuning. Eventually, the music builds to atmospheric waves of sounds that seem nearly static. Yet, within those clouds, riffs and figures unfold in complex rhythmic patterns. The second movement is more kinetic, full of scraping effects and staggered bursts of eerie phrases.
The cello emerges as the first among equals in this concerto. Yet in Saturday’s performance, Mr. Campbell, playing with uncanny control and powerful expressivity, was the riveting focal point, aided by Mr. Gilbert and the players. This program opened with “Axiom,” a haunting quartet for clarinet, bassoon, trumpet and piano by Marc-André Dalbavie, music that involves spatial acoustics with widespread, diffused sounds, another avenue of Ligeti’s aesthetic. It ended with Mr. Fulmer conducting Dai Fujikura’s “Ice,” a rapturous, intricately orchestrated chamber orchestra piece that, as the conductor said in a spoken introduction, explores unorthodox sounds, including ruffling seashells, and exoticism, reflective of Ligeti’s work, but in a fresh, personal way.
The final program, on Sunday afternoon, began with John Zorn’s “Remedy of Fortune” for string quartet, a piece Mr. Campbell chose, he explained from the stage, because the composer, like Ligeti, mixed echoes of old musical sources (here, a medieval piece by Machaut) into his language. It was played vibrantly by the Mivos Quartet. Then Mr. Fulmer conducted five players in Gérard Grisey’s mesmerizing “Talea,” a piece that explores the elements of sound, another path that Ligeti charted.
Then the virtuosic violinist Mr. Kuusisto gave a fearless account of Ligeti’s Violin Concerto, a half-hour work from the early 1990s, with Mr. Gilbert conducting the inspired orchestra. The piece synthesizes searing episodes of modernist music with evocations of Hungarian folk song, Bulgarian dance, hints of Renaissance polyphony — you name it. One reflective passage is like Ligeti’s answer to Copland. (Call it “Transylvanian Spring.”) Mr. Kuusisto vanquished the concerto’s daunting challenges, giving a wild yet masterly performance and eliciting a tumultuous ovation. Mr. Gilbert, the proprietor of the biennial, beamed.