To the list of recent happy theatrical surprises, add this one: Rory Kinnear sings, and very well, too.
Long acclaimed for his work in the classics (and a recurring role as M’s chief of staff in the recent James Bond films), Mr. Kinnear has described his singing voice as being “dormant” for several decades. But as the criminal Captain Macheath in Rufus Norris’s new National Theater production of “The Threepenny Opera,” in repertory at the Olivier auditorium, he anchors the tricky piece with vocal authority and bite. In turn, the show achieves the scabrous power this time-honored title is often said to possess but rarely does.
Indeed, notwithstanding a notably bumpy opening stretch, I’ve never before seen a London staging of “Threepenny” that came so naturally by the sour sardonicism of this collaboration between Bertolt Brecht and Kurt Weill from 1928. The gold standard in New York remains the Richard Foreman production from 1976 at Lincoln Center, with which Mr. Norris’s production shares a strikingly caustic, unapologetically confrontational tone.
One or two commentators have suggested that this “Threepenny” is missing a heart. But that is to miss the point about Brecht’s boldly anti-bourgeois study in alienation that attracts even as it repels: You look on appalled and in admiration, too.
That could also be said of Mr. Kinnear, an era-defining Iago in this same theater in 2013 (for which he won his second Olivier Award), who here recalls Heath Ledger’s screen Joker even as he ascends the gallows — a ceiling-high staircase with no rails — in a climactic reckoning that truly does defy gravity.
Newly adapted for the London of today by the Tony-winning playwright Simon Stephens (“The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time”), the production at first threatens to morph into a misguidedly glib commentary along the lines of Mr. Norris’s recent musical at the Olivier, “wonder.land” — lots of earnest thesis-mongering, preaching to the converted.
But as the first act picks up steam and that immortal score takes hold, the evening soars on a canny, foul-mouthed amalgam that couples German expressionism — Haydn Gwynne’s Mrs. Peachum is an Otto Dix study in scarlet — with a deeply modern inclusiveness that finds among the cast the disabled performer Jamie Beddard, who has cerebral palsy and lands arguably the most trenchant one-liner of the entire show.
The distinguished supporting cast further includes Nick Holder’s Peachum, an ovoid figure of fear, and a bespectacled Rosalie Craig as his daughter Polly, one of the many intendeds, as it turns out, of Mr. Kinnear’s take-no-prisoners Macheath, who cuts as sharp as the knife that gives his character both a career and a name.
The tone is more shouty than creepy in the paradoxically dull revival of “Romeo and Juliet” that is the latest entry in the actor-director Kenneth Branagh’s yearlong series of productions at the Garrick Theater.
“Romeo and Juliet,” by contrast, lacks that staging’s energy or fizz. It is chiefly interesting for the casting of Derek Jacobi, the 77-year-old English actor-knight and theater veteran, as — wait for it — Mercutio, Romeo’s good chum and by some measure the most commanding male in the play. A cane-twirling Mr. Jacobi, old enough to be his character’s grandfather, plays the role as a gently camp confidant and occasional crooner who treats every remark as a seeming punch line in the continuing bad joke that this aging roué might otherwise call life.
Those of a certain generation will note the comparably unexpected presence of Marisa Berenson, of “Barry Lyndon” fame, as Lady Capulet. At 69, Ms. Berenson is rather old to be playing the teenage heroine’s mother, but her elegant gravitas helps a production that otherwise tends to raise the decibel level for effect: I would imagine that Michael Rouse, playing her hyper-Italianate husband, can be heard halfway to Verona.
The setting is the hotheaded 1950s Italy of a Fellini film, which makes it doubly surprising that so little sensuality crosses the footlights. The excitable opening suggests a revival of the Fellini-inspired musical “Nine,” but what follows is as emotionally monochromatic as the imposing gray of Christopher Oram’s sets. The most famous balcony scene in all of drama is here played out more or less at stage level; if a visual emblem of the diminished reach of this production was needed, there it is.
In Ms. Smith’s unnerving view of things, the natural world is behaving very unnaturally indeed: pigeons fly into windows, roses no sooner appear before they wilt, and the animal kingdom is on an ever-alarming march — that is, those creatures fortunate enough not to have been shot.
Ms. Smith’s layered narrative allows the expert six-person cast to function for the most part in pairs. The widowed Nancy (Stella Gonet) welcomes her activist-daughter Alex (Natalie Dew) home from an extended trip away, while seeking companionship with the prickly John (Ian Gelder), who in turn is glimpsed in a series of pub encounters with an anxious father named Si (Sargon Yelda).
As a metaphor for a society under siege, Ms. Smith cunningly taps into the fear of the other that courses through so much of the public discourse these days. Camilla Clarke’s smart design allows bursts of blood to trickle down a Perspex back wall in front of which are six characters less in search of an author than of the “new life” referenced at the ending — if all involved make it through the gathering apocalypse and their old lives intact.
The Threepenny Opera. Directed by Rufus Norris. National Theater / Olivier. Continuing in repertory.
Romeo and Juliet. Directed by Rob Ashford and Kenneth Branagh. Garrick Theater. Through Aug. 12.
Human Animals. Directed by Hamish Pirie. Royal Court Jerwood Theater Upstairs. Through June 18.