355 pp. Random House. $27.
In summer 1967, responding to a telepathic vibe of peace, mysticism, beauty, music, drugs, antiwar fervor and sex — a lot of sex — perhaps 75,000 young seekers poured into the streets of San Francisco. They slept in the parks, gave their bodies to strangers, strummed guitars, panhandled, meditated and tried or preached many paths to enlightenment. They found their way to Monterey to hear Jimi and Janis. It was the Summer of Love, flowering just two years after the riots in Watts.
Attuned to the possibilities, a man with unkempt hair and penetrating eyes wandered the Haight, seeking a particular kind of damaged girl. She felt homely and worthless. She felt life would never happen to her. Handled correctly, she would cede control of her entire life.
Charles Manson was a skilled recruiter, having gleaned his techniques in prison from a Dale Carnegie course, from Scientologists and from pimps.
But what of their own magnetism, those girls of his so psychologically enslaved they would kill for him, who sometimes lured others, preferably men with money, into Manson’s family? What was their fierce, unschooled allure?
Emma Cline’s first novel, “The Girls,” is a seductive and arresting coming-of-age story hinged on Charles Manson, told in sen­tences at times so finely wrought they could almost be worn as jewelry. It reimagines the summer leading up to the notorious Tate-LaBianca murders in Los Angeles in August 1969, and it dissects an obsession — but not the one you’d expect.
Cline’s fictional narrator, a former devotee now adrift in midlife, recounts with lingering detail her fixation not on the cult leader, but on one of his familiars: a reckless and ultimately murderous 19-year-old named Suzanne.
An uncooked chicken, it might as well be Evie’s heart, so keenly does she yearn to follow the brazen, raven-haired Suzanne, to pledge into her “familial contract” with the other girls.
She gets her chance when her bike chain derails on a dirt road. Suzanne and four others pull up in a black bus festooned with a painted “crude heart, crowned with drippy lashes, like an eye.” What a perfect prophecy, an unstoppable dark force married to everything Evie craves — to be seen and to be loved.
Evie passes test after test as she commutes to the ranch by bike. She keeps servicing Russell, receiving his towel with gratitude to clean herself. But she steals to please Suzanne; she washes windows with joy because Suzanne is there, singing. Still a virgin, she lets Suzanne coax her to bed with a guitarist, Mitch Lewis, from whom Russell hopes to extract a recording deal for his songs. Suzanne seems clearly modeled on Susan Atkins, who kissed Manson’s feet the day they met. Atkins either stabbed or held down Sharon Tate (she confessed to both). “How could it not be right,” she said in court, “when it is done with love?” Unlike Atkins, Suzanne cultivates her own devotee. She praises Evie, instructs her and annexes her with light touches. She throws Evie’s life “into sharp, mysterious relief, revealing a world beyond the known world, the hidden passage behind the bookcase.” Also unlike Atkins, Suzanne flashes a surprising protective side that will prove pivotal.
Cline makes Russell, like Manson, a master manipulator who can speak to a young girl’s insecurities with the precision of a picador. “The flattered sickness in me was so pleasurable,” Evie recalls. Like Manson, Russell can sweet-talk people out of cash and cars. And his friendship with Mitch recapitulates Manson’s attempted lock on Dennis Wilson, the Beach Boys’ drummer.
But Cline withholds the truly vicious Manson who kept his followers paranoid, awaited a race war, sodomized a 13-year-old girl in front of the others, beat some girls and used others for knife-throwing games and ­traded their bodies like currency. This keeps Evie sympathetic. If she doesn’t glimpse pure evil, can she be blamed for signing on? It’s also conceivable that Cline flinched, for in not pushing Evie to the edge, she eludes a harrowing, possibly profound exploration of her soul.
What results is a historical novel that goes halfway down the rabbit hole and exquisitely reports back. Then it pulls out, eschewing the terrifying, fascinating human murk.
Still, it’s a spellbinding story, and Evie has good reason to tell it now. A young man and his teenage girlfriend, Sasha, on whose face Evie reads a familiar and desperate hunger, have disrupted the dull placidity of her days. They know who she was; they want gory details.
This older Evie’s back to her early lassitude, only now she has nothing to wait for. She’s not in trouble, and she’s not seeking sparks in her “sexless clothes.” As a live-in aide between gigs, the most she can say of her post-Suzanne life is this: “I tended to the in-between spaces of other people’s existences.” Sasha’s troubles ignite her, but Evie’s too passive to steer Sasha out of crisis.
Apparently nothing since Suzanne has revealed again to Evie that hidden passage. Or maybe she’s stunned into vacancy by the thought of what she might have become. Not surprisingly, these ­present-day sections read like palate cleansers. It’s hard to believe that a narrator so poetically expressive would not have more agency, more drive on the page.
Regardless, Cline gorgeously maps the topography of one loneliness-ravaged adolescent heart. She gives us the fictional truth of a girl chasing danger beyond her comprehension, in a Summer of Longing and Loss.