Multiple people were killed and several others were wounded when gunmen opened fire in a popular restaurant area in central Tel Aviv on Wednesday night.
At least nine people were wounded on Wednesday in a shooting incident in central Tel Aviv and one person was in critical condition, with Israeli police describing the shooting as an apparent attack aimed against Israelis.
JERUSALEM — Two Palestinian gunmen posing as restaurant patrons opened fire on civilians in a popular Tel Aviv cafe on Wednesday night, killing four people and reigniting fears of terrorism in Israel just as a recent wave of Palestinian attacks had seemed to be waning.
Then the men pulled assault rifles out of their bags and aimed at the patrons, causing mayhem. Video footage showed customers fleeing in panic and a security officer repeatedly firing at one of the gunmen in a nearby street.
The police identified the attackers as cousins from Yatta, a Palestinian town south of Hebron in the Israeli-occupied West Bank. Security officers wounded one of the gunmen and he was taken to a nearby hospital, the police said. The second gunman was arrested, but his condition was not immediately clear.
The shooting victims were not immediately identified. At least one of the dead was a woman. Several others were wounded.
Tel Aviv has suffered a number of deadly attacks since a wave of Palestinian assaults began last October in Jerusalem and the West Bank and spread to cities around Israel. More than two dozen Israelis and two American visitors have been killed in those attacks. Most were killed in stabbings, though there have also been several shootings.
About 200 Palestinians have been killed during the same period, most of them while carrying out or trying to carry out attacks, and others in clashes with Israeli security forces.
This is a savage crime of murder and terrorism in the heart of Tel Aviv. It is done by criminal terrorists who do not value human life, who are willing to murder innocent citizens who were sitting in a coffee shop. I think a larger tragedy was avoided by the resolute action of citizens, of security people, police. We are going to take the necessary steps to attack the attackers and to defend those who need to be defended. Thank you.
In January, two Israelis were killed in a shooting outside a bar on Dizengoff Street in Tel Aviv. The gunman in that case was an Arab citizen of northern Israel.
In March, a Palestinian went on a stabbing rampage along a coastal promenade near Tel Aviv, killing an American combat veteran who was a graduate student at Vanderbilt University.
But Tel Aviv has not been a main focus of the violence. Some 200,000 people participated in the annual Gay Pride Parade there on Friday, lending the seaside city a carnival atmosphere.
The Wednesday shootings took place during the first days of Ramadan, the Muslim holy month. The police said they would bolster their forces in Tel Aviv to increase people’s sense of security.
To carry out their attack, the gunmen picked the Max Brenner chocolate bar in the Sarona complex, an open-air entertainment and shopping district in the heart of Tel Aviv close to Israel’s military headquarters.
Ofer Newman, a witness, said that four gunshots rang out, scattering people in all directions, and that a second burst of fire quickly followed. “In between the two bursts, police and security forces started to run around in search of the source,” he told Army Radio.
Mr. Jabarin, the bartender at Max Brenner, said he had initially fled in fear but quickly returned to the cafe to try to help the victims.
