About five years ago, Capitol Music Group started shooting black-and-white videos of musicians on its various labels, recording at Capitol Music Studios in Los Angeles with minimal fuss. The name of the series is “1 Mic 1 Take,” and it started out just as the name promised, with artists from Capitol’s pop and jazz rosters performing alone. (More recent videos, with extra musicians, seem to be using at least one extra microphone.) All the videos are amiable and useful and are ultimately to be filed alongside NPR’s Tiny Desk Concerts and the MTV “Unplugged” series. What’s being sold is the idea of simplicity as an absolute virtue, an idea that isn’t always true; nor is it always true that these musicians would be forbidden anymore from putting stripped-down tracks on their own albums.
Motown Gospel, one of Capitol’s labels, has compiled an album from these sessions with five of its artists: Brian Courtney Wilson, Tasha Cobbs, Myron Butler and Levi, Royce Lovett and Smokie Norful. Many of them brought reflective songs or spiritual ballads for the occasion, and because of that the record grows drowsy. Mr. Wilson puts vocal grit and moods shaded by many piano chords into the Stevie Wonder-like ballad “Worth Fighting For.” Whereas the young and mellow Mr. Lovett’s acoustic-reggae “Say Something” feels floppy in its lack of polish; you might want to hear a slicker version of him.
A few performers tear it up within reduced circumstances. Ms. Cobbs, especially: Her ballad “Jesus Saves,” with piano and three chorus singers, transcends most conventions. Toward the middle of the track, she’s slightly off the ground, her voice ripping; she is playing for an invisible audience. Still, you can hear a dramatic solo performance on a regular gospel record. What’s more unusual is a great singer with a small band, as in Myron Butler and Levi’s “Nobody Like Our God” — Mr. Butler singing with only a drummer, two backup singers and a pianist playing sophisticated harmony. There’s a highly produced, hard-funk, synth-heavy, full-band arrangement of that song on Mr. Butler’s forthcoming album, “On Purpose.” (And there is a live version of it with Mr. Butler singing in front of the International A.M.E. Church Mass Choir that can be seen online.) But here the microphones are dry, the groove is intricate, the tempo is wakeful, and Mr. Butler drives its long crescendo.