George Balanchine and Lincoln Kirstein opened the School of American Ballet in 1934. The speed, stretch, off-balance audacity and attack that Balanchine and his fellow teachers demanded of their dancers soon reached levels that were extraordinary, exemplary and — hurrah! — controversial. Less than 40 years ago, those qualities seemed truly outlandish to many European eyes. Already then, however, they were influential internationally. Today they are widely copied.
On Saturday and Tuesday, the school gave its annual workshop performances; the dancers presented two Balanchine ballets, “Danses Concertantes” (1972, to Stravinsky’s score) and “The Four Temperaments” (1946, to Hindemith’s score), and one by Peter Martins, “Les Gentilhommes” (1986, to Handel). Although it’s tempting to attend these events as a talent-spotter — these young performers will join companies around the world — it’s better to watch as a student, to learn a little of what these dancers have spent months and years mastering.
The two Balanchines are totally dissimilar. “Danses Concertantes” — revived only occasionally by New York City Ballet and largely unknown elsewhere — is jaunty, witty, intricate. Its performers, dressed in wonderful colors by Eugene Berman, seem to be professional entertainers, with strong elements of baroque formality amid their 20th-century speed and daredevil high-wire feats of balance, velocity and timing. “The Four Temperaments,” by contrast, shows us dancers (the girls in black leotards, the boys in white T-shirts and black tights) demonstrating a formal yet strange and inexorable process, in which they often alternate — as if racked — between powerful convex and concave shapes.
Emma Von Enck as the “Danses Concertantes” ballerina was full of warm humor, throwing off coloratura footwork with relish, showing her affection for both her steps and the ballet’s tightly elaborate construction. Her partner, Thomas Davidoff, was both elegant and free; his role has some of the most memorable strokes in the ballet, as when — twice — his legs plunge down into grand plié and, most unusually, he stays there several beats. The second time, even more unusually, he does the plié with the ballerina’s support.
These are dance jokes, where Balanchine throws in unexpected effects the way that Haydn does in music, and makes them part of a larger classical format. This “Danses Concertantes” was staged by Susan Pilarre, a member of Balanchine’s original 1972 cast; all 14 dancers at each performance (each role is brilliantly individualized) exuded glee, fun, sparkle. Balanchine choreographed a celebrated but short-lived earlier version of “Danses Concertantes” for the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo in 1944, for which Berman made these designs. At first, this 1972 version, made for New York City Ballet, did not eclipse the older one’s legend. Since an important 1989 revival, the superlative inventiveness of this one has become increasingly evident. Why don’t we see it more often?
In “The Four Temperaments” Balanchine asks courage of a different kind from the dancers: coolly urgent, as if driven. This revival was staged by Suki Schorer; the young performers’ audacity, fastidiously based in strict execution of complex steps, was wonderful to see. I single out Christopher D’Ariano, who on Tuesday gave an exemplary account of the Phlegmatic variation, caught up in the movement as if infected by it; but I’m tempted to name several others, too. The go-for-broke impetus of Courtney Nitting in Sanguinic was marvelous. Apart from the speed and force of her dancing, the nerve with which, at each performance, she tipped powerfully off-balance to one side — confident that her partner, Gilbert Bolden III, would catch her — always took my breath away.
These two masterpieces are endlessly watchable. From them, we keep seeing that style in ballet is a form of self-revelation. The same is not true of Mr. Martins’s “Les Gentilhommes.” Though it puts nine men through their paces and tests their accomplishments, it’s all polish and facade without any vital essence. It reminds me of the Parisian ballets of Serge Lifar, where dancers are forever preening themselves and proclaiming “Moi!” without really showing us why they dance.
Style here becomes mere mannerism — as when all nine men lean over to one side on one beat and then, on the next beat, solemnly flourish one wrist as if this was somehow important. (In both “Danses Concertantes” and “Temperaments,” the movements of isolated hands and wrists really are important; the movement tells us what kind of humanity is being indicated.) The staging was supervised by Arch Higgins; I have no fault to find with any aspect except the central one that it took place at all. The young executants are all officially admirable; but the choreography presents them as stuffed shirts.