Opera fans live for the moments when a big-voiced singer fills a soaring melody with raw emotion and thrilling sound. But there’s a limit: Daniel Catán’s opera “Florencia en el Amazonas” (“Florencia in the Amazon”) is made up almost entirely of effusive melodic lines.
That’s certainly the way it came across on Wednesday at the Rose Theater at Jazz at Lincoln Center, where New York City Opera presented the New York premiere of “Florencia,” first heard in 1996 at the Houston Grand Opera. The overwrought lyricism and lack of musical subtlety kept turning the opera melodramatic, even maudlin. This current production, directed by John Hoomes, was originally presented at the Nashville Opera last year and is the latest offering from the resuscitated version of City Opera, which had gone under in 2013.
The characters in “Florencia,” with a Spanish libretto by Marcelo Fuentes-Berain, are inspired by the writings of Gabriel García Márquez, though the opera is not based on any specific work of his. The story follows a group of South Americans on a steamboat journey down the Amazon to Manaus, the jungle city, where they believe Florencia Grimaldi, a world-famous, reclusive soprano, has agreed to sing. Among the group, it turns out, is Florencia, who is searching for a former lover, a butterfly hunter who shaped her young life 20 years earlier.
The opera touches on potentially rich themes: that love can unleash creativity; that mutual devotion and personal freedom are not incompatible. The Mexican-born Mr. Catán, who died in 2011 at 62, brought sure skills as an orchestrator and colorist to his music. Here and there, passages of gritty harmonic intensity, brief eruptions of skittish instrumental lines, and other restless touches remind you that he earned a doctorate at Princeton under the serialist Milton Babbitt.
Overall, though, his musical language is unabashedly neo-Romantic. In scene after scene, the characters break into seemingly inevitable, luxurious lyrical flights. Puccini is the model, though he was a more savvy dramatist who saved soaring melodies for crucial moments.
The sounds of nature, from chirping jungle birds to the surging currents of the river, are effectively captured in Mr. Catán’s orchestral writing, evocative of Debussy and Stravinsky. But the orchestra also swells with hokey cinematic outbursts. The story becomes sunk in heavy-handed symbolism when a storm sets the boat adrift and sets off a night of soul-searching for the characters.
The conductor Dean Williamson drew colorful, shimmering playing from the City Opera orchestra. The cast was excellent, starting with the plush-toned, expressive soprano Elizabeth Caballero as Florencia. The soprano Sarah Beckham-Turner brought a warm voice and earnestness to Rosalba, a young journalist working on a biography of Grimaldi. Rosalba at first resists, but finally accepts, the love of Arcadio, the captain’s nephew, here the ardent tenor Won Whi Choi. Lisa Chaves and Luis Ledesma threw themselves into several scenes as a long-married, frequently quarreling couple who rekindle their love during the crisis-ridden trip. Kevin Thompson made a sturdy captain.
The production incorporates videos behind the action to convey the passing shore and flowing river. In a bold choice, the currents (and creatures) of the Amazon are suggested by a dozen dancers from Ballet Hispanico’s BHdos company, wearing full white body suits and writhing on the floor at the front of the stage. One lame touch came when the strong bass-baritone Philip Cokorinos, playing Riolobo, the captain’s mysterious helper, appeared in a mystical butterfly suit to calm the storm. If the idea was to conjure a magical realm, he just looked silly.