For this year’s New York Issue, we concentrated on the tiny sliver of New York life that happens 800 feet or more above the ground, turning the magazine on its side to reflect the height of the tallest 21 buildings in the city.
Social media has been buzzing over the last few days with images of another special edition of The New York Times Magazine. Published last weekend, the “High Life” issue is their latest annual issue about New York and celebrates the height of the city, a nice idea that’s made special by the simple device of rotating all the content by 90 degrees. ...
Of course the magazine has a huge team and great resources ... not to mention a fantastic locale to focus on. But to do it so well and make it appear so simple is the special part of the project. ...
“We must keep print formats!” was my first thought after savoring the articles and images in today’s vertically-formatted magazine. Your reporters and their subjects expressed themselves with spot-on images and prose. The whole issue is a bewitching mix of history, aesthetics, human interest, engineering, architecture — and the list goes on.
Sometimes the topics with the most resonance are so much a part of our environment that they become invisible to our examination: New York City skyscrapers! Celia Carroll, Santa Monica, Calif.
While respectful of the challenges of producing content for multiple platforms — the print version of The Times and the digital — one would hope that content would be readable in both. This week’s print version of the Sunday magazine is simply unreadable. Magazines are not meant to be read as if they were wall calendars, and some of the typefaces were illegible in print.
The digital version of The Times provides much material that obviously cannot be included in the print version. But creating material for the digital platform should not render the print version unreadable. Harold Rosenthal, Delmar, N.Y.
As a newspaper professional myself, I have to say that I enjoyed the selection of stories in this week’s magazine about buildings that top 800 feet in height. It was an interesting perspective, both in the words and the photos, that most of us will never experience in real life, which is exactly why I read The Times.
I also appreciated the attempt to do something interesting and unique with the design for the issue, to try and highlight the staggering heights of these buildings by changing the layout perspective. It was clever.
But that said, perhaps it was a bit too clever, as it really made the stories difficult to read, so much so that it was easier to go online. As a newspaper guy, that hurts my heart; I enjoy the print edition and subscribe to it and avoid the early postings of stories so that I can spend my Sunday morning reading it. But this was such a pain to read that all I could think is that you were actually giving people a reason not to read your product. Brian Beckley, Renton, Wash.
Your special issue seemed like a glorification and barely disguised advertorial for the extreme income disparity that is ruining this city. What New York desperately needs is affordable housing. What it’s getting instead are these spires that figuratively tear the heart out of a disappearing middle class. Teachers, nurses, social workers — the types of people who actually contribute to the public good — have necessities more worthwhile of your attention. These buildings may indeed constitute “high life” but only in the eyes of people like Donald Trump.
While the profiles of the buildings were fascinating from an architectural and construction perspective, I found the people who own and, less frequently, occupy them to be off-putting, especially in light of the current political discussion on addressing inequality. Frankly, who cares whether these hyperwealthy individuals’ views from their apartments are better or worse than those in newer buildings? Amy S. Rich, Orange, Conn.
The sideways issue was very cute! Never do it again. It kept slipping off the counter when I tried to read it in the diner; it was impossible to keep flipping back to see which building was being discussed; the cover came unstapled and fell off with all the stress. I still finished the puzzle in half an hour, though. Linda Lashbrook, West Long Branch, N.J.