The pastoral life is probably not what many New Yorkers associate with the Bronx, but for Dr. Maya Shetreat-Klein, a pediatric neurologist who lives and works — and raises chickens — in Riverdale, the borough offers a deep retreat from the urban experience. In her practice, Dr. Shetreat-Klein, 42, combines Western medicine with diet and botanical remedies to treat children with migraines, seizures, attention deficit disorders and other health problems. Her recent book, “The Dirt Cure: Growing Healthy Kids With Food Straight From Soil,” addresses her work. At home, she grows herbs and vegetables, and takes advantage of the Bronx’s many acres of parkland. “We eat their eggs,” she said of her eight avian household members. “We have not eaten the chickens.” In addition to the birds, the doctor lives with her husband, Avni, 44, a physiatrist, their three children and a golden retriever.
SET THE TONE I wake up around 7:30 or 8, on my own. I will take a few minutes to sit in bed and meditate and have a quiet mind and set an intention for my day and connect with gratitude. The way I connect with gratitude is often through a heart meditation in which I think about all the things I’m thankful for, all the things and people I love. It helps me set the tone of the day.
INTO THE WOODS If I’m taking my dog out, we might go for a walk in the woods near my house. I’ll be looking for new things in the woods because I like to forage. I’m looking especially for mushrooms. Last year I found over 30 pounds of maitake mushrooms in a 10-day period. That’s a sacred part of my morning, to have that time with my dog in the forest.
EGG HUNT I or my husband will go to our chicken coop and check to see how many eggs we have. We have different breeds of chicken, so our eggs will be blue and pink and very dark brown. We can easily go through 10 eggs in the morning. We get as many as eight eggs per day.
HERBAL REMEDIES Typically I’ll do some gardening and cleaning out of the chicken coop. I grow kale, beans, cucumbers, tomatoes, collards, fennel, sunflowers. And then also I like to grow medicinal herbs. One of the herbs that I love is yarrow, which has a beautiful flower, but also, you can make a salve that is really useful for bruises and soreness, or you can make a tincture that can be useful for bleeding. So my son would sometimes get nosebleeds, and I would just give him a few drops of the yarrow tincture that I made.
PREVENTIVE MEDICINE, WOODLAND STYLE We’ll often go hiking as a family. I think of it as forest bathing, which is a practice that was named in Japan, and there it’s called Shinrin-yoku. Part of preventive medicine for the body, mind and soul is to immerse yourself in the forest for long periods.
 It may be taking leftovers and transforming it into something more fun and interesting, like a chicken potpie. And always a lot of vegetables.
WORKING BY CANDLELIGHT My middle son, Elan, has a violin lesson on Sunday evenings. And my daughter, Margalit, is usually catching up on homework. And very often I’ll bring back bits of the forest, like some beautiful bark or leaves, and I’ll make a little landscape with them on a table. We’ll light candles to have a nice atmosphere.
FAMILY MOVIE My kids always ask if we can watch a quote-unquote “family movie” on Sunday nights. It used to always have to be Star Wars or Harry Potter, but now we’ve evolved where we can watch some other choices as well.
CHECK IN, AND OUT Hopefully I get a few minutes in to talk to my husband about what’s going on with ourselves, with the kids. Then we go to bed. I sometimes meditate before bed, but it will usually turn into falling asleep. Having a peaceful, wakeful and mindful time at 11 o’clock is a little more challenging for a parent.