After the death of her father and younger brother, Ben, in a car accident, Cedar and the other surviving members of her family are still turning the pages, searching for ways to cope with their grief. Her mother buys a summer house in Iron Creek, Utah, the desert town where she grew up, and throws herself into building a new deck — something she never would have done before the accident.
 Cedar mopes in her room, watched by a vulture roosting in a tree outside her window, until she meets “Nerd-on-a-Bike” Leo Bishop. Leo has a job, in costume, as an Elizabethan peasant selling concessions at the town’s famous Summerlost theater festival, and he helps Cedar get hired, too.
The job, and her friendship with Leo, entices Cedar from her room and distracts her from her sadness and anxiety, if only temporarily. Leo is working to earn money for a trip to London to see his favorite actor play Hamlet, but ­Cedar doesn’t know what she’ll do with her money. There’s nothing she wants.
To increase their earnings, Leo and Cedar open a secret side business, the Lisette Chamberlain Tour. Lisette, Iron Creek’s most famous native, got her start as an actress at the Summerlost Festival, became a movie star and died mysteriously at the Iron Creek Hotel. Leo and ­Cedar lead tourists through the landmarks of her life, reciting juicy biographical tidbits. ­Cedar is determined to learn more about the circumstances of Lisette’s death and the whereabouts of her missing wedding ring — not only because the information will add to the appeal of the tour, but ­because the mystery torments her. She may dread facing the death of her loved ones, but when confronted with the death of someone she never knew, she is compelled to search for answers.
Reminders of her father and of Ben, who was “special” (he seems to have been autistic), continue to strike pain in Cedar’s heart. Eerily, objects that only Ben would have liked begin to appear on her windowsill: a small screwdriver, a purple toothbrush, a folded-up map. Who is leaving these things for her? Leo? The vulture? Or perhaps the ghost of Lisette Chamberlain? Yet another mystery to solve.
Cedar has a dream about Ben that is both moving and spooky in its simplicity. “Ben stood in front of the door and wouldn’t let me in because he wanted to talk to me. ‘Blue T-shirt,’ he said. ‘Gray pants. Orange sneakers.’ ” Cedar had forgotten what he was wearing when he died, until he comes to tell her in this dream. “ ‘Blue T-shirt,’ he says again. ‘Gray pants. Orange sneakers.’ ” She wakes up crying.
Some revelations near the end of the book are perhaps too surprising. Cedar uncharacteristically steals something valuable for reasons that never quite add up. She also admits to having resented the extra attention Ben got when he was alive, but this confession comes late in the novel and doesn’t have the impact it seems to demand. It might have added extra depth to Cedar’s character to see her struggle more with her mixed feelings and her guilt, along with her grief.
Even so, “Summerlost” is swift and ­entertaining. It reverberates with feeling. After a summer spent grappling with the mysteries of death, Cedar comes to accept that some questions can never really be answered. All we can do is live with the people we love, and love them back while they’re here.