Union Fare First came a cafe that becomes a wine bar in the evening. Stage 2 of this sprawling complex in part of the original Barnes & Noble bookstore is a restaurant. A very long bar opposite high-top tables leads to a dining room that is a study in recycling, decorated in reclaimed wood, with chairs strapped in rubber from discarded tires. There’s a raw bar and a charcuterie station. The chef, Yvan Lemoine, focuses on seasonal American fare. At his side, and supplying the cafe with baked goods, is Thiago Silva. His bakery will be in a food market, opening later, with pizza, burgers, salads, poké and Peruvian rotisserie chicken. (Opens Wednesday): 6 East 18th Street, |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , unionfare.com.
Coco & Cru An Australian partner, Cory Lee, brings a taste of summer in Sydney to this NoHo cafe. Look for asparagus with eggs sunny side up, assorted grain-based meals in a bowl, and a grass-fed burger given a down-under turn with pineapple and bacon. Most of the drinks, including beer, cocktails, wine, coffee and tea, are on tap (Wednesday): 643 Broadway (Bleecker Street), |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , cocoandcru.com.
Combina Einat Admony’s mix of Spain and Israel was not the home run she has scored with Balaboosta and Bar Bolonat, so she ended its run at six months.
Pravda This distinctive underground watering hole opened in 1996, when vodka still ruled at the bar. Keith McNally created it and sold it years ago to James Huddleston and his brother, Mike, who will close it at the end of June. In September, they plan a redo and expansion, with a new name, an all-day cafe on street level, and a restaurant and bar, serving small plates, Middle Eastern style, downstairs: 281 Lafayette Street (Prince Street), |||PHONE_NUMBER||| .
Mark Ladner The executive chef and partner in Del Posto is creating eight new Italian menu items for Maple, David Chang’s food delivery service. Among the dishes are a sausage meatball sandwich, whole wheat pasta with mozzarella and cherry tomato salad, arctic char with lentils, and chicken scarpariello: maple.com.
Maurizio Marfoglia, who worked at Pino Luongo’s restaurants and more recently at Tutto Il Giorno in Sag Harbor, N.Y., is now the president and chief operating officer of the New York-based franchise of the burger chain Wahlburgers, which was started by the chef Paul Wahlberg and his well-known brothers, Mark and Donnie. Mr. Marfoglia will oversee the chain’s operations in Coney Island and at future locations in Maryland, Virginia and Washington, D.C. Mr. Marfoglia has also taken over the Tutto Il Giorno and renamed it Dopo La Spiaggia.
By Chloe The immensely popular vegan restaurant from the chef Chloe Coscarelli and Samantha Wasser, the creative director of ESquared Hospitality, will open an outlet in the Howard Hughes development at the South Street Seaport district next year. This year, there will be By Chloe branches in the Flatiron district and SoHo: 181 Front Street (John Street).
Casa Apicii The name refers to the followers of Marcus Gavius Apicius, a first-century Roman gourmand and writer. And this new restaurant, which in July will move into the space that was the Lion, will have an Italian accent. Casey Lane, a chef who owns the Tasting Kitchen in the Venice section of Los Angeles, will emphasize his seasonal, ingredient-driven style. His executive chef will be Adam Nadel, who was at Lincoln Ristorante. Patrick Cormier, who was at Locanda Verde, will manage it: 62 West Ninth Street.
Sistina After 33 years on Second Avenue at 80th Street, this quintessential upscale neighborhood restaurant is moving. For once, it’s not a landlord-tenant drama: The owner, Giuseppe Bruno, has long wanted more space. “People request big tables for six or eight, and there isn’t room for them in this restaurant,” he said. So in September he will close Sistina and move it to the townhouse that was once Parioli Romanissimo and, more recently, Crown. “It will be a gorgeous room for ladies to have lunch,” he said: 24 East 81st Street.
Yonekichi Bon Yagi is known as the East Village emperor of Japanese food, with 10 restaurants in that neighborhood and four more elsewhere in Manhattan. The entrepreneur will open his 15th restaurant this summer in Hell’s Kitchen. A spinoff of his East Ninth Street restaurant of the same name, it will also serve rice-based buns with various fillings, including meat and fish: 746 Ninth Avenue (51st Street).