LONDON — Wagner’s “Tristan und Isolde” is the kind of work that opera companies do to prove they can. Hugely demanding of resources, time and self-belief, it makes a statement. And the statement in the new production that opened last Thursday and runs until July 9 at the English National Opera here is that this much loved but beleaguered company, struggling to survive near-terminal misfortunes, can still show a brave face to the world.
Star billing goes to the sculptor Anish Kapoor, who has designed the spectacular sets. It was smart to engage Mr. Kapoor: His fame will draw an audience beyond the usual opera crowd and fill the London Coliseum’s 2,400 seats. (Attendance is one of several problems the English National Opera has to fix.) But more than that, his monumental, magisterial abstraction is a perfect visual correlative to Wagner’s score.
“Tristan” is bulky but not busy theater. There are rarely more than three or four people on the stage. The chorus plays a token role. The context scarcely matters. And the little action that occurs is contained within the final minutes of each act.
For most of its four hours, “Tristan” is expansively contemplative: a meditation on the power of love. And Mr. Kapoor’s elementally grand images have a totemic beauty that invites reflective thought.
Act I played in a golden, pyramidlike frame suggestive of the ceremonial formality with which Tristan is escorting a royal bride to meet her husband. Act II was set in a vast suspended hemisphere, hollowed out to look initially like the moon but then revealed as something closer to a geological specimen large enough for two lovers to clamber inside. And for Act III, the hemisphere was adapted into a sort of human organ — possibly a beating heart, or Tristan’s wound steeped in the purple-red of flowing blood.
Isolde (Heidi Melton) made her Act I entrance in a shapeless wrap that made her look like a malevolent hot-water bottle. Tristan (Stuart Skelton) was a toy-box Jedi. And with slapstick routines foisted on their attendants, Kurwenal and Brangäne, much of this high-serious opera hovered on the edge of farce. It might well have been Godot rather than Isolde we were waiting for in Act III.
Mr. Kramer’s reasons for such unexpected comedy seemed to be that love and life are alternating forms of madness, equally absurd, achieving sanity only in death. Whatever his intentions, they drew memorable performances from an outstanding cast. In supporting roles, Karen Cargill and Craig Colclough brought a manic brilliance to the two attendants that might be called pioneering. Matthew Rose’s King Marke was a paradigm of sorrowful nobility, magnificently sung.
Ms. Melton and Mr. Skelton were credible and captivating as ardent lovers; if there was an awkwardness about their gestures of abandonment as they romped in Mr. Kapoor’s hemisphere, no matter. It was touching, poignant, heartfelt.
Both had brightly agile voices with no glimmer of the rasping tightness that afflicts too many singers in this helden, or heroic repertory. And Mr. Skelton proved to be one of the freshest-sounding Tristans on the world stage — having sung it only once before, with Simon Rattle and the Berlin Philharmonic this year. He takes it on again to open the 2016-17 season at the Metropolitan Opera, which should be something to look forward to.
The biggest cheers, though, at the London Coliseum went to Mr. Gardner and the orchestra. They were the opening-night heroes — partly for artistic reasons (it was a magnificently measured reading, rich in texture, grand in scope), but also for holding firm while everything around them at the coliseum staggers from one crisis to the next.
Throughout the company’s woes — which can be attributed to financial recklessness, mismanagement, infighting and deep cuts in government funding — the orchestra and chorus have been in the firing line, with threats (partly realized) to pare them down into a smaller and less permanent ensemble.
Disputes about the future of the chorus were what prompted the departure of Mark Wigglesworth, Mr. Gardner’s short-lived successor as musical director. And the company’s management continues to seek ways to save money or make money, including trimming the number of new productions. Perhaps they have been thinking about Mr. Kapoor’s artful sets. They would most likely raise a useful sum at Sotheby’s.