Presumptive Republican presidential nominee Donald J. Trump spoke in New Hampshire today about the shooting in Orlando.
In a demonstration of his willingness to flout convention and engage in a style of demagogic politics rarely displayed by a presidential nominee, Mr. Trump claimed he had warned of the sort of terrorism that marked the shooting, which killed 50 and was the worst in the country’s history.
“I said this was going to happen — and it is only going to get worse,” Mr. Trump said in a statement, arguing that Mrs. Clinton’s presidency would mean “hundreds of thousands” more Middle East migrants.
“And we will have no way to screen them, pay for them, or prevent the second generation from radicalizing,” said Mr. Trump, the presumptive Republican standard-bearer.
The suspected gunman, Omar Mateen, was an American who declared allegiance to the Islamic State and was the son of an immigrant from Afghanistan. Mr. Trump extended his opprobrium to that war-torn, heavily Muslim country by noting the wide support there for Shariah law.
In a separate statement on Twitter, Mr. Trump said that the rampage in Orlando “is just the beginning” and noted that he “asked for the ban” on Muslim immigration to America. He has made his hard line against Muslims central to his campaign, and, even after becoming the presumptive nominee and turning to a broader electorate, refused to fully back off from his call to temporarily halt Muslims from traveling to America.
Mrs. Clinton, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, initially responded with caution Sunday morning after early reports about the assault, offering her thoughts to those affected “as we wait for more information.” But after President Obama spoke in the afternoon, and called the Orlando killings an “act of terror,” she issued a longer statement echoing the president. “This was an act of terror,” Mrs. Clinton said.
In her statement, Mrs. Clinton said “we need to redouble our efforts to defend our country from threats at home and abroad,” focusing on the threat of terrorism. Further down in her statement, she called for more stringent restrictions on guns.
Accounts of what happened from officials and witnesses.
The White House declined to comment on Mr. Trump’s demand for the president’s resignation.
A tragedy in the middle of a presidential race would typically force restraint on candidates. But this tradition has largely vanished in the era of the superheated, social media news cycle, where mass shootings immediately set off debates about access to guns and, if the perpetrator is Muslim, Islamist terrorism. And if the Orlando massacre was a test of how willing candidates and their supporters are to pursue partisan attacks in the aftermath of horrific violence, Mr. Trump left little doubt about his willingness to push the boundaries of the country’s public discourse.
It was a vivid illustration of how little heed Mr. Trump pays to traditional political standards, whether it is on how campaigns are waged or on the kinds of positions he embraces. But there were few Republicans criticizing him for his Muslim ban proposal on Sunday.
A gunman killed 49 people and wounded 53 more in an attack at the Pulse nightclub in Orlando, Fla., early Sunday.
If Mr. Trump was characteristically bellicose in his response, Mrs. Clinton was typically restrained. She used her statement to make clear she recognized that the country had suffered yet another act of terrorism, but also made sure to offer her solidarity with the gay community and reiterate her support for gun control. She was also off the campaign trail for the day, but avoided Twitter blasts and refrained from making any extended public comment until after the president delivered his remarks in the White House briefing room.
Mrs. Clinton was also planning to give remarks Monday lacerating her rival. She had planned to speak about what she deems as Mr. Trump’s dangerous demagogy at an appearance in Ohio.
It is unclear whether Mrs. Clinton will use her speech to forcefully confront Mr. Trump. Mrs. Palmieri, the campaign aide, said Mrs. Clinton would discuss “steps she would take to keep the country safe” in the coming days and another aide said the candidate intended to refashion her address Monday to focus on the terrorism in Orlando.
What is clear is that the shooting will reorient the race for at least the next week. Mrs. Clinton was to have held a campaign rally with Mr. Obama in Green Bay, Wis., on Wednesday, her first joint appearance with the president. But she quickly postponed the event on Sunday after the severity of the shooting became clear.