On Father’s Day in 2006, a Brooklyn high school student named Chanel Petro-Nixon went for a job interview at an Applebee’s restaurant just blocks from her apartment in the Bedford-Stuyvesant neighborhood. Chanel, 16, was an avid reader and a straight-A student. She never came back.
Within about a day, her mother, Lucita Petro-Nixon, reported her missing. Three days after that, a woman taking out the trash found Chanel’s body, strangled and partly clothed, in a garbage bag on the street outside her building on Kingston Avenue in the Crown Heights neighborhood. As the weeks went by, posters offering a reward for information dotted Chanel’s neighborhood, but nobody came forward. So every year after, Ms. Petro-Nixon and her husband, Garvin Nixon, have joined with friends and relatives to honor Chanel at a memorial march.
But on Wednesday, nearly 10 years to the day that Chanel disappeared, the authorities announced a major break: A man had been indicted in her murder.
Prosecutors said that Chanel had gone to meet the man, Veron Primus, at her interview on the day she vanished and that the two were former classmates who went to the same church. While the police had long considered Mr. Primus, 29, “a person of interest,” it was only in the last few months that they were able to make a case.
At a news conference held outside the Applebee’s, on Fulton Avenue, Ken Thompson, the Brooklyn district attorney, said that Mr. Primus, who once lived in Crown Heights, was in custody on the Caribbean island of St. Vincent on unrelated charges of kidnapping one woman and murdering another. He was deported to the island from New York last year after serving a prison term for assaulting a different woman and violating a protective order she had against him. Mr. Primus was also accused of rape in that case but was found not guilty of the charge.
Robert K. Boyce, the chief of detectives for the New York Police Department, said at the news conference that investigators from the 77th Precinct tried to find evidence against Mr. Primus for years. Finally, last August, the investigation was handed over to the department’s Cold Case Squad.
Then, in April, Chief Boyce said, detectives working on the case received a call from the authorities in St. Vincent with what seemed to be a fresh lead connecting Mr. Primus to Chanel’s death. Neither Chief Boyce nor Mr. Thompson would discuss that evidence.
But last month, the New York television station WPIX interviewed the woman Mr. Primus is accused of kidnapping in St. Vincent, Mewanah Hadaway. Ms. Hadaway told a reporter that before Mr. Primus locked her in a wooden shed for three months this year, he showed her a news clipping on Chanel’s murder.
Mr. Thompson’s office is working with the State and Justice Departments to extradite Mr. Primus from St. Vincent. He said it was a complicated process that could take weeks or months.
After Ms. Petro-Nixon spoke, Letitia James, the city’s public advocate, and Scott M. Stringer, the city comptroller, stood in front of the cameras, asking anyone with information on the case to come forward. So did the Rev. W. Taharka Robinson, the pastor of the New Life Tabernacle Church.
