James B. Comey Jr., the director of the F.B.I., said that there had not been any indication that the the massacre in Orlando, Fla. was part of a foreign-directed plot.
WASHINGTON — The F.B.I. director said on Monday that the gunman in the mass killing in Orlando was on a terrorist watchlist from 2013 to 2014, but that months of intense investigation into his foreign travels, his inflammatory language with co-workers and his possible motivations did not produce enough evidence to arrest him.
The director, James B. Comey Jr., defended his agency’s handling of its past inquiries into the gunman, Omar Mateen, telling reporters that there had been no indication that F.B.I. agents in Florida missed any chances to apprehend or prosecute Mr. Mateen before the deadly rampage in which he proclaimed his allegiance to the Islamic State.
The attack highlighted the difficulty the American government faces in addressing the threat from the terrorist group. Unlike Al Qaeda, which favored highly organized and planned operations, the Islamic State has encouraged anyone to take up arms in its name. Often, that means the F.B.I. is looking to identify people who have committed no crime.
Once the F.B.I. closes an investigation, agents are required to remove the targets from terrorism watchlists. That rule is intended to prevent the United States from keeping secretive, open-ended watchlists based on suspicions that are ultimately unfounded.
In 2009, the Justice Department inspector general criticized the F.B.I. for not moving quickly enough to purge those lists.
But for the F.B.I., which also investigated one of the brothers who carried out the Boston Marathon bombing in 2013 before the attack, its dealings with Mr. Mateen once again threaten to raise questions about its ability to effectively intercept terrorist threats — or even suspects who have made it onto the bureau’s radar before.
Donald J. Trump, the presumptive Republican nominee for president, speaking in a television interview on Monday, blamed “terrible intelligence gathering” for the attack. Mr. Comey curtly declined to comment on the criticism when asked about it.
Mr. Mateen seems to have been “inspired” and “radicalized” by the Islamic State’s radical ideology, Mr. Comey said, but he did not appear to have received support from anyone overseas or from others in the United States based on the evidence to date. That “lone wolf” approach made it much more difficult to head off the attack, he said.
The F.B.I.’s most intense investigation into Mr. Mateen came in a 10-month span beginning in the spring of 2013, Mr. Comey said.
Co-workers at the security firm where Mr. Mateen worked reported that he had made incendiary comments claiming connections to overseas terrorists, including Al Qaeda and Hezbollah, saying he hoped that the F.B.I. would raid his family’s home so that he could “martyr” himself.
The F.B.I. opened an investigation, putting Mr. Mateen on a terrorist watchlist for nearly a year.
F.B.I. agents in Florida used multiple investigative tools, including an undercover informant who made contact with the suspect, wiretapping his conversations, and pulling personal and financial records on him.
They also sought help from Saudi intelligence officials to determine whether Mr. Mateen had contact with any known terrorist suspects during his travels for the umrah in 2011 and 2012.
For Muslims, the umrah is one of the sacred pilgrimages to Mecca, the holy city in Saudi Arabia. Unlike the annual pilgrimage known as the hajj, the umrah can be made at any time of year. More than 11,000 Americans make pilgrimages to Mecca each year, and Mr. Comey said the F.B.I. found no “derogatory” information about Mr. Mateen’s trips.
Investigators interviewed Mr. Mateen twice in person as part of the investigation. While he acknowledged making the incendiary remarks to his co-workers, he maintained he had made the comments “in anger” because he was upset about his colleagues ridiculing his Muslim background, Mr. Comey said. Unable to determine that he had planned violence, the F.B.I. closed the investigation and took his name off the terrorist watchlist.
But just two months later, in July 2014, his name surfaced again in connection with an investigation into a Florida man, Moner Mohammad Abusalha, who had gone to Syria and killed himself in a suicide bombing.
F.B.I. agents learned as part of the Abusalha investigation that he and Mr. Mateen had attended the same mosque and had known each other “casually,” Mr. Comey said. They interviewed Mr. Mateen for a third time, but determined that his contacts with the suicide bomber were not significant, he added.
“It looks like things were done well,” Mr. Comey said of the F.B.I.’s handling of Mr. Mateen.
Mr. Comey’s remarks echo those made after the 2013 Boston Marathon bombing. The F.B.I. had investigated one of the two bombers, Tamerlan Tsarnaev, but found no evidence to pursue a criminal case. Some in Congress criticized that decision.
The Russian government told the F.B.I. in 2011 that Tamerlan Tsarnaev was a follower of radical Islam, and was associated with unspecified underground groups in Russia, the F.B.I. said. The F.B.I. investigated and ultimately found no links to extremists. The C.I.A. conducted a similar review.
Another report by the inspector general concluded that the F.B.I. had followed its guidelines in that case. Though internal investigators said the agent involved could have been more thorough, the final report said there was no evidence indicating that those additional steps would have uncovered a crime or justified keeping the investigation open.
Such cases rankle F.B.I. counterterrorism agents, who say they are criticized both for leaving cases open too long and for closing cases that do not have enough evidence.
Sally Q. Yates, the deputy attorney general, also told reporters at the news conference that the Justice Department might look to adopt new procedures that would alert counterterrorism investigators if someone who had been under investigation and on a terror watchlist tried to buy a gun.
Mr. Mateen bought the two weapons used in the attack just this month, officials said. When he went to buy those guns after having come under investigation, “one would have liked to have known about it,” Ms. Yates said.