A year after Anna Wintour staged a fashion intervention on Broadway, a decidedly more glamorous crowd headed Sunday night from the Tony Awards to the various after-parties.
The first stop for the night’s winners, losers and hangers-on was the Plaza Hotel for the official post-awards party. It was the biggest, starriest and most louche Tony night many could recall, though many were shaken up by the mass shooting in Orlando, Fla., less than 24 hours earlier.
“I do believe the thing of ‘you can’t let them win,’” said Reed Birney, holding a Tony for best featured actor for his role in “The Humans,” as stars like Jake Gyllenhaal and Jane Krakowski piled into the Plaza.
Oprah Winfrey arrived shortly after midnight, positively beaming. “It’s pretty unbelievable,” she said, describing what it felt like to see “The Color Purple,” which she co-produced with Scott Sanders and Roy Furman, take home a Tony for best musical revival.
The band played vintage Donna Summer and the ballroom kept filling. But by 1 a.m., guests including Andrew Rannells and Michelle Williams were already making their way to Tavern on the Green, where the night’s biggest winner, “Hamilton,” was celebrating.
There, Questlove was the D.J. on a platform next to a packed dance floor. Lupita Nyong’o was barefoot in the center of it. Close by was the actress Amy Landecker, doing an impromptu lip sync to “Pump Up the Jam” that ended only because her boyfriend, Bradley Whitford, decided it was time for a little mouth-to-mouth resuscitation.
Lin-Manuel Miranda, the creator and star of “Hamilton,” was nearby posing for selfies and accepting congratulations. Has he had time to sleep, a friend asked. “From 1 to 3,” he said.
Many still wore the silver ribbons that were handed out at the Tonys to express solidarity with the victims of the Orlando massacre. “You have to celebrate, acknowledge what happened and move forward,” said Okieriete Onaodowan, who plays James Madison in “Hamilton,” before disappearing into the dance floor.
That party would go on till 5 a.m.
Also going strong into the wee hours was the annual party held by the Broadway public relations firm DKC/O&M, which took place this year at the Baccarat Hotel. There, in a 12th floor suite, was Diane Lane, seated by a grand piano belting out show tunes like “Maybe This Time” with a handful of tuxedo-wearing theater types.
In the bedroom were the Tony winners Mr. Birney and Ivo van Hove, playing with their statues.
Fresh off his win for directing “A View From the Bridge,” Mr. van Hove was clearly having a good time. When he left sometime after 4 a.m., his Tony was still on the bed. “Ivo forgot it,” said Rick Miramontez of DKC/O&M, though it turned out that Mr. van Hove had simply left it with his agent.