275 pp. Random House. $27.
When essays about race in America, written over a span of five decades, are as relevant today as the earliest one was a half-century ago, we gain new insight into how much real progress this country has — or has not — made. Positive changes since the segregation era are undeniable; yet, in certain areas, the nation has in fact regressed.
Calvin Trillin’s latest book consists of articles he wrote from 1964 to 2008, as a staff writer for The New Yorker. The opening essay chronicles the dramatic events of the book’s title, “Jackson, 1964,” when black and white college students converged on Mississippi, a bastion of segregation, to register black people to vote for the first time. Written after the murders of ­Andrew Goodman, James Chaney and Michael Schwerner — Trillin the storyteller here eclipses Trillin the reporter, mentioning “the murder of three civil rights workers” only in passing — the essay spotlights Robert Parris Moses, the brilliant strategist of the Mississippi Summer Project.
In 1964, Trillin captured an exchange with King that speaks to our current political moment. King was flying to Mississippi when a young white man with “a thick drawl” and self-identifying as a Christian leaned across the aisle and questioned whether King’s movement was teaching Christian love or inciting violence. King explained that “love with justice” was a basic tenet of the nonviolent civil rights movement, and asked him what he thought of the new civil rights law. The inquisitor said he hadn’t read it.
In today’s hostile political climate, when an air of fatalist resentment seems to emanate from supporters of Donald Trump, that conversation, with a change of names, could easily occur.
Trillin also profiled people who were subject to America’s growing carceral state and police brutality. He visited Texas in 1970 to write about the “noisiest black militant in Houston,” who was sentenced to 30 years for giving away one marijuana cigarette. In 1975, he traveled to Seattle to write about a black man killed by a white policeman, against whom no charges were brought.
Trillin’s reporting in several of his essays offers insight into the mix of fear, entitlement, anxiety and sense of superiority felt by many white Americans. “No sophisticated study of public opinion is needed to establish the fact that in the United States, North or South, a white life is considered to be of more value than a Negro life,” he wrote in 1964.
