The discovery of a body, apparently cut in half and straddling an international border, forces bickering cops from neighboring countries to cooperate. It’s out there, as premises go, and it doesn’t seem as universally appealing as those of, say, “Law & Order” or “CSI.” But the Danish-Swedish series “The Bridge” has proved surprisingly exportable. It inspired an American remake of the same title, which ran for two seasons on FX, and then a British-French series, “The Tunnel,” whose second season ended recently.
American viewers can now compare all three versions, with the 10-episode first season of “The Tunnel” making its debut on PBS on Sunday. Fans of the tense, brittle original and the more florid, baroque American remake will probably be curious to see how the story has been adapted, a process that begins with the discovery of the body not on a bridge but in the Channel Tunnel.
What they will find — and the experience of watching “The Tunnel” will differ greatly, depending on whether a viewer has already seen one or both of the earlier versions — is that in the early going, the story has hardly been adapted at all. “The Tunnel” begins, and to some degree continues, as a hyper-faithful remake of the original Nordic production.
The major and minor characters are duplicated, beginning with the lead detectives, an uptight woman (Clémence Poésy) with no social skills and a laid-back man (Stephen Dillane) with a blended family and a recent vasectomy. The correspondences continue: her avuncular boss, his disaffected older son (who develops a crush on the female cop), an egotistic reporter, a strange guy who helps out undocumented immigrants.
The investigation proceeds in the same way it did in the original; the killer responds in the same way; and events happen against a similar background of social unrest. For viewers who have seen this story already (which, in the age of streaming, could be a significant percentage), there are no surprises. When the scenes that were showstopping set pieces in the original come along — when the reporter’s car doors lock themselves, and red lights start flashing — they don’t have the same effect.
Perhaps it’s unfair not to take the series completely on its own terms, and perhaps you might find the similarities comforting rather than redundant. In any case, you’ve been warned. For those who come to “The Tunnel” fresh, the story is still intriguing and amusingly outré, but there’s less of a sense of urgency in the direction, which makes some of the more outlandish plot twists more difficult to gloss over. There’s the same fetish for infrastructure, but the photography of the Chunnel and various port and railway areas doesn’t have the hallucinatory quality the original gave to the Oresund Bridge.
A pleasure that does translate from one version of the story to another, and it’s significant, is the humor and pathos of the relationship between the mismatched detectives. Ms. Poésy is fine as the clipped Frenchwoman who might have Asperger’s syndrome, but Mr. Dillane carries the show as the rumpled British Everyman. As with Kim Bodnia in the Scandinavian series, and Demián Bechir in the American, if he can accept all the craziness going on around him, so can we.