Gawker Media is seeking bankruptcy protection after the $140 million judgment against it in the Hulk Hogan lawsuit (nytimes.com, June 10). This is the next step in the legal process of individuals pursuing redress for harm caused by Gawker’s destructive publications, including my own $35 million suit for defamation. But beyond the legal narrative, I hope we will now see a repudiation of Gawker and its ilk by large numbers of readers, and also by anyone seeking a career in journalism.
The financial success of Gawker and its affiliated sites did not depend on insight or inspiration in the content. It depended on the number of visitors to the sites and other metrics, which translate into higher ad revenues and increased valuation.
In order to get the maximum number of visitors and click-throughs, a site like Gawker can rely on a simple calculation. First, what is the most sensationalist, defamatory, exploitative content we can come up with? Let’s call that the upside. The downside is the possibility that someone harmed by that content will sue the website publisher. But there seemed to be little or no worry about legal action, which would be expensive and embarrassing for the plaintiff.
But a funny thing happened in Gawker’s race to the bank. Some of the people who were getting run over — like Hulk Hogan and me — called in the law.
If any good has come from this situation, it’s the fact that the victims themselves initiated the counterattack against Gawker, rather than an outside law enforcement or regulatory agency. It’s great to hit a bully with my own hands, and to hit him in the wallet, where it hurts the most.
The writer, chief executive of CytoSolve, has sued Gawker for calling him a “liar” and a “fraud” for his claim to the invention of email.
Stephen Marche writes of the Hulk Hogan sex tape: “No one could possibly object if that were the tape of a congressman.” I could. And to answer my objection you would have to demonstrate to me the relevance of the congressman’s sexual activity to his oath of office.
Mr. Marche’s underlying view — that “Gawker predicted and took up arms against” the “asymmetry of celebrity power” — is a specious passing of the buck. Celebrity is not a quality inherent to a celebrity. It is conferred by the attention of others, attention that is only enhanced by every salacious Gawker post.
Mr. Marche writes of “the celebrity culture we all inhabit.” I do not. I watch no reality television, have no Facebook page, tweet no tweets. Reality TV has debased our entertainment; social media have made our interactions shallower; and journalism’s abandonment of the editorial function has made the truth that much more elusive, and erased the distinction between what is vital and what is trivial. Gawker is no scapegoat — it is the enemy.
It has been hard recently to get away from the stories about Peter Thiel’s funding of lawsuits against Gawker. The media coverage has focused almost exclusively on the threat that such lawsuits pose to freedom of the press. This, though, misses the much larger and more troubling story that deserves our full attention: that access to the legal system is so dependent on money that even a man as wealthy and famous as Terry Bollea (Hulk Hogan) needs a billionaire sponsor for a lawsuit.
The knowledge that money buys access to the law is by no means new, but this case could serve to bring this systemic issue more to public attention. Perhaps, if the media would redirect its focus, there is an opportunity in this presidential election year to help to ensure equal access to the law for rich and poor alike.
