Study this graphic of the British royal family tree and line of succession. What do you notice about the royal family? Where does Prince Harry fall in line to the throne? What questions about the monarchy and who is included does this article raise for you?
1. To what “ghosts of royal marriages past” is the title of the article referring? Why do you think the author begins the article by detailing this history?
2. Who is Prince Harry? Who is Meghan Markle?
3. The author writes that this engagement “is at once a huge deal, and not much of one at all.” What makes it, in one sense, not such a big deal?
4. What are two reasons that, according to the author, make Prince Harry and Ms. Markle’s engagement significant?
5. Why has Prince Harry accused some news outlets of racist and classist undertones in their portrayals of Ms. Markle as “unsuitable” for royalty?
6. Why does the Guardian commentator Afua Hirsch believe that Ms. Markle’s addition to the royal family has the potential to prompt conversations about race in Britain?
Are we being ushered into a new era where the boundaries of race and class will be blown open in Britain, when people will grow more open-minded about who they can consider as a mate? This is probably optimistic, though in some ways not: Interracial marriages are on the rise in Britain. In this sense, the prince and Ms. Markle are following, not leading. What is more intriguing is the question of whether, as a result of this unlikely pairing, more people of color will come to feel they have a stake in the country’s most old-fashioned institution.
There have been some racist responses to the announcement, just as there were racist reactions when they first started dating. There will probably be more. It’s impressive to see a prince who’s not afraid to ruffle a few feathers, who has made a clear statement against those prejudices by refusing to allow them to affect his personal choices. Harry feels millennial, current, like a prince for our times. His impact on modernizing the royal family’s image cannot be underestimated. He’s made the royals seem more in touch with the public. His union with Ms. Markle has shaken to the core the country’s ideas about who is entitled to a seat at the royal table.
What is your opinion of the royal engagement?
Do you think high-profile marriages like this one have the power to knock down social barriers? Why or why not? How, if at all, do you think Prince Harry and Ms. Markle’s union will affect notions of race, class and royalty in Britain and around the world?
Do you keep up with the British royal family and are you looking forward to another royal wedding? Read on to find out about the ring, how Prince Harry proposed and why some are saying Ms. Markle’s fashion choices are going to make history.