Rose Burlingham and Louis Robert Weigele were married Nov. 18 at the Harlem Jazz and Gospel Getaway, a townhouse in New York the couple rented from their friend, Joyce Hanly. Jerry Greenfield, a college roommate of the groom and a founder of Ben & Jerry’s ice cream, became a minister with American Marriage Ministries to officiate. Ben Cohen, the other founder of Ben & Jerry’s, took part in the ceremony.
The bride, 65, is an independent art dealer and writer based in Cleveland. She is writing a nonfiction book to be published by Post Hill Press in 2018. She graduated from Beloit College in Beloit, Wis.
She is a daughter of Genevieve Tamburr Generalli of Lakewood, N.J., and the late Ernest J. Generalli, who lived in Clifton, N.J.
The groom, 66, is a clinical social worker with a private psychotherapy practice in Cleveland. He is also an instructor and a Ph.D. candidate in social welfare at Case Western Reserve University, from which he received a master’s degree in social work. He graduated from Oberlin College.
He is a son of the late Marjorie Sayre Weigele and the late Louis C. Weigele, who lived in Northampton, Mass.
Ms. Burlingham and Mr. Weigele met as teenagers in 1966 when they worked at the Boys & Girls Club of Clifton summer camp in Wharton, N.J.
They remained friends for more than half a century, staying in touch through good times and bad, including each of their previous marriages.
But they were both single three years ago when Mr. Weigele invited Ms. Burlingham to the annual beefsteak dinner — a fund-raiser — at the Boys and Girls Club of Clifton.
So she asked him to stay — and he did.
Mr. Weigele, living in Cleveland at the time, drove Ms. Burlingham back to her apartment and they soon embarked on a long-distance relationship that resulted in her moving in with him in June.
Except of course, for Mr. Weigele.
On Nov. 17, the couple held their wedding rehearsal dinner at the Boys and Girls Club of Clifton, where they were joined by friends and family, bad lighting and all.