1. This is a graph that originally appeared elsewhere on NYTimes.com. For the purposes of this activity, we have removed some of the original text and features, all of which we will reveal Friday.
Share what you are noticing and what this may imply.
Are there items you noticed that answer what you wonder? Where could you find the answers to what you wonder?
Use what you notice. What can you infer from this graph beyond what it shows directly? What’s the deeper story that comes from this graph?
Each second Tuesday of the month, our collaborator, the American Statistical Association, will facilitate a discussion from 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. Eastern Time by paraphrasing comments and linking to responses to help students’ understanding go deeper. You might use their responses as models for your own.
4. On Friday mornings, we will reveal at the bottom of this post more information about the graph. How does the original New York Times article and the moderators’ additional questions help you see the graph differently? You can incorporate the statistical terms defined in Stat Nuggets in your response.
Until you saw this week’s graph, we bet you didn’t even think about a country’s labor-force participation. In fact, many economists see this as a bigger concern to the U. S. economy than unemployment. If a greater percentage of prime-age workers were participating, the economy could grow faster. At 88 percent, the U.S. has the lowest participation percentage among the group of seven countries in the graph. And, the percentage has been going downhill for almost 40 years. What’s going on in the U.S.? Your responses included no less than 30 possible “stories” behind this decline.
The time series graph is from Eduardo Porter’s Sept. 20, 2017 article “Unemployment Is So 2009: Labor Shortage Gives Workers an Edge.” Some of the student explanations for the decline include technology taking away jobs, women taking jobs traditionally done by men, jobs going overseas, people staying in school longer and men feeling more comfortable staying at home with children. Others said that Americans are becoming lazier and we are now more risk-averse to new opportunities. But, according to the paper, by Princeton University’s Alan B. Kreuger, which is the basis for this article, the major factor is the record number of prime-age workers receiving disability benefits. The response from Cameron Croom of Raleigh, N.C. hit the nail on the head by giving this reason.
Read the original New York Times article. What reasons does it give for the decline in the participation percentage? What is the main reason for disability?
• The graph only shows seven countries. How are these countries similar? What might the labor-force participation percentages be for dissimilar countries? Do you think all countries’ percentages are declining?
• The x-axis starts at 1980. Why do you think 1980 was picked?
• The y-axis starts at 88 percent, the lowest labor-force participation percentage. How would the graph look differently if the axis started at 50 percent or even 0 percent? Would this influence your interpretation?
• The article shows that wages started to increase in 1998. How may this have affected the labor-force participation percentage?
• Germany’s percentage is the most erratic in the 1980s and 1990s. What happened in Germany during that period?
• Why is Japan’s labor-force participation percentage so high and stable?
• What would you recommend to increase the U.S. percentage? How do you think the current immigration policy affects our economy and the participation percentage?
Below in Stat Nuggets, we define and explain what is a time series graph, how to interpret the graph’s axes, and how important it is not to confuse the percentage of workers with the number of workers. Look into the archives to see past Stat Nuggets terms.
Thank you for participating in “What’s Going On in This Graph?”, which is intended to have you think more critically about graphs and the underlying data in a news story. Critical thinking is an essential element of statistics, the science of learning from data. Data visualizations, like this graph, are an important part of statistics. They help us to understand and communicate about data.
Keep noticing and wondering. Come up with conjectures based on this graph. Probe whether they are possibly true, and if not, change your conjecture. We continue to welcome your responses to this graph.
A graph that shows how a numerical variable changes over time.
In the Labor-force Participation Rate graph, the variable was labor-force participation percentage and the graph shows how it changes from 1980 - 2017 for seven selected O.E.C.D. countries.
Typically, the axes of a graph start at zero. But, if there is no data in the lower values, an axis could start at a greater value.
In the Labor-force Participation Rate graph, the x-axis starts at 1980. We are given no reason 1980 is selected. This may be when labor-force participation percentages started to fall internationally. The y-axis starts at 88 percent. This was probably selected since no labor-force participation percentage is less than 88 percent. If the graph had started at zero percent, the countries’ lines would have been at the top of the graph and the differences between countries would have looked less noticeable.
Number is the count of some group. Proportion is the count of some characteristic of a group divided by the total number of members in the group. Proportions can be expressed as percentages, decimals or fractions.
In the Labor-force Participation Rate graph, the y-axis displays the percentage of labor-force participation for men age 25 - 54. Those values are calculated by dividing the number of men who are either working or looking for work (members of a group) by the total number of men age 25 - 54 (the entire group). The members of the group not included in the percentage are those who are not working or not looking for work.
We see that the percentage of men working or looking for work is decreasing over time. But, we do not know if the number of men who are working or looking for work is decreasing. Why is this so? Here’s an example. If the labor-force participation percentage decreases from 90 percent to 80 percent, but the number of men increases from 100 million to 120 million, the number of men working or looking for work increases from 90 million to 96 million. The percentage decreases (90 percent to 80 percent), but the number increases (90 to 96 million). In this graph, because we only know the percentage of men participating in the labor force, we cannot compare the number of men participating in the labor force.
The graphs for “What’s Going On in This Graph?” are selected in partnership with Sharon Hessney, the Statistics Content Director at Mass Insight Education. In addition, Ms. Hessney and Erica Chauvet, author and professor at Waynesburg University in Pennsylvania, moderated the Tuesday comments and wrote this week’s “reveal” and Stat Nuggets section.