Amy Elizabeth Reitnouer and Christopher Ryan Jacobs were married Nov. 4 at the York Manor, an event space in Los Angeles. James Ehrman, a friend of the couple who was ordained by American Marriage Ministries, officiated.
Ms. Reitnouer, 30, who will be keeping her name professionally, is a founder and the executive director of the Bluegrass Situation in Los Angeles, an online music magazine and promoter of roots, folk and Americana music and culture. She graduated cum laude from Elon University in Elon, N.C. She is on the board of Folk Alliance International in Kansas City, Mo., which promotes the history and future of folk music.
She is the daughter of Lisa L. Barnett of Frederick, Md., and Gary L. Reitnouer of Lebanon, Pa. The bride’s father retired as a high school math teacher from the Milton Hershey School in Hershey, Pa. Her mother, a pediatric nurse practitioner, works at Right Care Pediatrics in Silver Spring, Md.
Mr. Jacobs, 35, is a freelance radio and podcast producer in Los Angeles, where he hosts and produces the BGS Radio Hour, a weekly roots music program nationally syndicated on college and NPR stations. He also works as a music booker for the Lagunitas Brewing Company's music room in Azusa, Calif. He graduated from Abilene Christian University in Abilene, Tex.
He is a son of Cheri L. Jacobs and John L. Jacobs of Lewisville, Tex. His father retired as a vice president of sales from the Honolulu office of USAble Life, an insurance company based in Little Rock, Ark.
The couple, who met in 2015 in Los Angeles through the dating app Bumble, were intent on getting married at the York Manor on Nov. 4, the two-year anniversary of their first date (also the groom’s father’s birthday). Although the date was already taken, the day before, Nov. 3, was not. So the bride decided to have a reverse wedding, with a cocktail hour, followed by dinner, toasts and dancing. They exchanged their vows after the stroke of midnight, then had their first dance as a married couple and celebrated with a New Orleans-style second line led by the Dustbowl Revival, an American roots band.