Q. On the new iPhone system, where did the button for turning on AirDrop go when you swipe your finger up from the bottom of the screen?
A. The iOS Control Center — that panel of icons you can quickly open by swiping up from the bottom of the phone or tablet screen — got a makeover with the release of iOS 11 in September. (iPhone X owners need to swipe down from the top-right edge of the screen to open the panel.) When you open the Control Center, press and hold the quartet of icons on the top-left side to pop open the full panel. If you have the 3D Touch feature, you can press firmly on one of the icons.
The icon for AirDrop, Apple’s technology for wirelessly beaming files between iOS devices and Macs, is in the bottom-left corner of the expanded panel. The Personal Hotspot icon for turning your cellular data connection into a miniature Wi-Fi network is also visible in the full screen view.
The iOS 11 software also allows users to personalize the look of the Control Center panel by adding the icons for apps and utilities used most. You can also leave others off the screen. To choose the icons you want to see, go to the iPhone’s home screen, tap the Settings icon and select Control Center. Tap the Customize Controls option, and on the Customize screen use plus and minus icons to add or subtract the listed shortcuts from the Control Center screen. You can rearrange the order by dragging the items in the list up or down using the icon of three gray lines to the right of each control.
Later, when you are using the Control Center, you can find additional shortcuts with some icons — if you are using an iPhone with 3D Touch. For example, press and hold the Camera icon to get a quick menu of shortcuts for taking a selfie, recording a video of other photographic functions. You can adjust the intensity of the flashlight beam by pressing the flashlight icon or see your last Apple Pay transaction by pressing the Wallet icon. Not every Control Center icon has a shortcut menu, though, so you may have to poke around to find the ones that do.