Good Monday morning. Andrew has thoughts on the detention of Prince Alwaleed of Saudi Arabia over the weekend, especially after interviewing the billionaire less than two weeks ago. And we’re looking at the fallout from the Paradise Papers leaks.
Breaking: Broadcom announced a roughly $105 billion takeover bid for Qualcomm, worth $70 a share. Here’s the story on DealBook. More on what’s going on behind the scenes in a moment.
A reminder: DealBook’s sixth annual conference, Playing for the Long Term, takes place on Thursday. Want to join us? Apply to participate here.
Did Alwaleed know he was in trouble?
Two weeks ago, he seemed remarkably relaxed, no different than the few times I had interacted with him beforehand. He did make a point of praising Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman and his Vision 2030 plan for the country. He also was particularly spirited in his praise of President Trump, someone whom he had once called a “disgrace” and had called upon to drop out of the presidential race.
One thing that was surprising, given that Prince Alwaleed had been the face of finance for Saudi Arabia for years, was that he was not part of the large investment conference organized by Crown Prince Mohammed. The gathering took place at the Ritz-Carlton — just 10 minutes down the road from Alwaleed’s office.
But Vivian Nereim, Alaa Shahine and Sarah Algethami of Bloomberg report that Prince Mohammed was looking to please his population — particularly the unhappy young Saudis suffering from a recession tied to low oil prices — and not overseas investors.
• The kingdom’s new anticorruption committee will have the power to seize the assets of individuals found to have abused public funds, according to the Abu Dhabi newspaper The National. But Prince Alwaleed’s Kingdom Holding investment vehicle said in a statement that it had the “full confidence” of the Saudi government.
• President Trump offered his support on Sunday for Prince Mohammed’s modernization campaign, but made no mention of the arrests, according to the NYT.
• Citigroup faces a setback in its efforts to rebuild its Saudi business, given that one of its major shareholders is Prince Alwaleed, Bloomberg reports.
Today’s DealBook briefing was written by Andrew Ross Sorkin in New York, and Michael J. de la Merced and Amie Tsang in London.
What do the arrests mean for Aramco?
Depends whom you ask. Andrew has spoken with several people inside the kingdom who say that the detentions show a crackdown on corruption. Bob Diamond, the former C.E.O. of Barclays, expressed a similar view at a conference yesterday, according to Bloomberg.
But Andrew and Michael have spoken with others, including executives and investors in New York — some of whom have had long relationships with Prince Alwaleed — who suggested that the arrests will make the business community less certain about investing in Saudi Arabia.
• Whether Mr. Trump’s unexpected pitch on Twitter to have Aramco list its shares on the N.Y.S.E. will have much sway with the Saudi government is unclear. But he told reporters that he was aware of Saudi concerns about litigation if Aramco were to list on an American exchange.
Michael says that Qualcomm is expected to quickly reject the bid as too low. But deal makers have been whispering about how Broadcom and its C.E.O., Hock Tan, may have been laying the political groundwork for this deal.
Remember that Mr. Tan announced last week — at a White House news conference with Mr. Trump, no less — that Broadcom was moving its legal headquarters to the United States from Singapore. Did Broadcom make the decision to win friends in the White House as it prepared to go after a major rival? Any alliance with Qualcomm is expected to face close regulatory scrutiny.
• Pay attention to any role that Silver Lake, which has backed Mr. Tan for 12 years, plays in supporting Broadcom’s bid. Private equity firms usually don’t back unsolicited takeover offers, but will this time be different?
• If Broadcom wins, will it be able to strike a peace deal with Apple, which has been in a long-running legal fight with Qualcomm?
While several Trump campaign and business associates have come under scrutiny, until now no business connections have been reported between senior administration officials and members of Mr. Putin’s family or inner circle.
Both Gary Cohn, who was associated with 22 Bermuda entities while an executive at Goldman Sachs, and Rex Tillerson, who was a director of a Bermuda-based joint venture with the government of Yemen when he ran Exxon Mobil’s operations there, appear in the files. There is no evidence of illegality in any of their dealings.
There is no evidence that Mr. Milner or his companies had any connection to the Kremlin’s interference in the 2016 presidential election, pointing out that DST never asked for board seats or any type of control at Facebook or Twitter. “Only a worldview that sees my nationality as inherently suspicious could find such a fairy-tale compelling,” he said in a statement, according to Johana Bhuiyan of Recode.
The ICIJ examined confidential emails, board minutes and contracts from the giant trading firm to piece together its deal for big copper mines in the Democratic Republic of Congo.
What’s SoftBank’s plan B for Sprint?
Masa Son couldn’t accept the terms of merging Sprint, of which his SoftBank owns 82 percent, with T-Mobile if it meant becoming a minority shareholder of the combined business. That’s why he pulled the plug on the deal talks over dinner at his Tokyo home on Saturday night. Sprint’s C.E.O., Marcelo Claure, tweeted a defense of the move.
Mr. Son acknowledged that Sprint was “not in a strong position” as the No. 4 carrier in the U.S. market. He also acknowledged that combining Sprint and T-Mobile had been his “fundamental strategy” all along.
While he would consider selling Sprint — depending on “the price, the opportunity and the buyer” — Mr. Son added that he was committed to staying in the American wireless market because of its importance to his long-term bet on the internet of things.
Keep these numbers in mind: Sprint has $34.2 billion in long-term debt, while SoftBank has $101.7 billion. Can Sprint and SoftBank pay for necessary network upgrades?
In other SoftBank news: Mr. Son is negotiating to buy a stake in Uber, but at today’s news conference, he mentioned the possibility of investing in Lyft instead, according to Recode.
• Jean-Charles Brisard, a corporate security and intelligence consultant, posed as a Wall Street Journal reporter to speak to Carson Block, the founder of Muddy Waters Research, according to video footage reviewed by the … WSJ.
