SHAMELESS 8 p.m. on Showtime. The Gallagher clan has endured deaths, mental illnesses, prison stints, addictions and so much more over seven bleak, hilarious seasons. They stumble into Season 8 after burying their matriarch, Monica; she’s bequeathed them each with a bag of meth, which they handle with various degrees of maturity. The coming season deals in relevant plotlines like a new presidential administration and anti-immigration raids descending on the South Side of Chicago; within the family, Frank (William H. Macy) tries to sober up, and Fiona (Emmy Rossum) becomes a landlord.
BOB’S BURGERS 7:30 p.m. on Fox. Of all of the cartoon sitcom families on TV, the only one you’d probably want to be a part of is the Belchers, who, unlike the Simpsons, the Marshes or the Griffins, are kindhearted, generous and mostly just trying their best. In this episode, Tina (voiced by Dan Mintz) starts a babysitting enterprise, which is quickly derailed by her nemesis, Tammy (Jenny Slate, a voice-over veteran from “The Secret Life of Pets,” “Marcel the Shell With Shoes On” and many more). Bob and Linda scout out a competitor in the restaurant business. “The Simpsons” follows at 8 p.m., with Grampa getting a hearing aid.
LAST WEEK TONIGHT WITH JOHN OLIVER 11 p.m. on HBO. In a climate where troubling or seismic news seems to break every day, a weekly news show like John Oliver’s runs the risk of missing essential stories or glossing over the details. But Mr. Oliver hasn’t changed his methodical, slow-burning attacks, usually spending each episode skillfully dissecting one topic with plenty of zingers. This season he has gone after Equifax; Harvey Weinstein; and his No. 1 antagonist, President Trump, and his relationship with the truth.
MARC MARON: TOO REAL (2017) on Netflix. Things that get better with age: wine, cheese and Marc Maron’s curmudgeon act. His endearing grumpiness is on full display on his podcast, “WTF”; in his turn as a narcissistic, coke-addled director on “GLOW”; and especially in this new standup special. (His first sentence is “I can’t take it.”) Mr. Maron goes off on the president, contemplates mortality while watching the Rolling Stones live and lampoons the landscape of streaming services that churns out an endless supply of meaningless content — with a pinch of sarcasm, of course.