“Flute Affair” was the lighthearted if somewhat misleading title of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center’s program on Sunday afternoon at Alice Tully Hall.
Yes, the concert featured two fine flutists, Ransom Wilson and Tara Helen O’Connor, in works ranging from Bach to Henri Dutilleux. But the program was dominated by two substantive pieces which did not particularly highlight the flute, and which could not have been more different.
Very little happens in John Luther Adams’s “there is no one, not even the wind” (2016), a quietly cosmic piece for nine players. But in Johann Nepomuk Hummel’s Septet in D minor (1816), almost every moment is animated by fleet, virtuosic writing for the piano. This 36-minute, four-movement septet became a signature piece for Liszt; here Juho Pohjonen dispatched the piano part with effortless brilliance.
Mr. Adams, who lived for nearly 40 years in Alaska, often explores environmental themes in works like “Become Ocean,” a hypnotic orchestral piece that evokes the surging immensity of the sea (and won the 2014 Pulitzer Prize for Music). Since 2014 he has divided his time between New York City and a desert region of Mexico. His “there is no one, not even the wind” comes directly from his experience of the “space and solitude, the stillness and light of the desert,” as he writes in a preface to the work.
Scored for flute, alto flute, piano, two percussionists and four strings, the piece begins with eerily soft, sustained high string tones gently buttressed by chiming percussion chords. Mr. Adams stacks up tones to create wondrously strange and alluring harmonies. Sometimes the music reposes on what seems a soft, lushly diatonic chord, except certain instruments play nearly inaudible high pitches that lend sting to the sonority.
But the time-stands-still pacing and subdued atmosphere just continues — for 26 minutes. Now and then a short bass drum roll suggests that something ominous might be stirring. Not so. Occasionally you detect an embryonic melody. But it disappears into the wash of sounds.
If the aim was to create a contemplative mood, the music had the reverse effect on me: I kept getting impatient, wondering when some shift or turn might be coming. The performers played with impressive concentration and nuance.
Hummel and Beethoven were rival pianist-composers for some years in Vienna. Like a de facto piano concerto, Hummel’s septet bustles with rippling passagework, decorative scales, cascading arpeggios and, in the rustic finale, bursts of dancing octaves.
Mr. Pohjonen, who still has the boyish look of the 23-year-old from Finland who impressed 13 years ago in an exciting New York debut recital, conquered every challenge of the piece. I only wish the players had conceded primacy to the piano and placed Mr. Pohjonen in the front of the group rather than at the back, however unorthodox such an arrangement would have been. As it was, Mr. Pohjonen was mostly blocked from view by the others.
Still, during the ovation Mr. Pohjonen’s colleagues all turned to him and applauded. Rightly so.