610 pp. New York Review Books. Paper, $19.95.
Her distaste for the Gradgrindian plod of biography, then, is the counterpart to her love of literature. Literature does what life can’t and what boring biographers won’t: omit all the tedious bits that clot our days and signify nothing. In good fiction, every sentence and detail is necessary. The same is true of these impeccably economical essays, which, collected here with a wise introduction by Pinckney, offer a rich immersion in both her brilliant mind and the minds of so many others.
In 1963, four years after the essay was published, Hardwick and her treacle-allergic comrades founded The New York Review of Books, a proud vessel to plow through briny oceans. In “The Decline of Book Reviewing” she had written that “the interest of the mind of the individual reviewer is everything,” and those words could serve as the magazine’s credo. As these essays demonstrate, criticism should be commensurate with its subject. A piece on George Eliot, for example, begins in a way worthy of a first line by that novelist: “She was melancholy, headachy, with a slow, disciplined, hard-won, aching genius that bore down upon her with a wondrous and exhausting force, like a great love affair in middle age.” What follows is not, of course, a sweeping and gravid 19th-century novel about a woman seeking a life of meaning within a world of compromise, but something almost as good — a spry appraisal of a genius that is, in its own way, also a piece of writing about a woman seeking a life of meaning within a world of compromise. Eliot and Hardwick merit each other. The prickling irony of “The Decline of Book Reviewing” is that Hardwick’s subject, insipid writing, is not worthy of her. It’s a fool’s errand to try to make something truly good from something boringly bad.
In the third book of Elena Ferrante’s Neapolitan tetralogy, Lena, hitherto a deferential reader, realizes the insurrectionary potential of books: “I never actually used them, I never turned them against themselves. This is thinking.” Hardwick does something similar with writers; they are a way to understand other writers. Gertrude Stein, with “her prose an intimidating heap of bare bones,” is understood via Hemingway — there are crosscurrents of illumination. This collection is also, then, an education in 20th-century American literature; a book to send a reader to other books. Hyperbole is so strenuously resisted that when Hardwick pronounces Simone Weil’s essay “The Iliad, or the Poem of Force” “one of the most moving and original essays ever written,” it’s received as a blessed diktat: Go read now.
There can be a private and wicked glee to Hardwick’s wit. Boston, for example, is not a small New York, “as they say a child is not a small adult but is, rather, a specially organized small creature with its small-creature’s temperature, balance and distribution of fat.” A mind delighting in itself on the page is not always palatable, but Hardwick, in doing so with such restraint, is irresistible. In one of two essays on Melville (she later wrote a book about him), she begins with a 13-clause sentence that reads like watching Simone Biles execute a sequence of back flips and somersaults; only when it’s over do you realize you’ve been holding your breath the whole time. Relief and awe rush in with the exhale. After this prolix bravura Hardwick announces, “My own reading is largely concerned with the nature of Bartleby’s short sentences.” I laughed out loud.
Every piece of writing is autobiographical. It evinces the concerns, personality and insecurities of the writer herself. There is, as Hardwick puts it, “the pathos of autobiography lurking in the text.” She wrote that about Margaret Fuller, whose life (a sequence of dramas ended with a literal shipwreck) easily threatens to eclipse the text. But did Hardwick know that she was also writing about herself? Astringent and unsentimental, these essays span over half a century and, as such, constitute a monumental, if unwitting, autobiography. There is indeed a pathos in that. The literature has primacy over the life, yet the truest and most vital life is not in the facts, but the fictions.