MORRIS PLAINS, N.J. — The sloping, grassy expanse that will become Governor Chris Christie Drive is not much at the moment: a third-of-a-mile easement for a planned $1.5 million road that will lead to a county park, funneling drivers away from residential streets.
The road, about 15 minutes from Mr. Christie’s home in Mendham, is meant, officials said, to alleviate traffic.
For the Republican governor, who dreamed of much more, perhaps to have his name inscribed on a presidential library, and whose political career was tarnished by a colossal traffic jam orchestrated by aides and allies, a groundbreaking for the modest road was still an honor that he seemed to relish.
As he joined leaders and friends in Morris County for the ceremony, Mr. Christie dug his shovel a little deeper than anyone else, flinging dirt high into the air in front of him.
An impromptu receiving line of sorts followed. Taking refuge from the afternoon glare in the shadow of a Caterpillar backhoe, Mr. Christie greeted some of the 50 or so people who had braved the bracing November weather to witness their governor receive the recognition.
One supporter approached for an autograph, handing Mr. Christie a blue marker and two photographs for him to sign. Mr. Christie dutifully obliged, before stopping and looking at the second photo.
“He wants me to sign this,” he said, flashing the famous photograph of him shaking hands with President Obama after Hurricane Sandy, a moment meant to show Mr. Christie’s bipartisan skills but that also provoked backlash from conservative Republicans. He sighed, before uncapping a blue marker and scrawling his name across the image.
The ceremony buoyed the spirits of the governor, who has had little to be cheery about in the final months of his tenure. His successor, Philip D. Murphy, a Democrat, won a resounding victory that many saw as a response to Mr. Christie’s performance, which has earned him some of the lowest approval ratings of any New Jersey governor in recent history.
Mr. Christie was in a bit of an introspective mood.
He told the story of how his mother said his name was a mistake: He was going to be named James Christopher, after his grandfather, which would have avoided the repetition in his name, but his father allowed his uncle to stake a claim on James.
“The footnote to it is, my uncle had two daughters,” Mr. Christie said.
Mr. Christie has been vague about his future, saying only that he wants to maximize his earning potential. Rumors about work as a radio host, at law firms, and on corporate boards have swirled around as he nears the end of his time in office.
One possibility that has not been mentioned, however, is seeking another elected office, which would be an uphill task given his unpopularity.
But during the ceremony, Mr. Christie shared an anecdote that hinted he may not be finished with elected politics.
He recalled how Larry Ragonese, the Morris County communications director who played master of ceremonies at the groundbreaking, was a reporter when Mr. Christie was a county freeholder.
“Larry wrote a story when I was leaving office involuntarily in 1997 as freeholder director, and in one of the paragraphs, he wrote in the lead, ‘What was a once promising political future is now over,’” Mr. Christie said.
The ceremony, which included a bagpipe color guard and a sign unveiling, lasted about an hour. Then the governor took the three-foot-wide sign bearing his name and helped load it into the back of his S.U.V.
A construction crew began to assemble in the area that would be turned into the road.
The road has no waterways or other obstacles to cross over, so no bridges will be required.