For two weeks, the question hung over the trial of a New York City police officer charged in the fatal off-duty shooting of an unarmed man last year in Brooklyn: Had the man hit the officer?
The officer, Wayne Isaacs, said that the man, Delrawn Small, walked up to his car shortly after midnight on July 4, 2016, and punched him, prompting him to open fire. Surveillance video that surfaced of the shooting seemed to contradict the officer’s account, and the state attorney general, acting on a directive from the governor to investigate police killings of unarmed civilians, built a case around the grainy, soundless footage.
On Monday, the jury in the case acquitted the officer on charges of second-degree murder and first-degree manslaughter. In interviews after the verdict, two jurors, a man and a woman, said that instead of contradicting the officer’s account, the video showed the punch that prosecutors had maintained never happened. The two jurors, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because they feared retaliation over the verdict, said they saw the blow to the officer when they watched the video on a laptop and zoomed in on Mr. Small at the driver’s side window of Officer Isaacs’ car.
With the proliferation of cameras mounted on buildings, built into smartphones and worn by police officers, videos of police encounters with civilians have become more common. But for investigators and juries, the videos do not always settle questions about what happened and whether officers were justified in their actions.
Amid widespread frustration over police killings in 2015, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo declared a “crisis of confidence” in the criminal justice system and authorized the state attorney general’s office to act as a special prosecutor and investigate certain police killings.
The families of police shooting victims and those seeking police reforms had pushed for the measure, saying local prosecutors were too close to the police departments whose officers they were investigating.
The case against Officer Isaacs, in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn, was the first prosecution under the new mandate; five other killings statewide are still under investigation.
When the jurors in the Isaacs case went into deliberations last week, eight had decided the officer was not guilty while four others were not sure, a female juror said. She and the other juror who spoke to The Times said they were among the eight who had decided on a not-guilty verdict from the outset.
After establishing that Mr. Small had struck Officer Isaacs, the jurors considered whether the officer’s response was reasonable or excessive.
Under state penal law, using deadly force is justified if a person believes someone is about to use deadly force against them, or if stopping or preventing a violent crime, such as rape or robbery.
While the law establishes that people have a duty to safely retreat from the threat of deadly violence, it makes exceptions for those who are attacked in their dwellings and for police officers making an arrest or preventing an escape.
Legal experts have pointed out the lack of a legal standard defining when the perception of a threat is reasonable. The female juror said that when the panel asked Justice Alexander B. Jeong for guidance on this, he told them that as long as Officer Isaacs perceived a threat, he was allowed to use his training.
Officer Isaacs testified that he first noticed Mr. Small in a crosswalk, and assumed the man was crossing the street. When Mr. Small veered toward him, the officer said, he worried that he was about to be attacked or be the victim of a carjacking, so he gripped his off-duty firearm.
The officer testified that Mr. Small had threatened to kill him and that he swung his fist toward his face. Officer Isaacs said he was reeling and responded to the attack as he was trained to, by firing three shots.
Prosecutors argued that in the time it took Mr. Small to approach the car, Officer Isaacs had options, like running through a red light, to avoid the confrontation. They said he could have shown his badge and identified himself as a police officer to warn Mr. Small as he approached.
Prosecutors did not challenge the defense lawyers’ repeated assertion that it was a “fast-moving encounter” until closing statements.
Examining the video again, the jurors sided with the defense. The male juror said he counted about six seconds between when Mr. Small appeared in the street and when he hit the officer.
On Monday, the one or two remaining jurors who had been undecided joined the others in voting to acquit, the jurors said.
Soon after, as Officer Isaacs walked out of the court, Mr. Small’s supporters shouted “Murderer!” One of the prosecutors, Joshua Gradinger, quietly wept.
The jurors who spoke to The Times expressed confidence that they had reached a fair verdict based on the evidence and the law, even if they had mixed feelings about it.
She said the case raised questions about how police officers are supposed to respond to threats.
