‘ORIGIN STORIES: GRETA GERWIG’S FOOTNOTES TO “LADY BIRD”’ at the Quad Cinema (through Nov. 9). To accompany the release of “Lady Bird” (opening Friday), her first solo directorial feature, Ms. Gerwig has compiled a program of movies that influenced her. Some of the titles, like the Northern California coming-of-age classic “American Graffiti” (Saturday and Tuesday) and D.A. Pennebaker’s “Original Cast Album: Company” (Friday, Saturday and Wednesday), have clear bearings on “Lady Bird,” which follows a Sacramento teenager (Saoirse Ronan) as she copes with her family, adolescent romance, college applications and high school theater. Other titles, like Mike Leigh’s “Secrets & Lies” (Monday, Tuesday and Thursday), connect in more oblique and intriguing ways.
OTHER ISRAEL FILM FESTIVAL at various locations (through Nov. 9). This annual festival emphasizes voices from what it calls the “other Israel.” In this year’s edition, that label includes Palestinian and Arab-Israeli communities and, in the documentary “Desert Wounds” (Tuesday and Wednesday), Christian refugees from Eritrea and Sudan. The festival closes Thursday with “Holy Air,” a comedy about a man who tries to bottle and sell air from the site of the Annunciation in Nazareth.
‘STANISLAW LEM ON FILM’ at Anthology Film Archives (through Nov. 11). Perhaps the best-known film adaptations of Lem, the Polish science-fiction author, are the two versions of “Solaris” — one from 1972, a brooding, glacially paced philosophical meditation by Andrei Tarkovsky, and Steven Soderbergh’s remake from 2002, a concise, poetic recapitulation of the same themes. But both films were actually late to the punch. Anthology Film Archives will also show the rare “Solyaris” (Sunday), from 1968, shot in black-and-white for Russian television. This survey of Lem on screen also includes the half-live-action, half-animated “The Congress” (Sunday and Nov. 11), from 2013, directed by Ari Folman (“Waltz With Bashir”). It centers on an aging actress (Robin Wright) who agrees to have her likeness digitally archived for future use.
