The State of Virginia imposed strict limitations on Monday on demonstrations at the Robert E. Lee statue in the state’s capitol, one of the oldest Confederate monuments in the country, after a string of clashes there.
Gov. Terry McAuliffe of Virginia announced the emergency regulations, which restrict crowd sizes at the Lee Monument to 500, down from 5,000, and ban guns at permitted events. The rules will also require permits for events there that draw at least 10 people.
The regulations came out of a task force set up by the governor in August after a violent white nationalist rally in Charlottesville, Va., where groups like the Ku Klux Klan and neo-Nazis swarmed to protest that city’s decision to remove a statue of Robert E. Lee.
After that rally, Confederate symbols on public lands across the country faced a new reckoning, attracting impassioned protesters calling for them to be removed and pushing cities to dismantle them, even in the dead of night.
The Lee Monument in Richmond, erected in 1890 in the middle of a tree-lined roundabout on Monument Avenue in the capital, has been the site of clashes in recent months. Mr. McAuliffe said he enacted the limitations to protect public safety around the statue.
The emergency regulations will stay in place for 18 months while the state’s Department of General Services considers and finalizes a permanent resolution, and holds public hearings on the topic. The order applies only to the Lee Monument, which is on state property in the city. Five other monuments on the avenue are owned by the City of Richmond.
But he took a sharply different view after the clashes in Charlottesville, which resulted in the deaths of 32-year-old woman in a crowd hit by a car and two state troopers in a helicopter crash. He said then that Confederate monuments should be taken down and urged Virginia leaders to move them into museums.
The Lee Monument, a popular attraction and focal point in Richmond, has been a landmark in the city for nearly 130 years. Former soldiers in the Confederate States Army began advocating to have a monument to Lee in Richmond in the early 1870s. After years of planning, the bronze statue of Lee, astride a horse atop a granite pedestal, was unveiled in 1890 in front of a crowd of up to 25,000 people.
