When a new job sent Olaf Olafsson from Silicon Valley to Manhattan in 1989, his wife, Anna, was well short of gung-ho about the move.
“She didn’t know much of the city except what you see from a hotel in Midtown,” said Mr. Olafsson, 55, an executive vice president at Time Warner who is also a playwright, poet and the author of five novels, including “One Station Away”, due out in early December.
By way of putting out the welcome mat, a colleague invited the couple to dinner at a restaurant on the Upper East Side. They arrived early and went for a stroll, taking note of the stately houses, the mix of Queen Anne, Italianate, Beaux-Arts and Renaissance architecture, and shops like the Corner Bookstore.
Smitten by the neighborhood, they rented a two-bedroom apartment on the fourth floor of a townhouse, on a quiet side street. “It had just been renovated, so everything was brand new,” Mr. Olafsson said.
With the approval of the owner, who has become a good friend, the Olafssons broke through ceilings and built floating wood staircases to connect the units. Along the way, they added a laundry room and did away with one bathroom and three kitchens, moving their own kitchen one flight up to capture as much sunlight as possible.
“One of the problems with townhouses is that the kitchen is usually on the ground floor, and that’s always the darkest place in the building,” said Mr. Olafsson, who, like his wife, was born and raised in Reykjavik, Iceland.
Granted, there is duplication of space: Each floor has a sitting room. The third-floor sitting room is the spot for doing puzzles and, thanks to the recent acquisition of a turntable, for listening to music. The fourth-floor sitting room is for watching television. The fifth-floor sitting room with the piano is the place for making music. But the family tends to do most of its sitting in the kitchen, which is outfitted with one of Mr. Olafsson’s favorite possessions, a Viking stove. Of course.
Do the Olafssons ever ask themselves if it was crazy to do expensive renovations on an ever-expanding place they don’t own? Yes, they do. Often.
He needn’t add that hope springs eternal. The owner has promised the Olafssons first dibs on the building should he ever decide to sell.
Midcentury modern is the dominant theme, as represented by the kitchen table, by the desk and the Eames chair in Mr. Olafsson’s study, and by a Scandinavian side table, a bright-red Saarinen womb chair and an Eames lounge chair. But this is design without dogmatism. Deeming the effect too stark and off-putting, the Olafssons got rid of two very nice white midcentury sofas in the third-floor sitting room, replacing them with a pair of simple loden-green ones from Crate and Barrel.
Four years ago, the Olafssons almost bought a six-story townhouse on the Upper West Side. What a prize: 7,000 square feet for them to divide and arrange as they pleased. “We were thinking we could finally have everything exactly the way we wanted,” Mr. Olafsson said.
The contract was to be signed on a Monday. The preceding Friday, the couple’s architect gave them a floor plan of their future home along with, quite literally, a homework assignment: Figure out what rooms you want to put where.
The couple looked across the table at each other, then looked again at the floor plan and the paperwork: 7,000 square feet; two years of construction. What were they thinking? They decided to stay put.
