In what may indicate a new level of donor confidence in the Metropolitan Museum of Art’s management, one of its trustees is giving more than $80 million to the museum, the Met announced on Thursday.
The contribution, from the trustee, Florence Irving, and the estate of her husband, Herbert Irving, a co-founder of the food services giant Sysco Corporation who died last year, comes at a time when the Met has made a concerted effort to come back from a period of internal turmoil and financial crisis.
The museum’s latest annual report, also released Thursday, suggests that the Met is making progress. Where a shortfall of $15 million had been projected for the fiscal year 2017, which ended in June, that figure was contained to $10.1 million, according to the report, and the Met said it is on track to eliminate its deficit by 2020.
In addition, the museum’s endowments increased by almost $300 million, to a total of $2.9 billion; and the Met said it raised $232 million in philanthropic gifts, membership dues and government support.
The Irving bequest, the largest financial gift to the Met in recent history, will establish an unrestricted art acquisitions endowment fund, as well as several endowment funds for the department of Asian Art. These funds will support acquisitions, exhibitions and publications of the arts of China, Japan, Korea, Southeast Asia, South Asia and the Himalayas, with a preference for Chinese decorative arts and Indian and Southeast Asian art, the Irvings’ collecting fields.
An endowment will also support the Florence and Herbert Irving Galleries for South and Southeast Asian Art, named by the Irvings in 1994. In 2004, the museum designated the Florence and Herbert Irving Asian Wing.
The Irvings on Thursday also extended their largess to Columbia University and NewYork-Presbyterian, giving $600 million to the two institutions to advance their research and clinical programs for cancer treatment.
Mr. Weiss said that the Met has committed to increasing transparency; to providing more detailed information to the board to ensure better financial oversight; and to improving communication between the administration and the staff.
Over the past year, the Met has been able to increase revenue and reduce costs, Mr. Weiss said. Its once money-losing retail operations, for example, are now breaking even.
The Met is in the process of refining a proposal to charge admissions to non-New Yorkers. And a search is underway for a new director to replace Thomas P. Campbell, who resigned under pressure in February. Mr. Weiss, to whom any new director would report under a recent management reorganization, said it was too early to discuss possible candidates or a timetable for the selection.
While the Met’s renovation of its modern and contemporary wing is on the back burner, it continues to study how best to use the Breuer building. The museum has yet to determine whether it will continue to use that satellite location after its eight-year lease is up.
Sheena Wagstaff, the Met’s chairwoman for modern and contemporary art, said this was always part of the plan for the Breuer, which next fall will devote a floor to Abstract Expressionism and related work.
