Manhattan prosecutors investigating sexual assault allegations against Harvey Weinstein have subpoenaed a wide range of records from the producer’s former company, as well as two law firms that represented him or his company, two people with knowledge of the matter said Friday.
The subpoenas indicate a significant broadening of the criminal inquiry, which prosecutors and the police made public last week after Vanity Fair reported allegations by the actress Paz de la Huerta that she had been raped by Mr. Weinstein.
The prosecutor listed on the subpoenas is Christopher Conroy, the chief of the major economic crimes bureau in the office of the Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus R. Vance Jr., a sign that the investigation is expanding to look for evidence of fraud or other financial crimes by Mr. Weinstein or others.
The two people who described the subpoenas spoke on the condition of anonymity.
The records sought from Mr. Weinstein’s former production company include legal settlements with women who accused him of sexual misconduct, payroll records and any other documents reflecting who has received funds and who has been dismissed, one of the people said. Mr. Weinstein’s personnel file was also sought.
The prosecutors also are seeking records from the law firms Morvillo Abramowitz Grand Iason & Anello and Boies Schiller Flexner, the people said.
The Morvillo firm represented Mr. Weinstein in connection with accusations in 2015 that he had sexually assaulted an Italian model. Mr. Vance’s office brought no charges in that case, a decision for which he has come under fire. Mr. Vance has said he did not believe his prosecutors could prove that a crime occurred, while police officials have said an arrest should have been made.
Boies Schiller Flexner represented the production company, The Weinstein Company, in connection with several matters, including signing a contract with an investigative firm that was hired to try to block The New York Times from publishing a news story about Mr. Weinstein’s sexual misconduct with women.
David Boies, the chairman of the firm, has said he was aware of four of as many as a dozen settlements with women who had accused Mr. Weinstein of sexual misconduct, and was personally involved with one. Benjamin Brafman, one of Mr. Weinstein’s lawyers, declined to comment. Elkan Abramowitz, a partner at the Morvillo firm who represented Mr. Weinstein in the 2015 investigation, declined to comment. Mr. Boies could not immediately be reached for comment.
Joan Vollero, a spokeswoman for the district attorney’s office, declined to comment.
The New York Police Department has cast a wide net in its investigation of Mr. Weinstein, which began in the days after The Times and The New Yorker detailed his long history of allegations of sexual harassment and sexual assault of women in reports early last month.
The reports led to a deluge of tips to the police in New York and London about other episodes. The police in London and Los Angeles are investigating sexual assault allegations against Mr. Weinstein. Federal prosecutors in Manhattan are also conducting a separate investigation into transactions arranged by Mr. Weinstein involving $600,000 raised at an AIDS charity auction, people with knowledge of the matter have said.
Ms. de la Huerta’s complaint made Mr. Weinstein the focus of sex crimes investigators in New York.
The second time, according to her account, Mr. Weinstein ignored her pleas on the telephone to leave her alone and was waiting in her lobby when she arrived home one night. After persuading her to let him into her apartment, he raped her, according to her account.
Mr. Weinstein’s lawyers have denied the allegations.
But investigators say the case presents hurdles because it is seven years old and Ms. de la Huerta did not report the alleged rapes to the police at the time.