This week’s issue features a review of Lemony Snicket’s newest picture book. In 2005, Mr. Snicket took to the pages of the Book Review to argue for the importance of picture books, for adults and children alike.
There is a psychosis peculiar to the criticism of children’s literature: a delusion that adults can read the minds of children. This is a particularly vexing problem in the criticism of picture books, which is almost entirely rooted in the wrongheaded idea that adults can’t read them. Thus the critic goes the mind-reader route, or the pedagogical route (“Perfect for teaching Chinese history!”) or, most noxiously, the limited-market-research route, in which the toddler nearest the critic is questioned as an expert.
To add insult to injury, picture books are ignored by the champions of their nearest cousin, the graphic novel. The comics of Chris Ware, for example, are naturally linked to the surreal fictions of George Saunders, but never to J. Otto Seibold and Vivian Walsh’s books about Mr. Lunch, despite immediately obvious similarities.
Happily, these two books serve not only as antidotes for this disheartening state of affairs, but also as primers for adults on how to read picture books properly: as works of visual and textual art. William Bee’s “Whatever” and Jon Agee’s “Terrific” are both keen reminders that picture books are things one should read, and not necessarily with a child on one’s lap.
If you’re looking for moral lessons, you might check the latest finger-wagger by the pop star or the talk show host, with smarmy, redundant artwork to match. William Bee and Jon Agee tackle their themes with smarts and surprise rather than an eye for what they might teach people shorter than themselves, traits that mark great work. “Whatever” and “Terrific” remind us that such things can be found in a single word, a keen image and a sentence or two of explanation: just the things that so often get picture books dismissed. Which is a shame. The charm of “Whatever” and the delight of “Terrific “ deserve the attention of the interested reader, along with volumes of poetry, collections of photographs and all the other smart and surprising items that gather on our bed-stand stacks. And who knows? Certain children might like them too. Picture books, after all, are not just for adults.