Paul Buckmaster, whose orchestral arrangements brought power and poignancy to signature songs by David Bowie, Elton John, the Rolling Stones, Carly Simon and countless other rock, pop, country and jazz stars, died on Nov. 7 at his home in Los Angeles. He was 71.
McDaniel Entertainment, which represented Mr. Buckmaster, announced the death. The cause was not given.
Mr. Buckmaster was invited to do the arrangements, putting his fingerprints on one of the most acclaimed albums of the period. (It lost the Grammy Award for album of the year to Simon and Garfunkel’s “Bridge Over Troubled Water.”) His string enhancements elevate “Your Song,” Mr. John’s breakthrough single off that album. It was Mr. Buckmaster’s idea to put a harp at the start of “Sixty Years On,” which opens Side 2. He would continue to work with Mr. John regularly.
He went on to do the same for a vast and varied list of artists over the next 47 years, working with rockers like Guns N’ Roses (the “Chinese Democracy” album, 2008), mainstream bands like Train (“Drops of Jupiter,” for which Mr. Buckmaster won a Grammy in 2002), musical theater stars like Idina Menzel (her 2016 album, “idina”), country stars like Faith Hill (“You’re Still Here” and other songs).
Paul Buckmaster was born on June 13, 1946, in London. His father, John, was a British-born actor, and his mother, Ermengilda Maltese, who was Italian, was a concert pianist and a graduate of the Naples Conservatory of Music.
He showed musical ability from a young age. His mother tutored him in piano and music theory and signed him up for cello lessons when he was 4. He won his first cello competition in the 5-and-6 age group at a youth music festival. He later studied cello in Italy, and at 17 he was awarded a scholarship to the Royal Academy of Music in London. After his graduation, one of his former professors arranged for him to join the orchestra backing the pop singer Paul Jones, which led to a job playing with the Bee Gees on a tour of Germany.
Soon after that he met Gus Dudgeon, a producer; Tony Hall, who would become a record executive and manager; and Tony Visconti, a producer and arranger. It was Mr. Hall who suggested that he try arranging and gave him some trial assignments. Mr. Hall and Mr. Dudgeon then introduced him to the still largely unknown David Bowie, gave him a demo tape of “Space Oddity” and asked him to give it a shot.
The introductions to Mr. John and other artists followed, and soon he was sought after by all sorts of stars as rock continued to push beyond the limitations of guitars and drums.
“ ‘This Time’ may be the recording that finally gets Dwight Yoakam banned in Nashville and dropped from the Grand Ole Opry, and leaves country music traditionalists screaming ‘double-crosser,’ ” Russ DeVault, a reviewer for The Atlanta Journal and Constitution, wrote.
Mr. Buckmaster was rarely interviewed, but he described his approach in a 2010 article in The Guardian, citing “Your Song,” on which the rhythm section does not turn up until midway through.
Mr. Buckmaster is survived by a son, Banten; a brother, Adrian; and a sister, Rosemary.
Sometimes, Mr. Folds said, Mr. Buckmaster’s offerings were so expansive that they took some getting used to. He told the story of his 2005 song “Landed,” the first on which he used Mr. Buckmaster.
Once he’d had time to absorb Mr. Buckmaster’s contribution, Mr. Folds said, he made sure that subsequent versions of the song included the strings.
