New York City is one of the rare places in the country where charter schools generally have made good on the promise to outperform conventional public schools in exchange for flexibility from the state that lets them lengthen the school day, alter the curriculum, do away with tenure and change how teachers are compensated.
The State University of New York, which oversees most of the state’s charters, removed yet another regulatory obstacle last month when it gave high-performing charter schools the right to design their own teacher-training programs and certify their own teachers.
The new certification rules represent a reasonable attempt to let these schools avoid the weak state teacher education system that has long been criticized for churning out graduates who are unprepared to manage the classroom.
The national scope of this problem was documented a decade ago in a devastating report by Arthur Levine, a former president of Teachers College, Columbia University, who criticized universities for using teacher-training programs with low or no standards as cash cows. He called on colleges to strengthen the more promising programs and to shut down the worst.
A 2016 National Council on Teacher Quality review of New York’s teacher-preparation programs was just as damning. It found that only about a third of the undergraduate programs offered instruction in how to teach reading and only about a fifth provided sufficient grounding in elementary school math. These findings are especially troubling given that the colleges and their government enablers have staunchly resisted efforts to make teacher training more rigorous.
New York’s high-performing charter schools have long complained that rules requiring them to hire state-certified teachers make it difficult to find high-quality applicants in high-demand specialties like math, science and special education. They tell of sorting through hundreds of candidates to fill a few positions, only to find that the strongest candidates have no interest in working in the low-income communities where charters are typically located.
The new rules will allow charter schools that receive SUNY approval to recruit people who have college degrees in areas other than education as well as 3.0 averages for training programs that consist of a month of instruction and a week of practice teaching. Exceptions could be made for musicians or other artists who lack degrees but have been widely recognized in their fields. In its general outlines, the training regime resembles the highly successful Teaching Fellows program, under which New York City recruits college graduates and people who are changing careers to work in schools serving low-income children.
Even the president of the National Council on Teacher Quality has suggested that these charter training standards are too spare. But it’s hypocritical for state education officials to say the new rules are “lowering standards” given that the State Board of Regents itself voted in September to make it even easier to pass a state certification test.
The teachers unions, which want to stop the charter school movement any way they can, have filed a lawsuit claiming that the SUNY board has overstepped its authority.
That’s for the court to decide. But what’s beyond doubt is that the state certification process is failing to provide strong teachers in sufficient numbers to fill the demand.