For years, liberals have tried, and failed, to create their own version of conservative talk radio. Has Crooked Media finally figured it out?
It was early November, the day before Virginia’s elections, and the Democratic cavalry — in the form of four podcast hosts crammed into a Lyft — was coming to the aid of Lt. Gov. Ralph Northam. “Do you want to kick things off with something light and funny?” Jon Favreau asked Jon Lovett as their ride — an S.U.V. outfitted with neon lights and a disco ball that were a bit discombobulating before 9 o’clock in the morning — took them to a Richmond campaign office. They’d be rallying volunteers canvassing for Northam, the Democratic candidate for governor, who was at the time commanding a perilously narrow lead in the polls. “I want to go toward the end for some earnestness,” Favreau said.
“You should do something real message-y,” Tommy Vietor proposed.
“I’m expecting the ‘race speech’ for G.O.T.V.,” Dan Pfeiffer chimed in.
Its hosts have not shied away from making use of their newfound influence. In 2017, “Pod Save America” has pointed its audience toward an array of grass-roots groups on the left, partnering with MoveOn to send nearly 2,000 listeners to Republican town-hall meetings, with Swing Left to raise more than $1 million for challengers to House Republicans next year and with Indivisible to deluge Republican senators with tens of thousands of phone calls in favor of preserving Obamacare. And in Richmond, the hosts were lending their activist cachet and charisma to Northam, a candidate who, Democrats worried, could use a lot more of both.
Favreau, Lovett and Vietor were in their 20s when they went to work for Obama in the White House, and they had been somewhat adrift since leaving it around the end of Obama’s first term. They relocated to California in search of a second act, but nothing quite stuck. Lovett helped create a sitcom called “1600 Penn” about a wacky First Family, but poor ratings and reviews led NBC to cancel it after one season. Favreau and Vietor founded a strategic communications firm to pay the bills while they nursed their own TV ambitions, but their projects — a campaign drama-comedy called “Early States” and a public-affairs show that they pitched, with Lovett, as “a millennial ‘Meet the Press’ ” — were rejected by the networks and streaming services. “Lots of people in suits told us that politics was a crowded space as they greenlit ‘CSI [expletive] West Hollywood’ or whatever,” Vietor recalls.
The day after Trump’s victory, Lovett was driving Favreau and Vietor to The Ringer’s Hollywood studios when his car ran out of gas. It was while the three of them were pushing the Jeep Grand Cherokee down Sunset Boulevard that they first started discussing what would become “Pod Save America” and Crooked Media. They wanted to get involved in politics again, but none of them had any desire to go back to Washington or to work for a candidate. A podcast and a liberal media company, they thought, could be their contribution to the anti-Trump resistance.
More than 1,600 political podcasts — most of them anti-Trump — have appeared since the 2016 election, according to RawVoice, a podcast hosting and analytics company. “Pod Save America,” with nearly 120 million downloads to date, is the undisputed king of the field. But the show’s numbers alone do not quite capture the nature of its accomplishment. With a shoestring budget and no organizational backing, its hosts seem to have created something that liberals have spent almost two decades, and hundreds of millions of dollars, futilely searching for: the left’s answer to conservative talk radio.
“Pod Save America,” by contrast, has no conservative antecedent. The craft-beer-bar-bull-session vibe of podcasts suits the left better than the shouty antagonism of talk radio. “Rather than trying to replicate what’s worked on the right, these podcasts aren’t taking the same tropes you see on Fox or hear on conservative talk radio and applying them to the left,” Miller says.
The self-mockery about Crooked Media’s ambitions belies how outsize those ambitions are. In addition to “Pod Save America,” the company now has six other podcasts and plans to roll out at least two more soon. It has hired two producers, one from MTV and the other from the Oprah Winfrey Network. In October, it poached a New Republic writer to helm its website. A nationwide “Pod Save America” tour, Crooked Media’s first serious stab at live events, has so far played to sold-out theaters in seven cities. For the 2018 midterms and the 2020 presidential race, Crooked Media is hoping to host candidate forums and debates.
Acutely aware of the perils of their new operation resembling the old political-media boys’ club, the decidedly bro-ish “Pod Save America” hosts have slanted Crooked Media’s growing podcast slate toward non-white-male hosts, and the company’s top two executives are women. “Ideally what we’re trying to build is a media company that’s not about one show, ‘Pod Save America,’ but a whole bunch of new shows that are not living and dying by the latest tweet,” Vietor told me.
Few things are as inauthenticity-prone, however, as the political-pundit business. On a Saturday morning in July, “Pod Save America” traveled to the Pasadena Convention Center for Politicon, a two-day event that has been hailed as the “Comic-Con of politics,” in which several thousand political junkies pay $80 apiece for the opportunity to see their favorite cable-news talking heads in the flesh. When the Politicon organizers first approached them about appearing, the “Pod Save America” hosts recoiled at the idea — “Some of these people are despicable,” Lovett complained to the organizers about the other invitees — but they eventually reconsidered. After all, they had a brand to promote.
As they stood at the threshold of the Politicon greenroom, the “Pod Save America” hosts looked like patients about to go into surgery. “I’d rather stay out here as long as possible,” Vietor whispered. Inside, Ann Coulter — flanked by a couple of cops who were providing security — marked her territory, while the Coulter wannabe Tomi Lahren paraded around with a camera crew in tow. In one corner, the Republican rogue Roger Stone held court. In another, Chris Cillizza of CNN dispensed conventional wisdom. The Crooked Media guys mostly talked among themselves.
“The primary was about whether the I.R.G.C.” — Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps — “should be a terrorist group!” Vietor marveled.
“It’s like we’re all defending the Earth!” Kristol said.
