The director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau said on Wednesday that he would leave the federal agency this month, removing a major opponent to the Trump administration’s efforts to dismantle business regulations and unfetter Wall Street.
As the bureau’s first director, Richard Cordray, a Democrat appointed by President Barack Obama, has been an active watchdog whose role took on outsize significance in an increasingly partisan Washington. To many Republicans, he embodied the kind of overaggressive policing that they contend hamstrings businesses and quashes innovation. To Democrats, he was a champion of the public, fighting predatory companies and abusive practices that rip off ordinary people.
Established six years ago as part of the Dodd-Frank Act, the agency has unusually broad power to combat abuses in a wide variety of financial products, including mortgages, credit cards, bank accounts and student loans.
Mr. Cordray, 58, pursued that mission with zeal. Under his leadership, the bureau extracted nearly $12 billion in refunds and canceled debts for 29 million consumers. It cracked down on abusive debt collectors, strengthened protections for mortgage borrowers and created a complaints system that helped hundreds of thousands of people resolve disputes with financial companies.
Just hours after Mr. Cordray told his staff of his planned departure, the agency sued a debt collector that it said had broken state usury laws by charging illegally high interest rates.
Mr. Cordray has been a whipping boy on Capitol Hill for years — Congress called him to testify nearly 30 times — but in recent months he also came under attack from other federal agencies. In one case, the Justice Department sided with a mortgage lender that questioned the agency’s constitutionality. The acting director of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, a major banking regulator, publicly undermined several of the bureau’s actions and traded heated letters with Mr. Cordray.
But President Trump, who ran on a populist platform that harnessed Americans’ anger toward Wall Street, largely stayed out of the fray. On Twitter, his favorite venting ground, he has not commented on or criticized the consumer bureau or its director.
Mr. Cordray’s five-year term was scheduled to end in July 2018. He was widely expected to step down early to run for governor in Ohio, his home state.
Mr. Cordray did not discuss his future plans in his email. A bureau spokesman declined to comment.
In the months since Mr. Trump was elected, Mr. Cordray unleashed a fusillade of regulations — with mixed success. The agency adopted a new rule in July that would have allowed consumers to band together in class actions against financial institutions. Last month, Congress overturned the rule, with Vice President Mike Pence breaking a 50-50 tie in the Senate.
Other rules, including new protections on prepaid debit cards, withstood challenges. The agency recently imposed restrictions that will sharply curtail the payday lending market.
By installing his own director, Mr. Trump will be able to reshape the agency to look more like other financial regulators, many of which are now run by former industry executives. He picked Randal K. Quarles, a former private equity executive and banking industry lawyer to fill one of the top jobs at the Federal Reserve, and Steven Mnuchin, a former investment banker at Goldman Sachs, heads the Treasury Department.
One of the names being floated for the consumer bureau’s leadership post is Todd J. Zywicki, a conservative law professor at George Mason University, according to two people familiar with the White House’s discussions. They requested anonymity because the discussions are not public.
Democrats pledged to fight any nominee they perceive to be too cozy with the financial industry.
But with Mr. Cordray’s departure, some of his actions will be in jeopardy. “The C.F.P.B.’s rule-making agenda will grind to a halt and its enforcement profile will dramatically diminish,” said Isaac Boltansky, the director of policy research at Compass Point Research & Trading.
A new director could abandon some rules still under development, like restrictions on debt collection, and settle or drop lawsuits that the bureau is pursuing. One high-profile example is the case it brought this year against Navient, the nation’s largest servicer of student loans. The agency claims that Navient misled millions of borrowers and illegally drove up their loan repayment costs. Navient, which is fighting the case, has denied any wrongdoing.
Mr. Cordray struck a sanguine tone when asked this summer, in an interview with The New York Times, about his legacy.
