THURSDAY PUZZLE — Running is an extremely dangerous sport, primarily because it takes place outdoors and involves leaving the safety and comfort of my couch. And yet I do it. Well, what I do could better be described as “loping,” and only by people a lot more optimistic than me. But I am determined to be a runner, despite the dangers and despite the fact that I wheeze even more than I do when I go curling. Running is addictive and it’s supposedly good for you, providing you only do it to the point where you remain clinically not dead.
That is an absurdly hard thing to put one’s body through, and this particular marathon has runners putting their bodies through it in all five boroughs of New York City, if they run the whole thing.
My point is, Mr. Sagal is a brave man for at least two reasons: He is laying his life on the line to run in the New York Marathon, he is doing it as a guide for a blind runner (see his notes below), and he has constructed his first crossword, in collaboration with game designer and constructor Mike Selinker.
This is a lovely Thursday offering and I learned more about the marathon that I may never run today, so thanks for that, Mr. Sagal and Mr. Selinker. The theme stayed very cleverly hidden until the end for me, and I can’t ask for more than that. Except for maybe some hydration gel.
I spoke with Mr. Sagal and Mr. Selinker about their puzzle, about the marathon, and why you should never listen to anything Mr. Sagal says during a race.
Radio host Peter Sagal and game designer Mike Selinker talk puzzles.
If you are reading this on a mobile device or tablet, you can listen to the interview here.
All warmed up? Good, let’s see if we can achieve a personal best today.
Today we follow the path the marathoners will run on Sunday, by BOROUGH, and we are starting at the bottom of the grid. For example, the race begins on Staten Island, but that borough is no where to be seen, unless you jump down to 67A’s “Step 1: A passenger ship since 1817” and fill in FERRY. I got that through the crossings, because I wasn’t think about a small FERRY being a ship. However, we’re specifically thinking about the STATEN ISLAND FERRY from that clue, and the borough is implied.
We then lope — sorry, I mean run — into BROOKLYN, with 51A’s “Step 2: An old baseball team,” which is, of course the (BROOKLYN) DODGERS.
Keep up a good pace and, if you get lost, send up a flare or click here to see the entire theme.
5A: TIL that a small cape, like the one in Provincetown, is also called a SPIT.
17A: Not sure whether the Little Dipper is in URSA MAJOR or URSA MINOR? Fill in URSA M_ _OR, and use the crossings, Luke.
27A: Ha! You thought that was a political clue, didn’t you? “Trump is often involved in these” is a bridge clue today. The answer is BID.
15D: I honestly thought that “Faces With Tears of Joy” was some piece of artwork that I hadn’t learned about, but it turns out that today’s answer is the laugh-til-you-cry EMOJI.
49A: The city of Zagazig is not only in EGYPT, it’s extremely fun to say out loud.
Peter Sagal: In 2016, my friend Greg Pliska asked me to come do the “play-by-play” at the American Crossword Puzzle Tournament finals in Stamford, CT. I went and had a great time, including running into some old friends in the puzzle community. That inspired me to start solving the puzzle myself, and I’ve been doing it daily since around that time. In fact, it’s become a daily ritual in the “Wait, Wait ...” offices: we solve the puzzle together after our daily editorial meeting.
So, when Mike Selinker got in touch to ask me if I’d collaborate with him as a “celebrity,” I was thrilled. I had actually begun poking around with practice grids myself, thinking how gratifying it would be to make a puzzle for The Times, and was envious of the other folk who had gotten to work on one for the anniversary project. Mike and I met on a cruise a few years ago, and he helped me create a trivia game for the entertainers.
My first idea for the puzzle was shot down and I was a bit at sea as to what to do. I wanted to do something that related to my career, as many guest constructors had done, but didn’t know how to work the idea of a “quiz show host” into the puzzle. Maybe the clues were riddles with the solution being the answer? That didn’t work. Mike pointed out that I also am known for running marathons (13 so far, and I write a bi-monthly column for Runners World) and maybe that was a theme ... so I suggested in turn a “map” of the New York Marathon, which at that time was a few months off.
Mike responded amazingly. He constructed a grid in which a series of answers suggesting the five boroughs of the race, as a map, with the themed clues indicating their order in the race (Staten Island, Brooklyn, Queens, Manhattan, Bronx, and Manhattan again.) The clues are all phrases that suggest the name of the boroughs without naming them. He also managed to get in the phrase NEW YORK MARATHON and even BOROUGH.
I love the puzzle because it combines two things I enjoy when they happen to appear in the puzzle: first, the unwritten answer (i.e., you have to mentally provide the word BRONX to complete the answer CHEER) and the physical form of the puzzle; that is, it’s relevant where the answers appear in the grid.
As said, the grid was entirely Mike’s work. I contributed to the cluing as best I could, which was both difficult and a delight. As Mike pointed out to me, some words, like AGA, have appeared in the puzzle many times, and its a challenge to come up with new ways of cluing them. Of my clues that made it through the editing process, I’m most happy about 36 Across and 29 Down.
This really was great fun. It makes me want to try to construct one on my own, although it’ll be a huge leap from simply kibbitzing to doing it all myself. At any rate, I hope solving it gives puzzlers the same sense of pleased satisfaction I’ve gotten from doing the puzzle the last year.
One last important note: I couldn’t very well co-author a puzzle about the New York Marathon without running it, so I signed up with Achilles International to be a guide for a blind runner, as I’ve done three times before. I’ll be helping to guide an accomplished para-athlete named Asim Baig, and we’re raising money for Achilles and Mr. Baig.
Mike Selinker: A couple years ago on the JoCo Cruise, I helped Peter Sagal out with the clues for a game show — I know, right? — and so it seemed about time for him to return the favor. Peter was a more-than-willing collaborator, and we fleshed out a lot of ideas that didn’t really go anywhere. Eventually I posed to Peter, who runs a lot of marathons, the obvious question “What about a marathon puzzle?” Peter wanted to run the New York Marathon this week, and so he came up with this insane and stellar idea of drawing a map of the entire marathon route. To which I said, “Uh, yeah, I think I can do that,” and came up with this.
Actually, the first grid also had a 26-letter message — RUN AND RUN TILL THE RACE IS DONE — running from the second R in FERRY to the N and E at the start of NEW YORK MARATHON, with the black squares being the bridges between the boroughs. Which was great except Will went, “Okay, but why?” And he was — stop me if this sounds familiar — completely correct. I ripped that out and made a much better grid with Will and Peter’s guidance.
Once that was done, Peter clued the first pass all by himself, and he’s the best crossword cluer ever. That brain is crammed with so much trivia, he’s probably had to delete the node that tells him how to use a fork. I had no freaking idea about half the stuff he crammed into there. For me though, the best clues of his are the ones that just roll off as effortless comments, like the ones for MOO, IMHO, and ROCK ON. It was a great three-way collaboration with me, Peter, and Will. I hope we get to do it again soon. Now Peter just has to teach me how to be a radio god and we’re even. Meanwhile, I’ll also be doing a marathon of a different kind, playing Dungeons & Dragons all day to benefit children hospitals for [Extra Life]. Mine’s just like his, but with less sweating and more orcs.
Congratulations, Mr. Sagal, on your New York Times Crossword debut and best of luck to you and Mr. Baig this Sunday with the marathon.
