Sometimes the simplest questions are the hardest. Art Beltrone has spent months trying to answer this one: Who was Johnny from New York?
Mr. Beltrone is reasonably sure of this much. Johnny was a soldier, probably a private. The Army sent Johnny to what was then South Vietnam, probably in 1967. He sailed on a troop carrier, a huge vessel that crisscrossed the Pacific regularly as the United States involvement in the war escalated. He would probably be younger than Mr. Beltrone, who is 75 — perhaps as young as 68.
He wrote that on the canvas panel that doubled as the bottom of the bunk above his. Johnny’s writing was plain, almost as if he were scratching the canvas.
Other panels from other bunks on the ship had the artistic flourish that Johnny’s did not, like the one with “Hello, G.I.” and “Welcome to Viet-Nam” inches from the words “Viet Nam Susie” and a suggestive sketch of a woman.
Mr. Beltrone said to look closely. Susie’s long face looks a lot like the long face of the North Vietnam leader Ho Chi Minh — and she has a beard.
Mr. Beltrone said this at the New-York Historical Society, on Central Park West in Manhattan, on a bright morning last month. The Johnny and Susie panels are on display there as part of an exhibition called “The Vietnam War: 1945-1975.” It recreates everything but the unbearable heat of Vietnam through maps and objects like helmets, uniforms, even the little Zippo lighters that soldiers bought when they arrived. They paid extra to have them engraved, and the sayings soured as the war ground on.
The canvas panels were more restrained — they were not a soldier’s personal property, after all. Mr. Beltrone considers them graffiti and has made them the centerpieces of something called the Vietnam Graffiti Project. He started it 20 years ago after helping a neighbor, Jack Fisk, the production designer on the film “The Thin Red Line” (and husband of the actress Sissy Spacek).
The ship was the General Nelson M. Walker, which had been launched in 1945 as the Admiral H. T. Mayo. Its main claim to fame in World War II was that one of its crew members was a member of the Coast Guard, Victor Mature, the Hollywood heartthrob remembered for loincloths-and-leotards poses.
The Walker was unusual among the more than 100 ships tied up off Newport News, Va., because it was intact. Usually ships were stripped when they went into the reserve fleet. The Walker had been left in as-is condition in case the government needed it in an emergency. Even the electricity was on.
Mr. Beltrone was hooked. He told his wife, Lee, that they had to do something to preserve the canvases. He called the fleet superintendent and proposed transferring some of them to museums. Given the go-ahead, he removed about 50. The Smithsonian chose three, he said. The Library of Congress took 21 — every one that Mr. Beltrone had shown the curator he had contacted there.
Later, after the ship had been sent to a scrapyard in Brownsville, Tex., he took another 300 canvases off the ship.
Mr. Beltrone has done enough research to suspect that Johnny was from the First or Second Squadron of the First Cavalry Division. Both squadrons sailed on the same voyage, he said — he knows this from the ship’s log, which he found in the National Archives. He also found other canvases from those units on the Walker in Brownsville.
As for finding Johnny, he obtained rosters from the Army. “There are a lot of Johnnys,” he said dryly. Each squadron had about 1,200 soldiers.
Mr. Beltrone himself has never been to Vietnam. He was hired by the Long Island newspaper Newsday after he graduated from C. W. Post College in 1963 and became a reporter. In 1965, he wrote about one of the first soldiers from Long Island killed in Vietnam. He still has the clipping — and the letter from the dead soldier’s parents, thanking him for writing the article.
Mr. Beltrone has found soldiers from the Walker before, like the Tom from a bunk canvas on the Walker — “Tom & Gay,” it said. “Married 27 Aug. 66, got to VN 27 Aug. 67.” Mr. Beltrone sent a photograph of that canvas to the American Legion Magazine, which published it in March 2014.
The Tom in question turned out to be Tom Fey, 73, who lives in Black Hawk, Colo., an appropriate name, he said, since his squadron was known as the Blackhawks. He was flipping through the magazine when he saw the photograph.
“I said ‘holy moly,’” he said, and then screamed at seeing something from nearly a half century ago. The scream scared his wife. “It jumped into her brain, ‘He’s having a heart attack,’” he said. He was not. He got to take it home after a surprise presentation at a lunch for veterans at the historical society last month.
“That usually breaks the ice,” he said.
Even if the $87.50 is a made-up figure and he does not intend to collect anything.