As a candidate in 2013, fresh off his Democratic primary win, Bill de Blasio appeared before the Association for a Better New York, using the powerful perch to outline in new detail how his mayoralty would seek to end income inequality.
The speech was well received by the group of the well-heeled and civil-minded, who had generally eyed him with suspicion, given his campaign rhetoric.
Since then, the mayor has used his appearances before the association to unveil major new initiatives, including plans to address homelessness and to improve the performance of schools.
The mayor did not exactly take up the invitation.
Instead, a day before he is widely expected to be re-elected to a second term, Mr. de Blasio focused his 29-minute address on reviewing his first term and warning of the danger presented by a tax proposal emanating from Washington that could have a major impact on New York City.
The choice to do so reflected both Mr. de Blasio’s strong position going into Election Day, with polls showing him leading his Republican challenger, Assemblywoman Nicole Malliotakis, by more than 30 points, and his campaign tactic of linking her to President Trump.
He then said those investments were threatened by Washington.
“We see the basics improving,” he said. “But the danger to New York City isn’t here. It’s 200 miles down I-95."
For more than 10 minutes, Mr. de Blasio urged the audience to resist the Republican tax plan, which could do away with federal deductions for state and local taxes and in that way deliver a massive blow to the city and its taxpayers.
The room, which had embraced him with a standing ovation as he mounted the stage, greeted his comments about the tax plan mostly with silence, the sound of cutlery on breakfast plates audible throughout the speech. Applause finally came after Mr. de Blasio celebrated the leadership of Senator Chuck Schumer, a Democrat, on the issue, as well as that of Republican congressmen like Representative Dan Donovan, who represents Staten Island and parts of Brooklyn.
Jay Kriegel, a senior adviser at the Related Companies, a real estate firm, praised Mr. de Blasio’s emphasis on the tax proposal. Mr. Kriegel led a campaign for the New York business community to oppose a similar effort to change the tax deductibility during the Reagan administration.
The Association for a Better New York is opposed to Mr. Trump’s proposal to do away with state and local tax deductions, which have been in place since 1913, and most in attendance on Monday appeared to agree with Mr. de Blasio. But many declined afterward to be quoted on the substance of his address for fear of angering an incumbent mayor on the day before all expected him to be returned to office for another four years.
The choice to host Mr. de Blasio for a major address less than 24 hours before polls open in New York City was not the mayor’s, according to spokeswomen for Mr. de Blasio and the association. After the group invited the mayor, it was the only date they could find that would accommodate schedules as well as the availability of the room.
