Since her arrival in New York nearly a decade ago, Prachee Pathak has always lived in Yorkville, on the Upper East Side. And in late 2009, having finished her studies to become a physician assistant, she bought an alcove studio in a postwar building in the East 70s, for $300,000.
Ms. Pathak, now 42, worked in the emergency room at nearby NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital, where she met, and soon married, Richard Lappin, a physician.
But once Dr. Lappin moved into the Yorkville studio, he began to appreciate the advantages of walking to work.
Now they had three bedrooms and two bathrooms. “We constantly have guests, family and cousins visiting, so it worked out well,” said Ms. Pathak, who currently works in robotic surgery at Mount Sinai Hospital.
A few years later, though, they found themselves in need of more space: There were twins on the way, and Ms. Pathak’s mother, Vimal Pathak, would be joining them from Mumbai to help care for the babies.
The couple wanted to remain in Yorkville, where they could get home from work quickly if necessary. And they liked having John Jay Park and good public schools nearby. So they started their search for a four-bedroom co-op in the 70s and 80s east of Second Avenue.
Their price range was wide: maybe $1 million if they had to put money into renovations, or as much as $2 million for a place in near-perfect condition. Most options they found were in 1960s-era buildings similar to the one they were living in.
But the asking price was $1.65 million, which seemed high for the work needed. And the monthly maintenance was almost $2,400, although the building didn’t have a doorman, so it wasn’t hard for them to pass on it.
Nearby, in an East End Avenue building, three options appeared, all with views of the East River.
One was a three-bedroom on a high floor with a dining room that could be converted to a bedroom. It was listed at $1.895 million, with maintenance of around $3,300, which also seemed high. It later sold for $1.815 million.
There were two options to buy and combine apartments on lower floors, both uncomfortably pricey: One set of apartments was slightly over $2 million, and the other slightly under.
The prospect of renovating, moving and timing the sale of their place “started to feel like a lot of work for two older parents,” said Ms. Pathak, who was also concerned that some of the balconies were directly above the F.D.R. Drive, with its noisy traffic.
Staying put began to seem more appealing. And that was when they remembered the apartment next to them, an alcove studio that had sat vacant for years. They contacted the owner, who had retired and moved south, and after some negotiating, bought it for $305,000. Their maintenance is now around $4,000 a month.
Waiting for permits took months, and since construction started in the early summer, they have been living with dust and plastic, a situation that is even more challenging with one-year-old twins.
“I am glad we decided to do this,” Dr. Lappin said. “We are looking forward to the kids having their own room, so we don’t have to wake up when they wake up” — something that is unavoidable at the moment, as Uma and Sahm sleep in their parents’ bedroom, in Finnish-style baby boxes.
When Ms. Pathak and Dr. Lappin visit their friends in the suburbs, they marvel at the space. Still, they are convinced they made the right decision.
