But Mrs. Maisel had company. While stand-up comedy remained largely the province of men throughout the 1950s and ’60s, a few women had begun to appear on club stages and late show couches. Here are a few of the first female comics and a selection of their zingers.
As a 1950s comic who also sang, Carroll bridged the music hall comediennes of the past and the female stand-ups of the present. 
My husband, he’s a wonderful man, a regular do-it-yourselfer.
In the mid ’50s, Diller cultivated a stand-up act in which she appeared as a ditzy homemaker who apparently dressed in the dark. (The outlandish outfits were meant to disguise a cute figure.) Diller’s best-loved jokes, punctuated with a jackdaw’s cackle, skewered her fictional husband, Fang.
On my honeymoon, I put on peekaboo blouse.
My husband peeked and booed.
I’ve been on a diet for two weeks, and all I’ve lost is two weeks.
A veteran of minstrel shows and the Chitlin’ Circuit, Mabley attracted mainstream attention in the ’60s, when she played Carnegie Hall and often appeared on television. She recorded more than 20 albums of deep-voiced, loose-tongued jokes about sex, aging and racism.
Ain’t nothing an old man can do for me but bring me a message from a young one.
Ms. May began her career with the Compass Players in Chicago in the mid-50s, cultivating a style of sophisticated, absurdist sketch comedy. Her routines with Mike Nichols were sexy and brainy, sometimes abstruse. In one of their most famous sketches, Ms. May played a nagging mother to Nichols’s aerospace engineer.
Mother: You never call.
Arthur: Mother, I was sending up a rocket! I didn’t have a second!
Mother: Well, it’s always something, isn’t it?
Rivers’s early ’60s routines were talky single-girl riffs about her inability to land a husband. Wearing little black dresses and prim updos, she worked a style that was quick and brash and often angry — at men, at her mother, at a world weighted unfairly against women.
A man can sleep around, no questions asked.
But if a woman makes 19 or 20 mistakes, she’s a tramp.