Opinion|Vary the Minimum Wage by Region?
Vary the Minimum Wage by Region?
Jonathan Cowan and Jim Kessler’s argument for a regionally tiered minimum wage is poor policy that would leave too many workers behind. The minimum wage rates they recommend — an average of $10.90 initially for most regions of the United States and just $9.25 in lower-cost parts of rural America — are far too low and would not reach $15 an hour until about 2032 for most of the United States, and 2041 in rural America (assuming 2 percent annual inflation).
While the $15 wage movement started in cities like Seattle and New York, paychecks have been flat all across America, and cost-of-living data show that in all 50 states single workers will need $15 an hour in just a few years to afford the basics. Beyond living costs, regional wage differences in low-paying industries have been declining, with the result that home health aides and waitresses in New Jersey today earn just a little more than they do in Mississippi.
Our national economy therefore needs a strong and uniform national wage floor to lift workers across the country — and prevent a race to the bottom.
The writer is general counsel at the National Employment Law Project.
Jonathan Cowan and Jim Kessler correctly identify a serious problem with the national minimum wage: The cost of living varies greatly depending on where you live. However, their proposal for different minimum wages in a country with “hundreds of different micro-economies” is not only exceedingly complex but also avoids the fundamental question: Why have a minimum wage at all?
The New York Times itself opined in a 1987 editorial, “The Right Minimum Wage: $0.00,” that the minimum wage prices the working poor out of the job market. It still does. But it’s also about choice. Shouldn’t adults have the freedom to decide the price at which they are willing to exchange their labor with other adults? If we are pro-choice, we should be supporting the right of adults to make choices in all aspects of their lives, personal and economic.
The interesting proposal by Jonathan Cowan and Jim Kessler misses an important point. Even in Oklahoma City, where a simple breakfast at a diner costs only $5.79, and in Fargo, N.D., where a dozen eggs costs only 93 cents, a wage of $15 an hour doesn’t go very far. The system we have now is not very different from the reasonable but complicated system that Mr. Cowan and Mr. Kessler propose.
We now have a national minimum wage, and cities and regions where costs are higher are free to set their minimums higher. We need a $15 federal minimum wage because $15 is the minimum that a worker anywhere in the country should be paid. Cities and regions where the cost of living is more expensive will still be free to set higher minimums.
The current federal minimum wage of $7.25 per hour is a national disgrace. It was not sufficient when that rate was set in 2009. Doubling the minimum is right. And high-cost cities like New York and Seattle will want to go higher.
The bigger national disgrace is the discrepancy in income between low-wage workers and the plutocrats. Nobody is thinking about setting a maximum income for the people at the very top. But at least we can use the concept of the minimum wage to take a small step toward reducing the outrageous disparity between the highest and the lowest incomes by making sure that everywhere in the country someone with a job will have enough to live on.
