Bob Corker, the Republican chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and Mark Warner, the highest-ranking Democrat on the Senate Intelligence Committee, assess the dissolution of compromise in politics at a TimesTalks event.CreditCredit...Ralph Alswang for The New York Times.
WASHINGTON — Tax overhaul, Russian election meddling and whether Republicans and Democrats might ever reach a political détente during the Trump presidency were among the top topics on Wednesday during a TimesTalks conversation with Senators Bob Corker, Republican of Tennessee, and Mark Warner, Democrat of Virginia. The two traded good-natured barbs as they discussed the era of waning compromise in Washington.
As Southern senators who were used to cutting deals when they were businessmen, Mr. Corker and Mr. Warner have as good a reason as any to have faith in bipartisanship. But their forecasts on Republican and Democratic compromise were far from rosy. High-priority policies like health care and tax overhaul have been handled by Congress in way that has been anything but bipartisan.
Their theories for the split included the news media and activists on the extremes of both parties. “We’ve ended up concentrating too much power in respective Republican and Democratic leaders in the House and the Senate,” Mr. Warner said.
But, the senators agreed, President Trump has served to unify lawmakers in both parties in some cases — including whether to impose economic sanctions on Russia.
Trump-Corker feud is not over.
Few feuds have fascinated Washington this fall like the one between President Trump and Mr. Corker, who has emerged as one of his most vocal Republican critics. Mr. Corker tried to lower the temperature on Wednesday, but did not bet on a détente any time soon.
Mr. Corker did not name names, nor would he say whether he thought Mr. Trump would face a primary challenge if he stood for re-election in 2020. But in presenting a competing vision for the Republican Party, Mr. Corker may have made an ostensible — if unintended — case for himself as challenger.
“The governing model of dividing your country to solidify your base is just not one I can adhere to,” he said.
Mr. Corker gives few hints on where he’ll land on taxes.
Mr. Corker has repeatedly raised concerns about adding to the nation’s budget deficit when discussing Republicans’ fast-moving push to change the nation’s tax code. Where that conviction will leave him was made no clearer on Wednesday night.
Without his support, the bill will be on life support.
“If, when this bill is completed, I feel that the growth assumptions are out of line, and we are not in this 10-year window going to have a bill that doesn’t add to the deficit, I’m not going to vote for it,” he said.
Regardless, it was clear that Mr. Corker was underwhelmed by the way his party has moved on the tax overhaul — and he may not be alone.
Forecasting the Senate’s Russian investigation.
Republicans and Democrats investigating Russia’s interference in the 2016 presidential election are still hopeful they can hold together to issue a final, bipartisan report of their findings, Mr. Warner said. But as the top Democrat on the Senate Intelligence Committee, he said he was concerned that Mr. Trump’s dismissal of the panel’s work had hampered a “whole-of-government” response to Russia’s actions.
The Senate committee works in secret, and Mr. Warner gave few clues about its findings so far.
Other resolutions remain less clear, though. And the potential for a partisan split on an issue of high national significance presents a real danger, Mr. Warner said.
Roy Moore is heading for a loss.
If Mr. Corker and Mr. Warner are to be believed, then Roy S. Moore, the Republican nominee for a Senate seat in Alabama, is headed for a big loss in the special election next month.
Mr. Moore is accused of making sexual or romantic advances toward at least five women when they were teenagers, and his support among Republicans in Washington has collapsed. Despite Mr. Moore’s refusal to drop out of the race, the two senators said they were confident that his Democratic opponent, Doug Jones, would prevail.
Mr. Corker, citing new polling from the Senate Republicans’ campaign arm, said Mr. Moore was trailing Mr. Jones by double digits and, based on conversations with friends on the ground, would not recover.
“Folks in Alabama will surprise us,” Mr. Warner said.