SETTING This house is in the Central West End area of St. Louis, near a medical complex with three hospitals. The neighborhood is a 15-minute walk from Forest Park. Shops, bistros and art galleries are close by.
INDOORS The large foyer sets the stage for the home’s elaborate original millwork and quarter-sawn oak floors. One of three functioning fireplaces (there are also two nonfunctioning ones) is near the base of the grand staircase. An arched stained-glass window surmounts the first landing.
The formal dining room has a floor-to-ceiling pier mirror framed by classical moldings. The kitchen was renovated in the last 10 years with stone countertops, a six-burner stove and radiant heated floors. A kegerator installed in an under-counter cabinet provides cool beer on demand.
The third floor, which is reached by a back stairway, has three bedrooms and one bathroom. The unfinished basement has a gym with a rubber floor; all of the exercise and weight lifting equipment will remain there.
OUTDOOR SPACE The backyard has newly paved patio, raised garden beds and a koi pond. A covered patio is on the side of the house, reached through the living room. The .12-acre property also includes a two-car garage.
SETTING The house is on a 44-acre man-made lake in Ridgefield, a town in Fairfield County, Conn., an hour and a half from New York City. The community includes both seasonal residents and year-rounders. The lake is used for fishing and swimming (it has two beaches), and motorboats are banned; in winter, it attracts ice skaters. The home has its own dock.
INDOORS Built in the early 1970s, the house has a modern layout with an open living/dining room/kitchen area brightened by a full wall of windows and sliding glass doors. A spiral staircase leads to a pair of upstairs sleeping lofts and a private master bedroom downstairs with an en-suite bathroom. The living room has a vaulted ceiling and a wood-burning fireplace. The kitchen was updated within the last two years with sleek contemporary cabinets and Bosch appliances. The main floor has a bathroom with a shower.
OUTDOOR SPACE The half-acre grounds are planted with azaleas and rhododendrons. There is a firepit with a circle of log seats in front of the house and a patio beneath a grand willow tree in back, near the water’s edge. The living room opens to a long balcony with a cantilevered circular terrace overlooking the lake. Nearby, an elevated hot tub is built into a turret-like structure. A small outbuilding on the property has electricity. The parking area has room for up to four cars.
SETTING The corrugated metal house sits on a hilltop in the Picture Rocks area northwest of Saguaro National Park, a place with unusually dark night skies. Designed by Rob Paulus Architects of Tucson for an astronomer, the home has 360-degree desert and mountain views.
INDOORS Much of the main level is taken up by a double-height living-and-dining area with maple hardwood floors and glass walls. The kitchen is divided from this space by a breakfast bar and has a glass-tiled floor and backsplash, as well as glass doors leading out to a large cantilevered deck. Behind the kitchen are a mechanical room, slate-tiled bathroom with a tub and maple vanity and a bedroom entered through a sliding barn door.
A flight of industrial steel stairs leads to a loft space that overlooks the living area and was used as a home office. A laundry room and the master bathroom, with a pebble-floor shower, occupy the core. 
A storage shed beneath the home contains a seismograph that is sensitive enough to detect earthquakes as far away as Nepal. An observatory built on the property includes a telescope that can be manipulated from inside the house.
OUTDOOR SPACE The house is approached by a steep, serpentine driveway. Shaded parking is provided by a carport underneath the structure, and there is room next to the building for three additional cars. The five-acre property is visited by bobcats, coyote, quail, rattlesnakes and the hairy, sharp-toothed animals called javelina.
