So many of us come together to celebrate Thanksgiving, but the holiday means something different to everyone. We asked for a snapshot of your Thanksgiving — a story or a tradition or a dish that helps define your holiday, and hundreds of you responded. You shared funny stories, about the turkeys that were too big for your ovens. You shared tragic memories, about experiencing unbelievable heartache on a day that is supposed to bring people together. And you shared tales about overcoming hardship to create a memorable meal. Here are your stories; together, they help tell the story of the holiday itself.
About 45 years ago, my mother made a last-minute run to the grocery store. There was a pizza parlor next to the store, and she watched as three Marines entered. My mother couldn’t stand the idea of anyone eating pizza for Thanksgiving dinner, so she dragged them home. She cooked enough for a small army every night anyway, so three more hearty appetites wouldn’t make a dent. These three young men spent the day with our family, played board games, watched football and shared our Thanksgiving dinner. They even helped with the dishes. I think they were the most polite people my parents ever had over. — Sandy Stinson, Santa Barbara, Calif.
I was homeless and living on New York City streets, in foster homes and homeless shelters. One Thanksgiving, I received a donated turkey — a thoughtful, generous gift, for which I was grateful. My shelter, however, didn’t have an oven where I could roast my dinner. Ultimately, I cut meat off the turkey bones, boiling it in a small pot on a hot plate — my only cooking appliance. The generosity of the donated turkey was tempered by the indignity I felt as a hungry person, scrambling to find any possible way to prepare my Thanksgiving meal. — Debra Vizzi, Hillside, N.J.
When I arrived at my parents’ home a few hours before dinner, the pie I baked was still very warm. The refrigerator was already packed and bursting with food. It was a particularly chilly Thanksgiving that year, cold enough that I thought I’d just set the pie out on the back porch to chill until dessert time. The curtains had been drawn all evening, and when I parted them to open the sliding door and retrieve the pie I saw — to my horror — a small possum with its face buried in my perfectly cooked, beautifully seasoned pumpkin pie. I SCREAMED. It froze. My brother came rushing over (probably suspecting I’d actually dropped the pie) and witnessed the same scene. A possum. In the pie. — Sonja Groset, Lake Forest Park, Wash.
My mom had a favorite restaurant that we often enjoyed for Thanksgiving dinner. When I was 8 years old, we got dressed up after the Macy’s parade coverage, clambered into our ’65 aquamarine Chevy Impala and headed to the restaurant. At the reservation desk, my dad exchanged holiday pleasantries with the hostess and gave our name. She looked uncomfortably at my dad, who in turn stared at the reservation book, willing the name “Griffin” to appear. Dad had forgotten to make the reservation. There was no room. We walked back to the car, and Mom blew up. Her favorite holiday, all dressed up, kids hungry, ruined because Dad didn’t do the one thing she asked him to do. An eerie silence descended on the car as we started home, a cold rain streaking down the windows. Out of nowhere we came upon a truck stop on old Route 19 called The Rambler’s Rest. Dad said that we should go there and at least get us some sort of meal. We were the only people in the place. A waitress easily on the far side of 70 told us the specials, which included a turkey dinner. Ugh … truck-stop turkey? We thought it might be something that had once been turkey but gelatinized into something an astronaut might take to the moon. What came out, thankfully, was anything but. — Charlene Shaw, Grove City, Pa.
I ordered a “midsize” turkey from a woman who raised them. The afternoon before Thanksgiving, I drove to her farm to pick up my turkey. It was 37 pounds! It was the only one she had left. On my way home, I stopped at the local hardware store to buy a pan the turkey would fit in. Armed with a huge aluminum pan, I went home to discover that the bird did not fit into our wall oven. My husband cut off the drumsticks and some other parts. On Thanksgiving morning, I put the turkey in the oven. Several hours later, I checked on the turkey just as it caught fire. Some of the melting fat had dripped down onto the heating coil leading to flames and lots of smoke. Of course, just as we threw open all the doors and windows to get the smoke out of the house, my parents drove up for dinner. — Barbara S, Madison, Wis.
In 1974 I was a college sophomore 1,200 miles from home, with no money for airfare. When the dorms closed for the holiday, I was staying alone in a borrowed basement apartment known as The Pit and planning a lonely Thanksgiving meal of Kraft mac and cheese, when a friend’s boyfriend called. Gary had to stay in town and, like me, had no Thanksgiving plans, but he did have a turkey he got at work. He offered to share it and pay for all the trimmings if I would cook the meal. I had never cooked a turkey or much of anything else, but I quickly agreed. We swung by the A.&P.; bought canned veggies, instant mashed potatoes and a frozen pumpkin pie, and I set about cooking Thanksgiving dinner for the first time. Another friend joined us and we dined by candlelight, listened to Elton John and the Beach Boys and talked about home. — Rosemary S, Peoria, Ill.
Share your Thanksgiving story in the comments of this article.