Quarterback Dak Prescott won’t have to go it alone for Dallas. The Eagles are trying for a seventh straight win. The Panthers have traded their top wide receiver. The Seahawks are out to prove their secondary is still elite. These are just some of the story lines entering Week 9 of the N.F.L. season, which is sure to have a few upsets. Here are our picks against the spread.
It appeared that Ezekiel Elliott’s six-game suspension would finally keep him out of a game, but a federal appeals court granted him a short administrative stay that will keep him active on Sunday.
The change in Elliott’s status is welcome news for the Cowboys (4-3), who have won two consecutive games after a rough stretch in which they had lost two of three.
As good as Dak Prescott is, and as convinced as the Cowboys are that they will be fine even if the suspension eventually kicks in, the recent improvement has been powered directly by Elliott, a star second-year running back finding his rookie-season form. In the two wins, he rushed for a combined 297 yards and four touchdowns, while adding another touchdown on a 72-yard reception.
Being over .500 is good, and having Elliott around for at least one more week is better, but there is still cause for concern in Dallas. The Cowboys have just a 39 percent chance of making the playoffs, according to The Upshot’s Playoff Simulator. Catching the red-hot Eagles for a division title in the N.F.C. East seems unlikely, and if Dallas wants to beat out a crowded field of potential wild-card teams, it has little margin for error.
The Lions (3-4) have lost three consecutive games, but they will feel a lot better about their season if they get a road win against a division rival. The Packers (4-3) are coming off a bye week in which they tried to fix an offense that has been horrendous since Aaron Rodgers was injured, but this is a particularly difficult matchup: Green Bay’s offense has been reduced to a running game powered by Aaron Jones and Brett Hundley, and the Lions do their best work stopping the run. Pick: Lions.