Our guide to pop and rock shows and the best of live jazz.
DEER TICK at Brooklyn Steel (Dec. 2, 8:30 p.m.). Deer Tick makes music that pairs well with a raucous party, but it also makes music for the comedown that follows. This Providence, R.I., band’s two most recent albums, released simultaneously this fall, play up that contrast: “Deer Tick Vol. 1” leans on tender balladry, while “Deer Tick Vol. 2” is a rock ’n’ roll bash. Similarly, shows on the band’s current tour are broken into acoustic and electric sets. Stick around for both for the full Deer Tick experience.
JESSICA LEA MAYFIELD at Baby’s All Right (Dec. 1, 8 p.m.). The Ohio-raised singer-songwriter Jessica Lea Mayfield made her new album, “Sorry Is Gone,” in the aftermath of a divorce, and it’s full of vivid, complex emotions. (“Getting rid of you, but I don’t want to,” she sings over the chiming guitars of the title track, then adds, “I’m all right with being lonely.”) It’s an evocative listen that should be even more compelling at this show, rescheduled from a planned October date.
DAVID RAWLINGS at Brooklyn Steel (Dec. 5, 8 p.m.). David Rawlings is quietly one of the most influential artists in contemporary folk and Americana, even if most casual fans know him as the guy in the cowboy hat standing next to his longtime collaborator Gillian Welch. Their roles will reverse on Tuesday night, when Mr. Rawlings plays the frontman at a show to celebrate his excellent solo album “Poor David’s Almanack,” with a backing band that includes Ms. Welch.
ST. VINCENT at Kings Theater (Dec. 2-3, 8 p.m.). A fearsomely talented guitarist with dreams of pop domination — or so her highly theatricalized live performances in recent years have suggested — St. Vincent is never less than memorable in concert. At recent shows, she has begun with a brisk tour of her back catalog before playing her current and most daring gambit, “Masseduction,” in full. This pair of Brooklyn dates sold out long ago, but the resale market is reasonably priced if you’re the type who will regret missing out when clips of St. Vincent’s surreal set design and fantastic musical coups turn up on social media the next day.
CINDY WILSON at the Bell House (Dec. 6, 8 p.m.). Cheerful guardians of the camp tradition in pop and rock, the B-52s have been making music for about 40 years — long enough for two of its three primary singers, Fred Schneider and Kate Pierson, to release solo albums. The third, Cindy Wilson, followed suit in November with “Change,” a pleasantly danceable set, and she will headline this holiday benefit show for Planned Parenthood’s New York chapter. With Kaki King and Amy Rigby.
WOLF ALICE at Brooklyn Steel (Dec. 4, 8 p.m.). This British band’s second album, “Visions of a Life,” contains songs titled “Beautifully Unconventional” and “Formidable Cool” — as decent an approximation as any of the qualities that draw fans to Wolf Alice’s hip reinterpretations of ’90s alt-rock. This sort of music is fun to listen to on headphones, when you can appreciate the subtly layered guitar tones, and even more fun to see in concert, where the group’s headbanging side emerges.
YOUNG M.A. at Brooklyn Bowl (Dec. 5, 8 p.m.). The summer of 2016, in much of New York, was the summer of Young M.A., the Brooklyn rapper whose single “OOOUUU” echoed out of cars with the force of a honking horn. While her subsequent releases haven’t generated quite as much heat, Young M.A. is still a talent worth keeping an eye on, and this performance in her home borough is a good chance to do just that.
LENA BLOCH at iBeam Brooklyn (Dec. 2, 8:30 p.m.). Ms. Bloch, a Russian-born, Brooklyn-based tenor saxophonist, recently released “Heart Knows,” an album of original compositions with loose but deliberately plotted structures and an air of wistful beauty. Half were written by her, and half by the group’s excellent pianist, Russ Lossing. The quartet — called Feathery, in what seems like a reference to the dabbed, gossamer tone of Ms. Bloch’s saxophone — also includes the bassist Cameron Brown and the drummer Billy Mintz.
PEDRO GIRAUDO at the Jazz Gallery (Dec. 1-2, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). At its best, large-ensemble jazz composition retains the whirling kinetics that defined the original big bands. Perhaps with that in mind, Mr. Giraudo, a bassist, mines the tango tradition of Argentina, his home country. His arrangements have the ducking countermelodies and cross talk of a Bob Brookmeyer chart, and the feisty footwork of Astor Piazzolla’s up-tempo tunes. It’s hard not to hear echoes of another Argentine composer, the pianist and bandleader Guillermo Klein, but Mr. Giraudo’s music has its own character. He performs at the Jazz Gallery on Friday with an eight-piece ensemble, then on Saturday with a full big band.
DARIUS JONES at Roulette (Dec. 6, 8 p.m.). Mr. Jones, an alto saxophonist, here presents two pieces of imaginative musical critique. The concert will start with “Samesoul Maker,” a composition for guitar and three voices, imagining the role of a father in birthing and rearing a mythic planet, Or’gen. (It’s part of a major, three-part work that also includes his remarkable 2014 album, “The Oversoul Manual.”) Then Mr. Jones — whose squalling, earthy sound has established him as one of today’s most important instrumentalists — will present “LawNOrder” (pronounced “law no order”), a game piece in which eight improvisers are given a set of cues, and charged with finding symbiosis in the fray.
KONCEPTIONS’ 500TH SHOW at the New School (Dec. 2, 7 p.m.). For a dozen years, the musician James Carney and his partner, Heidi Bayer, have hosted Konceptions, a weekly jazz series at small venues across Brooklyn. For musicians, it’s a gathering place; for everyone else, it’s an opportunity to become embedded in the process of artistic experimentation and community-making. Konceptions is celebrating its 500th show with this benefit concert featuring some all-star talent: the vocalist and multi-instrumentalist Jen Shyu, performing her interdisciplinary solo piece, “Nine Doors”; the blistering, guitar-sax-drums trio Sun of Goldfinger; and the eminent tenor saxophonist Ravi Coltrane.
DANILO PÉREZ’S PANAMONK at Jazz Standard (through Dec. 2, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). The influence most commonly associated with Mr. Pérez is Herbie Hancock, whose diaphanous pianism helped chart a path for jazz after the hard-bop era. But Mr. Pérez’s best-known solo work is “Panamonk,” a 1996 album paying tribute to a very different idol, Thelonious Monk. The amalgam of influences — Monk, Mr. Hancock and Mr. Pérez’s own Panamanian inflections — make for a bristling, rhythmically adventurous record that still holds up 21 years later. Here Mr. Pérez revisits that repertoire with the drummer Terri Lyne Carrington, who appeared on the original recording, and the bassist Ben Street.
RENEE ROSNES at Dizzy’s Club Coca-Cola (Dec. 7-10, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Ms. Rosnes’s piano playing has an unflashy appeal, focused and energetic and light of touch. As a composer, she can channel the insider language of postbop to broadly compelling effect. Ms. Rosnes appears here with a straight-ahead jazz dream team: the tenor saxophonist Melissa Aldana, the vibraphonist Steve Nelson, the bassist Peter Washington and the drummer Lenny White.
