Less than 24 hours after disappointing Wall Street yet again, Snap promoted a new vote of confidence from a significant backer: Tencent Holdings, the Chinese internet giant.
In a regulatory filing on Wednesday, Snap, the parent of the disappearing messaging app Snapchat, disclosed that Tencent had increased its stake in the company to over 12 percent. The Chinese company bought shares on the open market, the filing added.
The Tencent investment is meant to give Snap a boost of confidence as it looks to fend off threats from bigger rivals like Facebook. Tencent is one of the world’s largest technology companies and the owner of WeChat, the popular Chinese messaging and payment service.
On Tuesday, Snap released its third-quarter results, which showed slowing user growth, sales that missed expectations and a bigger-than-expected loss. Shares in the media and messaging company dropped as much as 20 percent in after-hours trading following the release of the financial report.
The earnings announcement has spurred analysts and investors to ponder whether Snap, whose initial public offering in March was celebrated on Wall Street, is in trouble. Though it remains a darling of younger users, many of its major functions — notably its Stories video feature — have been copied by competitors, in particular Facebook.
Before its market debut, Snap had been lauded as being hipper and more innovative than Facebook and other social media companies. Since going public, however, it has had to address slower-than-expected user growth, rising costs and investor doubts about its strategy for dealing with both. Other problems that the company has grappled with include overestimating demand for its Spectacles camera-equipped sunglasses, a once-hot product whose sales cooled rapidly.
During a call with analysts on Tuesday, Evan Spiegel, Snap’s co-founder and chief executive, said that the company was focused on issues like simplifying the ad-purchase process on its platform and making its core app easier to use, a longstanding complaint. He also promoted the company’s efforts to expand its content and augmented-reality offerings.
That he spoke openly about his priorities marked a change for the Mr. Spiegel, who is normally tight-lipped about his strategy. Such an approach has frustrated investors who have sought a better sense of where the company was headed.
But now, Snap has the support of Tencent. The Chinese company has had a history of taking stakes in chat apps, such as Snap, in order to learn more about how they work and how they perform from a business perspective. It has long held a stake, for example, in South Korea’s Kakao.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Snap said that Tencent and its affiliates had “recently acquired” 145.8 million nonvoting shares through purchases in the open market.
That represents nearly 17 percent of Snap’s class A shares, which hold no voting power, and about 12 percent of its total shares.
A Tencent spokesman said at a company conference in Chengdu, China, that it viewed the Snap stake as a strategic investment.
“We saw Snap as an innovative company with a huge user base that is mostly focused on Western, developed markets,” he said.
Snap described Tencent as a long-term shareholder, but it did not disclose the Chinese company’s total holdings. It said it had no obligation to disclose changes in Tencent’s holdings of nonvoting shares because of Snap’s ownership structure.
Tencent had the option to raise its stake in Snap in a fund-raising round before the company’s initial public offering this year, but declined.
So far, stock market investors do not appear heartened by Tencent’s move. Shares in Snap were down nearly 15 percent on Wednesday, to $12.91 — well below the company’s initial offering price of $17 a share.