The ambiguous conclusion of last week’s episode left the fan favorite Ezekiel in dire straits, as his loyal subjects dove to protect him from a hail of gunfire. I wrote, in my recap, of my concerns about the show’s habit of playing it fast and loose with “gotcha” non-deaths, as well as about the hazards of eliminating a valuable force for positivity on such a bleak program. From this sticky narrative wicket, this week’s episode nimbly spins a cohesive and affecting story that places a standout supporting player in a well-earned spotlight. Ezekiel’s flame of hope does, indeed, get extinguished. But first, the episode earns that withering defeat.
Narrowing the focus to a single character seems to grant the writers a clarity of purpose. From his earliest introduction, Ezekiel has projected a refreshingly unbothered confidence, as epitomized last week and repeated here with his “and yet, I smile” speech. This episode quietly observes Ezekiel in flashback as he ritualistically prepares to greet his subjects, carefully going through the routine of washing himself, trimming his haggard beard and individually hand-rolling each dreadlock. He’s the model of composure, and this hour embarks on a search for the man behind the reassuring grin and the hearty laugh.
A strong match cut, which goes from an image of Ezekiel at the center of a group huddle among his trusting militia to an image of him buried under their corpses introduces the survivor’s guilt that will plague the King through this episode and ultimately break him. The episode continues to crosscut between the Kingdom’s preparations for their offensive and Ezekiel’s desperate scramble to stay alive after it goes belly-up, creating a contrast between the faith they put in him and his self-loathing over having betrayed it. He believes that a ruler and his subjects are bound by a sacred pact, in which he exchanges his protection for the masses’ support. In this sense, he’s failed them, and his memories of the heartfelt goodbyes between the soldiers and their stiff-lipped wives confront Ezekiel with the emotional ramifications of his shortcomings.
Nursing a broken ankle and running out of options to evade the approaching zombie horde, Ezekiel appears to done for. But he’s saved by his loyal knight Jerry, in more ways than one. Although Jerry ferries him to safety, even as the King demands to be cut loose and left for dead, Jerry’s most meaningful service to his liege is to reshape the way he thinks of his own role. Simply by stating, “We needed you,” Jerry communicates that Ezekiel’s value has always been more symbolic than anything else. Ezekiel provided a beacon around which an otherwise disorganized rebel force could rally. Nobody in the Kingdom really believes that Ezekiel comes from a royal lineage, but because charismatic leaders have a way of strengthening the people in their immediate proximity, the lie proves productive for all parties involved.
He’s no huckster, however. He’s a regular man who rose to the station that extraordinary circumstances demanded of him. In one of the flashback passages, Ezekiel muses to Carol that the upheaval of their apocalypse has a way of testing a person’s mettle. He confides in her that he’s still on the journey “to become, to will myself into what I must be.” This transformation into someone ordinary people can look up to hasn’t been as disingenuous as Ezekiel believes in his darkest moments. In the earliest days of the post-zombie world, Ezekiel freely reinvented himself, and the label of King only stuck because of his dedication to his people.
Easily the best-written episode of the season so far, this week’s installment illustrates the uneasy friction between personal insecurity and public responsibility. And yet, it still ends with the show’s returning to its same stable of narrative devices to generate pathos. Just as Ezekiel begins to forgive himself, his tiger nobly sacrifices herself to save his life, and in doing so, destroys the last scrap of hope he had left. This show needs to learn that it can rouse emotion and wound its characters without immediately resorting to death. The tiger’s death rips Ezekiel out of his internal journey to self-actualization and leaves him in a state this show’s viewers recognize all too well. He’s defeated down to his very soul by the time he returns to the Kingdom’s home base, ground down to a spiritual nub by the horrors he’s witnessed. Once a proud leader who inspired all those who heard his booming voice, he now has nothing to offer his widowed subjects other than a silent glance of sympathy.
“The Walking Dead” is where hope goes to die. Ezekiel heretofore curried audience favor by staying unencumbered by misery — and yet, he smiled — but now he’s another downtrodden specter of himself filling out the rank and file. Happiness has nowhere to hide, not on this show.
• Even in the most tense moments, the dialogue remains as insipid as ever. When Jerry tells Ezekiel, “Thank you, Your Majesty” and the King asks what for, Jerry’s only response is “for being such a cool dude.” As final words exchanged before diving into the heat of battle go, these lines lack a certain gravitas.
• And with that, we bid a fond farewell to Shiva, Ezekiel’s dutiful pet tiger. She died as she lived: mauling zombies. Here’s hoping her death doesn’t prove to be a “Felicity cuts her hair” moment for the series in the long run.