DIG DANCE WEEKEND SERIES at the 92nd Street Y (Nov. 17-18, 8 p.m.; Nov. 19, 3 p.m.). The 92nd Street Y presents “Big Mouth: Pan Asian Dance,” in which four companies from Korea, Japan and Taiwan perform on mixed bills. Companies include the Youn Puluem Project Group in “Woman on the Road” and the premiere of “Memories of Sense_Space” and BK Dance Project in “Big Mouth.” The programming is curated by Sin Ae Park, a producer and the founder of Korea Dance Abroad.
‘FLOWER - SECRET’ at Triskelion Arts (Nov. 17-18, 8 p.m., Nov. 19, 7 p.m.). Triskelion, in association with Vangeline Theater and the New York Butoh Institute, presents “Flower - Secret,” a program of solos highlighting the artistry of the Butoh veteran Tetsuro Fukuhara and the French-born, New York-based choreographer Vangeline. Mr. Fukuhara, who studied under Akira Kasai, Kazuo Ohno and Tatsumi Hijikata, performs in a suspended hollow tube, while Vangeline unveils a new “Dance of Darkness,” which is part of her Ritual series featured in the 2012 film “The Letter,” starring James Franco and Winona Ryder.
PERFORATIONS FESTIVAL at La MaMa (Nov. 17-26). This Croatian festival features a wealth of contemporary performance. Highlights include Bruno Isakovic with Mia Zalukar (from Croatia) in “Suddenly Everywhere,” a duet that explores how rational and irrational decisions affect our states of being, and a double bill by TukaWach/Magda Stawman-Tuka and Anita Wach (Poland). “How the Hares Are Dying” explores the notion of disappearance, while “Private Inventory” creates a setting for self-sacrifice and transformation. Ina Sladic (Croatia and Germany) offers “Penny/Audience,” a two-part conceptual work performed on separate nights. (In “Penny,” the New York performance artist Penny Arcade gives Ms. Sladic performance instructions through an audio installation.) And at Abrons Arts Center, Jasna Vinovrski (Croatia), presents “Staying Alive,” a look at the current migration debate.
SUNDAYS ON BROADWAY at WeisAcres (Nov. 19 at 6 p.m.). Cathy Weis Projects continues the fall season of her continuing series of performances, film screenings, and discussions with a shared evening featuring work by two worthy artists: John Jesurun and David Thomson. The playwright and director Mr. Jesurun presents a section from a new work and revisits “Everything That Rises Must Converge,” his 1990 play. Mr. Thomson offers an excerpt from “he his own mythical beast,” a series of performance installations in which he explores ideas based on identity and perception.
WORKS & PROCESS at the Guggenheim Museum (Nov. 19, 3 p.m. and 7:30 p.m.). In this program, “The Sarasota Ballet: Classical and New Voices,” Marcelo Gomes, the American Ballet Theater principal, performs selections from Frederick Ashton’s “The Two Pigeons.” But Mr. Gomes is a choreographer as well; here, the company dances excerpts from his new commission for the Sarasota Ballet. He is joined by the group’s director, Iain Webb, for a discussion about his creative process.
