Business|Trump Vowed End to Key Wall St. Loophole. G.O.P. Tax Plan Leaves It Intact.
Trump Vowed End to Key Wall St. Loophole. G.O.P. Tax Plan Leaves It Intact.
The tax-overhaul plan unveiled on Thursday by House Republicans would leave intact a loophole that benefits hedge funds, private-equity funds and other investment managers, despite President Trump’s campaign promises to eliminate it.
The proposal collapses several individual income tax brackets, slashes the corporate tax rate, targets income held overseas by companies and caps a popular deduction for mortgage interest. But while it eliminates many deductions and loopholes, the plan preserves the so-called carried-interest provision — a section of the tax code that is beloved by, and hugely valuable to, private-equity and other Wall Street investors.
A substantial portion of the compensation of hedge-fund and private-equity executives is derived from the investment gains that their funds generate. Under the current tax code, that compensation is treated as capital gains, meaning it is taxed at a rate of 23.8 percent, well below the 39.6 percent income-tax rate that now applies to the top tier of individual earners.
Democrats and some Republicans have long pushed to end the carried-interest provision and to stop treating this income tied to it as investment profits for tax purposes. They argue it is an unwarranted tax break for the richest of the rich.
The push has angered many people on Wall Street.
During the presidential campaign, Mr. Trump called for closing the loophole. He called hedge fund managers “paper pushers” who were “getting away with murder” partly because of measures including the carried-interest provision that he said allowed them to shield their wealth and to minimize their tax burdens.
Mr. Trump did not mention the carried-interest provision in his remarks about the tax plan while meeting with House Republicans at the White House on Thursday.
Even before taking office, Mr. Trump surrounded himself with Wall Street executives, and from the private-equity industry in particular.
Steven Mnuchin, the Treasury secretary, is a former hedge fund manager, as is John Paulson, who helped guide Mr. Trump during the campaign. Mr. Schwarzman is a friend of Mr. Trump’s who has advised him on economic issues. Wilbur L. Ross, the Commerce secretary, is a billionaire, who founded his own private-equity firm.
Spokesmen for the White House and House Republicans did not immediately respond to requests for comment.