In my boyhood I read Agatha Christie’s 1934 mystery novel “Murder on the Orient Express,” a copy of which was handed down to me by my mother, a mystery enthusiast. In my early teens I saw the then-grand movie adaptation, an all-star cast affair directed by Sidney Lumet and featuring Albert Finney as the finicky Belgian detective Hercule Poirot. Christie’s novel derives much of its notoriety from the solution to its mystery. It’s very novel; whether it’s ingenious or just ostentatious is still debated by mystery lovers. But even more than 40 years after Mr. Lumet’s film I had presumed that the ending was so well-known that there would be little point in a remake. And yet, as the poet Gerard Manley Hopkins said in a different context, generations have trod, have trod, have trod, and there are plenty of millennials who haven’t read the book.
Mr. Finney’s embodiment of Poirot in the Lumet picture was a marathon of sorts, with the actor testing how many of the beloved character’s irritating yet endearing quirks could be pushed to the limits of coherence. In this latest version, Kenneth Branagh, who also directs (from a script by Michael Green), gives us a Poirot who’s fussy but not too fussy, and rather crisp in his English-language diction. Most radically, this is a Poirot with heart.  It’s not the only dumb idea in this film, which nevertheless bounces along in a way that’s sometimes almost entertaining.
Mr. Branagh shot the film in the 65-millimeter format, which offers a particular kind of “big movie” resolution. People tend to think that big-gauge celluloid is best for big-vista movies, such as “Lawrence of Arabia,” but Mr. Branagh’s picture is set almost entirely on a train. It is a very opulent train, and the cinematography by Haris Zambarloukos gets all its ornate detail. It also gets the detail of the mostly C.G.I. special effects and settings, and here the marriage of digital and analog is awkward. In further pursuit of 65-millimeter shots, Mr. Branagh opens up the story regularly, however. He has the train stall on a cliff-side rail, supported by elaborate scaffolding on which he stages a foot chase. He has Poirot deliver his final summation of the case in a train tunnel.
As in Mr. Lumet’s adaptation, the supporting cast here is full of stars. Michelle Pfeiffer, Judi Dench, Willem Dafoe, Penélope Cruz, Derek Jacobi, and newer faces like Daisy Ridley and Leslie Odom Jr., fill out the roster of subjects. Johnny Depp, who is known to make some eccentric choices in crafting his characters, does not (necessarily) disappoint in the role of the murder victim, Edward Ratchett. Imbuing that unsavory character with the dopiest of gangster mannerisms, Mr. Depp may remind you of Matt LeBlanc’s “Friends” character, Joey Tribbiani. It’s as if Joey, that lovable bad actor, is trying to make the most of his first big break in the movies.