‘ERNEST AND CELESTINE’ at BAM Rose Cinemas (Nov. 26, 2 p.m.). Fiction is filled with odd couples, but the twosome at the heart of this film may be the oddest: Ernest is a bear, and Celestine is a mouse. Directed by Stéphane Aubier, Vincent Patar and Benjamin Renner, this 2012 Oscar-nominated French and Belgian production chronicles how the imposing but fundamentally gentle Ernest and the artistic, freethinking Celestine go on the lam together when society refuses to accept their unconventional friendship. Animated in a watercolor style that evokes Celestine’s paintings, this touching but never treacly work, dubbed in English, concludes this fall’s BAMkids Movie Matinees at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
‘HOWL’S MOVING CASTLE’ (Nov. 26, 12:55 p.m.; Nov. 27 and 29, 7 p.m.). Many children are familiar with the Wicked Witch of the West, but how about the Witch of the Waste? She’s pretty bad, too: The villain of this 2005 U.S. release date/lg animated classic by the renowned Japanese filmmaker Hayao Miyazaki, the witch turns Sophie, a teenager, into a 90-year-old. The curse is punishment for Sophie’s friendship with the dashing wizard Howl, who owns the enchanted palace of the title. The movie, the last presentation in Studio Ghibli Fest 2017, produced by GKids and Fathom Events, will be shown in select theaters nationwide: an English-dubbed version on Sunday and Wednesday, and the original Japanese (with English subtitles) on Monday.
‘INTERSTELLAR CINDERELLA’ at the Beckett Theater at Theater Row (through Dec. 17) More than one writer has updated the Cinderella tale, but few have taken the heroine straight out of this world. This futuristic, feminist retelling portrays Cinderella as a space engineer: “a builder and inventor and out-of-the-box dissenter.” That’s one of the clever lyrics by the show’s composer, the children’s pop titan Laurie Berkner, who has once again worked with Barbara Zinn Krieger, co-founder of New York City Children’s Theater, to adapt a beguiling story: in this case, Deborah Underwood’s book of the same title. In Ms. Krieger’s script, the prince holds a space parade, rather than a ball, at which Cinderella hopes to show off her latest design, a hyper-warp-speed engine. Her evil stepmother plans sabotage, but with a helpful robot and her own ingenuity, Cinderella can still shoot for the stars.
LIVING HISTORY at the New-York Historical Society (Nov. 24-25, 11 a.m. to 4 p.m.). Thanksgiving is a good time to remember ancestors, and with the help of theatrical talent, this museum will bring some noteworthy ones to life. On Friday, “Thanksgiving and the Civil War” will feature re-enactors representing soldiers of the 119th New York State Volunteer Infantry. Children can not only ask them questions and investigate their gear, but also learn a Union military drill. On Saturday, George Washington — in the form of the actor Michael Grillo — arrives to celebrate Evacuation Day, a once-popular holiday that commemorated the departure of the last of the British troops from New York in 1783. He will read proclamations and show how he mapped the route of the defeated soldiers’ exit.
THANKSGIVING WEEKEND CELEBRATION at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan (Nov. 24-26). Young visitors can express their gratitude with their hands and even their feet in a series of programs. (Schedules are on the website.) Options include making plates that chronicle their families’ stories for a dinner table installation; designing 3-D floats inspired by the Macy’s Thanksgiving Day Parade; and listening to “The Great Turkey Race,” Steve Metzger’s comic tale of birds with something to run for (and from). On Friday only, at 2 and 3 p.m., the Thunderbird American Indian Dancers will present traditional dances, and on Saturday only, at 2 and 3 p.m., the dance studio Steps on Broadway will enlist children in an interactive performance.
WINTER’S EVE AT LINCOLN SQUARE (Nov. 27, 5:30 to 9 p.m.). Santa Claus, the comedian Jack Frost (a.k.a. the Original Freezemeister) and the Very Hungry Caterpillar himself will be among the stars of this free festival, presented by the Lincoln Square Business Improvement District and stretching along Broadway from the Time Warner Center to 68th Street. The revelry begins with a tree-lighting at Dante Park (63rd Street), and Kids Central, inside the Raymour & Flanigan store at Broadway and 66th Street, will feature acts like the band Tim Kubart and the Space Cadets and performances of “The Very Hungry Caterpillar Show,” inspired by Eric Carle’s picture book; treats; and arts and crafts. Other attractions include a free screening of “A Christmas Story” (1983) at the Elinor Bunin Munroe Film Center.
WORLD VISION’S GIVE-BACK GIFT SHOP in Bryant Park (Nov. 27-29, 11 a.m. to 8:30 p.m.). It’s easy for children to forget that the holiday season is supposed to be more about giving than getting. This pop-up shop, sponsored by the nonprofit humanitarian organization World Vision, will serve as a gentle reminder, as well as a place to have fun. World Vision, whose catalog includes farm animals that can be purchased for indigent families — you can make the donation in honor of someone — will feature living gifts for children to pet: goats, donkeys, sheep, rabbits and chickens. Other activities will include a virtual-reality trip to Africa and a “water walk,” in which young visitors can pump water and then carry it, as children often do in the Third World.
