If you were a child of the hip-hop internet of the late 2000s, you enjoyed the gaudy ostentation of Cam’ron and the slow-moving psychedelia of Houston hip-hop. That period was the beginning of rap’s meme era, even though memes as we experience them today hadn’t yet been born. Instead, slices of hip-hop with vivid visual identity and lightly comic avant-gardism were sticky on the blogs of the time. Characters became stars.
“Cybersex” is Blackbear’s fourth album and first since signing to Interscope.
Blackbear, evidently, was paying attention. Witness the track listing for “Cybersex,” his fourth album and his first since signing with Interscope. There is a song with Cam’ron, “Bright Pink Tims,” that alludes to the rapper’s preferred color; another track, “Gucci Linen,” which takes its name from a Cam’ron lyric (or perhaps an ASAP Yams tweet); and a song, “Candy Apple,” that features Paul Wall and Riff Raff, two of Houston rap’s white eccentrics.
In theory, Blackbear’s versatility is a reflection of larger seismic shifts at play: the blending of hip-hop and elements of punk, the erosion of the wall between rapping and singing, the swiftness with which internet-native culture can permeate the mainstream. But there is a difference between merely fitting in and truly appearing at home; much of this album feels mimeographed.
Blackbear found early success as a songwriter — he was one of the writers of Justin Bieber’s 2012 hit “Boyfriend,” and has collaborated with Mike Posner, G-Eazy and Linkin Park. And the best song he released this year isn’t on this album; it’s “Hit Me Back,” an alluringly breezy collaboration with the Musical.ly star Jacob Sartorius.
For someone who wears his influences so loudly, Blackbear still seemingly harbors some anxieties about the ownership of ideas. In an interview last week with the Los Angeles radio station Power 106, just a couple of days after Lil Peep died of an apparent drug overdose, Blackbear protested loudly and awkwardly about frictions the two had, and accused Lil Peep of adopting elements of his style. It was a gauche move — he later apologized — but also precisely the type of inadvertently self-aware complaint that would be issued by someone who understands just how easy it is to wear a costume and, mostly, get away with it.