 She paused. Her silence was chilling.
Mrs. Livshits, 82, spoke in a soft voice when she recalled recently the years that she survived the Holocaust, as if she were still in hiding.
After 15 years in the United States, she has learned little English. Speaking in Russian, Mrs. Livshits slowly revealed her story, sometimes stopping — “It’s just too hard,” she would say — while trying to remember painful events from decades ago.
She was 5 in 1941 when she arrived at a summer camp outside Minsk, her hometown in Belarus, just before the Nazi invasion. She thought she would be away from her parents for a couple of days. But on June 22, it turned into a lifetime.
When camp counselors told her group of 25 children, ages 4 to 6, that they could not return to Minsk, several boys rejoiced, she said.
Soviet soldiers put her and other campers on horseback at 4 the next morning, she recalled. Her three-month escape via horse, car and train occurred “mostly at night, so nobody could see us,” she explained. During that time, she said, she witnessed shootings and bombings.
Her group’s passports and luggage were destroyed, she said, when an aircraft dropped a bomb on a car directly behind the one she was in. She is haunted by the deaths of other children in similar attacks.
Mrs. Livshits wound up at a foster home east of Moscow and grew up without running water or heat. She said the central theme of her childhood was fear.
“Any time planes flew above the building, my heart would start pounding,” she recalled.
When Mrs. Livshits was 15, her older sister, who had ended up at another foster home, in Volgograd, Russia, found her and offered to take her back to Belarus. The director of the foster home created new documents to protect Mrs. Livshits’s identity: She would be a Russian-born girl with an unidentified mother and a father called Ivan, a traditional Christian name in the country. Her new papers offered her protection from persecution for her Jewish heritage.
Together, the sisters returned to Minsk.
Mrs. Livshits became a tailor in her hometown and married a construction worker, who died after 29 years of marriage. Their only child immigrated to the United States with his new wife in 2002. Alone in Minsk, Mrs. Livshits decided soon after to follow them, settling with the newlyweds in Midwood, Brooklyn.
“Thank God we left,” she said.
The couple moved out in 2005, leaving Mrs. Livshits, then 69, in an apartment of her own for the first time in her life.
At a park one day, she overheard a conversation about Selfhelp Community Services, a beneficiary agency of UJA-Federation of New York, one of the eight organizations supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund. The agency, she said, has been her “everything.” It provided her with new furniture and appliances, and it is helping her translate resources into Russian.
Mrs. Livshits relies monthly on $822 in Supplemental Security Income, $184 in food stamps and $150 from the Blue Card, a group that assists Holocaust survivors in need. When she had to make repairs to her studio apartment because of a leak in the ceiling, the unexpected expense left her unable to pay her rent last month. Selfhelp used $700 from the Neediest Cases Fund to cover the rent.
Mrs. Livshits marvels at how her life has changed since coming to the United States. That change became even more evident when she visited an old neighbor in Minsk in 2005, her first time returning to Belarus. The woman was widowed in her 20s; her only child died in infancy.
