We’re starting to get to know some of the locations of schools, titles of programs, and names of individual students who comment week after week, and we want you to know how much we appreciate your contributions. Wilmington, N.C., Locust Grove, Ga., Asheville, N.C., King of Prussia, Pa., and the many students from New York City: We love hearing from you!
What are you reading, watching or listening to in The Times right now? Add a comment on this post or tag us on Twitter and let us know, or choose one of our recent writing prompts and weigh in.
Please note: All student comments have been lightly edited for length, but otherwise appear just as they were originally submitted.
I was honestly shocked when I saw the #MeToo campaign spread across multiple platforms of social media. Because of my own experiences, I have always though that sexual abuse was something you should keep quiet, because it was something to be ashamed of.
... The #MeToo movement has helped me realize that I was not alone and made me feel more comfortable about talking about these sensitive topics. I think that because of how influential social media is in our society, this movement has spurred changes because it has allowed people to feel empowered by hearing about other’s experiences and come forward and share their own.
There is one huge and disturbing fact about the #MeToo movement that often goes undetected, lacking the attention that it deserves.
The #MeToo movement should not have to happen.
 People refuse to believe women until suddenly it is trendy to do so.
Even though I myself have not been a victim of this kind of harassment, it had made me more aware and comfortable with the idea of talking about it, if it were to ever happen to me. ...Before, I knew it to be disabling and crippling. A reason to be ashamed. A reason to be embarrassed. But now, now everything has changed. Women are now coming together like never before to express that this happens to a lot of women. Too many women. This now gives women different reasons. A reason to be proud. A reason to be free. A reason to be a woman.
A single tweet from Alyssa Miliano has garnered thousands of responses and has sparked an international exposition of sexual misconduct within days. The article states that even celebrities such as Lady Gaga and Anna Paquin contributed to the movement. The power of social media has brought women of every race, age, social status, and nationality together and has enabled them to relate to each other in what is essentially an enormous support group. As a young woman living in today’s society, I find it empowering to know that my voice matters and that what I say CAN make a difference. 140 characters is all that it takes.
Hearing the stories of people who have been silenced for so long is deeply saddening, but it is something that I feel our nation needs to realize in order to progress and move forward. The #MeToo movement has united sexual assault victims, and has brought awareness to the fact that they are truly not alone. Victims no longer have to suffer in silence, which is incredibly powerful.
Drawing attention to social issues such as this one is the only way to make a change, as correcting the overall mindset/viewpoint of a population cannot simply be fixed with laws. This can take time however, which is why the #MeToo, #YesAllWomen and #EverydaySexism movements aren’t generally turning-points, though things don’t necessarily “go back to normal” either. Enough people have to change their opinions and stances on the issue to make an obvious difference. This can be helped along with social media, with its ability to spread positive messages and movements such as #MeToo; along with hate and prejudice however, which gather behind the screens of the same networks.
This is why we shouldn’t limit ourselves to action online; we need to go out and make a physical change in the world. Without something to remember the movement by, whether it be marches, campaigns to make donations to women’s shelters, or simply giving speeches to assemblies of people, the message won’t inspire as much change as what is so gravely required.
In my opinion, these “me too” videos will not prevent or change the way women are treated in society or in their given work force because many protests and cases have been untreated and unsuccessful. I have not participated in the #MeToo movement for many reasons.
... Major companies with powerful men who dramatically impact the business will not be fired because of their importance. This is a scary fact. I find it mind blowing how men are getting away with such actions just because of their importance. I began to question why the importance of someone in a business is more important than the safety of female workers. After time passes, things will be the same.
The most disturbing part of all this, perhaps, is the number of bystanders in these instances; people who knew about the things these women were going through and swept it under the carpet, even going as far as encouraging them to be quiet about it.
I do, however, think that there has been some fault with the #MeToo movement. On several occasions, women are unfairly generalizing and stereotyping all men into these categories. ...In general, I think that we are going to see a lot of changes following this movement, in the ways that we treat women and how we go about dealing with sexual assault.
I am not surprised at the pervasiveness of abuses of power by men in industries ruled and fueled by them. However, the quantification of it through the flooding of my news feed at the hashtag’s peak reinforced a more profound truth: every woman lives in a culture in which she can experience harassment and assault and is expected to remain silent on it to preserve the feelings and power of men.
I believe that this movement will inspire men, the perpetrators of this violence, to recognize the ways in which they reinforce these power structures. I have seen a number of women on my feed ask men to comment on her post with specific things they will do to combat assault and harassment; I was touched to see men explain that they will call out their friends when they enact these problematic behaviors, own up to their own previous instances of harassment, and speak to other men about how they must change to minimize and hopefully eradicate its presence.
Our second most commented-on post was about Fiona the hippo and your favorite social media stars.
Readers told us about favorites like the fashion bloggers theanayaleter and blazendary; the musical artists Justin Bieber, Lil Uzi Vert, Omeretta and Shawn Mendes; the ncomedians iamzoie and the Dolan twins; the animals (?) Jiff Pom the dog and April the giraffe; and the motivational speakers Boonk, Summer Mckeen and Haleigh Johnson. Some even mentioned President Trump.
After reading the related article, several readers clearly also caught Fionamania.
I can understand why Fiona the baby hippo has created a wave of media coverage on herself. She has gone through a lot and I’m sure that it resonated with a lot of viewers. To see that she is so lively now is especially inspiring considering even professionals expected her to die at any second. Despite the constant expectancy of death, Fiona pushed through it and lived. I would’ve expected her to be limited considering she went through so much, but she seems much more lively than any animal. Truly astonishing.
Now that I have seen Fionamania she is a playful hippo that loves to play. She is a little lovable hippo. Who doesn’t want to see a baby hippo play and swims all around with some twist and hops and splashes. I know I would.
My favorite social media star happens to be this cute little hippo in this news article. I have been keeping up with her on Twitter and Fiona is awesome, I can understand why she is such a “Social media star.” When an adorable hippo like her is born it’s most likely going to be the new craze.
We received a range of notably insightful responses to our question “What Stereotypical Characters Make You Cringe?” Not all students saw clichéd characters as problematic, arguing that these stereotypes are meant to make people laugh, not offend.
The portrayal of South Asian characters in Hollywood is problematic because it reinforces stereotypes and fails to bring positive diversity. As an Asian American woman, I am very disturbed when I see how other Asian characters are portrayed in mainstream media. Many are cast as the nerdy, weird, uncivilized, outsider mainly for comedic relief. By promoting such stereotypes, Hollywood is normalizing it and telling viewers that not only is it okay to label people and cultures, but it is also okay to laugh because they are all just a big joke.
When I see such characters, I question and wonder if this is what everyone else sees my culture as. Do they really only see Asians as all the same accented, frugal, geeks? I become ashamed knowing these rich cultures are reduced to mere offensive one-dimension mockeries.
Hollywood’s portrayal of South Asian characters in the media is, and always has been, harmful. Looking around at mainstream media, very few South Asian characters are fully developed.  Unlike their white counterparts, these characters are reduced to harmful stereotypes about Southern Asians, perpetuating common misconceptions and encouraging them.
To me, one such notable character is Raj from the Big Bang Theory. During the show’s prime, many audience members praised his character as being (finally!) a positive portrayal of an Indian man, but this is not true. Sure, Raj had friends and was a genius, sure he had a great job and hobbies, but fundamentally, Raj is a hollow echo of a racist caricature. Misogynistic, inconsiderate, and socially inept, Raj was still a perpetuation of racism in Hollywood, albeit a more subtle example than those like Apu of the Simpsons and Mr. Kim from South Park.
The character that absolutely made me cringe when I first learned about it was Le Fou, from the newer, live action version of Beauty and the Beast. He is supposed to be gay, and while gay representation is very much needed, it was executed incredibly poorly. 
Disney has been known to write their villains to resemble a stereotypical gay man (Jafar from Aladdin and Scar from The Lion King are two common examples) and this just makes it worse. Ursula, the villain from The Little Mermaid, was based on the drag queen Divine, and if you look up pictures of Divine, the resemblance is clear. Another villain character who is supposed to resemble a gay man (yes, Divine was a female character, but was played by a gay man).
  No matter how many characters in Disney are gay, if they are never shown positively with love and care, children will internalize the message that girly=gay=villain.
I do not like watching movies or television shows that portray women as dumb, sexual objects. The movie “white chicks” portrays white women as unintelligent and primarily focused on the superficial parts of life, like shopping and makeup. It also portrays women in general as objects that are willing to please men at all costs. It would be hard for me to watch movies that use this stereotype.
I do think calling attention to these situations is important and most definitely worthwhile. It calls upon the people of society to realize their role in discrimination and prejudice. I believe that filmmakers should make a substantial effort to accurately represent people of different backgrounds. Instead of using their own opinions, consult with one of that specific ethnicity on how they want to be portrayed.
South Asia is a huge combination of different people and cultures and in many shows, like the Simpsons, they are blended into one stereotype to fit the whole area. Aside from the fact that South Asian characters are commonly stereotyped, there are other cultures like the African American and Latino cultures who are commonly used as thugs, gang members, rapists, etc. in many Hollywood films and TV shows. This portrayal of certain races makes viewers more likely to associate these negative connotations with these races and cultures and create a divide between human beings.
Although I am an Asian woman, growing up, I was blind to the many stereotypes put in front of me because they constantly bombarded me in my everyday life. I became numb to the stereotypes and failed to notice how they were misrepresenting Asians and grouping them all together into one stereotype. In short, not only are these portrayals bad to the general audience but specifically, this can play a role leading to internalized racism within the South Asian community.
Additionally, these stereotypes leave Asians with less representation in the media in general. Asian men are never the roles of the attractive, male protagonist. They are always the shy, passive, nerds. As a result, this idea of Asian men is ingrained into our minds about what an Asian man is.
Commenters applauded the filmmaker Hari Kondabolu’s effort to draw attention to negative depictions of minority characters. Many also had their own suggestions for writers to create more positive representations of people from different backgrounds.
Writers and filmmakers should make an effort to more accurately represent different ethnicities and cultures not only to add authenticity but to show them that they are valued by taking the time to represent them correctly. A great way to start is research and if that hits a wall, then finding someone available to chat about their culture. I think there’s value in diversity and I don’t understand why that is not reflected in television or in books. Not only does the misrepresentation confuse those struggling to find their own identity, but also younger children who are trying to understand the world.
Studies have found that individuals who are told a lie will believe it more the more they are told it. The lie, in this case, is the negative portrayal of minorities.  While also glorifying the KKK as a group that could stop these black men. After the year 1915 (when the movie was released) the amount of KKK members rose dramatically. The question isn’t whether or not these characters are problematic, but why do we still have them?
Finally, I think calling attention to these stereotypes does not help. The reasoning is because exposing a problem and not fixing it helps no one. After Hari Kondabolu made the documentary on Apu it might have helped some people see the negative effects, but many more people still watch the Simpsons and are experiencing these stereotypes. Instead, we should create media that purposely portrays minorities in a positive light.
Human beings are tremendous, complex, twisted and fascinating creatures that are capable of doing so much. We’ve sent people to the moon, we’ve completely eradicated a virus, split up atoms and dug up unimaginable sea monsters. There’s no way we could have done any of these things if we stuck to narrow confines of “what you think you can do.” ... Often the thing I avoided doing for weeks because of anxiety, turned out to be easier to do than I thought. The only thing holding you back from exploring greater things is your own fear. Once you’ve transcended that, the sky is the limit.
The best way to a good performance is preventing any negativity from crossing the brain and putting one foot in front of the other, preparing for greatness. ... Mr. Richards wants us to get in over our heads and push forward with positivity. Negativity will only prevent greatness, so believe in yourself.
If you think you can run only 500 meters, then your preparation and performance would be limited to achieving only that goal. If you set a goal higher than what you think you can do, e.g. run 1 km, then your preparation and performance will adapt to achieving that. The phrase ‘get in over your head’ probably means put yourself in situations which require more skill than you think you have.
In my opinion, the most appealing component of the picture is its presentation. The elementary bar graph jotted down on a napkin, labeled hurriedly, yet purposefully, conveys a sense of urgency. Instead of opting for a deep, underlying moral, Richards reaches for his megaphone and bellows the lesson, calling us to apply it to future obstacles.
And, although this theme has been uttered by many, ranging from T.S. Eliot to William Shakespeare, not enough people cash in on the rewards this message provides in real life. As shown in the sketch, a monstrous gap separates our capabilities and perceived limits. ...Overall, this condensed motivational speech is crucial to our innovation as individuals and as the human race.
Take a chance and you might surprise yourself!
Thanksgiving to me is more than a break from school, or an opportunity to eat as much food as I want and not feel guilty about it. While these are perks of the holiday, it means much more to me. Every year, my family goes to the mountains and we spend our Thanksgiving in a cabin with a beautiful view. ... My family has many traditions for Thanksgiving and all of them together make the holiday so special. From picking out our own live Christmas tree, hiking in the mountains, watching our favorite Christmas movies, and eating the best meal of the year, Thanksgiving is by far my favorite holiday.
My most memorable Thanksgiving was a couple of years ago at my Grandma’s house. We ate a huge feast and ate dessert. While sitting around talking about what we were grateful about, the snow began to fall outside. It was beautiful. All us kids then stayed the night at Grandma’s, with late night seconds on pie and ice cream. The rest of the weekend we spent putting up the Christmas decorations around the house and having fun with the family.
The Silver household celebrates Thanksgiving a little differently than the typical family. We spend our holiday roasting ducks instead of turkey, and steaming dumplings rather than sweet potatoes.
I’ll never forget the first time my family decided to try something a little different for dinner. My dad had no idea what he was doing and couldn’t figure out how to separate the skin of the duck from the meat. My mom then had the crazy idea to use a bike pump to solve our problem. Since everyone else in my family was disgusted by the idea of pumping a dead duck full of air, I ended up having to do it. That was definitely one of the weirdest half hours of my life. Despite it being an unpleasant chore, my family has continued to use a bike pump every year since.
 Keep in mind that there were 40 people in my house at this time. ... So my dog got really sick and cost my parents a massive bill to take him to the vet. Now my nana is the only one to give my dog scraps.
I was surprised and about to cry last year because my cousin, who was gone most of my life due to drugs, showed up to Thanksgiving unexpected and it shocked me. The last time i saw her was at my other cousin’s graduation which was 4 years ago.
When I say family I know what you’re thinking, Aunts, Uncles, Grandmas and Grandpas, Cousins and siblings and although yes that is true, our family doesn’t stop there. Family to us doesn’t only mean the ones who your blood lines classify as related. People we classify as family are the ones you love so much it hurts, who are there when you need them, who know how to lift you up when you are down.
Every Thanksgiving is memorable to me. As I have gotten older, I tend to really appreciate Thanksgiving more than I used to as a kid.  It is probably one of the most meaningful holidays. We should always give thanks.
Black Friday used to just be another day during Thanksgiving Break. But as I have gotten older I’ve begun to understand why Black Friday is such a big deal to an abundance of people. I am at the age of using my own money to pay for the gifts that I get for my family and friends. It’s hard to get gifts for all of the important people in your life when everything is full priced. “Hate to break it to ya, but things aren’t cheap”, my mom’s favorite line around the holidays. Black Friday offers deals around the holidays that allow people to get gifts for others, or themselves, that they wouldn’t have been able to get had there not been these deals.
To those who believe that Black Friday is a pointless day of the year where mobs of people fight over cheap goods, you’re wrong. Black Friday isn’t the angry mobs and pushy shoppers that the movies make it out to be. It’s just dedicated people trying to get what they came for.
I do not feel the need to paw through toppling mounds of sweatshirts, trying to find the last size small. I do not feel the need to push, shove, and elbow my way through a swarm of equally as irritated shoppers for a video game. I don’t even open my laptop. I do not feel the need to lose myself in a frenzy of open tabs, watching the little number in the online shopping cart tick higher and higher and higher. For me, Black Friday shopping feels a lot like drowning in a sea of numbers and percentages — it is the thanksgiving of mathematics.
Thanksgiving is a day where America dresses up all fancy, sits down at a table, and says grace. Thanksgiving is a day where America beams cheesily and says into a camera, “I’m just so thankful for everything!” And then, America waits until midnight, after the turkey is tucked into the fridge and the plates are scraped off, and bolts into Walmart for a 65% off sale on the latest this or that. I don’t shop on Black Friday.
I have never been shopping on Black Friday, and I never plan to. Not in person anyway. I prefer to buy things online for cheaper prices on Cyber Monday, or whatever day it is this year. I think that people usually get over excited that things are so cheap. Most of the time they don’t even really need what they are buying, they just buy it because they can. Any advice I would give is save your time, and yourself. Shop online instead this year.
Associated with the term “Black Friday” is the mental image of pushy crowds and angry shoppers. In part, this is the fault of the advertisements of big businesses that promote their products as being in limited supply and/or only available for a short period of time. While this encourages customers to be competitive against each other, Black Friday chaos is mainly the fault of the individuals that first spark the violence and disrespect. In the end, no one forced them to behave as they did, and there’s no reason to go “Mad Max” on each other for a cheaper toy/electronic.
There are far better ways to spend this holiday than leaving grandma at the house to purchase a TV at Best Buy.
Our question on the thorny topic “Should Fraternities Be Abolished?” brought in a range of opinions, with many suggested solutions.
Fraternities can represent the best of university life — friendship, fun, and solidarity — but they can also provide a space for the worst of humanity to fester. Racism, homophobia, and rape culture are given a place to thrive and become ingrained in young minds, and the ideal of a strong sense of masculinity can become toxic and result in distress, isolation, pain, and even death.
... Rather than end fraternities and sororities, universities would do well to enforce stricter regulations on and greater support systems for them in order to prevent tragedies such as the deaths of pledges that will shape their friends and families’ lives forever.
One would be a fool to not take into account the good works done by fraternities. Fraternities often have their members take place in charitable events, and many fraternities raise large amounts of money for charities. Fraternities also are not inherently bad. They can be a way to become assimilated at a new school, and a way to find friends for life. Fraternities promote a life of brotherhood and charitableness.
However, it goes without saying that some practices of certain fraternities are in desperate need of reform. Whenever a fraternity puts a member or potential member in the way of harm, they should be held criminally liable.
I have found the case to be that fraternities have been getting more and more out of hand in recent years. I don’t think we should abolish them, but they should definitely be monitored more closely. Fraternities are a way for young people coming into a scary new world to connect with each other and feel safe. They shouldn’t be places where newbies are hazed to the point of dying.
... My dad has told me about all of the friends he made in his fraternity, many of which he is still friends with now. Fraternities are a good way to connect, but they can be hostile environments if not led correctly.
I think that fraternities and sororities are part of the reason that many kids want to go to college, so in no way is there a part of me saying they should be abolished, but the universities should maybe keep a tighter leash on them.
For starters, they should have rules put in place and enforced more strictly about underage drinking and drinking in general. They could be put on probation if they disobey these rules, or they could kick out people that individually break some of the rules. That way, people who are following the rules aren’t being impacted as much by people who aren’t.
Charles Manson was a constant dark presence in pop culture for decades after his arrest in the gruesome Tate-LaBianca murders.
What is it about him that made him so famous that his name is still a buzzword now? People still remember him, and there are Charles Manson T-shirts, and there are bands that are dedicated to him. He represents a counterbalance to all the illusions that were prevalent in the 60s, and he’s the guy who brought it all down to earth, and below. No, we weren’t all going to San Francisco with flowers in our hair. His legend and reputation and really the mythology that has risen around him will outlive him, I think, and the less people now about him, the more happy they will be to deify him.
Ever since my English class one year where i was assigned to read the well-known book “In Cold Blood” by Truman Capote, Perry Edward Smith has always fascinated me. In the murder, he was accompanied by another man named Richard Hickock, but the reason why Smith is so interesting is because of his personality and reasoning behind the murder.
Even more so, while Capote was interviewing Perry Smith so that he could finish writing this book, he found Perry so sweet and helpless that Capote ended up falling in love with Perry Smith, and it’s a mind-blowing turn of events.
One of the people from the past that has fascinated me the most would be Wally Byam. Wally Byam was the creator of Airstream, one of the world’s most iconic travel trailer/motorhome companies. Before Wally Byam, camping in RVs, trailers, and motor homes were unheard of. Byam created many different designs that allowed comfort, and affordability to be with you when you travel. Due to this new boom of affordable, mobile living, and traveling, more innovations, and companies started promoting the RV lifestyle.
Wally Byam, while an avid innovator, was also a peaceful diplomat, who gained admiration from countries, and powerful leaders for his extensive traveling. Byam’s foreign Airstream Caravans promoted fun, but also diplomatic relations during the 1950s, and 60s. Wally Byam, while not too famous, is most remembered for creating the concept of RVs, camping, and vacationing all with the comforts of home. The next time you see a shiny, silver travel trailer, or go camping in an RV, you can thank Wally Byam for creating that experience.
Last week the world lost the one musician alive that meant the most to me. Gustav Ahr (Lil Peep) was too good for the world. I did read the obituary that the New York Times wrote for him, but as a fan I can say that it was not all that should have been written about him.
While I did not learn anything new from reading the article I do want to show the New York Times who he really was. Lil Peep was always creative, from his childhood, everybody copied him. He always had to change to be his own person, until he truly found himself. He was depressed, but he made everybody happy. When he moved to LA he only had one friend, but despite his anxiety he found a group that understood him.
Some of his earliest creations are my favorites because he didn’t even know how to record. He used a 200$ mic, pushed buttons until he found his sound. His first album was lil peep pt 1 in 2015 and he released a mixtape with boy froot “Mall Musicc” earlier the same year as well as the live forever mixtape. He was an incredible artist that deserved more recognition when he was here. At barely 21 years old he has created or been featured in over 150 songs that I know of right now. In addition to being talented Gus was a very caring person. He talked to his fans and never charged them to meet him. He and his friends in his group GBC put on shows for prices lower than most charge for t shirts. They all love what they do and truly love their fans. Peep made me smile every day since I discovered him.
Our Picture Prompt “Starbucks Holiday Cups” reignited an annual debate. Many commenters said they liked the new cups.
Personally, I think the controversy over the Starbucks cup is comical. We could be doing so many better things, it is unnecessary for us to put all of our focus on something as insignificant as a small design that will be gone by the time that the holidays are over.
Currently, Puerto Rico is having a crisis that has yet to be addressed, big celebrities and politicians have been convicted of sexual assault, and mass shootings are common. Despite these problems, people are putting their valuable time and energy into criticizing a mere design. The image on the cup simply shows two people holding hands. Controversy has blown up about this because people are interpreting the image as two men holding hands. Even though the gender of the people is unclear, if it was two men, who cares? Minority groups are so underrepresented in the media and although this isn’t screaming representation, it can show that love is universal no matter the people it is between.
I personally like the Starbucks cup. I think the controversy over the design is overblown. I believe it is wrong to dislike a cup because there may be gay people on it. People are very passionate about what the cup looks like on the outside when it has no effect on the actual product. The possibility of gay characters on the cup does not affect the drink on the inside. People do not buy Starbucks for the cups they buy it for the coffee and other drinks that Starbucks has to offer.
Starbucks has stated that they “intentionally designed the cup so our customers can interpret it in their own way…” (Gould). In some ways, Starbucks has succeeded in reaching this goal, but in other ways, the company has missed the mark. Starbucks fosters creativity with their new cup with a design akin to a page from a coloring book. The lack of color (besides the occasional bursts of red) and graphic black lines entice customers to color in the design, supporting unique interpretations of the cup. However, one of the cute little doodles on the cup restricts the ability of the customer to “interpret it in their own way”: the Christmas tree. Yes, anyone can decorate a tree, and yes, the Christmas tree is traditionally pagan, but we all know that the Christmas tree is symbol for the Christian faith’s celebration of Christ’s birth. With this tree, it is clear that the Starbucks “holiday cup” is really a Christmas cup.
... As Jewish girl in a predominantly Christian country, I can’t help but notice that Christmas gets far more recognition than Hanukkah or Kwanza during the holiday season. It’s frustrating that Americans often forget that not all us are Christian, and it’s frustrating that I have had to learn to accept it.
First people got offended when they put a Christmas tree on it and now this. Who cares if the hands are between two girls, father and daughter, brother and sister or mother and father it is a symbol for love, which is what the holidays are all about.
If I had to design a seasonal Starbuck’s cup, I would make it colorful to not make it bleak and depressing and would add important ideas. These ideas would be things that would make people happy and remember fond memories such as baking cookies for Santa or drinking eggnog while Christmas caroling. Good cups are good advertising and if there are things people like on the cups, they would sell more drinks.
If I had a column in the New York Times, I would write about the little things in life that are unrecognized. I feel as if many people do not take time to recognize the things in life that are heavily valued. For example, music, art, nature, sports, and many more. These items are in our everyday life, and people, including me, don’t appreciate it.
The impact of music in my generation is insane. I guarantee when our parents were our age, they did not roam the halls with every other student having headphones in. In classes, music is played to calm or help focus students, and music is played to amp up teams and crowds of all sorts.
I strongly believe that there are certain topics that teenagers would be much better at giving advice rather than adults. The thing about today’s generation is that everything goes by so fast. And so does society. Therefore there are some things that make it hard for adults to stay up on.
For example, hazing in sports teams, when a majority of high schoolers’ parents were in high school, was very different than it is now. There was issues that involved forcing kids to do stuff that they do not want to do in a very public matter. Some of this has stayed the same, in the sense of kids being forced to do something that they do not want to do. But, it usually does not happen in a public setting anymore, it is usually online.
I would talk about high school athletics. I think that there’s a lot of great moments from high school sports that never get covered. I know our cross country team never gets the recognition we deserve. It was really unfortunate that we won the state finals and no one seemed to care at our school. I think that if high school sports of all kinds could get recognized in a national newspaper, people would show more respect towards theses accomplishments.
I would talk about high school soccer. I think soccer is the best sport in the world. Talk about ejections and how Mexican soccer is the best.
We loved reading your reactions to Barbie’s latest doll modeled after the Olympic fencer Ibtihaj Muhammad.
Growing up in a community where I was the minority with hair so thick that it broke combs, skin so brown that I stood out tremendously, barettes and twists and bantu knots all in my hair, I compared myself to the dolls I would get which were of course completely different. This new trend I hope is bound to let young girls and boys understand that they are beautiful/handsome just the way they are and the preconceived notion of “beauty” has no limits and begin to develop the idea that everyone is beautiful and can do or be anything.
A few years from now I want to see dolls that are a combination of different things. A Barbie/American Girl/Ken doll in military uniform with Vitiligo and different body, skin, and hair types. I want to see dolls with feeding tubes in their stomachs with different everything, I want to see dolls with everything for every child in the world.
If I could choose what the next Barbie looks like, I would make a doll with a chromosomal disease (e.g. Down syndrome). This would help many kids across the world feel like they can relate to something as simple as their own toys.
To make dolls in all kinds of shapes and sizes is a game changer. For kids growing up, it doesn’t mean that pretty is being skinny and perfect it means that pretty is what’s on the inside.
An inclusionary, diversified approach to doll range should reflect people across ethnicities, cultures, genders, and physical state (wheelchair user, amputee, dwarf, etc).
Ultimately, I’d wager it would be lucrative for the doll companies, if the principle of diversity and inclusion alone doesn’t sufficiently inspire them. Diversity in the doll range is likely to engage new markets, and inspire purchases from parents and people who might otherwise take a pass at buying a doll, if their choices are potentially unappealing or inappropriate for the child.
With the barrage of natural disasters, shootings, terrorist attacks and sexual harassment scandals, it seems we’re not the only ones experiencing disaster fatigue. Readers responded to our Student Opinion prompt “Do You Ever Get the ‘Bad News Blues’?” with their own experiences and recommendations for coping with an inundation of bad news.
The news, especially lately, has been so difficult to hear that I sometimes have to shut the television off or put my phone down and just take a breather.
Just the other night my father and I were watching the news during dinner I was so solemn the whole time. Not a single news story was happy or light in any way. There has recently been an outbreak of people coming forward with their sexual assault stories and though one feels happy for them that they finally found the courage to come out, it’s so upsetting seeing how people treat each other.
 There have been issues and Puerto Rico and it’s always upsetting to see people suffer, I feel like we could be doing something more. There are issues in government regarding our new president and his ideas, which never cease to anger me.
There are so many bad things happening and they seem to be happening all at once. It makes me feel like I’m being flooded with sadness and anger and fright, like the world is falling apart.
I believe that the best way to remedy this is to realize that while the unfortunate events always seem to take the headlines, there are happy things happening all around us. If people notice the positive events happening in communities, as well as the sad, we may be able to combat the “bad news blues”.
I have experienced “the bad news blues” scaring myself by creating ridiculous scenarios in my head. As a community, we can’t continue to damage our inner psyches or our physical beings. We have to remind ourselves that we’re still here unlike those Las Vegas victims and unlike the victims in the Texas shooting. We need to step out of “disaster fatigue” and be grateful. Being grateful for your life can push you to strive for better or help you be thankful for what you already have.
What about babies being born? What about the new discoveries in disease and medicine? What about the increasing pride of the LGBTQ community? What about developments in education? There are so many good things happening in the world, why not focus on those rather than the negatives?
My first major experience with “disaster fatigue” happened earlier this year in May, when reports of the Manchester incident were flooding the news. I was in complete shock that innocent concertgoers could be targeted in a horrific act of violence. After I read every article, filled with death statistics and suspect motives, I felt helpless and empty.
There are many ways to combat “bad news blues”. I listen to music that I enjoy, or music that calms me down. Music doesn’t make me forget what I read, but it temporarily keeps the bad thoughts away. In addition to listening to music, sitting down for dinner with my family and talking about our day places me back into my reality, where I have so many people, places, and things to appreciate.
In order to combat bad news, I watch YouTube, listen to music what I enjoy. Also I chat with my cousins, do something that keeps me busy to forget those things. “Bad news blues” can make anyone depressed and make their day worse. Sometimes forgetting bad news is hard and it causes people not to concentrate on what they are doing, so I think that avoiding these things is better.
The article offers pretty good advice on fighting the blues. Uplifter helps and so do websites like Upworthy and Sunny Skyz. I find talking to friends or family helpful, about something much lighthearted and uplifting, of course. But I don’t think we should stop reading such news for the sake of avoiding the blues. It’s always better to be informed than be oblivious, even at the expense of our happiness.