After years of increasing subway ridership, the number of riders has been steadily decreasing, a drop some blame on poor service.
Have some New York City subway riders had enough?
For years, even as service deteriorated, the number of people riding the New York City subways went in only one direction: up.
The increase in ridership was so dramatic that officials often blamed overcrowding for contributing to the rising number of delays in a century-old system that is ill equipped to deal with the demand.
But recently, those ridership numbers have been heading in the other direction: down.
Despite an increase in the population and in the number of new jobs, average weekday subway ridership dropped to 5.712 million this September from 5.817 million in September 2016, according to figures released this week by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority.
Still, other factors may have contributed to the decline, including changing work habits and transportation alternatives like ride-hailing apps and CitiBike, the shared biking service.
Joseph J. Lhota, the chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, told reporters on Wednesday, that ridership had not declined during the morning and afternoon rush, leading him to believe that the drop was more related to lifestyle, rather than poor service.
Jon Weinstein, a spokesman for the authority, said that an emergency repair plan that was started earlier this year was meant to improve subway service.
“At roughly 5.7 million rides a day, New York City subway ridership is still near historic highs — and we are stabilizing the system through Subway Action Plan so riders have the reliability they deserve,” Mr. Weinstein said.
Above ground, the decline in ridership has been even steeper. The number of people riding the bus this September fell to 1.946 million from 2.087 in September of last year.
Transit officials said that decline was driven in part by a generational shift, with younger New Yorkers less likely to ride the bus. But increased traffic on the city’s streets was also to blame, often slowing bus service to a crawl.
Average vehicle speeds in Manhattan below 60th Street have declined 12 percent from 2010 to 2015, according to the city’s Department of Transportation.
Governor Andrew M. Cuomo supports a congestion pricing plan that would charge drivers to enter the most congested parts of Manhattan during peak commuting hours. The plan is meant to reduce traffic and provide a new revenue stream that could be dedicated to finance the subway system.
But Mayor Bill de Blasio has said that he prefers generating new funds for the subway by increasing taxes on the wealthiest New Yorkers rather than congestion pricing. Mr. Cuomo controls the Metropolitan Transportation Authority.
Mr. Cuomo has continued to press the city to pay for half of the $836 million Subway Action Plan, but Mr. de Blasio has resisted, arguing that the city already provides enough financial assistance to the subway.
The decline in ridership will only add to the transportation authority’s financial burden.
At the authority’s board meeting on Wednesday, the agency said that declines in bus and subway ridership, along with lower toll fare collections than forecast, will result in a $281 million shortfall in its budget projections for 2018 to 2021.
Even if the authority is able to reduce costs and find a new source of funding, officials said that they might still need to increase fares and tolls.
Mr. Lhota said that nothing had been decided on fares.
