Saudi Arabia’s three-day-old blockade of entry points to Yemen threatens to plunge that war-ravaged country into a famine that could starve millions of people, the top relief official of the United Nations said Wednesday.
The warning by the official, Mark Lowcock, the world body’s coordinator of humanitarian aid, was perhaps the most dire so far regarding the blockade’s effects on what already is one of worst man-made disasters.
Mr. Lowcock spoke at a closed meeting of United Nations Security Council diplomats who have expressed alarm over the deterioration in Yemen, the Arab world’s poorest country.
The Yemen crisis has worsened since the Saudis imposed the blockade on Monday after a missile was fired deep into their territory by the Iran-backed Houthi rebel group, which has been warring with a Saudi-led military coalition for nearly three years.
Despite Saudi Arabia’s assurances that the measure was temporary while it reviews inspection procedures, virtually all humanitarian deliveries to Yemen have been halted, including at least three United Nations airplanes full of emergency supplies.
The Security Council, which has condemned the missile launching into Saudi territory, took no immediate action regarding the blockade. Ambassador Sebastiano Cardi of Italy, the Council’s president for November, said members called on all parties in Yemen to “provide unhindered access for humanitarian supplies,” a reiteration of the Council’s position.
Earlier Wednesday, 15 humanitarian relief groups expressed alarm in a joint statement that the blockade had imperiled lifesaving assistance to millions of people in Yemen.
The country is struggling with an acute hunger crisis that has affected at least 17 million people, more than a third of them considered close to famine. Yemen also suffering a cholera scourge that has sickened nearly one million.
“Given the current acute food-security crisis and cholera epidemic, any delays to the restoration and expansion of humanitarian access will cost the lives of women, men, girls and boys across the whole of Yemen,” the statement by the aid groups said.
The signers included some of the most prominent international aid groups, including the International Rescue Committee, Oxfam and Save the Children.
Two and a half years of war and a crippling cholera outbreak have brought Yemen to the brink of collapse.
On Tuesday, the International Committee of the Red Cross pleaded with the Saudi-led coalition to allow Yemeni ports to continue receiving medical supplies, including chlorine tablets used to prevent cholera.
Saudi Arabia has described the blockade as necessary to prevent the Houthis, who are from Yemen’s north, and their allies from smuggling military weaponry into the country.
The Saudis have accused Iran of delivering the type of missile to the Houthis that was launched at Saudi Arabia on Saturday, which traveled more than 500 miles before Saudi air defenses shot it down it near Riyadh, the capital. Iran, Saudi Arabia’s main rival in the Middle East, has denied the accusation.