President Trump projected an air of calm on Wednesday after charges against his former campaign chief and a foreign policy aide roiled Washington, insisting to The New York Times that he was not “angry at anybody” and that investigations into his campaign’s links to Russia had not come near him personally.
“It has nothing to do with us,” Mr. Trump said.
“I’m actually not angry at anybody,” Mr. Trump told The Times.
The phone call seemed intended to dispel the impression of a president and a White House under siege. The indictment of Mr. Manafort and his longtime deputy, Rick Gates, on Monday came as little surprise to Mr. Trump or his team, and they were relieved that the charges were not directly related to last year’s campaign. Instead, both were indicted on charges including money laundering, tax evasion and failing to properly disclose lobbying on behalf of foreign governments.
But the president’s advisers were surprised when another former aide, George Papadopoulos, who was on the president’s hastily assembled foreign policy team, pleaded guilty to lying to federal investigators about his repeated efforts to connect the campaign with Russians who might provide “dirt” on Hillary Clinton drawn from “thousands of emails.” Most unnerving was the discovery that Mr. Papadopoulos had been secretly cooperating with the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, for three months.
John F. Kelly, the White House chief of staff, has acknowledged that the investigation has taken its toll on the president. “It is very distracting to the president, as it would be to any citizen, to be investigated for something, while at the same time trying to carry the weight of what being president of the United States means on his shoulder,” Mr. Kelly told Fox News this week.
Still, three advisers, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss internal dynamics, said reports of a shellshocked team had been overstated, although some conceded that word that Sam Clovis, an early aide on Mr. Trump’s team, had been interviewed by Mr. Mueller’s team had caught some advisers off guard.
In private moments, Mr. Trump, who is prone to venting, blows off steam about the investigation but then moves on, according to one of the advisers. The president is “annoyed” by the omnipresent Russia fever, the adviser said, but he is comfortable with the strategy adopted by Ty Cobb, a senior White House lawyer, who has insisted on cooperating with Mr. Mueller without attacking him, in hopes of a speedy resolution. There is no talk of firing the special counsel, the adviser said.
More than Mr. Mueller, the adviser added, the president remains most frustrated with the same person who has drawn his ire for months: Attorney General Jeff Sessions. Mr. Trump has excoriated Mr. Sessions for recusing himself from the investigation and handing it over to a deputy to oversee, saying he should not have been appointed.
In the interview, Mr. Trump added that he was buoyed by fresh polling he said he had seen from swing states, supplied to him by the Republican National Committee chairwoman, Ronna Romney McDaniel, earlier on Wednesday.
“I just got fantastic poll numbers,” the president said, listing what he saw as his biggest accomplishments, including a focus on deregulation and low unemployment rates.
He did not cite any specific polls or reveal any numbers from Ms. McDaniel. An NBC/Wall Street Journal poll released on Sunday put Mr. Trump’s approval rating at 38 percent — the lowest for the survey since February, when he was a month into his presidency.
Additionally, the president said he was looking forward to his lengthy trip to Asia, which begins on Friday.
