EMERYVILLE, Calif. — During a recent speech at the University of California, Berkeley, Pieter Abbeel played a video clip of a robot doing housework.
The trick was that an engineer was operating the robot from afar, dictating its every move. But as Mr. Abbeel explained, the video showed that robotic hardware was nimble enough to mimic complex human behavior. It just needed software that could guide the hardware — without the help of that engineer.
Mr. Abbeel, a native of Belgium, has spent the last several years working on artificial intelligence, first as a Berkeley professor and then as a researcher at OpenAI, the lab founded by Tesla chief executive Elon Musk and other big Silicon Valley names. Now, he and three fellow researchers from Berkeley and OpenAI are starting their own company, intent on bringing a new level of robotic automation to the world’s factories, warehouses and perhaps even homes.
Their start-up, Embodied Intelligence, is backed by $7 million in funding from the Silicon Valley venture capital firm Amplify Partners and other investors. The company will specialize in complex algorithms that allow machines to learn tasks on their own. Using these methods, existing robots could learn to, for example, install car parts that aren’t quite like the parts they have installed in the past, sort through a bucket of random holiday gifts as they arrive at a warehouse, or perform other tasks that machines traditionally could not.
“We now have teachable robots,” Mr. Abbeel said during a recent interview at the new company’s offices in Emeryville, Calif., just across the bay from San Francisco.
Robots already automate some work inside factories and warehouses, such as moving boxes from place to place at Amazon’s massive distribution centers. But companies must program these machines for each particular task, limiting their possible applications. The hope is that robots can master a much wider array of tasks by learning on their own.
Mr. Abbeel and the other founders of Embodied Intelligence, including the former OpenAI researchers Peter Chen and Rocky Duan and the former Microsoft researcher Tianhao Zhang, specialize in an algorithmic method called reinforcement learning — a way for machines to learn tasks by extreme trial and error.
Researchers at DeepMind, the London-based A.I. lab owned by Google, used this method to build a machine that could play the ancient game of Go better than any human. In essence, the machine learned to master this enormously complex game by playing against itself — over and over and over again.
Other researchers, across both industry and academia, have shown that similar algorithms allow robots to learn physical tasks as well. By repeatedly trying to open a door, for instance, a robot can learn which particular movements bring success and which don’t.
He said he believed his new start-up can rapidly push its methods into manufacturing operations like the auto industry. Although robotics already handle many tasks inside such factories, there are many others they can’t yet master. That is what Embodied Intelligence hopes to change.
But Mr. Abbeel is among the world’s top researchers in his field, and his decision to start a own company is an indication that machine learning will continue to push robotics forward.
“It is obvious that this is what you need to build flexible, agile robotics,” said Geoff Hinton, a pioneer of machine learning.