For decades, the plan to reduce traffic by charging drivers in crowded zones in Manhattan has been revived again and again.
It is the Lazarus of congestion plans: reduce traffic in New York City by charging drivers in crowded areas at peak traffic times.
Now a state task force, called Fix NYC, has been assembled with the goal of developing another congestion pricing plan. It has been nine years since the last major effort by Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg died in Albany after state legislative leaders refused to bring it to a vote. Mr. Cuomo, after once expressing doubt about congestion pricing’s chances, is expected to unveil a plan early next year and make it a centerpiece of his legislative agenda.
This time congestion pricing is back at a moment of crisis — above ground, streets are becoming increasingly snarled in large part because of the boom in ride-hailing apps, while below ground the problem is even worse as the city’s aging subway system is riddled with delays and in dire need of money. The state-run Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which operates the subway, faces a litany of problems, including antiquated signals and overcrowded cars, that have led to frequent breakdowns — much of it documented by smartphone-toting commuters for the world to see.
While the subway crisis has created the latest opening for congestion pricing, it is largely thanks to three longtime advocates that it even remained a possibility. The advocates — Sam Schwartz, Charles Komanoff and Alex Matthiessen — have been widely credited with keeping the idea alive in the dark years after the Bloomberg plan failed, wooing back supporters and funders for another try, and working tirelessly to try to overcome opposition and build a grass-roots campaign, Move NY, that has laid the groundwork for the state task force.
They each have their strengths. Mr. Schwartz, 69, a former city traffic commissioner known as “Gridlock Sam,” is the irrepressible traffic engineer who is helping shape the discussion on congestion pricing as a member of the state task force. Mr. Matthiessen, 53, a former president of Riverkeeper, an environmental advocacy group, is the political strategist, founder and director of Move NY.
Mr. Komanoff, 70, a policy analyst and a former president of Transportation Alternatives, is the one who made congestion pricing more than just an idea by creating a spreadsheet model to calculate the real-life impacts, including how much money would be raised, how much traffic would be reduced and how the costs would be spread across the region.
Together, they are the “three amigos” — as Mr. Schwartz puts it — behind congestion pricing.
“They’ve played an invaluable role of maintaining the ongoing discourse on congestion pricing,” said Scott Rechler, chairman of the Regional Planning Association, an influential urban policy group, and another member of the state task force.
The three men, working separately at first, dissected the Bloomberg plan to find out what went wrong. That plan had sought to establish a congestion zone in Manhattan, south of 60th Street, and charge drivers an $8 flat fee to enter during peak commuting times. Drivers who do not want to pay would presumably stay away. It faltered in Albany despite the support of Gov. David A. Paterson, who had just taken office after Eliot L. Spitzer resigned amid a sex scandal.
Mr. Schwartz mapped out the political opposition, finding a crescent-shaped area of resistance running along eastern Queens, Brooklyn and Staten Island. Then he went on his own version of a listening tour — meeting with critics to hear their concerns and seeking ways to make the idea more palatable.
One frequent criticism of the Bloomberg plan was that Manhattan reaped the benefits of congestion pricing while the other boroughs bore the costs. So Mr. Schwartz, who proposed a toll system for the East River bridges, came up with a “toll swap:” as new tolls were added to the bridges, existing tolls would be lowered on other bridges linking areas with few subway and transit alternatives, such as the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge linking Brooklyn and Staten Island. He also proposed that part of the revenue raised from congestion pricing be reserved for roads and bridges to benefit drivers instead of all going to public transit.
Then, Mr. Schwartz joined forces with Mr. Komanoff and Mr. Matthiessen, both of whom had been hired earlier by Theodore W. Kheel, a prominent lawyer and labor arbitrator, to work on the issue. “It was almost like a three-musketeers moment where we all realized we brought something to the table,” Mr. Komanoff said.
They developed their own congestion pricing plan, which included Mr. Schwartz’s toll swap and revenue for roads and bridges. To address the surge in Uber and other ride-hail-app services, they also proposed adding per-mile and per-minute surcharges to fares for cabs and other for-hire vehicles in Manhattan south of 96th Street, which was intended to improve traffic flow in heavily congested business areas.
Mr. Matthiessen, who was in charge of fund-raising, secured about $3 million to run the campaign, of which more than two-thirds came from The Rockefeller Foundation and the Nurture Nature Foundation, which was founded by Mr. Kheel.
Kendra Hems, president of the Trucking Association of New York, an industry group that opposed the Bloomberg plan, said she became more open to congestion pricing as a result of Move NY. “We’re willing to have discussions,” she said. “We’re not just outright opposed to the idea. We just want to make sure there’s a benefit that comes back to the industry.
The Move NY campaign has had some successes, culminating with state legislators introducing bills in 2016 in both houses based on its congestion plan. But that effort did not get far. Funding dried up and the group had to lay off its staff of two.
But then as the subway crisis deepened this summer, Mr. Cuomo brought congestion pricing to the forefront. Move NY mobilized again. Mr. Matthiessen recalled that even in the beginning, he had thought it might take a transit crisis to push congestion pricing through Albany.
Mr. Schwartz said that he is feeling upbeat but cautious about being so close after all these years.
