Music|ECM’s Catalog Is Finally Streaming. Here Are 21 Essential Albums.
ECM’s Catalog Is Finally Streaming. Here Are 21 Essential Albums.
Sound quality has always mattered to Manfred Eicher, the meticulous and exploratory producer who founded ECM (Edition of Contemporary Music) Records in 1969 and has produced the vast majority of its recordings. ECM has released an extraordinary catalog that encompasses jazz, classical music and cross-cultural fusions from composers and performers like Keith Jarrett, Vijay Iyer, Arvo Pärt and Meredith Monk. Across styles, the label’s hallmark has been the contemplative detail of its music, a kind of acoustic enhanced realism.
What a group the bassist David Holland convened for an album named after a Persian Sufi classic. Sam Rivers and Anthony Braxton, on flutes and reed instruments, were structural innovators and freethinkers, deciding how wide-open improvisation could conjure stories. Mr. Holland and the drummer Barry Altschul knew how to steer them or set them loose, with no chordal instrument to hold them in. Thoughtfully and playfully, the diverse voices sing. J.P.
The tempos stay slow, the voicings sparse and the tension almost unbearable on “Open, to Love.” All solo albums have to reckon with solitude, and the pianist Paul Bley welcomes it, darkly and stoically, with music that floats alone, making listeners wait for every tense, unresolved, beautiful chord. J.P.
The best-selling solo piano album of all time, “The Köln Concert” was recorded live, on an unresonant baby grand that had been rolled onstage in error. But Keith Jarrett adapts, espousing a personal brand of barrelhouse folk-pop pianism that pulls together the warmth of Appalachian music, the insistence of rock and the stubborn intellectualism of free improvisation. G.R.
Something repeats and something else changes throughout this pinnacle of 1970s Minimalism. Steve Reich applied the precision of chamber music and a fascination with the beauty and perceptual effects of phase patterns to the plinking, percussive music from Ghana and Bali that he had studied. He devised a cross-cultural marvel, simultaneously meditative and hyperactive. J.P.
A flagship ensemble of the 1970s avant-garde, the Art Ensemble was ludic, irreverent, proudly Afrocentric and yet preternaturally universalist. The group’s layers of horns and percussion invited you into a conversation about the intimacy and implications of sound. That’s in line with ECM’s modus operandi. But the ensemble’s spirited rambles from reggae to swinging bop to rough abstraction? These were something rare to the label. G.R.
A trumpeter of smoldering grace, Leo Smith (now Wadada Leo Smith) defies standard technique or musical structure, but he always sounds fully embodied. This album is one of Mr. Smith’s finest, a collection of carefully orchestrated, luminous threads (flute, saxophone, vibraphone, bass, other trumpets) rising and exhaling together, following the loose prescriptions of Mr. Smith’s compositions. G.R.
This bass-less trio album shattered any previous conception of what three jazz musicians could create together; it’s an exercise in tactile wizardry. There are Paul Motian’s flighty cymbals, which leave enough space to be airy but not arid; and the saxophonist Joe Lovano’s gasping, guttural tones. But the guitarist Bill Frisell is the most striking musician here for his omnivorous diversity in tone: his guitar is solemnly organ-esque on “In the Year of the Dragon,” squawking with static on “Two Women From Padua,” and Lynch-ian on the eerie, unmoored “Fiasco.” A.R.C.
Although he also plays piano and has collaborated widely, on “Dança dos Escravos” the Brazilian composer Egberto Gismonti uses only various-sized acoustic guitars, solo and overdubbed, and occasionally his wordless voice. Traditional Brazilian rhythms, Minimalistic motifs, breakneck picking and sighing melody are commingled in pieces that look both inward and far ahead. J.P.
ECM’s contributions to the revival of early music over the past half-century have sometimes gone underappreciated, but they’ve been significant, not least in this sensuously solemn, shining disc of works by the medieval master Perotin. Repeating, overlapping, surging, receding, both plangent and smiling, it made perfect sense in the catalog alongside modern Minimalism. Z.W.
Nowhere in the label’s offerings is the coexistence of old and new lovelier than in this disc, which cleverly brought together a broad selection of Gyorgy Kurtág’s agile “Jatekok” miniatures with his Bach arrangements, many of the pieces played in four-handed piano arrangements by Kurtág and his wife, Marta, for 45 minutes of intimate rumination. Z.W.
Anouar Brahem, a composer and oud player from Tunisia, leads a subtle, intent transnational fusion on this album: oud, Middle Eastern hand drums, electric bass and clarinet or bass clarinet. His austere modal melodies guide the group in and out of improvisations that always keep the longer line in mind. J.P.
Among the most remarkable solo piano statements of this millennium, “Avenging Angel” bespeaks the passions of an irrepressibly studious and quietly soulful pianist. Moving from attenuated atmospherics to rigorous propulsion, Craig Taborn displays a gift for arranging and enriching sound; it can be hard to tell where his compositions end and spontaneous invention begins. G.R.
The pianist Carla Bley’s compositions have been appearing on ECM albums by the likes of Mr. Burton and Paul Bley (her ex-husband) since the 1970s, but she herself did not record for the label until far more recently. “Trios” is a triumphant tour through her book of finely sculpted compositions — sometimes elegiac, sometimes evasive, always distinctly hers. G.R.
Techno and Thelonious Monk coexist in the ideas the pianist Vijay Iyer brings to his longtime trio with Stephan Crump on bass and Marcus Gilmore on drums. “Break Stuff” encompasses sounds and spaces, speed and contemplation, curves and angles, methodical processes and brilliant impulses; it never stops thinking. J.P.
Its energy blistering, this ensemble is a valuable addition to a label still clearly on the lookout for important young artists. Especially those whose interests are a bit idiosyncratic: While this debut record was a rich, riveting dip into three important contemporary works, the Danes’ most recent ECM album, released in September, ranged further afield, to their own versions of Nordic folk tunes. Z.W.
David Virelles, a young Cuban pianist, is an avid musical searcher. He brought together a dozen other members to build the Nosotros Ensemble, which moves in many directions on “Gnosis.” Often working in response to Román Díaz’s beacon-like vocals and steadying hand percussion, the group conjures fragility and obstinacy, enigma and hard essence. G.R.