Politics|Trump’s Female Accusers Feel Forgotten. A Lawsuit May Change That.
Trump’s Female Accusers Feel Forgotten. A Lawsuit May Change That.
While allegations of sexual misconduct against powerful men in recent weeks have drawn wide public support and prompted quick response, women who came forward during the presidential race with accusations against Donald J. Trump said they spent the past year feeling dismissed and forgotten.
“With Trump, it was all brushed under the rug,” said Temple Taggart, who claimed Mr. Trump kissed her on the mouth when she was competing in his Miss USA pageant in 1997.
But that could change if a defamation lawsuit brought by a woman who accused Mr. Trump of unwanted sexual advances is allowed to proceed in New York State Supreme Court, a legal ruling that could come before the end of the year. Lawyers in the suit sought a subpoena seeking all Trump campaign records related to his female accusers. If the case advances, the accusers could be deposed, going up against Mr. Trump yet again.
The plaintiff in the lawsuit — Summer Zervos, a former contestant on Mr. Trump’s show “The Apprentice” — is represented by the law firm of Gloria Allred, who has helped bring cases against Bill Cosby and other high-profile defendants. They claimed that Mr. Trump defamed Ms. Zervos during the campaign when he repeatedly described her and other accusers’ accounts as “lies” and “nonsense” and said the women either were being put forward by his opponent Hillary Clinton’s campaign or were motivated to come forward by getting “10 minutes of fame,” according to the complaint.
Mr. Trump has sought to dismiss or stay the case, claiming that a sitting president cannot be sued in state court and that his comments amount to political speech, arguments that were reaffirmed by his legal team in a brief filed on Tuesday. But lawyers for Ms. Zervos point to the United States Supreme Court ruling that allowed Paula Jones to bring a sexual harassment suit against President Bill Clinton while he was in office, and several law professors have filed briefs supporting the legal grounds for such a suit.
Among those who said they would embrace the opportunity to provide a deposition in the case is Jessica Leeds, who has accused Mr. Trump of grabbing her breasts and trying to put his hand up her skirt during a plane ride several decades ago. “I would do it — I’m not afraid,” Ms. Leeds said.
During the campaign, more than 10 women made allegations against Mr. Trump ranging from unwanted touching to sexual assault.
Most of them spoke out after the release of an “Access Hollywood” tape that captured him bragging about kissing women and grabbing their private parts without invitation.
Mr. Trump insisted that he had never engaged in the behavior he described and dismissed his own comments as “locker room talk.” When woman after woman went public with accusations, he denied every one of them.
The accusers, varying in age and geographic location, had never met one another, and their allegations stretched back to the 1980s. Some said they had run into Mr. Trump through work, while others said they had had chance encounters with him.
Ms. Taggart and several others said they had spent the past year in a mix of disbelief, anger and occasional fear as they watched Mr. Trump call them liars, threaten to sue them and then win an election to the White House.
The suit, which is before Judge Jennifer Schecter, alleges emotional harm and about $3,000 in economic damage. But Ms. Allred has said the purpose of the lawsuit is not financial, but rather to expose the truth.
Legal experts point out that Mr. Trump could eventually be deposed or asked to testify, and that if he lied under oath, it would be grounds for Congress to impeach him, as happened with Mr. Clinton.
The day after Mr. Trump was sworn in as president in January, some of his accusers marched in Washington, drawing cheers from fellow protesters, including the actress Ashley Judd.
“She was telling us to stay strong, that we did the right thing,” Ms. Taggart said.
Since then, Ms. Judd has helped to unleash an avalanche of accusations against the film producer Harvey Weinstein, leading to his dismissal from his company and inspiring others to go public with complaints about other prominent male bosses.
Rachel Crooks, who said that Mr. Trump kissed her on the mouth in 2005 when she was working as a young receptionist at Trump Tower in Manhattan, has been heartened to see the recent allegations bring about change.
But she could not help seeing a contrast to how things played out for the Trump accusers.
