TOKYO — The first time Shinzo Abe, Japan’s prime minister, met President Xi Jinping of China, the body language told the story. Mr. Xi looked dour and stiff, turning away from Mr. Abe with pursed lips, as if someone had forced him into it after months of escalating tensions between their two nations. In the years since, relations have improved but the two leaders have always kept at a distance.
This past weekend, they met again on the sidelines of a regional summit meeting in Vietnam. This time, they shook hands and Mr. Xi flashed a grin.
It was a sign, the Japanese news media suggested, of a potentially momentous shift in the region, with two longtime adversaries drawing closer as the United States under President Trump has created unease among allies about the role the United States will take in the region.
To compensate, Japan and China are inching toward a possible reconciliation as they recognize the altered dynamics around the Pacific Rim.
But with the two Asian powers long divided by disputes over history and territory, as well as testiness over influence in the region, it will take more than a few handshakes — or a smile — to cement a genuine realignment.
In gesturing toward a new friendliness, Japan is motivated in part by the recognition that as the United States retreats, it needs stronger trade with China. Having watched Mr. Trump heap praise on Mr. Xi in Beijing last week, Japan is also propelled by fear that the United States may develop a closer rapport with China that would exclude Japan.
And as China seeks to strengthen its power, it realizes it may have more success exerting authority in the region with Japan as less of a rival. At the same time, Mr. Trump’s visit showed China that the United States is unlikely to get in its way, allowing a more confident Mr. Xi to be more generous toward Japan.
“What Trump represented was a real shock to the system of allies and the world,” said Nick Bisley, professor of international relations at La Trobe University in Melbourne, Australia.
The threat from North Korea is also naturally drawing China and Japan closer, although Mr. Abe has so far hewed closely to Mr. Trump’s approach of calling for more pressure and sanctions.
Mr. Abe appears keenly aware of Mr. Trump’s erratic swings in opinions and loyalties. Japan is naturally wondering if the United States may make some kind of deal with China that could put Japan at a disadvantage, experts said.
“Standing behind that is kind of what you always find in Japan — that underlying fear of abandonment,” said Daniel C. Sneider, a lecturer in East Asian studies at Stanford University.
As Mr. Abe and Mr. Xi take the first steps toward a better relationship, many obstacles remain.
Neither country has given any ground in a territorial dispute over a set of islands in the East China Sea, known in Japan as the Senkaku and in China as the Diaoyu. China also still regularly objects to what it perceives as any sign that Japan is returning to its militaristic past, and carefully watches the debate in Japan about how much to develop the military’s capabilities.
Japan has also actively sought to counter China’s economic rise by developing relationships with other countries in the region. On the same day Mr. Abe met Mr. Xi in Danang, Vietnam, Japan led a group of 11 countries in announcing the restart of negotiations for a sweeping trade agreement to create an economic bloc that would exclude China.
Still, the tentative outreach is happening as both Mr. Abe and Mr. Xi have recently shored up their domestic power, in Japan through a parliamentary election and in China as a result of last month’s Communist Party congress.
In China, after five years of relegating Japan to the diplomatic freezer, Mr. Xi decided a richer and stronger China had more to gain from smoother relations with Mr. Abe than continued hostility, Chinese analysts said.
And as Japan tries to carve out its own sphere of influence, particularly in Southeast Asia, Mr. Xi is following the old precept of keeping his enemies close.
While China applies a mixture of coercion, diplomacy and money to pull nations to its side, Japan is offering maritime and development assistance to countries like Vietnam and the Philippines.
Mr. Xi “needs to make sure Japan doesn’t emerge as a plausible third power in the region,” said Rana Mitter, a professor of history at the University of Oxford, and a specialist in China-Japan relations.
When Mr. Trump was in Beijing, Mr. Xi made clear his ambitions for China to replace the United States as the dominant power in the Western Pacific.
“The Pacific Ocean is big enough to accommodate both China and the United States,” Mr. Xi said with Mr. Trump beside him, an assertion that some in the region and Washington see as shorthand for China’s taking advantage of an American retreat.
Mr. Trump helped reinforce that perception by failing to press China on its military buildup in the South China Sea, according to analysts.
Experts said Mr. Abe may also be under pressure from Japanese businesses, which want to work with China to develop projects around the region.
Mr. Abe has been pressing for a change in relations between Beijing and Tokyo since he started his second term as prime minister in 2012. Earlier this year, the Japanese sent a senior politician to a Beijing conference hosted by Mr. Xi for the “One Belt, One Road” initiative, Mr. Xi’s signature infrastructure program designed to magnify China’s influence in Asia and Europe.
Japan had previously boycotted Mr. Xi’s global programs, like the Asia Infrastructure Investment Bank.
For its part, China refrained this summer from sending a fleet of fishing vessels to the waters around the disputed islands in the East China Sea — contrary to what it had in past years.
During the talks in Danang, Mr. Abe proposed that he and Mr. Xi visit each other’s country next year.
When Mr. Xi smiled during the photo opportunity, the Japanese news media trumpeted it as a breakthrough. “That smile was very different from the ‘salty response’ that Mr. Xi had shown in the past four meetings,” a commentator on Fuji Television noted while comparing pictures from earlier encounters between the two leaders.
Mr. Abe told reporters that Mr. Xi described the talks as ushering in a “new start of Japan-China relations.” Two days later, Mr. Abe also met with the Chinese premier, Li Keqiang, at a separate meeting in Manila, an unusual diplomatic twofer.
But history has shown that such meetings may not produce longstanding results. In 2008, when Hu Jintao, China’s president at the time, met in Japan with Yasuo Fukuda, then prime minister, they released a statement promising to “cooperate to enhance peace and friendship over the long term.” That commitment lasted just two years, until the dispute over the islands heated up.
