ATHENS — Flash floods in Greece have killed at least 15 people in the western outskirts of Athens, state television said on Wednesday, trapping dozens in their homes or cars and inundating hundreds of residences, businesses and boats.
Several people were reported missing after several hours of torrential rain fell Tuesday night, although it was unclear whether they had fallen victim to the floods or had sought refuge elsewhere. More rain was forecast for the next few days.
The fire service said it had received hundreds of calls from Greeks whose homes were submerged. As highways turned to rivers, the emergency services rescued people who had been trapped in their cars and stranded on buses.
On Wednesday evening Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras declared a day of national mourning.
Military facilities and other public venues will be made available to those left homeless by the floods, he added.
According to Greek media, at least 13 people had been killed in or around Mandra, a suburb west of Athens, and that most of the 17 reported injured were suffering from hypothermia. Among the dead were people found inside or in the yards of their inundated homes while Greek Coast Guard officers recovered the bodies of victims who were swept out to sea by floodwaters.
The country’s General Secretariat for Civil Protection called the floods “unprecedented” in the area, while Yianna Kriekouki, the mayor of Mandra, referred to the floods as a “biblical disaster” in comments on state television, made by telephone while trapped in her home.
Mr. Tsipras dispatched three ministers to the areas most affected by the flooding, and convened an emergency meeting on Tuesday evening to assess the state response.
While severe storms prompted the flooding, analysts said the devastation may have been exacerbated by the illegal construction of homes on the fringes of Athens.
The two towns hit hardest by the floods — Mandra and Nea Peramos — are known to have shoddy infrastructure. In September, the regional authorities allocated European Union funds to build a new drainage network for Mandra, though the construction had not begun.
On Tuesday, the authorities in the Aegean island of Symi, known for its colorful neoclassical houses and picturesque harbor, declared a state of emergency after rainstorms pummeled the area.
The flooding in Athens comes in a year in which hurricane have unleashed destruction from Houston to the Caribbean. Hurricane Harvey tore across the Gulf Coast of Texas, hammering the region with torrential rains and flooding that killed dozens of people, displaced more than one million and caused billions of dollars in damage.
In September two lethal hurricanes ravaged the Caribbean, destroying lives, homes and infrastructure in an area dependent on tourism. In October, Ireland and Britain braced for Hurricane Ophelia, the 10th hurricane of the Atlantic season.