When to watch: From Tuesday, on Hulu.
This is the series finale of the sometimes-wonderful “Mindy Project,” a show that has been out of narrative juice for a long time but still has plenty of solid jokes. (On this episode, from Rhea Perlman’s Annette: “Asian and Jewish? That’s a lot of New Years to celebrate.”) You are hereby encouraged to rewatch the pilot episode before watching the finale, as there are several callbacks.
“Mindy” had a bunch of different versions of itself: Mindy’s girlfriends were originally part of the series, but they were written off. Several co-worker characters came and went. Mindy was initially into Jeremy (Ed Weeks), but then Danny (Chris Messina) was set up as her cantankerous true love. Then his character changed into a strange monster, and then he, too, was written out of the show. And then in the series’s last gasps, he returned! At least her amazing pajama wardrobe never faltered, not even for a second.
When to watch: Wednesday at 9 p.m., on Science Channel.
Perhaps some “Mythbusters” purists will reject this new iteration of the series, but I will be too busy watching swords slice into ballistic gels to care. Behold the new “Mythbusters,” now with two new hosts: Brian Louden and Jon Lung, who are still settling into their new roles but seem fine enough. I was worried more that we’d simply run out of myths, but this new episode covers the question, “Is it dangerous, as the front-seat passenger, to put your feet on the dashboard?” To the test track in the desert! B.Y.O. spooky crash-test dummy!
When to watch: From Thursday, on Sundance Now.
David Mitchell and Robert Webb continue their fruitful comedy partnership (see also: “Peep Show,” “That Mitchell and Webb Look,” “Ambassadors,” among others) in this dark, fabulous British import, created by Simon Blackwell (“Veep,” “The Thick of It”). Mitchell plays the put-out Stephen, whose father has just died; Webb plays Andrew, who was one of Stephen’s foster siblings for a short period 20 years ago, and who has returned to grieve and reconnect with Stephen’s family.
The show isn’t sad-sad, but it is at points shatteringly awkward. Sometimes the “grown men act like jealous children” genre can be tiring, but “Back” is taut and well-drawn — and with more emotional complexities than it seems like it’s going to have.
