BARBARA HANNIGAN at the Park Avenue Armory (Nov. 16, 7:30 p.m.; Nov. 18, 5 p.m. and 8 p.m.). With Reinbert de Leeuw at the piano, this outstanding singer of music composed in the last century or so delivers two programs, the first concentrating on Vienna, the second Paris. On Thursday, there’s Schoenberg, Webern, Berg, Zemlinsky, Wolf and Alma Mahler; on Saturday, the music of Erik Satie, a composer whose work this partnership recorded to great acclaim last year.
PAUL LEWIS at Zankel Hall (Nov. 15, 7:30 p.m.). Fancy having to choose between two leading British pianists, performing on the same night, at the same time (the other being Benjamin Grosvenor at the 92nd Street Y). Paul Lewis’s program has a welcome focus on Haydn, who remains, despite his importance, chronically underperformed. Along with two Haydn sonatas, Mr. Lewis plays Beethoven’s Op. 126 Bagatelles, and Brahms’s Op. 118 Piano Pieces.
MARIINSKY ORCHESTRA at Carnegie Hall (Nov. 14, 8 p.m.; Nov. 15, 7 p.m.). Valery Gergiev leads his St. Petersburg ensemble in its usual repertoire. On Tuesday, that means Shostakovich, Scriabin and Prokofiev’s Piano Concerto No. 2, with Denis Matsuev as the soloist. On Wednesday, the most alluring work is the local premiere of Daniil Trifonov’s Piano Concerto, a wonderfully over-the-top piece in the idiom of Scriabin and Rachmaninoff played by the pianist himself. Here, it comes with Strauss and Prokofiev.
SWEDISH CHAMBER ORCHESTRA at David Geffen Hall (Nov. 12, 3 p.m.). Beethoven’s “Missa Solemnis” is led by Thomas Dausgaard, who was recently appointed the music director of the Seattle Symphony and has done sterling work with this group. He conducts the Swedish Radio Choir, along with the soloists Malin Christensson, Kristina Hammarstrom, Michael Weinius and Josef Wagner. Note that the choir also performs at the Church of St. Mary the Virgin on Tuesday at 7:30 p.m., with Peter Dijkstra conducting recent choral works, including Schnittke’s Concerto for Choir.
TETZLAFF QUARTET at Zankel Hall (Nov. 16, 7:30 p.m.) This foursome, led by the soloist Christian Tetzlaff, recently released a superb recording of Haydn and Schubert, and here they reprise that release’s account of Schubert’s tumultuous last quartet. Also on the program are Mozart and Berg.
‘THAÏS’ at the Metropolitan Opera (Nov. 11, 1 p.m., through Dec. 2) Massenet’s opera commences a short run, in this production by John Cox. Ailyn Peréz sings the title role, with Gerald Finley as Athanaël, Jean-François Borras as Nicias and David Pittsinger as Palémon.
