The conventions industry pays big bucks for impersonators. How do they solve a problem like The Donald?
Randy Nolen is a 66-year-old talent manager based in Indian Wells, Calif. He specializes in the meetings and conventions sector. His clients seek acts that can entertain, say, a thousand conference attendees who have nothing in common except that they work in the insurance industry.
Long ago, Mr. Nolen realized that everyone knows the president of the United States, and everyone likes to make fun of the boss. Thus, his bread and butter for the last 25 years has been booking and managing performers who portray the president. In the 1990s, he did well with a natural Bill Clinton look-alike named Tim Watters. In the 2000s, he hit it big with Steve Bridges, who used elaborate facial prosthetics to transform into a striking likeness of George W. Bush.
That’s why the buzzword that guides Mr. Nolen is “respectful.” He encourages the entertainers he represents to “poke fun” at the president, in a clever but civil way.
Then, a colleague of Mr. Nolen’s insisted he meet a former real estate salesman named Tim Watters, who had started making appearances at corporate events because of his resemblance to America’s new president, Bill Clinton. When Mr. Nolen’s acquaintance spotted Mr. Watters at a Motorola conference, he said the executives there were practically falling over themselves to get a photo with him.
While Mr. Nolen was skeptical, he agreed to meet with Mr. Watters. “From the nose up, he looked exactly like Bill Clinton,” Mr. Nolen said.
That still wasn’t enough. But when Mr. Watters agreed to develop an actual stand-up act that would allow him to charge more for performances, Mr. Nolen started booking gigs for him.
In their best year together, 1996, Mr. Nolen said he booked 177 dates for Mr. Watters at $10,000 a performance. When President Clinton was re-elected that year, Mr. Nolen urged Mr. Watters to expand his act, from 30 to 45 minutes, so that they could increase their fee.
“Most convention and meetings planners want a full hour if they can get it,” Mr. Nolen said.
But Mr. Watters didn’t want to invest the money into writers who could help expand his act. “That’s when I said, ‘If I ever do this again, I’m going to find a guy who’s got the will and the talent, and then I’m going to find a prosthetic makeup artist and make him look like the president,’” Mr. Nolen said.
In his natural state, Dave Burleigh looks nothing like Donald J. Trump.
Squint, and you might say Don Jr. Mr. Burleigh has brown hair, hazel eyes, round cheeks and a puckish grin. At 48, he still looks boyish.
That started to change, however, as Kevin Haney, a Hollywood makeup artist, retrieved an individually cast silicone ear, an individually cast silicone eye bag and so on, and methodically covered Mr. Burleigh in a thin layer of Trump.
“What is the toxicity of this stuff?” Mr. Burleigh asked, as Mr. Haney brushed a Q-tip dipped in denatured alcohol against the silicone replica of Donald Trump’s left cheek glued to Mr. Burleigh’s face.
“It’s all medical grade — completely safe,” Mr. Haney said.
Recruited by Mr. Nolen more than a year ago, Mr. Burleigh has made three brief appearances as President Trump at Southern California comedy clubs. Now, Mr. Haney is prepping him for his first official paid gig in the role, a private party in a restaurant.
No character, however, has ever challenged him like Mr. Trump has.
Mr. Nolen believes he can blame it all on James B. Comey, the former director of the F.B.I.
Like many people, Mr. Nolen had started paying attention to the 2016 presidential election well before the primaries got underway, though his interest was driven by a tragedy several years earlier.
While Steve Bridges’s busiest year as President Bush was in 2006, he continued to get jobs for this portrayal well after Mr. Bush left office. In 2012, days after the 48-year-old Mr. Bridges had returned from playing Mr. Bush in China, he died unexpectedly.
In the two years afterward, Mr. Nolen tried to develop other acts built around what he calls “likeness prosthetics,” but nothing came to fruition.
And when that happened, he reasoned, the Democrats would have to replace her with a last-minute stand-in. So Mr. Nolen started looking for someone who could play Joe Biden.
“Within seconds, I could tell he was the guy I was looking for,” Mr. Nolen said.
Mr. Burleigh, who impersonates a wide range of Hollywood celebrities, had never thought to include Joe Biden in his act.
But he did know all about the success Steve Bridges had playing George W. Bush. At his peak, Mr. Bridges had earned far more to play the president than the president himself earned in salary for the job.
Anticipating a similar payday, Mr. Burleigh signed a contract with Mr. Nolen.
Mr. Nolen was wrong about Mr. Biden. He was also wrong in initially thinking Mr. Trump didn’t have a real shot at winning.
That, Mr. Nolen believed, was enough to turn the tide.
On Election Day, Mr. Burleigh was on a cruise ship in the Caribbean, drinking in the crew bar at 4 a.m., after performing a gig that night.
What Do You Get From a Glut of TV?
The first time that Mr. Haney built a new face for Mr. Burleigh in July, Mr. Burleigh thought he ended up looking more like Liberace than Donald Trump. “Randy kept saying, ‘This is just a test.’ But I was worried,” Mr. Burleigh said.
The second time, one of the other comics at the club where Mr. Burleigh performed just sat there and glared at him. “She was looking at Dave like he was some evil creature,” Mr. Nolen said.
With Mr. Bridges, Mr. Haney got so good at simulating the look of Mr. Bush that people sometimes thought they were meeting the actual president when shaking his hand.
To achieve even that level of verisimilitude takes around four hours and a great deal of patience. As Mr. Haney blended the edges of various silicone pieces, Mr. Burleigh held a small red fan to his face to mitigate the fumes from the solvents.
Once Mr. Haney finished applying the silicone, he started using a low-pressure spray gun to speckle it with tiny dots of color — mostly reds, pinks and browns.
Mr. Burleigh, too, has no intention of turning Mr. Trump into an Oompa Loompa.
Steve Bridges certainly did that with George W. Bush. Indeed, as President Bush’s approval ratings dropped in the face of endless war and a slowing economy, Mr. Bridges’s popularity grew.
In the Trump era, when it sometimes feels as if we are no more than a tweet away from nuclear war, civil war or nuclear civil war, there are millions of people who have zero interest in a similarly sympathetic depiction of Mr. Trump.
And there are millions of people who are no doubt tired of seeing Mr. Trump depicted only as a sour buffoon or an evil mastermind. In a recent tweet, the president himself pressed for “Equal Time” on the nation’s late-night TV shows.
At 5:38 p.m., Mr. Haney finally stepped away from Mr. Burleigh. After sitting with low-energy calm for more than three and a half hours, Mr. Burleigh burst into motion. He ducked into a nearby closet, where he put on a fat suit that gives him a pot belly and some larger-than-average junk in the trunk.
Finally, Mr. Burleigh slid on a wig that is essentially a horseshoe-like fringe of white-blond hair that leaves the top of his head bald.
It’s temporary — he is having a better one made, at a cost of $10,000, by a wig maker who has designed pieces for Cher and Jennifer Aniston. Her services are in such high demand that she won’t be able to complete it for several weeks.
That was why Mr. Burleigh was working in a baseball hat — the one Mr. Trump wore on his visit to post-hurricane Houston.
As Mr. Burleigh exited the hotel lobby and started to walk down the street, diners inside a nearby restaurant spotted him through the window and whipped out their cellphones to take photos. Passers-by slowed and did double takes.
After a couple of blocks, Mr. Burleigh broke left with statesmanlike authority, toward the staff entrance of the 555 East American Steakhouse. As he waited outside for his cue to enter, Mari Okumura, Mr. Haney’s assistant, dabbed at the left side of Mr. Burleigh’s face in a last-minute attempt to improve the contouring of his plump, patrician jowl.
“Good to be here. Great to be here,” Mr. Burleigh purred from behind a podium at the front of the room. “I was expecting more people. My birthday party had a billion people.
Mr. Burleigh played the president in his schmoozy, self-satisfied M.C. mode — not rousing the rabble so much as nuzzling it.
As he made jokes about building a wall between Long Beach and Orange County, and the record he set at nearby Trump International Golf Course — “I shot an 18” — restaurant staff drifted over to watch, holding up their smartphones to take photos.
And when Mr. Burleigh closed his act by singing “Happy Birthday” to the 80-year-old guest of honor, everyone in the room joined in with great strength and stamina, buoyed by the bonhomie of Mr. Burleigh’s engaging presence.
Not just because Mr. Burleigh effectively sanitized the president by avoiding topics of any controversy, but also in the way he elevated him.
