They won the baby ballerina lottery.
This will be Alex’s first time in the part; it’s Maria’s second. But they’re both “Nutcracker” veterans: Maria started out as the Bunny, and Alex was first an Angel.
Only two girls are chosen for this prized role, made even more famous by Jill Krementz’s “A Very Young Dancer,” a 1976 photographic look at the life of a ballet student who played Marie.
In the ballet, Marie is given the gift of a Nutcracker by the magical Herr Drosselmeier at a holiday party. At night, the toy turns into a prince; together, Marie and the Prince battle mice, brave a snowstorm and end up in the Land of the Sweets, where the Sugarplum Fairy awaits.
About 40 percent of the students in the School of American Ballet’s children’s division — two casts of 64 — dance in “The Nutcracker.” Rehearsals last eight and a half weeks. And while appearing in the production, which runs Nov. 24-Dec. 31, is extracurricular, it gives the students at the school affiliated with the company a valuable chance to learn exactly how class work can lead to the stage.
Being a good student is one thing. But Maria and Alex are something more — they’re exceptional Maries, the kind that don’t come along every year. They have the ability to execute their steps and the dramatic imagination to play a girl (and not a ballerina girl) who finds herself in an enchanted world.
It’s a lot for an 11-year-old to handle. During a recent rehearsal they ran through scenes, with their princes and without: Maria is dancing with Tenzin Niles, 10, and Alex is partnered by Aaron Plous, 12. After Alex performed, she sat down to watch her friend. Maria glanced over and gave her not one, but two thumbs up.
And they do practice it so many times. They train and rehearse six days a week — and then, of course, there’s school. (They’re in sixth grade.) But they don’t seem to find juggling both a struggle or a sacrifice.
In the girls’ down time, they like to relax — which sometimes means even more dancing, but at home. And they listen to music. Maria prefers classical and a little bit of jazz. Alex has a thing for David Bowie. Each morning, she wakes up to the same Bowie song.
We chatted after the girls’ rehearsal — edited excerpts from the conversation are below — but their dancing day wasn’t over: They still had an evening class. To help get them back into their bodies, who better to send them off than David Bowie? I played Alex’s wake-up song on my laptop, and she gave a hearty whoop. Maria laughed in delight as her friend, arms outstretched, spun away. With a tandem “Bye!” they slipped through the door — stealthily, gracefully and in giggles.
Do you have a moment that you look forward to in the ballet?
ALEX GRAYSON My favorite part is Snow because it’s so magical and really pretty.
MARIA KASHVILI I like to steal some of the snow. I have a whole collection of souvenirs from “The Nutcracker.” I have Polichinelle pompoms. Little jingle bells that fell off of one of the Candy Cane costumes. A little feather from a soldier’s hat. They’re in my jewelry box.
How do you like being spun on the bed?
MARIA It’s very nauseating. You get kind of dizzy.
Do you ever feel like you’re going to fall off? Sometimes those bed spinners go a little crazy.
MARIA I finally told my bed boys to take it easy. And then they made it even faster! And sometimes when it spins around especially fast, I feel like I’m going to fall off into the orchestra pit. I’ve never been on a roller-coaster, and I never want to.
How do you feel about your princes? Is it strange to dance with a boy?
MARIA It’s kind of weird. But I got used to it since I’ve had to dance with so many boys over so many performances.
ALEX I’m not really bothered by it because as long as I’m friends with the person who I’m working with, it’s not that awkward. The first year in the party scene, Ms. Abergel said, “And now you’re going to have to hold hands with the boy,” and everyone went, “Ewww!” It got easier.
What is it like to imagine living in the world of the 1800s?
MARIA I always wanted to live in the olden times. It’s so much simpler. It feels a little bit like time travel.
Does the costume help put you into that frame of mind?
MARIA The first time I was Marie and I wore the dress — I had been in it for fittings and I thought it was O.K. — but opening night you’re extra nervous because you’re worried about what’s going to happen, what it’s going to feel like. [Pauses] The dress wasn’t really helping. Sometimes those dressers put it on so tight that you can barely breathe. I remember in “Swan Lake” everyone could barely breathe in those costumes.
ALEX It was like cardboard. When you tried to curtsy you couldn’t really bend down.
Are you exhausted by the end of the run?
ALEX I’m more exhausted during the run and then I kind of just relax at the end. It’s sad at the end, but it’s also kind of nice because I’m so tired and kind of stressed out during the performances. But then it feels good.
MARIA Well, it is kind of hard. But in the end you really feel like you’ve had an accomplishment.  You forget all your troubles. All the tiredness goes away.