Federal prosecutors on Wednesday filed charges accusing the driver in the Manhattan truck attack of carrying out a long-planned plot, spurred by Islamic State propaganda videos, to kill people celebrating Halloween.
The charges describe the driver, Sayfullo Saipov, 29, as a voracious consumer and meticulous student of ISIS propaganda, and detail how he said he was spurred to attack by an ISIS video questioning the killing of Muslims in Iraq. They say he began planning the attack about a year ago and, after taking a test run in a Home Depot rental truck last week, chose Halloween to carry it out because more people would be on the streets.
The charges were filed in civilian court, and not the military system set up for foreign terrorists, a decision that flew in the face of Mr. Trump’s broadsides against the criminal justice system. Mr. Trump said he was open to trying Mr. Saipov instead in military court at the American prison at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba.
Read the criminal complaint against Sayfullo Saipov.
Mr. Saipov, accused of killing eight people and injuring 12 in the attack, was pushed into a Manhattan federal courtroom in a wheelchair just after 6 p.m. on Wednesday. He sat slightly hunched, his rail-thin body dressed in a gray shirt and gray pants. His hair stuck up slightly in the back. His hands and feet were chained. Five guards stood behind him.
He nodded along as Judge Moses read his rights, but sat still and impassive when she read the charges against him: one count of providing material support to terrorists and one count of violence and destruction of a motor vehicle causing death.
The vehicle charge, which carries the possibility of the death penalty, raised the prospect of a rare capital case being brought to trial in New York.
David E. Patton, the chief federal public defender in New York City, who was representing Mr. Saipov, asked that he receive a daily change of dressing on the wounds he sustained after being shot by a police officer.
“He is in a significant amount of pain,” Mr. Patton said.
The grievous injuries to victims, the scope of the inquiry and Mr. Saipov’s path toward extremism all began coming into view on Wednesday. The F.B.I., after saying it was trying to learn more about a second Uzbek man in connection with the attack, later announced that investigators had found the man, Mukhammadzoir Kadirov, 32, in New Jersey. It was not clear why federal authorities wanted to question him in connection with the attack.
The authorities questioned Mr. Saipov after he waived his Miranda rights at a Manhattan hospital, the complaint says. They were also questioning Mr. Saipov’s wife, Nozima Odilova, who was cooperating, law enforcement officials said. The couple live in Paterson, N.J., and have three children.
As investigators looked into whether Mr. Saipov’s Uzbek contacts may have handed him off to an ISIS operative, they pieced together parts of his past, law enforcement officials said. He attended a wedding in Florida of an Uzbek man who was under scrutiny by the F.B.I. But his attendance didn’t trigger a separate investigation of him, the officials said.
Investigators were still looking into whether Mr. Saipov had links to other federal counterterrorism inquiries.
The F.B.I. was uncovering details that sent agents on a far-ranging chase for leads.
But several crucial facts remain unclear. It is not known if the F.B.I. is still investigating the Uzbek man whose wedding Mr. Saipov attended. And as investigators built out concentric circles of his associates, they are still looking at whether Mr. Saipov had direct connections with ISIS operatives.
Even so, the federal complaint filed against Mr. Saipov said he hewed closely to instructions last November in an ISIS magazine, Rumiyah, for a vehicle attack. After plowing his Home Depot rental truck down a bike path along the Hudson River that teemed with pedestrians and cyclists and crashing into a school bus, the complaint said, he jumped out of the truck, yelled “Allahu akbar” (Arabic for “God is great”) and waved a paintball gun and a pellet gun.
The Rumiyah instructions called for followers to carry secondary weapons so they could continue an attack after crashing the vehicle, and Mr. Saipov did so, the complaint said: He had a bag of knives in the truck “but was unable to reach them before exiting.” There was also a stun gun on the floor of the truck near the driver’s seat, according to the complaint.
“He appears to have followed almost to a T the instructions that ISIS has put out,” John J. Miller, the New York Police Department’s deputy commissioner for intelligence and counterterrorism, said at a news conference on Wednesday morning.
Those who knew Mr. Saipov said he had been turning toward extremism for years since arriving in the United States in 2010.
Mirrakhmat Muminov, a truck driver and community activist in Stow, Ohio, said Mr. Saipov became aggressive and grew out his beard during his three years there. Mr. Muminov said he grew concerned about Mr. Saipov’s temper, including how heated he became when he discussed American policies regarding Israel.
Mr. Saipov created more unease when he moved to Florida. Abdul, an imam at a Tampa mosque who spoke on the condition that only his first name be used because he feared reprisals from other radicals, said he worried Mr. Saipov was misinterpreting Islam and urged him to calm down and study the religion.
In the two months since Mr. Saipov “decided to use a truck in order to inflict maximum damage against civilians,” the complaint said, he began plotting assiduously. Nine days beforehand, he rented a Home Depot pickup truck so he could practice making turns, according to the complaint.
He also rehearsed the route from New Jersey, over the George Washington Bridge and down the West Side of Manhattan in an Uber car he drove in the days before the incident, a law enforcement official said.
On Tuesday, he asked to rent the Home Depot truck for a short while, though he never intended to return it, the complaint said. He planned to drive all the way south to the Brooklyn Bridge, but he made it only as far as Chambers Street.
 Nine people remained hospitalized from injuries on Wednesday, officials said, four of them critically injured but in stable condition. The injuries ranged from the amputation of multiple limbs to serious head, neck and back trauma.
