WASHINGTON — Floyd Abrams is the nation’s most prominent First Amendment lawyer, and he almost always argues in favor of free speech. But he has struggled with the case of a Colorado baker who refused to create a wedding cake for a gay couple.
Charged with discrimination, the baker said that forcing him to bake a cake for a same-sex wedding would hijack his constitutional right to express himself. Mr. Abrams’s first impulse was to agree.
In the end, Mr. Abrams signed a brief supporting the gay couple, David Mullins and Charlie Craig. It was one of close to 100 friend-of-the-court briefs filed in the case, an extraordinary number. Among the most interesting ones are from deeply committed First Amendment experts who have struggled to find the right balance between protected expression and unlawful discrimination.
The case, Masterpiece Cakeshop v. Colorado Civil Rights Commission, No. 16-111, will be argued before the Supreme Court next month. It has tested deep and longstanding commitments to free speech, and it has divided old allies.
Consider Eugene Volokh, a leading First Amendment scholar who teaches at the University of California, Los Angeles. In 2013, he filed a brief supporting a wedding photographer who refused to document a same-sex union.
“Photographers, writers, singers, actors, painters and others who create First Amendment-protected speech must have the right to decide which commissions to take and which to reject,” Professor Volokh wrote in the brief, which he filed with Dale Carpenter, a law professor, and the Cato Institute, the libertarian group.
In the new case, Professor Volokh is on the other side. Cakes may be tasty and pretty, he wrote in a brief supporting the couple, but creating them is not expression protected by the First Amendment.
Professor Carpenter agreed. But the Cato Institute took the opposite view, filing a brief supporting the baker, Jack Phillips. “The fact that Jack’s media are icing and chocolate rather than ink or paint does nothing to diminish the artistic content of his work,” the brief said.
Ilya Shapiro, a lawyer with Cato, said he and his former allies agreed on the basic principles. Writers, singers, actors and painters are entitled to protection, he said, while caterers and limousine drivers are not. Bakers are a hard case, he said, because they are close to the line.
Professor Volokh agreed, saying the dispute was over where, not whether, a line should be drawn.
Other prominent First Amendment scholars who generally take strong free speech positions also signed that brief, including Kathleen M. Sullivan, a former dean of Stanford Law School, and Geoffrey R. Stone, a former dean of the University of Chicago Law School. The brief was filed by Walter Dellinger, who was acting solicitor general in the Clinton administration.
There are big names on the other side, too. Among them are Michael W. McConnell of Stanford, Richard W. Garnett of Notre Dame and Randy E. Barnett of Georgetown, who signed a brief supporting Mr. Phillips, the baker. “The state’s effort to compel Phillips to use his artistic talents in a manner violative of his sincere convictions offends the vital constitutional commitment to freedom of expression,” the brief said.
Professor Volokh said that approach was too broad. The First Amendment, he said, protects only conduct that is inherently expressive or both meant and likely to send a message.
He said his disagreement with the Cato Institute about confectionary expression demonstrated that it was not always easy to decide what warrants First Amendment protection.
