While raising their daughter on rugged Orcas Island, Stacey Coleman and Shelley Kimball gave her treasure maps, rusty locks and eye patches to play with. “We more or less raised her like a pirate,” Mr. Coleman said.
Rather, Mr. Coleman, 62, and Ms. Kimball, 64, who ran a restaurant and store on the island in the northwest corner of Washington, concocted elaborate outdoor treasure hunts amid farm fields and forest for their daughter, Theodora Kimball Coleman, and her friends.
But after she left for college in 2004, the parents found themselves craving a more urban adventure.
They moved to Pasadena, Calif., in 2007, opened a new store and called it Gold Bug, after an Edgar Allan Poe story about buried treasure. Advertised as a “contemporary cabinet of curiosities,” the store resembles an outré natural history museum with artist-made products like armored copper lamps standing on brass octopus tentacles and hawk’s feet; bird and snake specimens mounted in frames as art; and rings cradling large chunks of rock crystal and pyrite.
In 2013, they bought a steep 3.5-acre lot for $135,000, with wetlands on one side and views of the water and distant Olympic Mountains on the other, and commissioned the Seattle-based architecture firm Heliotrope to design a house.
In response, Mr. Herrin’s firm designed a low-slung, high-contrast 1,600-square-foot box clad in black painted steel, with cuts for porches and windows highlighted by smooth white stucco. The architects added expanses of glass for taking in the views, balanced with enough wall space for displaying art, and kept the material palette to a minimum: polished concrete floors, Carrara marble counters, more stucco in the showers and white paint.
“There’s almost no visible hardware on anything,” Mr. Herrin said, including the custom fronts covering the Ikea cabinets in the kitchen. “We just beveled the edges,” he noted, to create integrated finger pulls.
Two bedrooms with en-suite bathrooms are positioned on either side of the living room: one for the owners and the other for their daughter. A studio is separated from the living quarters by an integrated carport that doubles as an outdoor dining area in inclement weather.
“We have a large limestone table on wheels that we can just roll out when the weather is poor,” Mr. Coleman said.
Construction was completed last fall for about $850,000, and he and Ms. Kimball have since been alternating visits to the house with their daughter, ensuring that at least one family member is always in Pasadena to mind the store.
The objects recently on display in the house included a preserved blue-and-gold macaw framed by Christopher Marley, decorative wall-mounted ceramic hearts by FOS Ceramiche, multi-armed glass orbs by Andy Paiko and taxidermy beavers with crowns. Despite the owners’ desire to create a home-cum-gallery, however, nature may be winning out.
