The International Olympic Committee’s decision next week on how to punish Russia will be informed by diaries seen exclusively by The New York Times.
The chemist has kept a diary most of his life. His daily habit is to record where he went, whom he talked to and what he ate. At the top of each entry, he scrawls his blood pressure.
Two of his hardback journals, each embossed with the calendar year and filled with handwritten notes from a Waterman pen, are now among the critical pieces of evidence that could result in Russia being absent from the next Olympic Games.
The chemist is Grigory Rodchenkov, who spent years helping Russia’s athletes gain an edge by using banned substances. His diaries cataloging 2014 and 2015 — his final years as Russia’s antidoping lab chief before he fled to the United States — provide a new level of detail about Russia’s elaborate cheating at the last Winter Games and the extent to which, he says, the nation’s government and Olympic officials were involved.
His contemporaneous notes, seen by The New York Times and previously unreported, speak to a key issue for Olympic officials: the state’s involvement in the massive sports fraud. In recent days, it has become clear that the International Olympic Committee is convinced of the authenticity of the notes and that they are likely to contribute to the group’s decision to issue severe penalties.
Olympic officials will announce their decision on Dec. 5. If they do not bar Russia completely from the coming Winter Olympics in Pyeongchang, South Korea, they are likely to keep all Russian emblems out of the Games: The Russian flag would not fly at the opening and closing ceremonies, Russian athletes would compete in neutral uniforms and the Russian anthem would not be played. Such restrictions, Russian officials have said, would be tantamount to an outright ban, and Russia would consider boycotting the 2018 Olympics.
Together with Dr. Rodchenkov’s sworn statements, the diaries detail specific discussions about cheating that he conducted with prominent officials including Vitaly Mutko, Russia’s sports minister at the time who is now the nation’s deputy prime minister; Yuri Nagornykh, Mutko’s former deputy sports minister, who also belonged to Russia’s Olympic Committee; and Irina Rodionova, the former deputy director of the center of sports preparation of national teams of Russia.
“6:20 a.m. Nagornykh woke me up — we have to see Mutko today. I swam in the pool — the water is ice-cold...I had breakfast, came to work early — got all the materials ready for Mutko,” Rodchenkov wrote on Feb. 3.
Later that day, he wrote, he met with the sports minister, Vitaly Mutko, and his deputy in Mutko’s office in Sochi. “We went over all the issues. He wants to preserve Sochi as a backup facility.
Alongside those consequential conversations, Dr. Rodchenkov recorded the mundane details of his life — simple errands like buying a Bounty chocolate bar at Sochi’s central market along with cold medicine for Thierry Boghosian, the international lab inspector who never detected Russia’s brazen breaches of drug-testing during the three weeks of the Sochi Games.
On Jan. 13, 2014, Dr. Rodchenkov wrote that Ms. Rodionova’s assistant, Aleksey Kiushkin, had brought him a drug cocktail known among the officials as Duchess, a mixture of three anabolic steroids and Martini-brand vermouth. Dr. Rodchenkov had formulated the drink for top athletes to take throughout the Olympics, and Ms. Rodionova prepared and distributed it to coaches and athletes.
“Kiushkin came with tons of news. He also brought a freshly-made Martini. I took it right away,” wrote Dr. Rodchenkov, who regularly tested drugs on himself and documented their effects.
On Feb. 1, he followed instructions that Mr. Nagornykh, the deputy minister, had given him at the Azimut hotel the night before. Dr. Rodchenkov inspected the building adjacent to his lab, controlled by the Federal Security Service, he said. The stockpiled urine had arrived in Sochi and was surreptitiously stored there, he wrote, but he was maddened that the samples were not sorted by sport or alphabetized by each corresponding athlete’s name.
On Feb. 3, four days before the Sochi Games began, Dr. Rodchenkov’s preparations culminated with his presentation to Mr. Mutko, the sports minister. In a meeting at Mr. Mutko’s office at the local organizing committee’s headquarters, Dr. Rodchenkov wrote that day, he had handed Mr. Mutko a copy of the “Duchess list,” naming the dozens of Russian Olympians who were ingesting the drug cocktail and would have their incriminating urine swapped out with their prestocked clean urine.
Russian athletes could have been medal contenders in about a third of the 102 events at next year’s Winter Olympic Games.
At that meeting, according to the diary entry, the minister suggested keeping the Olympic laboratory open after the Games, as a place to experiment with new frontiers of doping.
Five days later, at the Azimut Hotel in Sochi, the minister followed up, requesting Dr. Rodchenkov put in writing a request to keep the lab open, which Dr. Rodchenkov did that evening as he drank tea, he wrote on Feb. 8.
Following multiple investigative reports published last year, Russia’s coordinated cheating has been accepted as fact among top Olympic officials, in spite of a largely defiant response from Russian authorities that has grown fiercer in recent weeks. This fall, Russia criminally charged Rodchenkov with abuse of authority and indicated it would request his extradition. Authorities had previously seized his property in Moscow, where his family remains.
Russian officials have suggested Dr. Rodchenkov acted alone in tampering with more than 100 incriminating urine samples in Sochi, an act which has so far led the global officials to order Russia to return 11 Olympic medals. “One can hardly steal a victory that has already been won,” a Kremlin spokesman said Monday about those disqualifications.
President Vladimir V. Putin has forcefully disputed the state’s involvement, a question that could be the difference between a full ban of the nation’s athletes and a lesser punishment, such as barring the Russian anthem from playing at the 2018 Games.
But consequences are expected to extend beyond the Winter Games, as the widespread cheating that investigators confirmed stretched across seasons, sports and years — as Dr. Rodchenkov also closely detailed discussing with Russia’s most powerful sports officials in his journals.
Months later, on March 14, 2014, Dr. Rodchenkov wrote that he had sat in his car, charging his phone, while talking to Mr. Mutko, who had called to “let me have it” for not effectively covering up Ms. Lashmanova’s drug use.
On April 21, 2014, Dr. Rodchenkov debated with Mr. Nagornykh whether to falsify Ms. Lashmanova’s record, something the deputy minister was advocating but Dr. Rodchenkov feared would draw the attention of global regulators and jeopardize his lab’s accreditation, he said.
In July 2014, Ms. Lashmanova was suspended.
Last year, after an initial investigation commissioned by the international regulator of drugs in sports had confirmed Dr. Rodchenkov’s account, the Russian government dismissed Mr. Nagornykh, Natalia Zhelanova and Ms. Rodionova. Putin elevated Mr. Mutko to deputy premier in October 2016.
In an interview with The Times last year, Mr. Mutko distanced himself from Dr. Rodchenkov, saying his deputy, Mr. Nagornykh, had managed preparations for Sochi.
“6:30, I took a shower, had a smoke, got ready, had hot cereal and farmer’s cheese at breakfast,” Rodchenkov wrote on Feb. 17. That day he presented to the International Olympic Committee’s medical commission, after which he briefed the sports minister and deputy minister.
Dr. Rodchenkov and his lawyer say the contemporaneous notes make clear he was a foot soldier in a system that was controlled at the highest levels of the state. Documents published Monday by the International Olympic Committee indicate they, too, accept his account.
“Dr. Rodchenkov was telling the truth when he provided explanations of the cover-up scheme he managed,” Olympic officials wrote in the first disciplinary decision related to the Russian doping scandal, justifying a lifetime ban for the 19th Russian athlete so far disciplined for the Sochi schemes.
While it is unclear if the entire Russian national team will be penalized for the cheating, Thomas Bach, president of the International Olympic Committee, suggested this month that the coming sanctions will be more severe than those levied ahead of the 2016 Summer Games in Rio de Janeiro, from which more than 100 athletes were barred.
“It is about the manipulation of the antidoping system of the Olympic Games,” Mr. Bach said in an interview with The Times. “These are our tests, and this is the lab of the Olympic Games, and therefore our position now is very much different” than it was ahead of Rio.
Dr. Rodchenkov is living in an undisclosed location in the United States under protection by American authorities. His lawyer said Dr. Rodchenkov had been fully cooperative with American and international agencies concerning Russia’s doping program.
“If the I.O.C. fails to act to severely punish this frontal assault on the integrity of the Olympics, it will forever lose the moral authority to punish any cheaters,” said the lawyer, Jim Walden, of the firm Walden, Macht and Haran.
Dr. Rodchenkov told The Times last year that he had recorded the details of his work in Moscow somewhat mindfully, and not on a computer — as his friend Nikita Kamayev, Russia’s former antidoping chief who died suddenly in 2016, had done. It was Mr. Kamayev who gave Dr. Rodchenkov the black and gold Waterman pen he used for his diaries.
Dr. Rodchenkov attributed Mr. Kamayev’s sudden death to his announcement that he was writing a book, from which Dr. Rodchenkov said he tried to dissuade him.
