Climate|Trump Ignores Climate Change. That’s Very Bad for Disaster Planners.
Trump Ignores Climate Change. That’s Very Bad for Disaster Planners.
When Hurricane Irma swept through the Florida Keys in September, it brought a vivid preview of the damage that climate change could inflict on the region in the decades ahead.
The storm washed out two sections of the highway connecting the Keys, leaving residents stranded for days. With ocean levels rising around these low-lying islands, however, that interruption could end up seeming minor: By 2030, almost half the county’s roads could be affected by flooding.
“We know that the water isn’t going away,” said Rhonda Haag, the sustainability director for Monroe County, which is preparing to elevate vulnerable roadways in the Keys. But the task is so costly, up to $7 million per mile of road, that the county may ultimately require outside help.
In Washington, the Federal Emergency Management Agency is leading recovery efforts that could cost taxpayers more than $50 billion after devastating storms hit Texas, Florida, Puerto Rico and the United States Virgin Islands. At the same time, the agency is wrestling with an even harder problem: how to help communities prepare for future flooding disasters that could be far more severe than anything seen this year.
Complicating that task is the fact that the Trump administration has largely been hostile to discussions of global warming. In August, a week before Hurricane Harvey made landfall in Texas, President Trump rescinded an Obama-era executive order that urged federal agencies to take into account climate change and sea-level rise when rebuilding infrastructure.
Climate change remains a polarizing topic in the nation’s capital, and FEMA is caught in the middle. A recent report from the Government Accountability Office warned that rising sea levels and heavier downpours fueled by global warming could increase flooding costs in coastal communities by $23 billion per year by midcentury unless they start adapting now.
As the hurricane season unfolded, administration officials began hinting that they would craft a new federal flood standard, though it is unclear whether it would take into account climate-change forecasts. And, Mr. Wright said, FEMA is still moving forward with other initiatives aimed at helping states and cities defend against future floods. Even states led by governors who reject climate science, like those in Wisconsin and Florida, are now taking steps to prepare for the worsening flood risks climate change could bring.
But the controversy around the climate rule illustrates how tricky preparing for future disasters can be in today’s political landscape, especially since experts argue that adapting to stronger storms and several feet of sea level rise could require upfront investments beyond what the federal government has been willing to consider to date.
Most of the planning for floods happens at the state and local level, with officials making decisions about where to build homes or how high to elevate buildings in floodplains. But if a severe disaster like a hurricane strikes, the federal government typically steps in with aid for recovery.
That, experts say, can lead to a type of moral hazard. Studies have shown that one dollar invested in pre-disaster mitigation can prevent four dollars in average losses. But if cities aren’t paying the full price for those losses, they may have less incentive to take costly or difficult measures to avoid flooding in the first place — like restricting development along coasts.
Under the National Flood Insurance Program, FEMA maps areas of the country at risk of flooding and requires homeowners in those zones to buy federal insurance polices and communities to enforce minimum construction standards, like elevating new homes above the 100-year floodplain, the area with a 1 percent probability of a flood in any given year.
Yet there’s broad consensus that the flood insurance program is inadequate, partly because its maps are often outdated and don’t take into account future flood risks from expanding development or climate change, and partly because those minimum standards have often proved insufficient in the face of severe floods.
Because Congress is unlikely to refuse aid to desperate citizens after a major flood, FEMA often has to strategically nudge localities into taking preventive action.
After Hurricane Sandy battered the Northeast in 2012, FEMA officials took a harder look at what else the agency might do to encourage stronger flood preparation — particularly as climate scientists were warning that floods were expected to get worse over time.
Another Obama-era change: In order to qualify for disaster aid, states would have to consider the effects of climate change in the hazard mitigation plans they submit to FEMA every five years, detailing the risks they face from floods and other disasters, as well as possible steps they might take to minimize losses.
FEMA also began folding climate adaptation into a program that allows cities to receive discounts on their flood-insurance premiums if they take additional steps to reduce their flood risk. Under the Community Rating System, cities can now get credit for planning for the effects of rising sea levels. Officials in the Florida Keys are planning to take advantage of these credits as they map their vulnerable roadways.
A week before Mr. Trump entered the White House, FEMA also unveiled a proposal for a “public assistance deductible,” in which states would be responsible for a greater portion of the cost of disaster recovery unless they took steps like enacting stricter building codes to limit exposure to disasters. While this proposal, which is not yet implemented, may face pushback from states and homebuilders, environmentalists and fiscal conservatives say it could lessen the moral hazard around flood policy.
Since coming to office, Mr. Trump has moved quickly to repeal Obama-era policies focused on curbing the greenhouse gas emissions causing climate change and has vowed to withdraw the United States from the Paris climate accord.
But, apart from the rollback of Mr. Obama’s flood order, the Trump administration has been more restrained in directly targeting measures aimed at adapting to future disasters. While the Environmental Protection Agency has scrubbed mentions of global warming from its website, FEMA’s climate adaptation page remains.
Mr. Wright, who has held his FEMA position since 2013, said the agency was still pursuing many of the mitigation efforts begun under the previous administration, while working to quadruple investments in pre-disaster mitigation by 2023. And administration officials are now contemplating a new federal flood standard that could guide post-disaster rebuilding efforts.
Alice C. Hill, who helped develop the Obama administration’s climate resilience strategy, had a different concern: Unless the administration was actively engaged on adaptation efforts, it was less likely that such programs would expand in the future.
For example, in 2012, Congress created an advisory council to help FEMA improve its flood insurance program maps. The council has made dozens of recommendations, including ways that FEMA could produce maps that accounted for climate risks to help communities plan for the future.
But the task is costly, requiring airborne mapping of much of the country, and Congress hasn’t provided sufficient funds for FEMA to implement it. And in his first budget, Mr. Trump proposed further cuts to mapping programs.
That framing may catch on. In October, Representative Mark Sanford, Republican of South Carolina, wrote a letter with 14 other lawmakers calling on the White House to reinstate a federal flood standard. The letter avoided mention of climate change, but noted that flood disasters were getting worse over time — and federal taxpayers were on the hook.
While climate experts praised some of the steps FEMA has taken to push localities to prepare for climate change, they argue that far more is needed.
In the Florida Keys, scientists project that ocean levels may rise between 2 and 7 inches by 2030, and between 9 and 24 inches by 2060.
“We can probably handle what’s happening over the next 20 years, but when we look beyond that, that’s a very different conversation,” Ms. Haag said. If sea-level rise ends up at the high end of current projections, the Keys may need more extensive aid from the state or federal governments to adapt.
Robert S. Young, who directs the Program for the Study of Developed Shorelines, asserts that federal lawmakers may eventually have to take more drastic steps. In the 1980s, Congress passed the Coastal Barrier Resource Act, which identified barrier islands most at risk of flooding and declared the federal government would no longer send aid to those areas.
A move like that would be politically explosive. In 2012, Congress passed a bill to reduce subsidies for federal flood insurance in high-risk areas, to better reflect the hazards involved. But after protests from homeowners, Congress partly reversed itself two years later.
