CUBA AND THE CAMERAMAN on Netflix. Starting in the early 1970s, the filmmaker John Alpert traveled to Cuba to document the life there, centering on a family of poor farmers under the evolving regime of Fidel Castro. Then something unexpected happened: Mr. Alpert became friends with Castro himself, interviewing him several times, including on a flight to New York for his October 1979 speech at the United Nations. This expansive and intimate documentary examines Cuba both from the dictator’s seat and from the ground up, with scenes capturing the country’s economic decline, tourism boom and response to Castro’s death in 2016.
LOVE ACTUALLY (2003) 6 p.m. on CMT. It’s the day after Thanksgiving, which, of course, means that Christmas season has arrived in full force. Usher in the season with Richard Curtis’s big-hearted, scattershot film, which weaves together vaguely interconnected tales of love, sex and heartbreak over London. Bill Nighy takes center stage as the narcissistic daredevil Billy Mack, but it’s Laura Linney who gives the movie its tender core as the overextended yet helplessly smitten Sarah. And look for a certain “Game of Thrones” star as a head-over-heels tyke.
HEY ARNOLD! THE JUNGLE MOVIE 7 p.m. on Nickelodeon. Millennials have successfully smuggled bits of their childhood into modern pop culture: “The Magic School Bus” is back on Netflix, and whole NBA teams have turned to posting “Arthur” memes to gloat or sulk after games. On Friday, everyone’s favorite football-headed kid returns for another adventure that picks up where the 2002 finale “The Journal” ended. The kids from P.S. 118 head to the jungles of the fictional Central American republic of San Lorenzo, where a field trip turns into a search for Arnold’s long lost parents.
GRAMMYS GREATEST STORIES: A 60TH ANNIVERSARY SPECIAL 9 p.m. on CBS. For every misguided, ill-fitting Grammy collaboration that should have never existed, there’s an unforgettable performance of a superstar at the peak of their abilities. Hosted by Carrie Underwood and John Legend, this special looks back at some of those moments — from Aretha Franklin replacing an ailing Pavarotti at the last minute to sing “Nessun Dorma” to Christina Aguilera in a career-defining performance of “Beautiful.” Interviews and archival footage feature Elton John, Paul McCartney, Bruce Springsteen, U2 and more.