Welcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown that lets you sleep — and lets us get paid to watch comedy. What do you think of it? What else are you interested in? Let us know |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Stephen Colbert devoted a full segment of Tuesday’s “Late Show” to the sexual misconduct allegations that have been lodged against Roy Moore, the Republican candidate for Alabama’s open Senate seat. Mr. Colbert focused on reports that when Mr. Moore was in his 30s, he was known to spend time in Alabama shopping malls, chatting with teenage girls.
Mr. Colbert was especially outraged when he heard that Mr. Moore had reportedly flirted for years with a young woman who dressed up as Santa’s helper at a mall, eventually asking her out when she was 16.
Attorney General Jeff Sessions testified on Tuesday before the House Judiciary Committee as part of the investigation into Russia’s role in the 2016 presidential election. As he had in testimony in October, Mr. Sessions often said that he could not answer questions being posed to him because he could not remember the issue in question.
Mr. Colbert parodied Mr. Sessions for repeatedly saying that his memory had failed him.
President Trump on Tuesday concluded his 12-day tour of Asia. On “The Daily Show,” Trevor Noah took the opportunity to discuss the region’s geopolitics. He pointed out that Mr. Trump has not only refused to sign onto the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a Pacific Rim trade deal that he has long opposed; he’s refused to fashion a replacement for it. Mr. Noah said this opened up opportunities for China to take a leading role that the United States historically would have occupied.
Hard to imagine a better “Carpool Karaoke” partner than Pink, one of pop’s most durable stars.
Jordan Klepper managed to parody Alex Jones and opponents of the Black Lives Matter movement in one fell swoop. On “The Opposition” on Tuesday, he announced his “All Lives Friday” sale (instead of “Black Friday” — get it?).
Mr. Noah on Wednesday will sit down with the Peabody Award-winning filmmaker Elaine McMillion Sheldon, whose new documentary, “Heroin(e),” tells the story of three women working to make a difference in Huntington, W.Va., an Appalachian city where the opiate overdose rate is 10 times the national average.
Our chief pop critic spoke to the visionary pop star Björk about her new album, “Utopia.” On it, he writes, she has turned a corner: from the darkness and defeat of her previous effort to a new kind of openness and optimism.