WEST HOLLYWOOD, Calif. — “You’ll be meeting in the man cave,” the publicist said, pushing open the door to the ground floor of a villa set in the lush gardens of the Sunset Marquis.
Previous hotel guests have included members of Aerosmith, Guns N’ Roses and Metallica, and while they might never have visited the man cave, it seemed to bear homage to them, or to hair metal, or to hetero teenage boys, or to something. It had a pool table, a guitar, plenty of booze, a framed print of a nude body-painted woman, and another of a skull enveloped in flames. Darkened windows kept out the California sun.
By any measure, it was a curious spot to interview Timothée Chalamet and Armie Hammer, the stars of “Call Me by Your Name,” due Nov. 24, a heartbreaking coming-of-age story about two young men who fall in love during an idyllic sunlit Italian summer decades ago.
Arriving at the cave moments later, Mr. Chalamet and Mr. Hammer took in the décor with a few chortles, and then Mr. Hammer beelined to the guitar and began strumming, as Mr. Chalamet threw himself onto a big L-shaped couch. The pair have fallen into an easy camaraderie that extends most places they go. For a good chunk of the film’s shoot last year in northern Italy, and in the days leading up to it, they were often the only ones who spoke English, which helped them forge a connection that crackles through their scenes. They have also been promoting the film together, on and off, since its triumphant premiere earlier this year at Sundance, where it sent festivalgoers into a swoon.
“—— sentences,” Mr. Chalamet chimed in.
“Sandwiches,” Mr. Hammer replied.
Mr. Guadagnino is a master at hitting all five senses, which is one of the reasons critics have warmly embraced the film.
Tired of gay best friends who love shopping and lesbians who hate men? These films feature fully fleshed-out L.G.B.T.Q. characters who defy stereotypes. See all the titles in this collection on Watching, The New York Times’s TV and movie recommendation site.
Though the lovers’ age difference has drawn some attention, the film has largely been a source of deep gratification for its key players. It represents a return to the screen for James Ivory, 89, who wrote the screenplay with echoes of his 1987 love story, “Maurice.” It is making a name for Mr. Chalamet, who is 21 and strongly tipped for an Oscar nomination. And for Mr. Hammer, 31, the time spent making the film in Italy was, he said, “the most transformative experience” of his professional life.
He was proved right with the actors’ chemistry — their characters’ attraction is shot through with a fraught competitiveness — even though Mr. Chalamet and Mr. Hammer are as strikingly different in person as they are onscreen.
“It was the luck of the universe, or something, that there was just a natural bond as humans,” Mr. Chalamet said.
Mr. Hammer is 6-foot-5, with Ken-doll features (“the textbook guy for shaving-cream commercial looks,” noted GQ), a sardonic mien, and a voice that booms with assuredness and authority. His great-grandfather was an oil tycoon, and he grew up in the Cayman Islands and Los Angeles. He said he wanted to be an actor after seeing “Home Alone,” when he was 12.
Mr. Hammer had greater trepidation, and was not sure if he was good enough for such a stripped-down, emotionally honest film, with no set pieces or special effects. “This movie lives and dies in the moments between these characters,” he said. There was also a lot of nudity in the original script, though it was revised, and Mr. Hammer, somehow, had never done a sex scene.
He resolved to make smaller films, and his first one was last year’s “The Birth of a Nation,” which ended up being bittersweet for him, too. The drama, about Nat Turner’s slave rebellion, sold for a record $17 million at Sundance, but was engulfed in controversy after decades-old rape allegations against the filmmaker and star, Nate Parker, emerged. It was a crushing experience that Mr. Hammer said he was still recovering from.
“I didn’t think anybody really cared what I said, I didn’t think anybody cared what James Woods said, you know?” Mr. Hammer said.
Mr. Guadagnino said any chatter about the age difference amounted to an “artificial topic.” No one took issue with the age difference in the 1987 film “Dirty Dancing,” he pointed out, where Jennifer Grey was playing a 17-year-old and Patrick Swayze’s character was 24. Also in “Call Me,” he said, it is Elio who goes after Oliver. “The person who chases is 17,” he said.
