Daniel Dae Kim was wide awake and scrolling through Twitter at 4 a.m. when he realized “The Good Doctor” was going to be a hit.
It was a Tuesday in September, and Mr. Kim, a 49-year-old actor known for his work on “Hawaii Five-0” and “Lost,” found himself in bed in western Bulgaria not far from the set of “Hellboy,” a movie he was filming for release next year.
He had a special interest in “The Good Doctor,” because it represented his first outing in a new role: executive producer. And so, although he had to go to work in just a few hours, he could not keep himself from checking the effusive social-media reaction to the show’s premiere episode on ABC.
When Mr. Kim stumbled onto the “Hellboy” set in the morning, he felt just fine. “I’ve lived with this project since 2013, so one night of lost sleep wasn’t going to make a difference,” he said, laughing.
The surprise hit has been a boon to ABC, which has been stuck in last place among the big four networks. It also came as sweet relief to Mr. Kim, who had spent three years developing this adaptation of a South Korean show through his 3AD production company.
“The Good Doctor” is a big-hearted medical drama with a twist: The lead character, a brilliant resident played by Freddie Highmore, is autistic. In addition to learning how to become a skilled surgeon, he must figure out how to communicate with skeptical colleagues and confused patients. “What’s the point of sarcasm?” he asks in an early episode.
The show can be soapy and even a little gory. Because the protagonist speaks haltingly at times, onscreen graphics show how his beautiful mind goes at the job of deconstructing a troubled liver or heart.
Mr. Kim took notice of the original version of “The Good Doctor,” an award-winning 20-episode series in South Korea, not long after it started airing in 2013. He scooped up the rights for his new production company and got to work adapting it. Because he was a star of the CBS show “Hawaii Five-0” at the time, he developed it for his home network, which ordered up a script. After taking a look, however, CBS decided against commissioning a pilot.
That is usually the stage when all parties agree to leave a project behind, but Mr. Kim, who was born in South Korea and grew up in Bethlehem, Pa., bought back the rights from CBS. He felt that strongly about it.
He eventually teamed up with Sony’s television arm, which brought in Mr. Shore, the creator of the successful Fox medical drama “House.” Mr. Shore’s version began to attract network interest — although not from CBS.
Earlier this year, along with his Asian-American co-star, Grace Park, Mr. Kim left “Hawaii Five-0” after he suggested that they had not been not offered salaries commensurate with those of their white co-stars.
“The path to equality is never easy,” Mr. Kim wrote in a Facebook post at the time.
In the end, CBS lost a prime time actor and ABC gained an executive producer who brought it an unexpected hit.
The network needed it. For the last two years ABC has been in last place among the four broadcast networks in the 18- to 49-year-old demographic that is important to advertisers. To make matters worse, Shonda Rhimes, the showrunner behind the ABC hits “Scandal” and “Grey’s Anatomy,” decided to make Netflix her home for all future projects.
The show is partly the result of a programming strategy that ABC hit upon last year, after heartland voters had a strong hand in the election of President Trump — a strategy focused on “not just appealing to both coasts,” said Ben Sherwood, the president of the Disney and ABC television group.
“Roseanne,” the ABC comedy about a working class family that lit up the Nielsen ratings during its nine-season run? Reboot it! “American Idol,” a politics-free singing contest that lasted 14 years on Fox before going off the air in 2016? Revive it! As for other programming, the network decided on a new game plan.
Indeed, ABC executives and producers for the show are convinced that Dr. Shaun Murphy, the main character of “The Good Doctor,” plays to a wide audience because he is innocent and never meanspirited. While the median age of the show’s viewers is 58, according to Nielsen, it is also popular among teenage girls.
Mr. Highmore, the lead actor, came aboard after playing Norman Bates on the A&E series “Bates Motel.” He had a break of only a few weeks between playing a psychotic killer and a good-hearted savant who wants to save lives.
Whether or not the main reason for its success has to do with the times or the show itself, “The Good Doctor” is ABC’s highest-rated first-year hit since “Desperate Housewives” in 2004 and the best broadcast performer at 10 p.m. in the past 11 years. And now the fourth-place network has something to build on.
