Jonathan’s father always told him he would never amount to anything other than a drug dealer. He entered the foster care system when he was 12. At 18, he was in college, but had to drop out to take care of his ill grandmother.
“I always told myself I would graduate college and wouldn’t be a statistic in the foster care system,” said Jonathan, 26, who gave only his first name to protect his privacy. But at 21, he was homeless and jobless. “One day I Googled ‘help with foster kids aging out,’” Jonathan said, and he found Youth Villages, one of the national nonprofits aimed at stopping the downward spiral of people like him.
He now lives in an off-campus apartment at Bridgewater State University in Massachusetts, drives part time for Uber to help support himself and will graduate in December with a bachelor’s degree in management with a concentration in operations.
Yet too often, this population is ignored.
Almost all the people served by the nonprofits identified by the center are low-income. Many are already parents themselves, and a significant number have been in the foster care system their entire lives and are virtually on their own when they age out, typically at 18. Providing intensive guidance and training during this time can stop the descent into chronic homelessness and lifelong reliance on government services, Ms. Rosqueta said.
Other factors make it tougher for these young people to succeed. Many have been tangled up in the criminal justice system and, with limited recourse to medical services, some struggle with mental illness, which often first makes an appearance in the late teens or early 20s.
Even well-meaning people think that those in their late teens and early 20s are already beyond help, said David Abromowitz, chief public policy officer of YouthBuild USA. “They say, ‘I want to work with children.’ I say, ‘Who do you think are the parents to those children?’” For example, he said, about 30 percent of those enrolled in YouthBuild have children.
“People need to understand something actually works with this population,” Mr. Abromowitz said.
Youth Villages helps emotionally and behaviorally troubled children succeed by working with them and their families; YVLifeset, a part of Youth Villages, is aimed at people 17 to 22 years old. It is an intensive six- to 12-month program to support, guide and encourage participants, most of whom grew up in the foster care system. The statistics for those who spent their childhood in foster care is dismal: At age 21, half are unemployed, one in five is homeless, and almost 70 percent have been involved in the criminal justice system.
Since 1999, YVLifeset has served more than 11,000 young adults in seven states, and is beginning to partner with other nonprofits and state and local governments to replicate the model. The idea, said Patrick Lawler, the chief executive of Youth Villages, is for counselors, known as specialists, to offer the resources that other parents give their children every day. They have a small caseload – only eight at a time – and meet with their clients one to two times a week.
Kelly Conlin, the educational and vocational coordinator for YVLifeset in Massachusetts, said part of her role was not to tell her clients what to do but to find out what goals they have for themselves. She often meets them at a local McDonald’s or Dunkin’ Donuts, helping them to find the resources they need, whether it be signing up for food stamps, finding mental health care, learning a trade, finishing high school or getting into college.
“I get them set up for the next stage in life,” she said. And just as important, or even more so, she offers them stability and support, something most have never experienced.
A five-year independent study by MDRC, a research organization, found that compared with a randomly selected control group, YVLifeset participants show decreases in homelessness and violent relationships and increases in earnings.
But, said Professor Courtney, who was one of the authors of the independent study, the best organizations helping young adults are committed to learning what works and what doesn’t. And they have found that just as important as offering their participants real-world skills is providing a place where they are welcomed rather than spurned.
Respect was something Taryn Canty-Reed, 20, felt instantly when she joined YouthBuild, a national yearlong program that helps those 16 to 24 years old earn a diploma or high-school equivalency certificate and learn a trade.
She started at YouthBuild Philadelphia two months ago and is working in the GreenBuild construction training track, learning to build solar panels and other sustainable energy products. Her goal is go on to a local community college, major in business and construction and then start her own business.
The first YouthBuild program started in the 1970s as an experiment in East Harlem in New York City to get low-income youths to rebuild vacant and dilapidated homes in their own community. In 1992, Congress created the federal YouthBuild program and it is now part of the federal Department of Labor. It receives funding from AmeriCorps, as well as corporate, private and foundation grants.
Now, there are 230 YouthBuild programs in the United States and 80 internationally. Programs are often housed within a larger nonprofit, such as a YMCA or housing development.
Although the emphasis is on the construction trade at many YouthBuild programs, in Philadelphia, the largest YouthBuild program, students can get a certificate in one of four areas: construction building trades; customer service and business administration; child care; and health care.
Nationally, 75 percent complete the program, 74 percent receive a high school diploma or certificate, and a little more than half go on to jobs or higher education.
Some organizations are aimed at those young adults who have graduated from high school, but flounder when they are either unable or unwilling to go on to higher education. The goal of Year Up, a national nonprofit, is to get motivated 18- to 24-year-olds with high-school diplomas or equivalency certificates ready for corporate internships that often lead to jobs, said Gerald Chertavian, founder and chief executive of Year Up. The program, which started in 2000, provides a six-month course, where students must dress in professional attire, be respectful and be on time and ready every day for their classes from 8:30 to 3:30 – or risk having their stipend docked or being kicked out of the program.
It has 22 locations across the country, some within community colleges, and about 19,000 young adults have gone through the program; the students earn 20 to 30 college credits if they finish it. Almost 30 percent are homeless or don’t have stable housing, Mr. Chertavian said. And almost half have been exposed to violence or trauma. But he also has a more cheerful statistic: Ninety-one percent of his graduates get a full-time job with an average salary of $40,000.
Kerry Sullivan, president of the Bank of America Charitable Foundation, who also sits on Year Up’s board, said that of the 470 interns the bank has hired through the program since 2004, 170 have gone on to full-time jobs.
