So perhaps Kait Kerrigan and Brian Lowdermilk, the show’s talented authors, will understand my saying that “The Mad Ones” is a nonstarter. Or that it feels like a claustrophobic, overheated road trip. We’re the ones stuck in the car.
It certainly had quite a journey getting to New York, where it opened in a Prospect Theater Company production at 59E59 Theaters. Formerly titled “The Unauthorized Biography of Samantha Brown,” the project has been kicking around since at least 2009. After a production at the Goodspeed Opera House in 2011, some of its hybrid emo-musical theater songs began showing up on YouTube; videos of “Run Away With Me” sung by Aaron Tveit and Jeremy Jordan have now reached about a million views each.
But the long development process and the success of individual songs performed out of context have done the storytelling no favors. Too much rewriting has over-narrowed the characters into one-note clichés: Sam indecisive, Kelly wild, Beverly forbidding, Adam dim. And the stakes have been jettisoned somewhere along the way. All the high-angst “where am I going?” imagery seems silly once you realize that Sam’s big decision is about taking a gap year or not.
The effort to disguise the banality of that plot, or to pump it up to earn the release of song, forces “The Mad Ones” into some overwrought detours. Much is made of Sam’s repeated failure to pass her driving test. Several accidents and near accidents occur. But if, like “Company,” the show has a recursive structure, returning to key moments to re-examine what happened, each examination here feels the same as the previous one, with no apparent growth toward the eventual underwhelming resolution.
This puts a lot of stress on the songwriting, and taken individually the numbers demonstrate why Ms. Kerrigan and Mr. Lowdermilk have built up such a following despite having only one prior New York production — a children’s musical called “Henry and Mudge” — to their credit. Their tuneful songs reward flashy vocalism and are generic enough to flatter many kinds of interpretation.
But only sometimes — mostly with the peripheral characters — are they truly theatrical. Beverly (Leah Hocking) gets a furious feminist anthem called, inevitably, “Miles to Go,” which tries to push Sam toward a sensible choice. And Adam gets the presold “Run Away With Me,” a sweet-nervous declaration of love with a clear intention. Jay Armstrong Johnson, subbing at the last minute for Ben Fankhauser, sings it beautifully.
Unfortunately, the rest of the 14 songs, stacked like pancakes and nearly as identical, glop together; the vagueness of their lyrics and the legginess of their musical structure make them feel episodic rather than pointed. The numbers for the two main women are so alike that it seems irrelevant whether they’ve been assigned to Sam (Krystina Alabado) or Kelly (Emma Hunton). And though both performers excel at putting across this kind of material, that almost makes it worse. Plays are not playlists.
I hope he and Ms. Kerrigan reconsider, because that road’s a dead end.