MADRID — A Spanish judge on Friday issued an international arrest warrant for the former leader of Catalonia, who refused to return to Spain from Belgium to appear before the national court.
Judge Carmen Lamela, who sits on Spain’s national court, is seeking the detention of the former leader, Carles Puigdemont, and four former members of his cabinet who left Catalonia for Brussels on Monday. The warrant was sent to Belgium’s public prosecutor.
Spain’s attorney general is seeking to prosecute Mr. Puigdemont and 19 other politicians on rebellion and other charges after they declared Catalonia’s independence from Spain last month. On Thursday, Judge Lamela ordered eight former members of the regional government jailed without bail, pending a full trial, after they appeared before her.

That process is likely to take more than a month and could provoke a diplomatic wrangle between Spain and Belgium, where Mr. Puigdemont and the others could seek asylum. It is also likely to trigger political tensions within Belgium, which has a fragile coalition government that includes some Flemish politicians who support the Catalan independence movement.
The judge would then decide whether to order the arrest of Mr. Puigdemont and the four other politicians. If they are arrested, the next step would be an appearance before a Belgian court that would decide whether to return them to Spain to stand trial, Mr. Van der Sijpt said.
“The whole procedure, including appeal up to the highest court, can take between one and two months,” he said.
Dirk Vanheule, a professor of international law at the University of Antwerp, said that the Catalan elected officials could argue that the international arrest warrant is not valid in Belgium on several grounds, among them a claim that the charge of rebellion has an insufficiently clear equivalent in Belgian criminal law.
They could also contend that the fundamental right of suspects to a fair trial is not guaranteed in Spain, an argument Mr. Puigdemont has made repeatedly this week.
On Thursday, Paul Bekaert, Mr. Puigdemont’s Belgian lawyer, told VRT News, a television channel, that “if the extradition is approved, then we will definitely go the whole way,” in terms of appeals within Belgium’s judicial system.
Mr. Puigdemont’s arrival in Belgium on Monday raised problems for Prime Minister Charles Michel, who leads a governing coalition that includes both Francophone liberals and Flemish separatists. Mr. Michel will have to contend with conflicting needs, keeping in check separatists in his government who are sympathetic to the Catalans’ desire for independence while maintaining good diplomatic relations with Spain.
Some Flemish politicians have already said they would help to defend Mr. Puigdemont.
“To imprison a democratically elected government leader is more than a bridge too far,” Geert Bourgeois, the Flemish president and a member of the New Flemish Alliance party, told VRT News on Thursday. His conservative separatist party is part of the prime minister’s coalition.
He also took a jab at the European Union for declining to intervene in the Catalan conflict. “A European Union that silently defends the interests of nation states, and does not dare to raise its voice to protect freedom of expression — that worries me,” he said.
The arrest warrant, along with the detention on Thursday of half of the members of the former Catalan government, may provoke new street protests in Catalonia. It could also reinvigorate the independence movement before regional elections scheduled for December.
Spain’s judiciary also turned down an appeal on Friday to release two other separatist leaders who have been jailed since mid-October awaiting trial on sedition charges.