MADRID — The former leader of Catalonia, Carles Puigdemont, will not appear on Thursday before a Spanish judge to face possible charges — including rebellion — arising from his government’s declaration of independence for the region, his Belgian lawyer said.
Mr. Puigdemont traveled to Brussels on Monday, three days after he and other separatist lawmakers voted to create a Catalan republic, in violation of Spain’s Constitution.
From Brussels, he explained that he was neither seeking asylum in Belgium nor trying to escape Spanish justice, but wanted guarantees that Spain’s judiciary would treat Catalan politicians fairly, after Spain’s attorney general had demanded that they stand trial for rebellion and other charges.
Spanish legal experts noted that the law allows a judge to immediately order a defendant jailed without bail if there is a flight risk. Nineteen separatist leaders are expected to appear in two Spanish courts on Thursday and Friday. Some members of Mr. Puigdemont’s cabinet flew back to Barcelona from Brussels late Tuesday, a day after they had traveled to the Belgian capital with the region’s former leader.
The legal proceedings come as Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy’s government has taken charge of the region’s administration under the emergency constitutional powers used to put down secessionism in Catalonia.
In a major escalation of Spain’s territorial conflict, Catalan lawmakers voted on Friday to declare the region an independent nation. Hours later, Mr. Rajoy fired Mr. Puigdemont and his cabinet and dissolved the Catalan Parliament, ahead of new regional elections scheduled for Dec. 21.
If charged with rebellion and found guilty, Mr. Puigdemont and others could face up to 30 years in prison. The attorney general said the separatist leaders should also be prosecuted for sedition and misuse of public funds, after organizing and staging an independence referendum on Oct. 1 that was declared illegal by the Spanish government and courts.
Should Mr. Puigdemont not show up in Madrid, in contempt of a court order, the Spanish authorities could request a European arrest warrant to get Belgian authorities to detain him.