A small tree at the corner of an almond orchard just outside Modesto is decorated several times a year with colorful ornaments.
For passing motorists, the festive display has been something of a mystery.
So a couple weeks ago, the Modesto Bee looked into it.
The tree, it turns out, was cherished by a little girl named Danielle, the daughter of the orchard’s owners.
For whatever reason, the tree had failed to thrive, and David Genzoli, Danielle’s father, planned to rip it out. But Danielle protested.
Then in 2005, Danielle was killed in a car crash at the age of 16.
As Christmas approached that year, the family didn’t have the heart to celebrate.
The Genzolis went out to the orchard soon to discover that somebody had decorated the tree with homemade Christmas ornaments.
One February, Danielle’s first grade teacher had her students create laminated hearts that they hung from the tree for Valentine’s Day. It was festooned for St. Patrick’s Day and Easter.
At some point, Danielle’s grandfather and great-uncle began running electricity out to the tree so they could add lights. People sometimes left notes with remembrances of Danielle.
Right now the tree is decorated for Halloween.
David Genzoli said he was driving a tractor in the orchard last Saturday, when he saw an older woman hanging a small cellophane pumpkin on the tree. He wandered over.
The woman told him she had been touched by the story in the Bee and that in February she had lost her son, a father of two girls aged 3 and 5.
Inside the pumpkin were notes written by the girls to their father.
It’s gas tax hike day.
After much wrangling and debate, the price of a gallon of gas is rising 12 cents.
For a typical car, that could mean roughly $2 extra per fill-up. But don’t expect to notice the difference right away.
As it happens, the tax increase is happening on Nov. 1, the same day that California gas stations switch each year to a cheaper winter blend of gas.
The cost of a gallon of gas typically drops as much as 10 cents with the changeover, said Jeffrey Spring, a spokesman for the Automobile Club of Southern California, which opposed the gas tax.
From the consumer’s point of view then, the tax hike may appear to be canceled out.
The tax increase is part of legislation intended to raise more than $5 billion a year over the next decade to help fix the state’s roads and bridges.
Gov. Jerry Brown signed it in April.
But the wrangling may not be over. Republican leaders are fighting hard to dismantle the law.
