A production of Eugene O’Neill’s “Long Day’s Journey Into Night” starring Lesley Manville and Jeremy Irons, a world premiere of a piece by Meredith Monk, and the return of visiting theater companies from Britain and Russia are among the highlights of the coming winter-spring season at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
The season, which is scheduled to run from Jan. 15 through June 23, will include theater, music and dance performances, as well as standing festivals like the RadioLoveFest (for podcasts and public radio) and Everybooty (for New York City Pride), the Brooklyn Academy announced on Tuesday.
“Long Day’s Journey Into Night” (May 8-27), an import from the Bristol Old Vic in Britain , will be directed by Richard Eyre, who directed Ms. Manville in a production of Ibsen’s “Ghosts” — “possibly the best ‘Ghosts’ you’ll ever see,” Ben Brantley wrote in The New York Times — at the Brooklyn Academy in 2015. Accompanying the run is a talk, “Bringing Home the Opioid Epidemic” (May 18), inspired by Ms. Manville’s character, the troubled matriarch Mary Tyone, who is addicted to morphine.
Other theater productions include return engagements by the Royal Shakespeare Company, which will bring its Antony Sher-led “King Lear” (April 7-29), and the Maly Drama Theater of Russia, which after a daring staging of Chekhov’s “The Cherry Orchard” in 2016 will perform an adaptation of Schiller’s “Love and Intrigue” (June 6-10).
Ms. Monk’s latest genre-defying work, “Cellular Songs” (March 14-18), will incorporate music, movement and visual art for an exploration of how humans interact with nature, with inspiration from cellular functions like replication and mutation.
Also in March, the Aga Khan Music Initiative, which promotes the education and performance of Central Asian music, will present “Qyrq Qyz” (March 23 and 24), a multimedia reimagining of oral tradition with music by the Uzbek composer Dmitri Yanov-Yanovsky.
Festivals include the 2018 edition of DanceAfrica led by the artistic director Abdel Salaam, a 2017 Bessie Awards winner for “The Healing Sevens” at the Brooklyn Academy last year.