So was the social media world, where he connected with other young men who loved makeup. As his profile and career grew (he has 3.6 million followers), Mr. Starrr also realized the power he had to influence a larger movement.
In Mr. Starrr’s case, the employee is now the collaborator: In December he is releasing a special collection of products with MAC, which will kick off a yearlong commitment for five collections. The collaboration is second in size only to Rihanna’s collections for the company.
“That’s foundation, concealer, mascara, gloss and done,” he said.
And it’s likely they would all like to achieve the success of James Charles, now 18 with 2.5 million Instagram followers, who landed a CoverGirl contract as its first male ambassador.
Certainly their ages have raised eyebrows and drawn eyeballs. Some have mainstream celebrity followers, like Shay Mitchell, Ansel Elgort and Meghan Trainor. But Carly Cardellino, beauty director of Cosmopolitan.com, argues that their skill is the draw.
While men wearing makeup in Mr. Warden’s community was not the norm, he was far from ostracized. His family and friends largely supported him. “The earlier guys on social media, they took some of the hate and negativity for us,” he said.
And the way men are dispensing with male beauty stereotypes is trickling down. Cozy Friedman, a founder of the Cozy’s Cuts for Kids hair salon in Manhattan, has seen a shift in attitudes.
 “I do think that one day boys will be able to do whatever they want and not be judged,” he said.
Yet for a male influencer like Kevin Ninh, 21, known as Flawless Kevin on Instagram and YouTube, simply putting on makeup and taking photos should be only part of the message. Mr. Ninh is now at the University of Washington Bothell, where he is double-majoring in media communications and gender, women and sexuality studies. Though he started wearing makeup as a teenager and posting about it on YouTube five years ago, he has learned, he said, how portrayals in media can affect perception of gender and identity.
