THURSDAY PUZZLE — Stress dreams happen to all of us, and they might, in fact, still be a part of your life: You dream that you’ve slept past your alarm, you show up late for “class” — possibly with no pants on, if you’re really stressed — and the teacher is covering material you’ve never seen before. You’re humiliated and confused, and of course there is a pop quiz which will count for an ungodly large portion of your final grade. You know the kind of dream I’m talking about.
And even though it was very clever, that’s what solving Alex Eylar’s puzzle felt like to me. It has been AGES since I studied logic in school, and today’s theme had me flashing back to my freshman year of college, where learning to chase down answers to questions you barely understood was a large part of my higher education. Not only did I solve this puzzle, with its cross-referenced and self-referenced theme, but I re-familiarized myself with the thematic concepts so I could explain them here.
Fortunately for all of us, I am in possession of my pants, so the stress is not all that bad.
Mr. Eylar demonstrates for us that he was able to absorb the material in his college Logic class through his eyelids, which he claims remained shut during the time that poor Professor Clifford was teaching.
He also visually demonstrates four examples of logic in his 76-word grid, which is a neat trick. It’s not an intuitive solve unless you are really familiar with the topic, so I’m going to spill the beans here.
17A and 58A are examples of TAUTOLOGY, where A = B and B = A, although I was under the impression that a TAUTOLOGY was when an idea was repeated, but in different words. Either way, that’s why TAUTOLOGY is repeated in the grid.
25A is self-referential because that is exactly what a RECURSION is.
36A, or “See 66-Across,” asks us to go on A WILD GOOSE CHASE, because there is no 66A.
46A, or “See ??-Across” is an AMBIGUITY because we are not told what number clue to refer to.
9A: Hopefully, solvers saw a SPACE between the quotation marks in this clue.
23A: THE is “Not just any old” in the sense that this is not just any old crossword puzzle, but THE New York Times Crossword.
33A: You are CIS-gendered if you live as the gender you were assigned at birth.
24D: To “Come down hard” could mean to be punitive, but in today’s puzzle it means to HAIL.
35D: I have a “ball at work?” but I am not a SEER. A SEER has a crystal ball.
I dedicate this puzzle to the early morning Logic 101 class I took for a course requirement, that I totally didn’t fall asleep in every single week.
You’re welcome, Prof. Clifford.