Suzanne Hollack tried to care for her husband at home after he was diagnosed with frontotemporal dementia at age 69. But it got to the point where she couldn’t take a shower for fear he would stray out of the house.
So 18 months ago, she moved him to a memory care community near their home in Scottsdale, Az., which like most long-term care, is not covered by Medicare. That, plus his other medical expenses, cost the couple $90,000 last year.
Republicans say the deduction affects relatively few people — 8.8 million out of about 150 million taxpayers last year — and that the bill as a whole would benefit more families by lowering tax rates and increasing the standard deduction in lieu of itemizing.
“I understand that in order to get tax reform through there need to be some ‘pay fors,’ but getting those revenues from families who have been hardest hit by high cost medical conditions like autism or cancer seems a bit like targeting hurricane victims as a potential source of revenue,” said John Rodakis, 48, of Dallas, who has a son with autism and runs a nonprofit foundation devoted to autism research.
The Joint Committee estimated that the deduction for medical expenses would cost the federal government $10 billion next year, if it were not eliminated. That is far less than the two big deductions the Republican bill would preserve: one for interest paid on home mortgages is expected to cost $63.6 billion, and one for charitable donations, $47.8 billion. Most taxpayers claiming those deductions have incomes above $100,000.
Taxpayers claimed a total of $87 billion in medical costs through the deduction in 2015, according to the Internal Revenue Service. An increase in the standard deduction would not nearly make up for that, tax experts said. The average Medicare beneficiary, for example, pays $5,680 a year in out-of-pocket costs, according to AARP.
While the Affordable Care Act expanded coverage to millions more Americans and limited out-of-pocket costs, many, like Ms. Block, still face large expenses that insurance does not cover.
Lisa and Peter Witzler’s second son, Jackson, was born with spina bifida, a defect caused when the spinal cord does not close in the womb. By his fifth month of life, he’d spent three months in the hospital — six weeks in neonatal intensive care — and his parents had spent the money they had planned to put toward day care.
Doctors had recommended private nursing because Jackson had severe sleep apnea and would repeatedly stop breathing and turn blue. But insurance would not cover it.
“We didn’t have that time to prepare or save for anything,” said Mr. Witzler, a union organizer.
The family, which lives in Montgomery Village, Md., had $25,000 in unreimbursed medical expenses last year. Being able to deduct those expenses, the Witzlers said, is the difference between their son getting treatment now, or needing more public services later in his life.
Adrienne Lynch, who is 34 and lives in Austin, Tex., is undergoing in vitro fertilization for the second time this year. “We have spent around $43,586, and that won’t be the last of it for 2017,” she said. Ms. Lynch, who manages regional media advocacy for the American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network, said that the deduction, which would lower her taxable income by more than $20,000, would help rebuild the emergency savings that she and her husband have spent on fertility treatments this year.
“To go after this is a gut punch,” she said.
But eliminating the deduction could hasten the speed at which some older Americans spend down their savings and have to go on Medicaid, a far greater expense for the federal government.
“Already I’m having to dip severely into whatever I’ve saved,” said Jennifer Clark, 76, of Falls Church, Va. She has multiple sclerosis and a form of blood cancer, and while insurance covers her chemotherapy and other medications, she pays out of pocket for part-time aides, dental care, a portion of her physical therapy, some of her medications and the continuing care retirement community she lives in.
