‘GENERATION WEALTH’ at Anthology Film Archives (Nov. 17-30). The photographer and documentary director Lauren Greenfield casts a critical eye on conspicuous consumption. As a companion series to “Generation Wealth,” an exhibition of Ms. Greenfield’s work at the International Center of Photography, Anthology Film Archives will screen films that put the “moola” in “movies,” including Ms. Greenfield’s own “The Queen of Versailles” (Friday and Nov. 25). Sofia Coppola’s “The Bling Ring” (Friday and Nov. 30) and Amy Heckerling’s “Clueless” (Monday and Nov. 26) offer a lighthearted look at the well-heeled residents of Los Angeles County, while Mary Harron’s “American Psycho” (Saturday, Nov. 24 and Nov. 26) and Robert Bresson’s “L’Argent” (Sunday and Nov. 25) take a more jaundiced view of the corrupting effects of money.
‘THE LOST YEARS OF GERMAN CINEMA: 1949-1963’ at the Film Society of Lincoln Center (through Nov. 23). A crash course in German cinema might start with the Expressionist masterpieces of the silent era; continue with large-scale Nazi productions like “Titanic” (1943), or the films of Leni Riefenstahl; and then jump to the late 1960s for Rainer Werner Fassbinder and Werner Herzog. Filling in the considerable gap after World War II, the Film Society will screen movies by returning Hollywood expatriates like Fritz Lang and Robert Siodmak and will also show three features by Helmut Kautner, potentially an undersung auteur. Mr. Kautner’s films include the 1955 “Sky Without Stars” (Friday, Wednesday and Thursday), a romance between an East German factory worker and the West German police officer who sneaks her son across the border, and “Black Gravel” (Friday, Sunday and Thursday), a 1961 noir in which old lovers, one now married to an American military officer, reunite by chance, only to become embroiled in a fateful accident.
‘RIALTO PICTURES: 20 FILMS FOR 20 YEARS’ at the Museum of the Moving Image (Nov. 17 through Dec. 29). For New York cinephiles who came of age in the last 20 years, encountering Giulietta Masina’s comic grace in Federico Fellini’s post-neorealist classic “Nights of Cabiria” (Friday) or sitting with a rapt, breath-holding audience during the lengthy heist sequence in Jules Dassin’s “Rififi” (Dec. 8) will count as treasured memories. Both films are among the early hits of Rialto Pictures, founded by the Film Forum programmer Bruce Goldstein with the goal of releasing restorations from the canon (and, in some cases, forgotten films worthy of reappraisal). For the company’s 20th anniversary, the Museum of the Moving Image will screen 20 features — less than one-fifth of Rialto’s prodigious output over the years.
‘SCREEN PLAY: THE AMERICAN FILM THEATRE’ at the Quad Cinema (through Nov. 21). Digital technology now makes it possible for filmgoers to see a live simulcast of a performance in London, but the impulse to bring stage productions into movie theaters isn’t new. From 1973 to 1975, the American Film Theatre presented plays in movie theaters, replete with programs and intermissions. The films weren’t “Great Performances”-style recordings of pre-existing productions, but classics of theater reimagined for the screen. Eugene O’Neill’s “The Iceman Cometh” (Sunday), with Lee Marvin as Hickey, and Eugene Ionesco’s “Rhinoceros” (Tuesday), with Zero Mostel and Gene Wilder, together again after “The Producers,” are among the highlights of this revival series.
