Somewhere beneath Rockefeller Center, in a workroom with the bare fluorescent lights and tall shelves of a big discount warehouse, auction-house employees are sorting through Chinese porcelain tureens, duck decoys, prized paintings and hundreds of other items. A photo studio has been set up, too, the better to shoot close-ups for the catalogs that will be issued before everything is sold five months from now.
What is going on is exactly what David Rockefeller wanted.
The items being logged in by Christie’s in New York belonged to Mr. Rockefeller, the methodical banker from the storied family who died in March at age 101. The money from the sales will fund pledges he made more than a decade ago to a dozen institutions, among them two universities and the Museum of Modern Art, which stand to receive more than $100 million each.
Several other groups will receive amounts that are smaller but still immense by most people’s standards. And all of them could collect more, in the proportions he outlined, if bidding wars break out over his porcelain or his Picassos and Cézannes, driving the prices past the presale estimates.
So his charities would do even better.
Mr. Rockefeller, who gave away $20 million to $30 million a year in the last 10 years of his long life, found another way to use philanthropy to make a difference — a big difference, if the sales at Christie’s bring in the $700 million that some auction experts are predicting. The previous record for an auction was set when the collection of the fashion designer Yves Saint Laurent and his partner, Pierre Bergé, were sold for $484 million in Paris in 2009.
Becky MacGuire, a senior specialist in Chinese export art at Christie’s, said she could not recall a collection Christie’s had sold that was as large or as varied. And everything is what might be described as gently used.
Mr. Rockefeller decided on his plan years ago, even before he signed something called the Giving Pledge. The brainchild of Bill and Melinda Gates and Warren E. Buffett, the Giving Pledge began as a way to induce wealthy people to commit to donating at least half of their fortunes to philanthropy — if not while they were alive, then after they died.
The initial reception was somewhat chilly in philanthropic and nonprofit circles. Some fund-raisers maintained that the pledge amounted to little more than a public-relations ploy. But more than 170 ultra-wealthy people have signed it.
In the beginning, Mr. Buffett said he believed that the real value of the pledge would be the example it set. And Mr. Rockefeller played a role, setting an example that went beyond signaling publicly what he had already decided to do. He helped arrange a dinner at Rockefeller University that was attended by Mr. Gates, Mr. Buffett and other early Giving Pledge signers. His imprimatur added the credibility that only he could confer, and he was pleased that people who had made their fortunes were making plans to devote them to global issues.
Peter J. Johnson, the Rockefeller family historian, said there was more to his patience. Mr. Johnson said that by the time Mr. Rockefeller committed to a donation, he believed that there would be a payoff for the organization — maybe not today and maybe not tomorrow, but someday.
Wealth advisers say that is a lesson for people with fewer zeros in their bank accounts. Another page from Mr. Rockefeller’s playbook that philanthropy experts point to is: pick charities whose work you care about and, whenever possible, know firsthand.
On his list were institutions he was familiar with: Harvard University, his alma mater (he received his bachelor’s degree there in 1936); the Museum of Modern Art (his mother Abby Greene Aldrich Rockefeller was one of its founders); the Council on Foreign Relations (he led its board for 15 years, until 1985); three groups concerned with preserving land near where he had houses; and three Rockefeller funds (he served as secretary of one, the Rockefeller Brothers Fund, from the day it was organized in 1940).
Stacy Singer, a senior vice president at Northern Trust Company who is not involved with the coming sales, said that that kind of involvement could avoid headaches after a donor’s death.
Patrick Rooney, professor of economics and philanthropic studies at Indiana University’s Lilly School of Philanthropy, underscored that point, saying that one of Mr. Rockefeller’s accomplishments was to plan.
They also prized excellence, she said, and they had so many plates, dishes, cups and saucers to serve a Rockefeller-size dinner party — not 10 or 12 people, but 40. And Mr. Rockefeller had already given so many away that he could not keep track.
