SUNDAY PUZZLE — Today’s constructor, Natan Last, has taken the road less traveled, at least in his career. After being graduated from Brown University in 2012, he worked in economic consulting at a start-up company in Kenya and at an education nonprofit before landing a job as a strategist at the International Rescue Committee. He has devoted his life thus far to being of service, and I say kudos to him.
Mr. Last’s puzzle not only uses the title of Robert Frost’s 1916 poem “THE ROAD NOT TAKEN” as a seed entry, but he shows us how to (almost) effortlessly make that detour when necessary.
Five phrases take a masterful detour as we make our way from left to right in today’s puzzle. One of things I liked about today’s theme is that the entire puzzle is solvable even if you don’t take those detours.
Now that you have your road map, go find the other theme entries and their divergences.
In non-theme news, I really liked some of Mr. Last’s debuts, like GOD HELP US, DRAG AND DROP. PWNS, I AM LEGEND, NO YOU DIDN’T, UPSELL and STUB HUB.
20A: Of course “Slant in columns” is MEDIA BIAS. Not that you’ll ever find that in Wordplay.
82A: Once again, words have different meanings. In today’s puzzle, “heads” are meant to be an overseas reference to lavatories or water closets, and the answer is WCS.
125A: Another use of the word “line”! A “Line in the sand?” could mean where someone draws a boundary, or it could be the line(s) you draw to write “S.O.S.” when you are trapped on a deserted island.
10D: Do people deliberately “eddy”? The clue is “Went for a whirl,” which is cute, and the answer is EDDIED. I hope they took their Dramamine.
72D: Ah, summers back in the day. But we’re not talking about lazy days at the beach, are we? No, we are talking about people who “sum,” or add, and back in the day — before the advent of calculators — they used ABACI.
This puzzle germinated during late nights spent dreaming under a mosquito net — I was in western Tanzania for work and it was recommended we stay in the compound at night, so I spent a lot of time with sci-fi e-books and blank grids and anti-malarial pills. Maybe also poetry — the Frost poem was definitely the seed, and earlier iterations of this puzzle focused equally on the “less traveled” and the “diverged” lines. Initially I was looking for movies, songs, and literature pairs that had the word ROAD in them “diverging.” (Here’s a long boring explanation of that old, dream-fueled idea: imagine ROAD TO RIO across, then an additional OAD diagonally down from the R, then it picks up three rows down and finishes across with HOUSE, for the movie ROADHOUSE. The idea was to play on “less traveled” as less popular — ROADHOUSE as grossing less or having smaller audience numbers than ROAD TO RIO, or something). Anyway, that morphed into the idea you see now, with a nice steer from Joel on putting a black square after the “diverged” answer, since it should function as if it were its own entry.
Diagonal words always make filling tougher, and I’m happy with some of the pizazz in the puzzle, but would have spent more time trying to avoid the glue, especially in the lower left. Hopefully the theme offers a fun aha moment, and hopefully you’re as tickled by the descent of THE ROAD TO HELL as I am. Sad to see an Ed KOCH clue become Koch Industries, given the hellscape toward which companies like theirs have steered us. Thanks to Will, Joel, Sam and all those who looked at early versions of this!
Great to travel with you awhile, Mr. Last.