Opinion|Who Will Benefit From the Republican Tax Plan?
Who Will Benefit From the Republican Tax Plan?
The latest tax cut proposal is reminiscent of the tax cuts that were enacted during the Reagan years, when the national debt almost tripled. During the 1980 Republican primary campaign, George H. W. Bush referred to that proposal as “voodoo economics” because it consisted of huge tax cuts coupled with extravagant increases in military spending. Sound familiar?
The current bill is yet another example of an absurd double standard applied by congressional Republicans when it comes to budget policy. If a Democrat is in the White House, Republicans become fierce deficit hawks. But if we have a Republican president, all of that goes out the window.
This latest incarnation of trickle-down economics, which is supported by President Trump, shows that, during the 2016 presidential campaign, Mr. Trump’s pitch to working-class voters was disingenuous. What he condones are policies that will fuel the stock market and that mainly benefit millionaires and billionaires like him.
SCOTT SMITH, GREAT NECK, N.Y.
The proposal to eliminate the tax deduction for high medical expenses is simply cruel. This will increase the financial stress for those already suffering with illnesses serious enough to qualify them for the deduction.
 Asking those who are seriously ill to facilitate tax relief for others who are enjoying good health and financial comfort is completely outside the bounds of good and compassionate government.
DAVID P. WALSH, WELLESLEY, MASS.
If Congress really wanted to create a tax plan that would favor workers and encourage more hiring, it has a straightforward way of doing so. Reduce payroll taxes. Currently, about 15 percent of every dollar companies spend on a middle-class job goes to taxes. If you reduce this tax, it directly reduces the cost of labor for the company and puts extra money in the pockets of middle-class folks. This would also apply to the self-employment tax that affects small businesses.
Instead, a corporate tax cut, as the Republican tax plan provides for, does nothing of the kind. It provides all of its benefits to the owners of corporations. The idea that it will trickle down somehow to the worker is wishful thinking. Sadly, we’ve been here before.
JEFFREY OLKIN, PRINCETON, N.J.
There seems to be this universally accepted notion that simplifying the tax code by reducing the number of brackets, from seven to four as is being proposed by the Republicans, is a good thing. But why? The fewer the brackets, the more inequitable the tax code becomes, as taxpayers fall off huge cliffs into the higher brackets. If anything, the number of brackets should be increased, not decreased.
And reducing or increasing the number of brackets will not make it any easier or harder for a taxpayer to file a return, since the tax computation is done either by consulting an I.R.S. table or using a computer program.
Many thanks to Mr. Leonhardt for calling out the false spin of the tax proposal as a boon to the middle class. I am disgusted, as a Republican, with this plan, which will undoubtedly cause my taxes to rise based upon what we know so far.
I hope and trust that you will be ready with many, many real-life examples of how the tax plan will affect multiple types of taxpayers at every part of the spectrum. I am looking forward to your leading a robust, detailed debate.
CONNIE WHITE, PASADENA, CALIF.
STEVEN A. JENSEN, PALMERTON, PA.