CHAMBER MUSIC SOCIETY OF LINCOLN CENTER at Alice Tully Hall (Nov. 19, 5 p.m.). A rare, welcome foray into contemporary music from the Chamber Music Society includes the New York premiere of “there is no one, not even the wind,” a piece for chamber ensemble by John Luther Adams. “Flute Affair” is the concert’s title, and it’s an accurate one: Also on the bill are Bach’s Trio Sonata for Two Flutes and Continuo, Mozart’s Flute Quartet in C major, Dutilleux’s Sonatine for Flute and Piano, and a Hummel Septet.
DOVER QUARTET at Washington Irving High School (Nov. 18, 7:30 p.m.). One of the most powerful new releases to cross my desk recently is “Voices of Defiance,” on the Cedille label, a look by this impressive young foursome at string quartets from the end of the Second World War. Alongside some more routine Mendelssohn and Schumann, this bargain People’s Symphony Concert includes two quartets from that album: one written in 1943 by Viktor Ullmann, who died in Auschwitz the following year; and another by Simon Laks, written in 1945, after he had survived Auschwitz, where he led the prisoners’ orchestra, and Dachau.
KARL LARSON at Spectrum (Nov. 20, 8:30 p.m.). This Brooklyn pianist begins a survey of the complete piano works of Scott Wollschleger, the composer with whom he has been a longtime collaborator. This first of two programs includes the world premiere of “For Nils,” a local premiere of “Gas Station Canon Song,” and several other works.
NEW YORK PHILHARMONIC at David Geffen Hall (Nov. 22, 7:30 p.m., through Nov. 25). Gianandrea Noseda, a coveted conductor who recently began his tenure as music director of Washington’s National Symphony Orchestra, leads Rachmaninoff’s Symphony No. 3, the suite from Rimsky-Korsakov’s “The Legend of the Invisible City of Kitezh,” and Saint-Saëns’s Violin Concerto No. 3. Frank Huang, the Philharmonic’s excellent concertmaster, is the soloist.
VOX LUMINIS at the Church of St. Mary the Virgin (Nov. 18, 8 p.m.). Life and death blur in this program of Baroque royal funeral music, including Bach’s “Mit Fried und Freud ich Fahr Dahin” and Schütz’s “Musikalische Exequien,” and two works in memory of English monarchs: Thomas Morley’s music for Elizabeth I’s funeral, and Purcell’s “Funeral Sentences” for Mary II’s.
