PARIS — It’s a common complaint among people who dislike photographs of themselves: “That looks nothing like me!” Most of them don’t possess anything close to the star wattage of Marlene Dietrich. Yet the movie legend expressed similar angst during her first meeting with the film director Josef von Sternberg, in Berlin in 1929.
But Dietrich, who died in 1992 at the age of 90, adored a challenge, and she spent the rest of her career doing all that she could to bend photographers to her will in that “impossible” search. Two exhibitions on different sides of the Atlantic — “Marlene Dietrich: Dressed for the Image” at the National Portrait Gallery in Washington, through April 15; and “Obsession Marlene” at the Maison Européenne de la Photographie (MEP) in Paris through Jan. 7 — explore how Dietrich sought to express the many facets of her fluid personality.
After the box-office success of “The Blue Angel,” which was released in German and English-language versions, Dietrich arrived in Hollywood in 1930 with a contract from Paramount. The timing was auspicious for the 29-year-old actress and cabaret singer, who brought with her some of the glamour of Weimar Germany’s gender-bending night life. Shifting social mores meant that the Hollywood studios began to produce far racier movies.
Dietrich’s first Paramount movie, “Morocco” (1930), directed by Sternberg — who at that point was her lover — set the tone for future transgressions. Dietrich again plays a cabaret singer, a role that would come to define her career, and this time one who falls in love with a member of the Foreign Legion (Gary Cooper).
The photograph is among several Dietrich devised to decorate her character’s apartment, which is full of pictures of herself. In the portrait, shot by the Paramount stills photographer Eugene Robert Richee, Dietrich wears a top hat, a white tie and tuxedo, and a cigarette dangles suggestively from her mouth. The androgynous look, which Dietrich said had been inspired by the English music hall performer Vesta Tilley, became the actress’s signature, and she appears to have guarded it jealously.
Ms. Lemay said that she “wanted to highlight Dietrich’s intelligence, her own articulation of her image, and her own hand in sustaining and creating her image.” This meant moving beyond the enduring idea that Dietrich was Sternberg’s puppet and entirely submissive about the way she was lit and represented.
When Dietrich posed for a series of portraits for Vogue in 1948, Irving Penn tried to lay down the law, saying: “Now look: In this experience, you be Dietrich, and I’ll be the photographer.” You can almost see a scowl on Dietrich’s face as she poses for a picture in a shapeless black coat, looking over her shoulder toward the camera.
Above all, Dietrich detested any hint of vulgarity — a criticism she leveled at her bête noire, Madonna. Among the 200 photographs in the MEP show, there are two of Dietrich wearing a plunging neckline, and the images, by George Hurrell, were never published.
“What’s interesting about Marlene is that she was the daughter of a Prussian soldier, and she was always impeccably turned out like a good soldier,” Mr. Passebon said.
Dietrich’s fixation with her image extended into old age, when she did everything in her power to avoid being photographed, so as not to tarnish her legacy. The MEP exhibition includes a picture of an elderly Dietrich wearing a black beret and sunglasses, striking the photographer Daniel Angeli for having the temerity to take her photograph uninvited.
