Times Insider|I Interviewed Joe Biden. A Sob Took Me by Surprise.
I Interviewed Joe Biden. A Sob Took Me by Surprise.
You know that terrifying moment when you hear your voice crack, and it’s crystal clear that, no matter how hard you fight it, the next syllable out of your mouth will be wrapped in a sob?
Well, that’s how my meeting with former Vice President Joe Biden began.
After 18 months of pestering his office for an interview for my “Table for Three” series at The Times — to talk about the death of his elder son, Beau, in 2015, and how we somehow manage to go on after monumental losses — he finally said yes. Except the piece would now be for the Book Review, because in the time I’d spent asking, Mr. Biden had written a book on the subject. His new memoir, “Promise Me, Dad,” will be published on Tuesday.
For me, the secret pleasure of interviewing people like Mr. Biden is preparing to interview them: diving into their press coverage and writing, hunting for clues about the men and women behind their public images, so that in my limited time with them, I can bring a fresh picture to life. That meant reading everything I could find about Mr. Biden, of course. But I also waded into the world of grief memoirs, books about personal tragedy and loss. I read an elegant pair by Joan Didion, “The Year of Magical Thinking” (about the death of her husband) and “Blue Nights” (on the death of her daughter). And I revisited a poetic heartbreaker, “The Light of the World,” by Elizabeth Alexander, whom I interviewed with Sheryl Sandberg six months ago about the deaths of their husbands and parenting through grief.
With these books and Mr. Biden’s life story in my head, I created a mission for my interview: Why would anyone put himself through the misery of reliving the most painful moments of his life? And as a literary matter, how do you pull off a book like that so it’s not too depressing for readers to bear?
Thus armed, I traveled last month to Mr. Biden’s home in a leafy neighborhood of Wilmington, Del. His wife, Jill, met us at the door and showed me and the photographer, Ryan Pfluger, to a wood-paneled, book-lined study, where Ryan would shoot Mr. Biden’s portrait and I would conduct the interview. At the far end of the room, two doors opened onto a raised patio, overlooking green lawns that rolled down to a picturesque lake.
A few minutes later, Mr. Biden’s sister and longtime campaign manager, Valerie Biden Owens, joined us. She offered me a snack while Ryan prepared. Not one to refuse a pastry, I followed her into the kitchen. That’s where I first met Mr. Biden. He was sitting with an aide at his long kitchen table, looking like any husband and father in America.
Maybe that was it: He was just an ordinary man in this domestic setting. Or maybe it was because I’d only recently finished his account of terrible loss. Who knows how our hearts work?
I nodded in agreement, not quite ready to speak, and he went back to his aide. I picked up an éclair and returned to the study.  After all my persistence and preparation, I would go down as the one who bawled. I have long observed that the deeper the affinity I create with subjects — whether in our vulnerability, our humor or our strength — the better the interview. But now I had gone too far.
Ms. Owens followed me back to the study. “You can’t do that to him,” she said, echoing her brother.
“It won’t happen again,” I promised, but I wasn’t so sure about that. I had officially entered the “self-doubt” phase of the interview. “Can I pull this off?” I wondered. It happens every time.
Then Mr. Biden joined us, sitting for photographs for 15 or 20 minutes. We chatted about his forthcoming book tour and exercise regimen. Ryan directed him to look to his left, then off to the right. And I found my sea legs. When we began the interview, Mr. Biden sat on a sofa across from me, and I knew I hadn’t lied to his sister: It wouldn’t happen again. And it didn’t. We were dry-eyed as Mr. Biden walked me through the emotional and literary thicket that brought me to him. By the time we finished, I felt certain that I’d been forgiven for my rough start.