New York’s attorney general has subpoenaed TIAA, the giant insurance company and investment firm, seeking documents and information relating to its sales practices, according to people briefed on the inquiry.
The subpoena to TIAA, which handles retirement accounts for over four million workers at 15,000 nonprofit institutions across the country, followed an article last month in The New York Times that raised questions about the firm’s selling techniques. TIAA oversees almost $1 trillion in client assets.
The TIAA practices drawing scrutiny from the New York attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman, are also the subject of a whistle-blower complaint filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission. That complaint, obtained by The Times, was filed by former TIAA employees who contend they were pressured to sell products that generated more revenue for the firm but were more costly to clients while adding little value.
The complaint, which is pending, also says the firm’s advisers were told to tap into customers’ fears to get them to buy the products.
Because it is an investment firm, TIAA and its employees are subject to various federal laws governing how they interact with clients. But New York State’s Martin Act gives Mr. Schneiderman greater power over financial firms on matters involving fraud, deception or undisclosed conflicts of interest. Either civil or criminal cases can be brought under the Martin Act.
Interviews with over 20 current and former TIAA employees support the assertions of dubious sales practices made in the whistle-blower complaint. These people spoke on the condition of anonymity because TIAA makes its employees sign an agreement when they are hired barring them from making disparaging public comments about the firm.
TIAA has previously said it puts its clients first and has maintained that because its 855 financial advisers and consultants do not receive commissions on the products they sell, they are unbiased.
But former employees and TIAA regulatory filings challenge this view, pointing out that the company awards bonuses to sales personnel when they steer customers into more expensive in-house products and services. TIAA discloses these incentives in S.E.C. filings, but has not highlighted them in client brochures.
“In more than 10 years at TIAA, I have never heard such language, which is certainly not in keeping with our values or approved materials,” said Mr. Peterson, the TIAA spokesman.
This page was among sales training materials used by TIAA employees to prepare them for meetings with clients. It advised the sales representatives to conduct a sequence of probes to get clients to make an investment move. Pushing clients to “Feel the Pain” was a goal.
Most of TIAA’s clients invest with the firm because their employers have hired it to administer their workers’ retirement plans. TIAA typically acts as record keeper to these institutions, administering accounts that allow plan participants to choose among an array of mutual funds and annuities. When TIAA is a plan’s record keeper, its in-house funds are typically among the investments offered. When other firms act as a plan’s record keeper, TIAA’s funds are rarely offered.
The company earns a record-keeping fee from the institutions whose accounts it oversees, but can generate far more revenue when investors buy its annuities and funds. This presents the potential for conflict.
Some of its former advisers say TIAA began taking a more aggressive stance on product sales after the company hired Herbert M. Allison Jr., a former Merrill Lynch executive, to run its operations in 2002. The push to place clients in more costly asset-management accounts, annuities or in-house mutual funds escalated after the firm began losing institutional accounts. Officials at the University of Notre Dame moved its $1.3 billion retirement plan from TIAA to Fidelity in 2014, a crushing blow.
The S.E.C. whistle-blower complaint contends that TIAA began conducting a fraudulent scheme in 2011 to convert “unsuspecting retirement plan clients from low-fee, self-managed accounts to TIAA-CREF-managed accounts” that were more expensive. Advisers were pushed to sell proprietary mutual funds to clients as well, the complaint says.
The more complex a product — such as life insurance or asset management — the more an employee earned selling it, the complaint says. Those who questioned management’s demands were “processed out” of TIAA, according to the complaint.
Scrutiny of TIAA’s practices comes as the firm and other financial services companies gear up to comply with a new rule requiring that providers of retirement account services operate as fiduciaries, putting their clients’ interests ahead of their own.
Heightened regulatory interest in asset managers is long overdue, said Edward Siedle, a former S.E.C. lawyer and founder of Benchmark Financial Services, a firm that investigates improprieties at pension funds.
