All other articles promptly vanished from the sites; an official at DNAinfo said they would be archived online.
Mr. Ricketts wrote that he founded DNAinfo in 2009 “because I believe people care deeply about the things that happen where they live and work,” and he thought he could build “a large and loyal audience that advertisers would want to reach.” DNAinfo and Gothamist, which Mr. Ricketts bought in the spring, attracted more than 9 million readers a month, in New York and other cities where they operate satellite sites, DNAinfo said.
But in the financially daunting era of digital journalism, there has been no tougher nut to crack than making local news profitable, a lesson Mr. Ricketts, who lost money every month of DNAinfo’s existence, is just the latest to learn. In New York City, the nation’s biggest media market, established organizations such as The Village Voice, The Wall Street Journal and The Daily News have slashed staff or withdrawn from street-level reporting. The Voice stopped publishing its print edition in September.
The decision puts 115 people out of work, both at the New York operations that unionized and at those in Chicago, Los Angeles, San Francisco and Washington that did not. They are getting three months of paid “administrative leave” at full salary, plus four weeks of severance, DNAinfo said.
Merging DNAinfo and Gothamist was intended to ease some of the financial strain. But the two sites were an odd mix. DNAinfo specialized in street-level reporting on neighborhood issues not covered in other media, including real estate developments and crime. Gothamist brought a puckish attitude to articles that were sometimes original, sometimes based on news published elsewhere.
On Thursday, the sites were replaced by a letter from Mr. Ricketts. An official at DNAinfo said the missing articles would be archived online.
But the profits never materialized.
Journalism in general has become less profitable as print advertising, which commanded high prices, has crashed, and revenues from digital advertising have not replaced it. Local newspapers and sites, which deliver smaller audiences for advertisers, have been particularly pressed. The New York Times has also cut back on its local coverage of New York City, closing regional bureaus, for example.
Patch, a network of hyperlocal news sites that started two years before DNAinfo in 2007, is one relatively bright spot on the local-news landscape. It says it is now profitable, after cutting more than three-quarters of its staff in 2014 and deciding to duplicate much of its content across more than 1,000 local sites.
The city also has its share of locally owned neighborhood sites, including West Side Rag and Tribeca Citizen in Manhattan, Bklyner in Brooklyn and The Queens Post. The founder of West Side Rag said their site was profitable.
When the DNAinfo and Gothamist New York newsrooms first moved to join the union in April, management warned that there might be dire consequences.
But reporters at many digital news sites make only a fraction of what staffers made in the heyday of print newspapers. And in joining the Writers Guild of America East, which has organized staffs at some larger digital organizations, including Vice and HuffPost, the DNAinfo and Gothamist staffers hoped for stability and recognition.
