Today’s introduction comes from Adam Nagourney, the Los Angeles bureau chief.
Confronted with the anguished concerns of neighbors, the Los Angeles City Council is trying to walk a fine line by responding to upset constituents without hurting tourism, a major economic force here. (And there are few tourist draws as big as the Hollywood sign.) The council is moving to adopt regulations that would require tour operators to give patrons private headphones, getting rid of squawky speakers. And the city is drawing up a list of streets where tour vans would be banned completely.
Neighborhood groups in Hollywood are often criticized for being resistant to development and outsiders. But the roads in the hills can be extraordinarily narrow, and it is not unusual to come around a blind corner to confront an oncoming tour van.
On a foggy morning exactly 10 years ago, a container ship struck one of the Bay Bridge towers, unleashing a swath of oil that would contaminate the environment. The spill, caused by the Cosco Busan, was not the largest in Bay Area history — when two tankers collided there in 1971, they spilled more than 10 times as much bunker oil — but the numbers were striking.
The shipping companies that owned and operated the Cosco Busan reached a $44.4 million settlement to reimburse government agencies that responded to the spill; as restitution for the lost human uses of the shoreline; and to restore damaged fish and bird habitats.
The Cosco Busan sent about 53,000 gallons of bunker oil into the bay. By comparison, the Exxon Valdez spilled about 11 million gallons into Alaska’s Prince William Sound in 1989, and the Deepwater Horizon explosion released more than 160 million gallons into the Gulf of Mexico in 2010.
An estimated 6,849 birds died from the oil spill, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Association. Birds from 65 species, including the threatened marbled murrelet and snowy plover, were killed.
The crash left a 100-foot gash on the port side of the 926-foot ship, which was traveling at 11 knots, or 12.7 miles per hour, when it hit the bridge.
The Cosco Busan’s pilot, John J. Cota, was sentenced to 10 months in federal prison after pleading guilty to violating the Clean Water Act and the Migratory Bird Treaty Act. According to his lawyers, he had piloted about 4,000 ships in a 27-year career before the crash — with only one minor accident.
