On Nov. 9, 2016, I boarded the Lake Shore Limited, Amtrak’s overnight service from New York to Chicago. I had with me a small suitcase stuffed with a week’s worth of clothes, half a dozen books, a bright blue Casio wristwatch, and a cheap digital camera I’d picked up at Best Buy on my way to Penn Station. My phone remained at home.
Over the next 13 days, I would log 8,980 miles aboard six trains, traversing 31 states, subsisting mainly on Three Cheese Tortellini with Creamy Pesto Sauce and Vegetable Medley. During this time, I had conversations with upward of 80 strangers, almost all of whom I met over meals in the dining car. Aside from what I was told by other passengers, I consumed no news in any form during my trip.
In the months leading up to the presidential election, I’d been working on a passel of new songs for a run of shows at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, and, on the heels of years spent zigzagging the country in a tour bus, I was thinking about travel, and the varied impulses that have given rise to travel throughout history, as an organizing principle. But I wanted to write something that was at the very least framed by a personal journey, if not entirely personal in its content.
At the same time, I was also keenly aware — who wasn’t? — of the rupture in our body politic, and decided that I might kill two birds with one stone by taking a trip that would wrest me out of my New York City bubble while offering the narrative frame I was seeking. So in early October, I bought a series of train tickets and decided that regardless of the outcome, I would set off the morning after the election.
Meals in the dining car work like so: If you’re in a sleeper car, an attendant walks through midmorning and takes reservations; you’re handed a slip of paper with the time and number of people in your party. At the appointed hour, an announcement is made inviting those holding reservations to appear at the threshold of the dining car. If you’re in a party smaller than four, you’ll be placed at the next open table, leading to stochastic seating arrangements that create unexpected social and cultural adjacencies.
In the course of my travels, I chatted with postmasters, real estate agents, nuclear engineers, schoolteachers, farm equipment saleswomen, nurses, long haul truck drivers, retirees headed to the Grand Canyon, retirees headed back from the Grand Canyon, a sea-steading software engineer, a prominent TV personality, a cowboy, a national park trail crew leader, an aspiring music publicist, a public utility employee focused on solar energy who nevertheless professed to be a climate change skeptic, a flight attendant, an actuary, an air conditioner salesman, two ultramarathoners, and two train enthusiasts who met on an online forum and now maintain a food blog documenting everything that they eat during their trips. The list goes on.
Where much of the digital world finds us sorting ourselves neatly into cultural and ideological silos, the train, in my experience, does precisely the opposite. It also acts, by some numinous, unseen force, as a kind of industrial-strength social lubricant. To be sure, I encountered people whose politics I found abhorrent, dangerous, and destructive, but in just about every instance, there was something about the person’s relationship to family, and loyalty to family, that I found deeply moving. That ability to connect across an ideological divide seemed predicated on the fact that we were quite literally breaking bread together. Perhaps it also had something to do with the pace at which we traveled.
Limping along obsolescent track at speeds averaging 55 m.p.h., the American train is tremendously inefficient; it takes almost four full days to cross the continental United States via rail. But that inefficiency is precisely what made this train trip revelatory. Rail culture, in contrast to the digital, proposes a fundamentally different relationship to time, and to time’s modern bedfellow, efficiency.
There are categories of experience and thought threatened by our devotion to efficiency, and in our fast-paced lives, we may be blinded to the loss of those ways of thinking. I mourn the decline of complex truth, the ability to hold two sides of an argument in mind, the desire to understand rather than simply to be right. We have, for the most part, retreated into pure binary thinking.
Our inability to think dialectically, and by extension, empathetically, stems both from our shortened attention spans and the flattening of public discourse, but also from our fear of being shamed — in an ideologically divided society — for acknowledging any iota of truth to the grievance of the other side. After a few days of the dining car routine I began to wonder if the train might be a salve for our national wound, bringing us into intimate conversation with unlikely interlocutors, and allowing us to see each other as human rather than as mere containers for ideology.
On the train, I slowed down. I thought more deeply. I listened better, and longer. We moved at such a languorous pace through what would otherwise have been a blink of a town that I could feel, for just a moment, that this tiny hamlet, with its single pub, gas station, antique shop and general store, was the center of the universe.
When I returned from my trip a few days before Thanksgiving, I stared at the pile of translucent blue New York Times bags that had accrued. Over the last year, in writing songs about my experiences and the people that I met, I’ve often felt that I ought to read or at least unwrap those newspapers, to understand how that brief period was described by journalists. But for some reason, I couldn’t bring myself to do so, for fear that the tenderness and salvation I felt aboard those trains would be lost. I still haven’t opened them.