Sitting in the passenger seat of a car en route to Benjamin N. Cardozo High School in Queens, which he attended, Mr. Fieg, 35, wistfully described the cereal-bowl recipes of his youth: Frosted Flakes with Rice Krispies and crushed Linden chocolate-chip cookies with chocolate milk for breakfast, and “just Frosted Flakes with milk” for his afternoon fix.
“It was tougher to quit cereal than it was to quit smoking cigarettes,” Mr. Fieg said. It could not have been easy, then, for him to open Kith Treats, a chain of cafes dedicated to cereal located inside of his stores. “I relapsed,” Mr. Fieg said.
A streak of obsessiveness runs through Mr. Fieg’s approach to most things. “With Ronnie, we’re either doing something and it’s 1,000 percent pedal to the floor or we’re not going to do it at all,” said Mikol Stambaugh, the head of development and production at Kith, whose team meets with Mr. Fieg every day.
His intensity may explain how, in the course of six years, he has turned a pair of 800-square-foot sneaker shops into one of America’s most talked-about independent brands. Kith is both a store and a label (it has 178 employees): A sprinkling from recent collections includes cropped, monochromatic hoodies; plaid work shirts; streamlined track pants; hand-distressed denim; shearling parkas; soccer sneakers made with Adidas; and faux-fur-covered hiking boots produced with Fracap.
Kith is cited regularly in cool-kid publications like Hypebeast, Highsnobiety and Complex and has Reddit forums devoted to tracking its latest products. At its new three-story flagship store in Manhattan, which opened in October, customers regularly line up outside for the latest hoodie, jogger or sneaker, which typically cost $100 to $300.
“It’s really indicative of what is driving fashion today,” said Bruce Pask, the men’s fashion director at Bergdorf Goodman and Neiman Marcus, where Kith has in-store shops and customers have lined up outside for nearly every one of its releases.
Along with other companies that built their business models around the drop, such as Yeezy and Supreme, Kith has defined this particular moment in the purchasing patterns of tweens, teens, 20- and 30-somethings.
The release will cap off a flurry of activity for the company. In the last several months Kith has opened an outpost of Kith Treats in Tokyo and a children’s store; put on its second fashion week show; and created products in partnership with Coca-Cola, Vogue, Bergdorf Goodman, Off-White, Nike, Adidas and the restaurant Carbone.
It is difficult to define the boundary between Kith the label and the man behind it. Asked what he likes to do in his free time, Mr. Fieg was silent for a moment, then turned to his executive assistant, Stacey Root. “I’m going to let Stacey answer that question,” he said.
Mr. Fieg has been developing his tastemaker status since he turned 13 and asked his second cousin David Zaken, the owner of the David Z chain, for a job at one of his shoe stores instead of bar mitzvah money. He began taking the F train from the final stop on the line, near his parents’ house, to the West Village, after school and on weekends. At the time, the block where he worked, Eighth Street between Fifth and Sixth Avenues, was a gathering spot for some of the decade’s biggest stars.
Mr. Fieg has an intuitive understanding of what his customer wants because in many ways he is his customer. “I want a Bergdorf Goodman varsity jacket, and I want it to be multicolor in these regal colors, and then I make it and I wear it,” Mr. Fieg said. And then his followers wear it, too.
Before he was even a teenager, Mr. Fieg desperately wanted a pair of Reebok pumps, but his parents couldn’t afford them, so his mother bought him a pair of Asics Gel Lyte III sneakers instead. Mr. Fieg was disappointed at first (“I was crying,” he said), but he eventually came to love the shoes and wore them into the ground. When he asked for another pair, it turned out they were discontinued.
In 2007, when Asics offered him the chance to bring back one of its archival models, Mr. Fieg immediately knew which one he would resurrect. The collaboration and the story behind it brought Mr. Fieg a lot of attention and established him in the sneaker scene.
His foray into apparel similarly started from his desire to make a thing that he wanted to own. In late 2012, he received a pair of Scotch & Soda pants that he thought didn’t fit well so he tailored them to make them look like twill joggers. “People were asking me about my pants more than they were asking me about my shoes, and I’m always wearing the best shoes, so it was weird, right?” Mr. Fieg said.
After some small-batch experimentation, he hired Mr. Stambaugh and started producing and selling clothing in earnest, using the same limited-run model that has worked so well for him with sneakers.
