BOSTON — A longtime Boston television journalist on Wednesday accused Kevin Spacey of sexually assaulting her 18-year-old son in the summer of 2016 at a Nantucket bar.
At an emotional news conference, Heather Unruh, a former news anchor for WCVB, an ABC affiliate, said that the actor plied her son with “drink after drink” and then reached down his pants and grabbed his genitals. Her son had told Mr. Spacey that he was 21, she said, though he was only 18.
“But,” said Ms. Unruh, regardless of her son’s age, “Kevin Spacey had no right to sexually assault him. There was no consent.” She said she hoped the actor would go to jail.
Mr. Spacey and his spokesman did not immediately reply to email messages seeking comment on Wednesday.
Ms. Unruh said that she discussed the incident informally with the sheriff of Nantucket, Mass., last summer shortly after hearing her son’s account, but only last week did her son officially report the matter to the Nantucket police, who are conducting an investigation. She said her son also “handed over evidence,” which she declined to describe.
Her son, now a sophomore in college, did not attend the news conference. Ms. Unruh said they decided to go public now because the climate had changed after accusations of sexual assault and harassment against Harvey Weinstein and because victims of sexual misconduct were no longer being blamed.
Mitchell Garabedian, who is representing Ms. Unruh’s son and who joined her at the news conference, said that the allegation against Mr. Spacey was “well within the statute of limitations” for a civil claim and “also within the criminal statute of limitations.” They are now considering their legal options.
She said the room was crowded and dimly lit. After Mr. Spacey grabbed him, her son shifted his body to try to remove the hand, then he froze, Ms. Unruh said.
“He ran as fast as he could all the way to his grandmother’s house,” his mother said, where he told his sister what had happened. The two then called their mother in the middle of the night.
Mr. Garabedian, who represented victims of the Catholic Church clergy abuse scandal (and was portrayed by Stanley Tucci in the film “Spotlight”), said he was conducting his own investigation and would contact Mr. Spacey but had not done so yet.
