GENEVA — The authorities in Papua New Guinea have vowed to use force, if necessary, to remove hundreds of migrants and refugees protesting at a closed detention center on the remote Manus Island if the men have not left of their own accord by Saturday.
Conditions have deteriorated in recent days for the nearly 600 men, mostly from the Middle East and Southeast Asia, who were sent to the island as part of Australia’s offshore detention program. Some have been held there for years.
United Nations experts on Thursday said that Australia was responsible for the developing humanitarian crisis, urging the government to move the men to safety in Australia and to end its policy of sending asylum seekers to offshore centers.
The United Nations Human Rights Committee, a panel of independent experts, bluntly rejected Australia’s position that it had no obligation toward the welfare of migrants it had sent to the center because they were not on Australian soil.
Canberra had “effective control over this situation and as a result it has responsibility for the fate of these individuals,” Yuval Shany, the panel’s vice chairman, told reporters in Geneva.
By law, Australia does not resettle any migrants who approach the country by boat, and since 2013 it has paid neighboring Papua New Guinea to shelter migrants trying to reach Australia. Most have already sought refugee status, and some are waiting for resettlement. Another 1,200 asylum seekers are being held in a center on the island of Nauru.
The rights panel’s observations echoed deepening alarm among other humanitarian agencies about the conditions on Manus Island. Water, power and other services were cut off at the island’s original detention center last month after officials decided to move the men to another location on the island. Australia withdrew its security staff from the camp last week, and the migrants barricaded themselves inside and refused to leave, fearing violence from island residents.
Tensions increased on Thursday after Prime Minister Paul O’Neill of Papua New Guinea threatened to use “appropriate measures” to clear the migrants from the center. A notice posted at the camp warned that remaining there would be detrimental to the men’s health, and that if they were not out by Saturday, they could be forcibly removed or arrested.
Behrouz Boochani, a Kurdish Iranian refugee detained on Manus since 2013, said that several fences around the camp had been removed and that although people in the camp were frightened by the threat of arrest, they planned to stay put.
The Papua New Guinea Supreme Court ruled on Tuesday that the country’s government was not required to provide the migrants with food, water or electricity, and its immigration minister, Petrus Thomas, said last month that the asylum seekers were Australia’s responsibility.
Amnesty International, the human rights group, called the court decision “an abhorrent attack on the right to life.” “The lives of these men, who are only asking for their rights to dignity and safety, are at serious risk,” the Amnesty researcher Kate Schuetze said in a statement on Tuesday.
On Thursday she denounced the authorities’ plan to forcibly remove the men.
Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull of Australia said this week that the asylum seekers should move to the “very high-quality” accommodation prepared for them in the nearby town of Lorengau, but United Nations refugee agency officials said the centers were incomplete and had space for only about 100 people.
