An article on Saturday about a federal report linking human activities to climate change misstated the number of global heat records established over the last 17 years. Sixteen of the last 17 years have been the warmest years on record for the globe, not six of the last 17.
The “Wealth Matters” column on Oct. 21, about investors’ interest in house flipping, misidentified the name of a money lender focused on the San Francisco Bay Area. It is Rubicon Mortgage Fund, not Rubicon Mortgage Lending.
An article on Monday about Facebook’s efforts to monitor fake accounts on its social platform’s misstated at one point the most recent report of its monthly average users. It is 2.07 billion, not 2.3 billion. The article also misstated the company’s estimate of fake accounts on its site. Facebook estimates that about 60 million — not 200 million — accounts are fake. The company estimates that about 200 million accounts are duplicate, used by real people.
The “Common Sense” column on Saturday, about General Electric’s use of “chase planes” and the company’s recent struggles, included outdated titles for John J. Brennan of Vanguard. He is the company’s chairman emeritus and senior adviser, not its chairman and chief executive.
A capsule summary on the cover of Business Day on Saturday about monthly employment data misstated the number of jobs that the United States economy added in October. As the article correctly noted, the Labor Department reported that employers added 261,000 jobs, not 106,000.
A picture caption with an article on Monday about Google’s new machine learning technology misstated the surname of a researcher for Google. He is Sergey Levine, not Levin. The caption also included an outdated credential for him. He is an assistant professor at the University of California, Berkeley, not a postdoctoral researcher there.
An obituary on Sunday about the costume designer John Mollo misspelled the name of the county in England where he died. It is Wiltshire, not Wilshire.
Because of an editing error, an obituary on Sunday about the family therapist Salvador Minuchin misidentified his birthplace in Argentina. He was born in San Salvador, not San Salvador de Jujuy.