J. C. Penney surprised Wall Street on Friday, but not in the way investors had come to expect: The beleaguered department store chain reported an increase in a key measure of sales that was greater than anticipated, causing its stock to surge.
The retailer said comparable sales — those at stores open at least a year — had risen 1.7 percent in the third quarter compared with the same period a year earlier, more than double analysts’ expectations and the company’s own forecast last month.
The upswing was J. C. Penney’s first in that critical metric in a year, an indication that the chain’s strategy of purging excess inventory and closing underperforming stores was paying off. The company’s $2.8 billion in revenue for the quarter also exceeded expectations.
J. C. Penney stock was up 15.3 percent on Friday, to $3.17 a share. A year ago, shares were trading above $9.
The J. C. Penney results were a departure from recent earnings reports from retailers that have raised concerns heading into the holiday shopping season. Department stores, in particular, have struggled to recapture foot traffic and to make innovations as they lose sales to Amazon and other online sellers.
Macy’s reported on Thursday that its comparable sales for the third quarter had slipped 3.6 percent year over year. Kohl’s reported an uptick in same-store sales, but its quarterly profits missed expectations, a result it attributed to the impact of Hurricanes Harvey and Irma hitting during the back-to-school season. Comparable sales at Nordstrom’s, which were also announced on Thursday, also underwhelmed.
Not all of J. C. Penney’s earnings picture was positive. The company reported a net loss of $128 million, or 41 cents a share, nearly doubling from $67 million, or 22 cents a share, a year earlier. Adjusted for one-time changes, the loss was 33 cents a share, less than analysts had expected.
The company managed expectations by releasing an earnings forecast on Oct. 27 — a day before the end of its third quarter — that predicted a more modest performance than the final report showed.
But J. C. Penney has also taken “bold but necessary steps” to help “reset” major parts of its business, Marvin Ellison, the chief executive, said in an earnings call on Friday.
He said the retailer had used deep discounts to clear out slow-moving inventory in its women’s division and had expanded its casual and contemporary offerings, leading to the first positive same-store sales in the category in 14 months.
The company said in February that it planned to close as many as 140 stores — 14 percent its total — in the months ahead.
