It lasts just a split second, almost imperceptible in a two-hour score. It’s over too quickly to summon the dogs of the Upper West Side or to break any nearby windows.
But brief as it is, the A above high C that the soprano Audrey Luna reaches in Thomas Adès’s new opera, “The Exterminating Angel,” is so high, it has never been sung in the 137-year history of the Metropolitan Opera.
Watch soprano Audrey Luna hit the highest note in the history of the Met with the help of assistant conductor Bryan Wagorn.
High C has been hit by the thousands. D’s and E’s, too, are rousing but not uncommon. F’s have been rarer, and G’s and A flats rarer still.
But a high A — a combination of genetic gifts, rigorous training and psychological discipline over two fragile vocal cords — is monumental, and unprecedented at the Met, according to its archivists.
As he planned the new opera, he approached Ms. Luna, who had already ventured to a high G as the sprite Ariel in Mr. Adès’s adaptation of “The Tempest” at the Met in 2012.
In “The Exterminating Angel,” based on the 1962 Luis Buñuel film, Ms. Luna plays Leticia, an opera diva who is part of a blue-bloods dinner party, the guests of which find themselves mysteriously unable to leave at the end of the evening. The vocal demands are a workout for almost every performer onstage.
Her topmost register is unusually lucid and effortless. Even in those notes unattainable by most other sopranos, and even when those notes are held far longer than the pecks requested by most other composers, Ms. Luna’s tone is full. She manages to avoid shrillness in what she aptly calls the “Wagnerian coloratura spectacle” that is her final “Exterminating Angel” aria, a flood of sustained superhigh sound up to F.
The celebrated French soprano Lily Pons sustained a high F in the final mad scene from “Lucia” — sung, at her Met debut in 1931, “in legitimate note, not bird whistles or falsetto,” according to The New York Post. At the turn of the 20th century, Sibyl Sanderson, as Massenet’s Manon, hit a G, known as her “Eiffel Tower note.” Mado Robin, a French coloratura, was recorded shrilling up to a B flat, but she never sang at the Met.
More recently, Natalie Dessay was known in New York for her crystal-clear G’s as the mechanical doll Olympia in Offenbach’s “Les Contes d’Hoffmann.” Just this fall, Erin Morley’s Olympia ornaments brought her up to A flat, a feat Rachele Gilmore achieved in the role at the Met in 2009.
“The Exterminating Angel” isn’t the first time Mr. Adès has pushed a singer to extremes, nor was “The Tempest.” In fact, one of his very first works, “Five Eliot Landscapes” for soprano and piano, from 1990, ends on a sustained G flat.
Callow or not, he’s still at it. Mr. Adès said that in the score of “The Tempest,” which had its premiere in London in 2004, he had placed a high G in brackets, indicating a note that at the time he only dreamed of hearing.
When she sang the part at the Met, Ms. Luna could reach the G. Now, more than a decade later, the score of “The Exterminating Angel” has a high B in brackets — yet another seemingly impossible note, waiting patiently for a soprano who can crack yet another music-stave ceiling.