Illustrated. 226 pp. W.W. Norton & Company. $26.95.
Farmers are fatalists. Rick Hammond, the Nebraska farmer at the heart of Ted Genoways’s new book, “This Blessed Earth,” has spent “his whole life just barely keeping the wolves away from the door,” and he knows that the weather and the weeds will always win in the end.
Genoways, in addition to his work as a journalist, is also a poet and a biographer of Walt Whitman, but this isn’t a particularly lyrical book. For the most part, it’s a cleareyed and unsentimental look at how farming has become relentlessly optimized by automation, markets and politics; factors that don’t always take into account the guy who’s actually driving the tractor.
The book follows a year on Centennial Hill Farm, where Hammond and his family raise commodities including soybeans, corn and cattle. Worry is a central theme. Anxieties operate on at least three levels on Hammond’s farmland: that of the global economy, more local political and financial concerns, and finally, at the deepest, darkest level, anxieties of obligation, self-worth and legacy.
Hammond is caught in the massive currents of global markets; his crops are units in an industrial system that can just as well use soybeans from a Brazilian farmer if the numbers make sense. The financial pressures are crushing, and the loans, insurance and mortgages may seem abstract until the bank takes back a piece of land, or a hired hand is laid off.
Hammond’s work is also inevitably political. Sometimes those politics are historical, like the Cold War policies that declared, “Food is a weapon,” and that still influence how he makes a living, but they can also be personal: At the seed dealership, Hammond is greeted with, “Well, if it isn’t the local liberal.” Tensions can even get explicitly spiteful, such as when a neighbor, angry about Hammond’s outspoken opposition to the Keystone XL pipeline, declines to renew a lease on hundreds of acres of land that are vital to Hammond’s income.
Hammond, with his cowboy hat and thousand-yard stare, can feel like an archetype, but Meghan, his daughter, is a more raw personality. Funny and salty, she’s fully aware that farming is a gamble in which the house always wins, but she is still eager to embrace the incredibly complex skills of the modern farmer: arbitrage and market timing, plant genetics and soil chemistry, how to quickly replace an irrigation pivot gearbox in the fading afternoon light.
When Genoways moves away from the subject of the Hammonds, he writes with authority on plant breeding, water rights and, in a particularly interesting example, Henry Ford’s early evangelizing for soy as an ingredient for car parts, an initiative that led Fortune to write, “There is a bushel of soya beans in every Ford car.” Sometimes, though, we end up in the weeds. A long section about irrigation, for example, overwhelms with technical details and historical arcana.
Genoways comes from a long line of Nebraskans himself, and late in the book, his father says of a dying prairie town: “Maybe this town has served its purpose, and now it’s time for it to fade into history.” It’s a reminder that the family farm will inevitably pass, just another screen that we’ve used to project our anxieties about modernity and progress. But it’s also an affirmation that those farms have also existed for a purpose: to feed us all.