The first time Anne Fadiman got drunk was not at a debauched frat party or a tawdry dive bar. She was 15 years old, touring France on a prep-school summer program, and out to lunch at La Pyramide, a “triple-étoile establishment” that her father had told her was “the best restaurant in the world.” Fadiman was determined to develop a taste for the Burgundy and Bordeaux her father treasured — “I wouldn’t be my father’s daughter if I didn’t” — and, over a 10-course tasting menu, consumed more than her fair share of a 1962 Brut Crémant sparkling wine. It was a thrill-less indulgence: She drank not because she enjoyed the wine (it just made her dizzy), but because she worried about her chauffeur. The more she sipped, the less she left for her companion — the director of her study abroad program, who tended to speed his Mercedes through two-way passing lanes.
This early experience foreshadowed the relationship the adult Fadiman would forever have with wine: Available to her in both quantity and quality, drink has always been dominated by her father’s high expectations, and she partakes first and foremost out of a sense of dutiful obligation.
But “The Wine Lover’s Daughter” is also a portrait of a more complicated relationship: her father’s infatuation with the bottles he fastidiously collected and poured nightly from his crystal decanter. Fadiman’s prior work has established her as a talented anthropologist; her 1997 book, “The Spirit Catches You and You Fall Down,” a daringly in-depth profile of a Hmong refugee family she’d met in California nearly a decade earlier, won the National Book Critics Circle Award for nonfiction. Turning her keen powers of observation to her father’s love of wine, Fadiman delivers an illuminating and nuanced case study in connoisseurship that probes the dazzling hedonism and gnawing anxieties that fuel an obsession with fermented grape juice.
“The Wine Lover’s Daughter” also reveals how the insecurities of one generation influence the next. Fadiman pére ensured the “demeatballization” of his children through a steady gavage of literature and Pinot Noir, and the younger Fadiman admits she has “spent decades concealing the privileges of my childhood.” Having finally pulled back the curtain, she shares a litany of “mortifyingly unbohemian” luxuries: There’s her tennis instructor, her swim coach from U.C.L.A.’s varsity team and her family’s uniformed cook, who could be summoned by a bell installed in the dining room of their eight-bathroom Bel Air home. “By the sixth grade,” she writes, “I would have recognized the names of all four Premier Cru Bordeaux” — along with a few Grand Cru Burgundies and the best vintages for each. While she was growing up, her wine education involved once-in-a-lifetime bottles including the 1934 Domaine de la Romanée-Conti ($25,000 today) uncorked by her father for her brother’s 21st birthday.
Yet “The Wine Lover’s Daughter” occasionally feels short on another quality that drew Clifton to his prized French reds: acid, the sourness that adds complexity to both wine and life. Fadiman generally concedes that her apathy toward wine is not a serious hardship — an admission that robs the book of some of its tension — yet she sometimes reaches for drama in ways that strain credibility. In one passage, Fadiman compares her guilt at faking enthusiasm for her father’s red Bandol to “a daughter feeling sure that her kind but conservative father knows she’s gay even though she hasn’t come out to him.” But the stakes are of course incomparable; there is nothing to indicate Fadiman risks being disowned because she doesn’t fawn over first growths, and she shares numerous passions with Clifton, including a career as a writer. There are glimmers of friction between parent and child: Fadiman acknowledges, for example, that her father was a “male chauvinist” who belittled women and expected less of his daughter than of his sons. She then spins this as a blessing in disguise: It “both devalued and protected me,” she writes, arguing that the pressure placed on her brothers gave her the freedom to follow in her father’s literary footsteps.
