In 2010, Greece was insolvent. The profligacy of Greek governments and the staggering laxity of lenders after the country joined the European common currency in 2001 had left it with huge debts that, in the aftermath of a global recession, it could no longer afford to service. Countries in such straits usually go through ad hoc bankruptcies known as sovereign debt crises, in which the currency is devalued and debts defaulted upon and/or written down. These can be messy, but they do at least allow for fresh starts.
Short of leaving the euro, a move with no precedent or procedure and a high risk of cascading chaos, this was not an option for Greece. So in May 2010, the European Commission, European Central Bank and International Monetary Fund stepped in with what was characterized as a 110 billion euro ($146 billion at the time) bailout.
It wasn’t so much a bailout of Greece, though, as of its lenders, notably the struggling big banks of France and Germany. Greece still owed an impossible amount of money, only now its main creditors were the “troika” of E.C., E.C.B. and I.M.F., which went on to impose harsh austerity measures. That austerity accelerated Greece’s economic decline, making repayment of its debts even less likely. More bailouts that weren’t exactly bailouts followed.
“Fiscal waterboarding” is the name that the University of Athens economist Yanis Varoufakis gave to this process, after the torture method that simulates near-drowning again and again. And just as intelligence experts generally don’t think waterboarding is an effective way to extract information, it is hard to find an outside economic or financial expert who thinks the troika’s Greece policy has been effective or sensible.
At the outset of the narrative, the former United States Treasury secretary Lawrence Summers asks Varoufakis in a dimly lit hotel bar in Washington, D.C., whether he is an “insider” or “outsider,” warning that outsiders (those who “prioritize their freedom to speak their version of the truth”) tend to have a hard time getting anything accomplished in government.
That bold fashion statement, Varoufakis recounts, was unintentional — the result of leaving his suitcase in a cab in Athens two days before. Arriving in Paris on a Saturday evening after most stores had closed, he had to make do with a couple of shirts from Zara and a coat borrowed from the Greek ambassador to France.
So Varoufakis wasn’t always trying to make waves. And he seems to have approached his chief task with great seriousness. He got Summers on his side, with the Harvard economist frequently emailing and calling with advice and information. Playing an even bigger role was Jeffrey Sachs of Columbia, who helped Varoufakis craft his debt restructuring proposals and accompanied him to meetings with European and I.M.F. officials. James Galbraith of the University of Texas, who had brought Varoufakis to Austin as a visiting professor, holed up at the finance ministry in Athens to develop contingency plans for a Greek exit from the euro. Other members of Varoufakis’s kitchen cabinet included the former chancellor of the Exchequer Norman Lamont (a Tory), the former Deutsche Bank chief economist Thomas Mayer and even, on occasion, the French economy minister (now president) Emmanuel Macron. This was no amateur hour. That the effort nonetheless ended in failure seems to have been only partly about that insider-outsider thing. A bigger obstacle was political deadlock in the country that now calls almost all the shots in Europe.
Varoufakis had hoped to engineer an orderly bankruptcy for Greece within the euro, with the country’s debts significantly reduced and austerity scaled back. Failing that, though, he was willing to pull Greece out of the euro and go the sovereign-debt-crisis route.
The German finance minister Wolfgang Schäuble, the dominant figure in European financial affairs, openly favored the latter course. His harsh but not entirely unreasonable view was that it had been a mistake to let Greece into the eurozone, and that the only way forward was for Greece to leave. Chancellor Angela Merkel, on the other hand, was unwilling to contemplate a “Grexit” that might lead to an unraveling of the common currency. But she was also unwilling or unable to force Schäuble to offer a better deal to Greece. The result, as Varoufakis writes: “Stalemate!” Reinforcing the stalemate was what Varoufakis calls the “eurozone runaround,” the repeated protestations from officials at the E.C., E.C.B. and I.M.F. that, while they sympathized with Greece’s plight and agreed with many of Varoufakis’s recommendations, they alone couldn’t change the troika’s course. Jack Lew, then the United States Treasury secretary, similarly offered sympathetic words but made clear that he had no interest in crossing the Germans. The end finally came in July 2015, when — right after 61 percent of Greek voters decided to reject the latest “bailout” from the troika — a fearful Tsipras chose nonetheless to submit. Varoufakis resigned after that.
Varoufakis does a magnificent job of evoking the absurdities and frustrations of his tenure. This is what it’s like to go from meeting to interminable meeting for six months, trying and failing to negotiate your country’s way out of a terrible impasse.
At least, this is what Varoufakis says it was like. I did wonder on occasion how much I could trust his play-by-play. I’m reviewing this book, not fact-checking it, but I couldn’t resist asking Summers for his assessment of the opening scene in the hotel bar. “Somewhat embellished,” was the verdict. Leaving aside whether Varoufakis’s recollections might be more accurate than those of a man who has met with so many embattled finance ministers over the past quarter century that he has probably lost count, I’m good with that. A truth somewhat embellished is still pretty much the truth.