The success of a novel often depends on decisions an author makes before writing a single word. For that reason, when I was asked to review “Mrs. Osmond,” John Banville’s sequel to “The Portrait of a Lady” by Henry James, my first question was, “Is it written in James’s style?” Informed that it was, I bowed my head in awe and pity. The great Banville, I feared, was attempting the impossible.
At the same time, I was amazed that no one had thought of doing this before. First published in 1881, “The Portrait of a Lady” concerns a young American woman, Isabel Archer, who, after the death of her parents, travels to Europe, becomes “independent” through an inheritance and is besieged by suitors seeking her hand in marriage. The tragedy of the novel is that Isabel chooses the wrong suitor — the scheming dilettante Gilbert Osmond — and the question hanging over the book’s last section is whether she’ll leave him or not. In the final scene, one of Isabel’s jilted suitors, the American industrialist Caspar Goodwood, follows her to her friend Henrietta Stackpole’s house in London, only to be told that Isabel has returned to Rome. Henrietta then says, “Look here, Mr. Goodwood.… Just you wait!” And the last line of the book is: “On which he looked up at her.” James doesn’t explain what that look means, and readers have been arguing about it ever since. As if to clear up the mystery, James added a paragraph for the 1908 edition, expanding the ending as follows: “On which he looked up at her — but only to guess, from her face, with a revulsion, that she simply meant he was young. She stood shining at him with that cheap comfort, and it added, on the spot, 30 years to his life. She walked him away with her, however, as if she had given him now the key to patience.” This second ending clears up Goodwood’s fate but not Isabel’s, and it presents Banville with his opportunity.
What’s more, in the century and a half since the novel was first serialized in The Atlantic Monthly, Isabel’s decision has grown in importance. Does she return to her husband in Rome out of wifely duty? To rescue her stepdaughter, Pansy? Or to free herself from the marriage, thus regaining her independence and prefiguring the political and social emancipation of women in general? In this regard, “Mrs. Osmond,” despite its antiquated atmosphere, speaks to our present moment.
The Irish like to do this kind of thing. With a piety once reserved for religion, they perform an act of devotion to a literary idol. Colm Toibin’s novel “The Master” is the most obvious comparison. But Toibin chose to write in the third person, in his own style, and to depict the life James led outside his books. For that reason, “The Master” enacts an expansion of James rather than a resurrection.
And in “The Portrait of a Lady” James was at his liveliest. One reason the novel has remained so popular is that it’s a fantastic read. The first half of the book — the courting, the proposals, the refusals — has all the delights of a traditional marriage plot; while the second half, full of dark revelations and wrenching decisions, is psychologically complex and anything but trivial.
By contrast, “Mrs. Osmond” begins with the knowledge that Isabel’s marriage has been a mistake. Much of the action consists of her going here and there, meeting various characters and telling them about it. When the book’s climax finally does come, Isabel manages to extricate herself from her past in a relatively simple fashion. This has the curious effect of making one wonder if her plight in the first book was really all that dire, and whether one’s sympathy for her was misplaced. From this perspective, oddly enough, Banville’s homage reduces the object it venerates.
Halfway through, however, Banville wriggles out of his self-imposed straitjacket to do a remarkable thing. For eight pages, he enters the mind of Gilbert Osmond. As with Jean Rhys’s Brontë prequel, “Wide Sargasso Sea,” this shift of perspective lets the reader view the original story anew. Banville, who has always excelled at writing about criminality and villainy in both his literary fiction and the novels he produces under his pseudonym, Benjamin Black, here reclaims that portion of his dark talent. The section crackles with threat, energy and malice. I was disappointed that Osmond’s turn on the stage was so brief.
Now and then, you read about people who have renounced modernity: Eccentrics who dress in Victorian clothes and live in houses where everything from the wallpaper to the lye soap dates from 1880. It’s probably fun to visit people like that. But after a few hours spent squinting across a dim parlor illuminated by whale oil, you might want to say, “You know what? There’s this thing now called electricity.” This is the difficulty embedded within Banville’s project. There’s something fanatical about it. And no matter what, he’s in a bind. The pace of the novel isn’t exactly swift. And the more longueurs Banville provides in order to reinforce the Jamesian mood and manner, the more tedious the novel becomes. It’s easy to forgive James for keeping to a pace as ruminative and slow as the age he lived in; with Banville, it feels willful to the point of perversity. And yet, without these longueurs, there would be a reduction in fidelity to the original. It’s a no-win situation. The “better” the book is, the worse it is.
In the same way materialists claim we’re nothing but our bodies, it’s possible to wonder whether a prose style is anything more than words. Banville channels James’s sentences with remarkable conformity. But a writer isn’t only what he writes; he’s also what he leaves out, the intrinsic pattern of his noticing and attention. These things are as distinctive as a fingerprint and yet leave no mark. There is no way to recreate Henry James, not in full, without possessing his actual brain, so as to have at every moment his exact thoughts and reflections. Throughout “Mrs. Osmond,” I had the uncanny feeling of recognizing its sentences as Jamesian without feeling that James had written them, as though by the very act of impersonating James, Banville had managed to illuminate how inimitable James is.
There’s no shame in this. It follows from the impossibility of the project. Lovers of “The Portrait of a Lady” are legion. Many of them will be eager to read this book and many will be enchanted by it. For that last number, there’s an added benefit. The ending of “Mrs. Osmond,” it turns out, is just as enigmatic as that of “The Portrait of a Lady.” It’s the kind of ending that, to the very brave or reckless, might inspire another sequel. Have patience.