GADSDEN, Ala. — It was 1982, and four circuit judges from rural Etowah County, Ala., had filed a state bar complaint against a lawyer named Roy S. Moore, accusing him of running “slanderous” political ads that had portrayed the local legal system as corrupt.
The response from the 35-year-old Mr. Moore, who had just lost his own effort to win a judgeship, was infused with the kind of crusading righteousness — his critics would call it sanctimony — that would later fuel his rise to national fame.
Today, rather than flee, or at least quit his race for the Senate, as many are demanding, Mr. Moore is declaring his innocence and charging ahead despite allegations of improper sexual behavior.
The current furor, in which numerous women have come forward alleging that he approached, dated, or in some cases sexually assaulted them when they were teenagers and he was in his 30s, has played out like a concentrated version of Mr. Moore’s combative history, in which he rose to national prominence as an unyielding spokesman for conservative and religious values.
Mr. Moore, a Republican, has responded with the same defiance that he exhibited when he was twice removed from his post as chief justice of the Alabama Supreme Court, first for dismissing a federal court order to remove a 5,280-pound granite monument of the Ten Commandments he had installed in the state judicial building, and later for flouting the United States Supreme Court’s decision affirming gay marriage. For good measure, he has declared that homosexuality should be illegal, and that Muslims should not be allowed to serve in Congress.
Mr. Moore first made a name for himself as a prosecutor and an anti-establishment political outsider here in Gadsden in the years after 1977, when he returned to Etowah County after an education at West Point, a tour of duty in Vietnam and law school in Tuscaloosa. He already had the contentiousness, if not the overt religiosity.
During those years, he was developing another reputation, passed along in whispers. Now they have grown to a roar, threatening to derail what might have been a cakewalk political contest in deeply conservative Alabama.
One of the women, Leigh Corfman, said she was 14 years old when Mr. Moore engaged in a sexual encounter with her. “I stand by my story,” said Ms. Corfman, whose account first appeared in The Washington Post. Mr. Moore has denied any impropriety with Ms. Corfman or any other woman.
Mr. Moore was rarely seen in the places where lawyers would routinely gather to swap gossip, said James Sledge, a former federal judge who was a lawyer at the time. Few remember him out and about socially. He is, however, remembered as a common presence at the Y.M.C.A. and the Gadsden Mall.
Myron K. Allenstein, a local lawyer who rented office space to Mr. Moore and later tried cases with him, insisted that Mr. Moore was a man of unimpeachable character. “He’s real down to earth but feels real strongly about what he believes,” he said. Mr. Allenstein noted that he was a Democrat who planned to vote for Mr. Moore in the Dec. 12 election.
Janet Reeves, 57, a former employee of a photo kiosk and an Orange Julius at the mall, talked of Mr. Moore asking a friend of hers, who she recalled was 17 or 18, for her phone number. “I just thought he was the creepy old guy,” she said.
People who grew up with him suggest his polarizing reputation goes back further than his days as a county prosecutor.
Twenty years later, he was inspiring some of the same strong feelings, alienating much of the Gadsden legal community and provoking local judges to take the rare step of filing bar complaints against him. (The complaints were eventually closed without action being taken.) An unsuccessful run for county judge in 1982, though giving voters a taste of the hard-line populism that would later draw a national fan base, only seemed to leave him more isolated.
Bill Willard, a longtime lawyer here, ventured a theory. He pointed out that Mr. Moore had never seemed to have any kind of social life, certainly not among his professional peers. And the current allegations, he said, could be seen in that context.
Having resigned his prosecutor job to run for judge and spent his savings to finance his failed bid, Mr. Moore left for Texas, to train as a kickboxer.
It was a break from a trajectory that started with a working-class childhood in Gallant, a small rural community in the foothills east of Gadsden, where his father was a construction worker and his mother a homemaker. His path to adulthood was marked with blue-chip resume highlights, but also struggle and unpleasantness.
It was at West Point, he wrote, that he found the boxing ring to be an equalizer, “where someone from Alabama with a ‘country’ accent could get as much respect as anybody else.” He graduated in the bottom quarter of his class.
In Vietnam, where Mr. Moore commanded a military police battalion, he cracked down so aggressively on what he described as his troops’ drug use and lack of respect for authority that they derisively referred to him as Captain America. He was so convinced, he wrote, that one soldier was going to kill him that he put sandbags under the bed, ostensibly to keep grenades from being rolled under it.
Law school, at the University of Alabama, was a “welcome relief,” he said. But in a recent newspaper column, Guy V. Martin Jr., one of Mr. Moore’s professors, described him as immersed in “illogic,” and said he had constantly argued with classmates. “Moore never won one argument, and the debates got ugly and personal,” Mr. Martin wrote.
One afternoon in 1984, U. W. Clemon, a federal district court judge, was having lunch in his Gadsden office when Mr. Moore stopped by. He had returned after more than a year of boxing in Texas and working on a cattle ranch in the Australian outback.
Judge Clemon, the first black federal judge in Alabama history, remembered Mr. Moore from several years earlier, when, as a prosecutor, Mr. Moore had urged opposition to his confirmation to the bench, charging that Judge Clemon was soft on crime.
“He said he was sorry that he had done it, it was wrong and he had heard good things about me,” Judge Clemon remembered of that afternoon. Mr. Moore was not finished, though. He was opening a law office, he said, and he knew the judge had old law clients in Gadsden. He needed referrals.
So began Mr. Moore’s second run at a legal career here, this time as a private practice attorney, working out of a room he rented from Mr. Allenstein in an 1897 Victorian manse, converted into an office building, near the courthouse. Mr. Allenstein remembered him as “a great orator” who was particularly gifted at closing arguments.
Kathleen Warren, a lawyer who shared the office space, has different memories.
She had heard the gossip about him and young women, but the talk faded around the time of his marriage. At a Christmas gathering in 1984, as he describes in his book, he met a 23-year-old woman named Kayla Kisor, 14 years his junior, whom he immediately recognized from a dance recital he had attended “many years before.” They married the next year.
As he settled in to raise a family and practice law, Mr. Moore remained combative, but few remember him as explicitly religious, though they concede he may have been at home.
“I think this, the whole religious thing, just came as an evolution of his political career,” said Mr. Garmon, the former Gadsden Times reporter, a Democrat who said he liked Mr. Moore but abhorred his politics.
In 1992, Mr. Moore finally became a circuit court judge. He was appointed by the governor at the time, Guy Hunt, to whom he had a connection through a family friend, after the sitting judge died of a heart attack. To decorate his courtroom, Mr. Moore put up a homemade redwood plaque of the Ten Commandments — a precursor to the granite behemoth he would later install in the state judicial building. Few seemed bothered, at first.
Gadsden watched him become a hero of the religious right with mixed feelings.
Mr. Moore would go on to win legal fights and lose them, win elections and be removed from office only to win again, and eventually win the Republican nomination for United States Senate.
