But on Wednesday, the agency reversed its position. In light of the delays, it agreed to allow those rejected because of mail delays to resubmit their renewals for Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals.
The Department of Homeland Security’s acting director, Elaine C. Duke, told the immigration agency to allow applicants to resubmit their paperwork if they have proof that they mailed their renewal in a timely manner and that the reason it missed the Oct. 5 deadline was because of Postal Service delays. Homeland Security issued the guideline in a statement Wednesday night.
In New York, lawyers reported that 18 out of 34 applications had actually arrived at the Chicago location on Oct. 5, according to postal receipts, and yet they were not accepted by the immigration agency until the next day.
Officials from the immigration agency said they were still investigating the cause and location of the problems. Details about the date of the deadline to resubmit applications would be forthcoming, the agency said.
The deadline led to a frenzy of 132,000 applications, according to the immigration agency. At least 4,000 renewals were rejected because they were late, according to a government official in an Oct. 18 deposition in a federal lawsuit over the cancellation of DACA.
It was not clear how many of those 4,000 were rejected because of mail delivery issues, and if that number had increased since Oct. 18.
But as of Wednesday, the number of DACA renewal applicants who had been rejected because of mail delays had increased to at least 115, according to lawyers and lawmakers, including cases in Texas, Wisconsin, Washington State, North Carolina and Michigan.
On Thursday, senators and members of the House of Representatives who sent letters of protest to the Department of Homeland Security this week applauded the agency’s reversal.
There are three Citizenship and Immigration Services intake locations, known as lockboxes, in the United States: in Phoenix, Chicago and Lewisville, Tex., a suburb of Dallas. All three were affected by mail problems, according to immigration advocates, but Chicago had the most applications delayed.
The government had a deadline of its own to address the mail delays because of continuing litigation over the ending of DACA. At a Thursday morning hearing, Judge Nicholas G. Garaufis of Federal District Court in Brooklyn agreed to allow the plaintiffs — two immigrant advocacy groups and a legal services organization from Yale Law School — to amend their original complaint to include the issue of the applications being rejected because of mail problems. But only, he said, if the parties could not come to an agreement first.
“We are pleased to see the government has changed its position,” said Emily Villano, a Yale Law School student involved in the case, but she said that “significant uncertainty” remains.
Stephen M. Pezzi, a trial lawyer in the civil division of the Justice Department, said that officials hoped to resolve the issues facing “all or nearly all” of the immigrants whose applications were denied because of mail delays.
DACA recipients celebrated the reversal with gratitude. In New York, a husband and wife had their applications sent on Sept. 26, along with 13 other renewals from the Northern Manhattan Coalition for Immigrant Rights, an advocacy organization.
All of those renewals were accepted by the immigration agency on Oct. 1, except for one, which arrived on Oct. 6. It belonged to Simrri Juarez, 27, a television programmer. His wife, Hortencia, 27, had her application accepted weeks earlier.
