The leader of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority acknowledged on Monday that the failing health of New York City’s subway system imperils not only the city’s financial future, but the well-being of the surrounding region.
Joseph J. Lhota, the chairman of the transportation authority, said in an interview on Monday, a day after an investigation by The New York Times outlined how years of neglect and poor decisions plunged the system into crisis, that his challenge was not only to tackle the long list of problems, but to instill wholesale change in how the agency manages the subway.
He said he was not interested in assigning blame or focusing on what happened in the past, but he added that it was clear that New Yorkers had been failed and drastic measures needed to be taken to reverse the situation.
“I don’t think the City of New York as we know it today and how we have known it for the last half century can work without the subway,” he said.
The Times investigation showed how even as delays have soared, financing for basic maintenance was slashed. And though the city is experiencing robust financial growth, the transit system has been steadily starved of the money it needs to operate the trains reliably on a day-to-day basis.
Today, the subway system has the worst on-time performance of any major rapid transit system in the world.
The problems are systemic, stretching back decades, with both Republican and Democratic elected officials — including Governors George E. Pataki and Andrew M. Cuomo and Mayors Rudolph W. Giuliani to Bill de Blasio — sharing the blame, that there are no easy fixes.
In June, Mr. Cuomo declared a state of emergency, directing Mr. Lhota to deploy a series of steps, from aggressive train maintenance to signal repairs, to restore service to acceptable levels. But Mr. Lhota said that riders will not see significant progress until next year.
Mr. Lhota used his past experience as leader of the transportation authority during Hurricane Sandy in 2012 as a way of explaining how different this crisis is than what he faced in the past.
The authority had just completed a drill predicated on a storm flooding the system when Sandy swamped the subway tunnels. Officials said they had been prepared and Mr. Lhota earned generally high marks for quickly getting the system up and running again.
He left the authority to run, unsuccessfully, for mayor against Mr. de Blasio.
It was only after the state of the subway system had reached crisis levels that Mr. Cuomo called him back into service.
This time, Mr. Lhota said, the challenge is far greater because the problems plaguing the subways were not the result of a single event, like a storm, but are the consequences of actions taken over a long period of time.
Mr. Lhota said he wants to ensure that the mistakes of the past are not repeated and he believes part of his responsibility is to be an advocate who presses elected officials to provide the resources needed to make short- and long-term investments.
He pointed to a statement he issued on Twitter.
He took issue with some critics who say that steps like enhancing stations and platforms are more cosmetic should be put aside in favor of focusing on essential maintenance.
Mr. Lhota also faces the challenge of improving the public’s perception of the subway, especially among younger riders who have only known it during its high point and not during darker periods of disrepair and crime in the 1970s and 1980s.
That battle will be waged largely on social media, which has become a powerful tool for frustrated riders.
On Monday, the Riders Alliance, a transit advocacy group, sought to offer riders a way to direct their anger.
The group handed out postcards that read ‘Delayed again?” and then encouraged them to send their thoughts directly to the governor on social media.
“He needs to hear from YOU!” the card reads.
John Raskin, the head of the group, said that the current focus on the transportation authority will hopefully force action.
“It’s becoming clear that the delays and breakdowns on the subway system aren’t inevitable with the passage of time; they’re a consequence of years of underinvestment and inattention from our elected leaders, up to and including the governor,” he said.
Dani Lever, a spokeswoman for Mr. Cuomo, took issue with the way Mr. Raskin characterized the governor’s handling of the crisis.
“We fully recognize that the subway system is in unacceptable disrepair and is functioning with flawed performance, which is exactly why the state invested $8.4 billion in capital money, declared a state of emergency, funded the state’s half of the action plan, and empaneled FIX NYC to identify a dedicated revenue stream for the system,” she said in a statement.
Despite the work ahead, Mr. Lhota remains optimistic that he can leave the system better than he found it.
