LONDON — The publicist for Kevin Spacey has announced that the Oscar-winning actor is seeking treatment, as reports emerged that the London theater where he was the longtime artistic director turned a blind eye to allegations of sexual misconduct.
More men have come forward accusing Mr. Spacey of behaving inappropriately toward them. This week, the actor Anthony Rapp accused him of sexual misconduct years ago, when Mr. Rapp was 14.
Many of the accusations regarding Mr. Spacey involve behavior that would have taken place when he was artistic director of the Old Vic theater in London, a position he held for 11 years, until 2015.
The institution released a statement saying it was “deeply dismayed” by the allegations, adding that it had set up an email address for anyone who has worked there to make a confidential complaint about inappropriate behavior by Mr. Spacey or anyone else.
A spokeswoman for the Old Vic declined interview requests.
On Sunday, the “Star Trek: Discovery” actor Mr. Rapp told Buzzfeed News that Mr. Spacey had invited him to a party at his apartment in 1986, where he had made unwanted sexual advances. Mr. Rapp said that after the other guests had left, Mr. Spacey, who appeared intoxicated, took him into his bedroom, and lay on top of him.
The day after that apology, Netflix announced that the next season of “House of Cards,” in which Mr. Spacey starred, would be its last.
On Wednesday, another man came forward, saying that when he was a teenager, Mr. Spacey had lain on him while he was sleeping. Speaking via a video link in which his face was not visible, the man told Victoria Derbyshire of the BBC that the episode had occurred in the 1980s in New York.
The man said that when he was 17, Mr. Spacey had invited him to spend the weekend in New York. He said that Mr. Spacey had asked him to share his bed, but that he had declined and slept on the sofa. He then described waking up in the morning to find Mr. Spacey’s arms around him.
In a statement posted on Facebook, Roberto Cavazos, a Mexican actor, said that Mr. Spacey routinely made unwanted advances toward young men. “It seems that it only took a male under 30 to make Mr. Spacey feel free to touch us,” he said.
