HARARE, Zimbabwe — A young American woman living in Zimbabwe will be tried on charges of attempting to overthrow the government of Zimbabwe with a tweet mocking President Robert Mugabe, the world’s oldest head of state.
The arrest of the woman, Martha O’Donovan, 25, has raised fears that the Zimbabwean government is stepping up efforts to control social media ahead of national elections in 2018. Mr. Mugabe, who will be 94 next year, is running for re-election despite his increasingly frail health.
Ms. O’Donovan was arrested on Friday at her home in Harare and charged with subverting the government and undermining the authority of — or insulting — the president. 
But on Thursday, a high court judge in Harare granted bail to Ms. O’Donovan and openly expressed skepticism of the charges against her.
She has surrendered her passport and was ordered not to leave the country. A trial date has yet to be set.
Ms. O’Donovan, of Martinsville, N.J., is a 2014 graduate of New York University’s Gallatin School of Individualized Study and is a project coordinator for Magamba Network, which produces political satire and comedy. She lives in Harare, the Zimbabwean capital.
 They say that Ms. O’Donovan had access to the anonymous account, with the handle @matigary, via her laptop computer, and that she used an anonymous web browser known as Onion Router.
Ms. O’Donovan’s goal, prosecutors charged, was to “replicate offline uprisings like what happened in Tunisia and Egypt” in 2011.
The @matigary account — which has accumulated a wide following, including among Zimbabwean journalists, for incisive posts about Mr. Mugabe’s government — has continued to tweet since Ms. O’Donovan’s arrest.
Ms. O’Donovan’s employer, Magamba Network, which focuses on youth culture and news, describes its vision as “a democratic and just Zimbabwe.” It is funded in part by the Omidyar Network, a foundation established by Pierre Omidyar, the eBay founder.
A social media campaign started by the organization under the hashtag #FreeMartha urges Zimbabweans to call for her release, and is being spread by local and international rights groups.
The arrest came as Zimbabwe’s government, which last month established a cybersecurity ministry, is tightening its control over social media and its potential threat to Mr. Mugabe’s 37-year rule.
The government began a crackdown last year on activists who use WhatsApp and Facebook, leading to some of the biggest street protests in years.
The crackdown has helped keep the nation’s streets quiet this year. But as Mr. Mugabe prepares to run for another term, Ms. O’Donovan’s arrest indicates that the authorities are unlikely to tolerate even the slightest criticism of the aging leader.
Led by Mr. Mugabe’s wife, Grace Mugabe, the president’s closest allies have been closing ranks behind him. This week, they engineered the removal of one of the two vice presidents, Emmerson Mnangagwa, who was regarded as a strong contender to eventually succeed Mr. Mugabe.
In an apparent display of strength, Mr. Mugabe had the airport in Harare, the nation’s biggest, renamed for him on Thursday.
Mr. Mugabe, who helped lead Zimbabwe’s struggle for independence and has ruthlessly outmaneuvered every challenger ever since, has expressed growing frustration with the unpredictable power of social media. Last year, a previously obscure pastor, the Rev. Evan Mawarire, became a symbol of the grievances against Mr. Mugabe’s long rule after posting a video on Facebook. After briefly becoming Zimbabwe’s leading opposition figure, the pastor was driven out of the country and quickly lost his influence.
In September, government officials described social media as a security threat, after false rumors about shortages in the nation’s supermarkets caused panic buying and a spike in prices.
Mr. Mugabe’s longtime finance minister, Patrick Chinamasa, was appointed the new cybersecurity minister last month. It is not known where — or whether — the ministry has a physical office.