I recently joined a book group for women over 50 that grew out of an Italian-American social club. Some of us are retired teachers, one owns a restaurant, one has a Ph.D. in literature. We have been reading Elena Ferrante’snovels, but we don’t limit ourselves to just Italian books.
I am a painter and have taught art. The head of the club asked me to find a book about an artist’s inspiration or about the origins of creativity. I have read several artists’ memoirs and biographies, but none have stood out for me. I would like to learn about creativity from the perspective of someone like Twyla Tharp, or maybe even a musician.
Innumerable how-tos, biographies, memoirs and volumes of criticism offer tantalizing glimpses into artists’ minds. To narrow down the selections, I picked books that parse process and offer wisdom about creativity from a wide variety of perspectives.
In the delightfully nutty “Creativity,” another performing artist, the eclectic Philippe Petit — best known for his Aug. 7, 1974 high-wire walk between the towers of the World Trade Center — boldly declares himself an “outlaw” and “a defiant Renaissance Boy.” The slim and quirky book, full of diagrams and lists, is like performance art on the page. Petit’s conspiratorial and imperious voice calls on readers to vanquish the blank slate and celebrate chaos. He lists his own inspirational “avalanche” of files rife with ideas that include children’s books and lock-picking (with a nifty accompanying illustration of lock and key). To add depth to your book discussion, your group could read “Creativity” alongside Colum McCann’s novel “Let the Great World Spin” and Mordicai Gerstein’s picture book “The Man Who Walked Between the Towers”: two moving, beautiful texts that feature Petit and his art.
In “The Rise,” Sarah Lewis, an art historian and curator, examines innovation with exhilarating range and fierce curiosity. She presents historical and contemporary examples such as the modern dancer and choreographer Paul Taylor, and the physicist Andre Geim — the first individual scientist ever to win both the Nobel and the decidedly less illustrious Ig Nobel prizes. What binds the book together, in addition to Lewis’s exceptional storytelling skills and quiet lyricism, is the clarity and care with which she describes the power of failures to lift creativity.
Another erudite book about ingenuity, Lewis Hyde’s “The Gift,” is a rich, deeply philosophical work of art and scholarship that reckons with the act of creation in a capitalist society. Drawing from diverse cultural traditions, parables and folktales and artists themselves — Walt Whitman and Edward Hopper among them — Hyde develops a steadying, inspiring study that suggests how to keep art sacred.
While looking for books on collaboration and creativity in music, I discovered a fascinating collection of conversations that covers both: “Absolutely on Music,” by Haruki Murakami and Seiji Ozawa, translated by Jay Rubin. The unpretentious and engaging dialogues between passionate artists — the bewitching writer in whose novels music plays a prominent part and the indefatigable, amiable conductor — make the pages fly. Their subjects range from Beethoven’s Third Piano Concerto to “manic record collectors” to the way writing has given Murakami “a better ear” for music. If you can take the time to listen to the music they discuss while you read their conversations, the words will sing.
