The 16th season of “Project Runway” comes to a close. And a new Mitchell and Webb series debuts on streaming.
BACK on Sundance Now. David Mitchell and Robert Webb have mined excruciatingly uncomfortable situations for laughs for more than two decades, whether at Cambridge University in Britain, in sketch television shows, or on their acclaimed sitcom “Peep Show.” They’ll torment each other yet again in “Back,” with the pair slipping into a familiar dynamic: Mr. Mitchell plays the hapless, neutered Stephen, trying to take over his recently deceased father’s business; Mr. Webb plays his estranged foster brother, the swaggering, possibly malicious Andrew, who shows up just in time to throw everything into disarray. Simon Blackwell (“Peep Show,” “Veep”) created and wrote the script.
IT’S ALWAYS SUNNY IN PHILADELPHIA on Netflix. You have less than a month to watch 11 seasons of this delirious gross-out sitcom before it leaves Netflix in December. The show follows five ignorant, arrogant bar owners in South Philadelphia in their Sisyphean quests for wealth, fame, sex, bragging rights and mere literacy. Not sure where to start? Try “The Gang Solves the Gas Crisis,” a fiery caper that ends with one of the great catchphrases of all time; “Charlie Work,” a kaleidoscopic single-shot sendup of “Birdman” that finds genius within an idiotic routine; “Sweet Dee Has a Heart Attack,” which takes going postal to a depraved new level; and “The Nightman Cometh,” maybe the worst musical ever written.
N.F.L. FOOTBALL: STEELERS VS. TITANS 8:25 p.m. on NBC. This matchup features two confident division leaders who roll into the week with four-game winning streaks. The Pittsburgh Steelers have one of the league’s top defenses as well as the offensive savants Le’Veon Bell and Antonio Brown, and the Tennessee Titans’ running game has boomed recently behind the quarterback Marcus Mariota.
PROJECT RUNWAY 9 p.m. on Lifetime. The 16th season comes to a close as the final four designers head to New York Fashion Week. Jessica Alba is guest judge.
SCANDAL 9 p.m. on ABC. The first half of the final season ends after a shocking revelation about Olivia Pope (Kerry Washington) and her ability to break bad. Quinn (Katie Lowes), meanwhile, has vanished. The fall finale of HOW TO GET AWAY WITH MURDER follows at 10.