The editorial board rightly condemned President Trump’s use of the tragic terrorist attack in Lower Manhattan as an opportunity to launch a baseless assault on the American criminal justice system and a sitting senator.
Against the backdrop of Russian efforts to influence our electoral process and further fracture our country along cultural and political fault lines, and attacks by terrorists seeking to shake the American psyche and undermine confidence in our government, one has to ask: Why does Mr. Trump launch unfounded attacks that aid our enemies in their efforts to sow dissension and discord? More important, when will the American people come together and say enough is enough?
The greatest long-term threat to this country is not a physical attack on our people but an internal assault on our institutions that undermines our system of governance.
MICHAEL CURRY, AUSTIN, TEX.
It is infuriating to hear about yet another terrorist attack claiming the lives of innocent people. My deepest condolences go to the victims and their families.
As a Muslim, I find it very demoralizing to see these types of attacks being associated with my faith.  As an Ahmadi Muslim, I will continue to categorically condemn these attacks. And it is important that other Muslim communities around the world also collectively speak out against toxic ideologies that shed the blood of the innocent.
Sayfullo Saipov came to the United States from Uzbekistan in 2010. Like most immigrants he sought a better life. Did our immigration policy fail us, as President Trump asserts? Did we admit a sleeper agent, calmly preparing to wreak havoc some seven years later?
Or did we fail Mr. Saipov? Did he not find the American dream that drew him, like so many others, here? Does it still exist? For how many? Here is a man who married, had children, struggled to find meaningful work, and finally turned to violence against infidels to provide the reward our socioeconomic system seemed to withhold.
This kind of simplistic, reductive thinking has great appeal. It allows the individual to feel he has the power to make a difference — a deadly difference, to be sure. Our president would do well to ask how we failed Mr. Saipov rather than how we can magically ferret out those who resort to violence when the promised land is not the land they imagined.
When Donald Trump was running for president, he told the country, “I know more about ISIS than the generals do,” and he promised a plan to defeat ISIS. It is now almost one year since the election. Now that we have had our first terrorist attack in the United States since he took office, whom does he blame? Senator Chuck Schumer and the Democrats.
Where is the Trump plan? He is the president, and the Republicans are the majority in Congress. Why is he blaming the Democrats? Have they (or “Crooked Hillary”) kept Mr. Trump from defeating ISIS?
Sayfullo Saipov’s murderous intentions were clear. By his own account, he would have driven farther and struck other innocents had he not crashed into the school bus. When he emerged from his truck, he was carrying two guns. In another city, they would have been lethal weapons, but rigorous gun laws in New York City and in New Jersey, where he lived, limited him to a paintball gun and a pellet gun.
Who says gun control doesn’t save lives?
The terrorist attack that took place on the Hudson River bike path on Tuesday has left experts and laypeople alike at a loss as to how to approach this all too often recurring horror.
The fact that a heroic New York police officer was able to apprehend Sayfullo Saipov by shooting but not killing him presents a unique opportunity to send a message to all those contemplating similar acts of terrorism. Usually, the criminal is convicted, locked away, and more or less forgotten by the public.
What I suggest is that Mr. Saipov be incarcerated in solitary confinement and suffer the resultant misery. Then, on a periodic basis, the media should report what his life is like. Such coverage just might make the homegrown terrorist reconsider his actions. Anticipation of being a hero in the eyes of fellow radicals and the heavenly reward to follow would be debunked. Even if just one terrorist act is deterred, many lives would be saved.
