New York is a booming city somehow plagued by vacant storefronts, pockmarks on the streetscape that are casualties of urban evolution: Higher rents are forcing smaller shops out of business, and in their place follow a series of ubiquitous banks, chain drugstores and coffee shops.
On Thursday, the City Council is expected to pass a bill that tackles a little-known facet of the multipartite problem: the commercial rent tax, which affects only businesses in Manhattan south of 96th Street that pay at least $250,000 a year in rent.
The threshold for the tax was last changed in 2001, when it was raised to $250,000 from $150,000. Since then, commercial rents have exploded in most of Manhattan; in SoHo, for example, those rents have gone up an average of 431 percent between 2001 and 2016, according to data collected by the Real Estate Board of New York.
The bill, introduced by Councilman Daniel Garodnick, a Democrat who represents the Upper East Side and Central Manhattan, would raise the rent threshold to $500,000 a year, a move that would free some 2,000 businesses of the tax.
The bill is co-sponsored by 42 members of the 51-member Council, and has the backing of the Council speaker, Melissa Mark-Viverito, and the administration of Mayor Bill de Blasio.
“We’ve worked closely with the Council on the bill and look forward to its passage and to the relief it will give thousands of small businesses,” said Eric F. Phillips, Mr. de Blasio’s press secretary.
The Council has long discussed possible solutions to the spate of vacant storefronts, such as a fine for owners who keep shops vacant for too long, in the hopes of luring big-ticket renters. But previous legislative efforts have gone nowhere.
The measure would cost the city $35 million in lost tax revenue, roughly 4 percent of the $848 million that the tax is still projected to bring in for 2018, according to projections from Mr. Garodnick’s office.
There is an income stipulation: To be eligible for the tax break, businesses must earn less than $5 million a year. For those businesses that earn more than $5 million and have annual rent lower than $500,000, the tax will be phased in based on the store’s revenue; at $10 million in annual revenue, the full tax will be charged.
The commercial rent tax was created in 1963, a time when the city was struggling to find new means of revenue. But with rents rapidly rising, even small businesses are now being forced to pay the tax, which was not the original intent, Mr. Garodnick said.
Natasha Amott pays $27,000 a month in rent for Whisk, a kitchenware shop in the Flatiron neighborhood. Last year, she paid over $15,000 in the commercial rent tax, money she said could have gone toward renovations, pay increases for her staff, or tweaking her website.
Though the tax is a drop in the bucket compared with her $324,000 annual rent bill, Ms. Amott applauded the measure as a critical first step.
