Kevin Shattenkirk made it abundantly clear in July when he signed as a free agent with the Rangers that he wanted, above all, to play for his hometown team.
His bonds with the Rangers have been visceral. He was 5 when the Rangers won the Stanley Cup in 1994. He was 15 in 2004, when he heard stunning news aboard a bus with teammates from the Brunswick School in Greenwich, Conn.: Brian Leetch had been traded to the Toronto Maple Leafs.
The sentiments of youth are now intertwined with his accomplished professional life: Shattenkirk, now 28, has become friends with Leetch through their shared link as Rangers defensemen.
Shattenkirk, who grew up in New Rochelle, N.Y., has been surging along with the Rangers, who have recovered after a 3-7-2 start. He has five goals and 12 assists, including three goals and five assists in the past six games, all victories. The Rangers face the Blackhawks in Chicago on Wednesday.
Shattenkirk has been particularly effective on the power play, one of the main reasons the Rangers coveted him. His skill was well illustrated Saturday in a 4-2 comeback victory over the Edmonton Oilers, when his perfect cross-ice pass resulted in the tying goal by Pavel Buchnevich, who has scored seven times since Oct. 26.
Shattenkirk has found a steady groove since being paired during the winning streak with Brady Skjei, who is coming off a solid rookie season that included 34 assists.
The Shattenkirk-Skjei pairing has steadied the back end for the Rangers, and the confidence has filtered through the entire roster.
Starting with a 6-4 comeback victory over the Vegas Golden Knights on Oct. 31, the Rangers reeled off overtime victories at Tampa Bay and Florida, followed by home wins over Columbus, Boston and the Oilers. Shattenkirk scored the overtime winner against the Panthers and has 10 points over all in a seven-game points streak.
The recent results have heartened Coach Alain Vigneault, rumored to be on the hot seat after the slow start, but neither he nor his team had showed outward signs of alarm. A productive Shattenkirk surely helps.
Shattenkirk was brought in as a weapon from the point. He and Ottawa’s Erik Karlsson, a two-time Norris Trophy winner, are the only two defensemen in the N.H.L. with 25 or more power-play points each of the last four seasons.
“Right off the hop, you saw the great talent he has in being able to get things done on the power play — the passing and getting his shot through at the right time,” Vigneault said.
Shattenkirk, who began to make his mark in the N.H.L. after being traded from Colorado to St. Louis in February 2011, signed with the Rangers for four years and $26.6 million following a late-season trade from the Blues to Washington.
Skjei, 23, is happy Shattenkirk chose New York.
Now that the season and team are finding their balance, Shattenkirk said he felt more at ease as routines become predictable and any distractions of playing at home become easier to manage. He had more than 100 friends and family members, many wearing specially made T-shirts, at the Rangers’ home opener last month.
He bought extra season tickets so his parents; his fiancée, Deanna; his brother Eric and a handful of others can regularly come to home games.
His mother, Barbara, said she had not discerned any hometown distractions so far.
Maloney, the youngest captain in Rangers history, understands Shattenkirk’s transition from teenager to seasoned pro — though little has changed since he first met the motivated defenseman.
As his connection with Leetch has grown, Shattenkirk is eager to absorb advice from the Hall of Famer, who amassed 240 goals and 981 points over 17 seasons with the Rangers, including the Stanley Cup-winning campaign.
