WASHINGTON — The Trump administration announced on Tuesday what it called “a new day for Medicaid,” telling state health officials that the federal government would be more receptive to work requirements and other conservative policy ideas to reshape the main government health program for low-income people.
Seema Verma, the administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, said the administration would approve proposals from states to require work or community engagement for people who want to receive Medicaid. The Obama administration had turned down such proposals, saying they would not further the purposes of Medicaid, which are to promote health coverage and access to care.
Many people on Medicaid, including many who became eligible as a result of the Affordable Care Act, are able-bodied adults of working age, Ms. Verma said.
She heaped criticism on the Obama administration, saying it had focused on increasing Medicaid enrollment rather than helping people move out of poverty and into jobs.
Jason A. Helgerson, the Medicaid director in New York State, said on Twitter that Ms. Verma’s comments were “absolutely awful.” It was absurd for her to suggest that she was ushering in a new day for Medicaid by taking it away from millions of people, he said.
Ms. Verma worked for years as a consultant to state Medicaid officials. With her guidance, her home state of Indiana expanded Medicaid eligibility under the governor at the time, Mike Pence, while emphasizing “personal responsibility” by requiring beneficiaries to pay premiums and contribute to health savings accounts.
In her remarks on Tuesday, Ms. Verma did not renew Republican calls for repealing the Affordable Care Act. But she criticized the law’s expansion of Medicaid, an option that has been taken up by 31 states.
“The thought that a program designed for our most vulnerable citizens should be used as a vehicle to serve working age, able-bodied adults does not make sense,” Ms. Verma said.
Average monthly enrollment in Medicaid, according to the Congressional Budget Office, has climbed by nearly one-third, to 77 million people, since President Barack Obama signed the Affordable Care Act in 2010.
The Kaiser Family Foundation reports that at least six states — Arkansas, Indiana, Kentucky, Maine, Utah and Wisconsin — have pending waiver requests that would require work as a condition of eligibility for some Medicaid beneficiaries. New Hampshire submitted its own proposal last week.
“Community engagement” is a broad term that states define in various ways. It can include not only paid employment, but also volunteer activities, going to school, job training, searching for jobs, caring for elderly relatives and even treatment for drug or alcohol abuse.
The Affordable Care Act gave states the “flexibility and financing” to cover that population in diverse ways, without seeking a federal waiver, Ms. Mann said.
And she noted that the expansion of Medicaid had been defended by Republican governors including Chris Christie of New Jersey, John R. Kasich of Ohio, Rick Snyder of Michigan, Chris Sununu of New Hampshire and Brian Sandoval of Nevada.
Ms. Verma also announced changes to speed the review of state requests for waivers of the federal Medicaid law. She said the Trump administration could approve some waivers for 10 years. Waivers have typically been approved for five years, with the possibility of an extension for three years.
She said the Trump administration would issue a scorecard measuring and comparing states’ performance in improving the health of people on Medicaid. The federal government and the states together spend more than $550 billion a year on Medicaid, and people deserve to know if the money is “producing positive results,” she said.
Matt D. Salo, the executive director of the National Association of Medicaid Directors, said state officials agreed with Ms. Verma that they should focus on Medicaid beneficiaries and the outcomes of the care provided.
But, Mr. Salo said, “we have a lot of disagreement” with the contention that Medicaid should not be serving able-bodied adults of working age. State officials said that many Medicaid beneficiaries had low-wage jobs that did not provide health insurance for them or their family members.
Ms. Verma insisted that the Affordable Care Act had given states perverse financial incentives, paying a higher share of Medicaid costs for newly eligible beneficiaries.
