Great wealth in America primarily comes from two sources: entrepreneurship and inheritance. In any age, how people work and create great wealth and how others put to use money they inherited, sometimes many generations removed, speak to the complicated feelings people have around wealth.
Entrepreneurs range across every industry, from the esoteric to the fascinating. For a time, tech entrepreneurs who took industry-changing ideas hatched in their dorm rooms and rode them to vast and quick wealth were lionized. Now many in that group are seen as selfishly fixated on the wealth itself.
Society’s view of inheritors has always been complicated. Some have been president, like Franklin D. Roosevelt, John F. Kennedy, George and George W. Bush, and now Donald J. Trump. Other inheritors have used their great wealth to endow museums, universities or charities, like the Whitneys, Vanderbilts and Rockefellers. Some, of course, have just had tremendous fun with their inheritance, not always to society’s approval.
To better understand how the sources of wealth might change one’s view of it — and life — I reached out to the multimillionaires Blaine Vess, 36, an entrepreneur, and Mitzi Perdue, 76, an inheritor, who bring equally complicated views to their wealth.
In August, Mr. Vess sold the online study-aid company he founded, Student Brands, in his college dorm to Barnes & Noble for $58.5 million in cash. His dorm was at San Jose State University, not Stanford or Harvard. It took him 17 years to build the company. And during that time it was always profitable, growing from $60,000 in revenue when he graduated in 2004 to over $20 million in 2016. He also owned an estimated 80 percent of the company. Last year, he started a second company, Solve, an airport concierge service, and this fall sold it to Blacklane, a global chauffeur service.
Here are edited and condensed excerpts from my interviews with them.
What did you want do when you were young?
I grew up in Darien, Ill. I graduated from Naperville North High School. I wanted to be an entrepreneur. I wanted to create something. I wanted to work with my friends. I wanted to have fun. All of this was leading toward, I wanted freedom, freedom to live the way I wanted to live, do what I wanted to do. I made more money than I expected. I wasn’t shooting for that. I knew it would be something in technology. I was always gravitating toward internet businesses. Having this outlet, this career path was fortunate.
How and why did you sell your first company?
I’d been in the business almost 18 years. The key for a lot of older businesses like Student Brands is it’s not the hottest company around, but we’d created a lot of value, and we happened to find a partner who could take that value to a higher level. We thought we’d eventually sell the business. It worked out: right place, right team, right buyer.
How was the sale of your second company different?
I felt I could apply some of the things I’d learned to airport concierge, which is an old-school business. For me, it was I stumbled upon another problem I had experienced in my life that I wanted to solve. I didn’t intend to go the venture capital route, but when my co-founder and I teamed up a year ago, we felt that the venture route could be an option for us. We applied to Y Combinator [a tech incubator]. That began the very fast-paced journey of building that company. It accelerated the business to a point where it needed more help, or more help than we could supply. We had been working with Blacklane as partners. They were interested in bringing Solve into Blacklane. We felt like it has a good home.
What was it like to have money from a liquidity event?
I didn’t really know what to make of it. That morning, that was a weird day in general. The deal closed in the afternoon. I think it was Aug. 3. I knew it really happened when the money hit my bank account. I wasn’t going to leave my apartment until it happened. The deal closed, and I went alone to one of my favorite restaurants, Absinthe. I kind of just had a big meal and four drinks. This is 1 p.m. I didn’t know what to do from there. We had a lot of work to do at Solve. I had to get right back to work. It was an intense business.
How did the sale of your first company affect you?
It didn’t change my lifestyle that much. Partly that’s because I ran a bootstrap business for a long time. I was able to make a good amount of money over a long period of time. Years ago I had bought a Maserati, and then I had a McLaren. I got those things out of my system. There are no more fancy cars coming. I guess for me the way that I think about it is I like building businesses, I like creating something that solves a problem for me and probably solves problems for other people. I didn’t come from a really wealthy family. I’m happy where things are.
Do you ever worry about losing the money?
I used to. A lot of entrepreneurs like myself, there is still that vision of somehow ending up on the street. It’s an unrealistic thought in the first place. One thing that helped me is I got the advice from a wealth manager who asked what if the business goes to zero? He laid it out. Once you understand if something bad happens this is the plan, that’s very helpful.
In what ways has money made life easier and harder?
Easier in all the basic ways – not worrying about a mortgage payment or a car payment and stuff like that. I like to travel but I travel in a frugal way. Being able to travel and not think about every expense along the way, I love that. It all boils down to not having to worry. As for making it harder, I’ve purposely kept things simple. A lot of people hire an assistant who then ends up complicating things. I didn’t do that. I can’t think of any way it’s made things harder.
How do you think these experiences and this money are going to make life different for any family that you have?
The good thing for me and my girlfriend is we’re both very grounded. I think it was great that my parents didn’t buy me a car. My parents just always instilled working hard in me. I worked at Wendy’s when I was 16 years old. I worked at the grocery store. Some parents would argue that you could have been focused on your education. That’s fine. But for me work was always instilled early on. When I graduated from college, I felt I’d better figure this out because there isn’t going to be this natural support system. I want my kids to work for things on their own. That’s how I got here. Not being comfortable led to comfort.
What did you want to do when you were young?
Mother always said that her greatest aspiration for us was that we’d be good strong contributors to society. One thing she did was we went to private as well as public schools. My father, he was very strong in the notion that we not be entitled. If we wanted something, he’d say in a low strong voice, earn it. We always had loads of tasks. We were brought up to be frugal. It was the same in the Perdue family. Frank to the end of his days almost always flew economy. We’d use public transportation, particularly in Manhattan. He knew the subway system inside and out. It was an attempt to get out of the bubble.
How did your parents teach you financial responsibility?
When I was 15 years old I was given a job working for my father’s company, the Sheraton hotels. My job at age 15 along with probably 15 other people was to file credit cards.  I became a much better student after that and got into Radcliffe.
My first job was as a management intern in the Treasury Department, in the commissioner’s office of the I.R.S. It was 20 guys and me. I remember telling my father about my job and being so moved when he said I’m proud of you. It meant so much that I had a job and that I had gotten it not on my name. It’s something I see very much in the Perdue family. You need a job outside of the family for several years before you get a job in the company.
What was the sale of Sheraton like for your family?
My father died in 1967, and we sold it shortly after that. When it came time to sell Sheraton, there was the issue of whether we sell the company or not. There were strong economic reasons to do it. But on the other side this was our identity. Who would ever love it as much as we did? It was a public company, but we owned the controlling share. I was one who really didn’t want to sell. I thought of my father’s legacy and our identity. Half wanted to sell and half were thinking, don’t do this horrible thing. But by the time of the sale we were united. The reward is 50 years later we still have these family reunions where people come together.
Do you ever think of wealth in terms of what is enough?
I don’t think about wealth in that parameter. Wealth is power. Do you want to use it for good or do you trust that other people are going to use it for more good than you? You’d be surprised how simply I live. I don’t need wealth for status. The apartment I live in, one neighbor is a librarian, one is a technician at the local hospital, one is working at the sheriff’s department. It’s firmly middle class. I don’t need an apartment on millionaire’s row. I don’t need the money for lavishness. I love that I can support the charities that I support. If you give me a choice between a first-class ticket to Beijing and an economy-class ticket to Beijing, and I can give the $9,000 difference to charity, it’s a no-brainer.
Do you ever worry about losing your wealth?
No. Let me tell you why I don’t worry about it. It came from my late father. In Dublin, N.H., I watched him chopping wood. He was doing it rhythmically. I said, “Daddy, you’re the head of a major hotel company, you employ 20,000 people, you could pay someone to do this.” He said: “I like this. I like the physical nature of this. But if I lost all my money, it wouldn’t change my mental furniture because I’ve learned on my feet.” Now, do I want to lose my money? I’d prefer it not happen because I like how I live now.
There’s a whole world of worry, about not paying your bills or having your choices restricted that courtesy of my dear father and my dear husband, I don’t have to worry about, and I’m grateful for it.
As for harder, is there any world in which I wished I had been born into a different family and had a different economic background? No. But my sentiment comes from a whole childhood of being prepared.
Were there big adjustments going from the Henderson family to the Perdue family?
I have often thought that the Hendersons and the Perdues are in parallel universes because we have similar values. Both put tremendous effort into being a strong family. Neither family left it to accident. One difference is the Perdues have been a family business since 1920, the Hendersons have been a family enterprise since 1890. Some of our traditions are a lot older and therefore a lot stronger. I admire both families equally.