SANA, Yemen — A ballistic missile fired from Yemen came close to the Saudi capital, Riyadh, on Saturday and was intercepted by the Saudi military over the city’s international airport, the Saudi defense ministry said.
Coming on a day of increasing regional tensions, it was the first time such an attack had come so close to the center of Riyadh in the two years since Saudi Arabia started a war against the Houthi rebel group that toppled Yemen’s government.
Yemen’s Houthi-controlled defense ministry said its forces had targeted the airport with a long-range missile called the Burqan 2H in response to an attack by the Saudi-led coalition on Wednesday that killed 26 people in a hotel and a nearby market.
“This act of aggression against Riyadh proves involvement of one of the terror states supporting the Houthis,” the coalition was quoted as saying in a tweet from Al Hadath, a Saudi-run news channel.
Several hours after the missile attack, the Yemeni capital, Sana, was hit by the worst barrage of Saudi-led coalition airstrikes in more than a year.
About 12 strikes were heard hitting the defense ministry downtown and other targets mostly on the city outskirts. The exchange of fire took place on a day when the region was on edge over the growing tensions between Saudi Arabia and Iran.
Earlier, the Lebanese prime minister, Saad Hariri, resigned from a unity government that includes Iran’s Lebanese ally Hezbollah. Speaking from Riyadh, he blamed Iran for interfering in Arab affairs. Iran and Hezbollah read the move as pressure from Saudi Arabia, Mr. Hariri’s patron, to isolate them as part of a campaign to curb Iranian influence.
The Yemeni defense ministry has claimed several times to have fired a Burqan 2 missile at Saudi Arabia, which has acknowledged at least one previous strike.
Residents and travelers in Riyadh reported a loud explosion on Saturday. The Twitter account of King Khalid International Airport issued a message saying airport operations had not been affected.
One showed red flares rising toward the sky.
Military analysts at IHS Jane’s have written that the Houthis’ emerging use of ballistic missiles offers some support for American, Saudi and Israeli allegations that Iran is aiding them with parts or technology, but add that it would be difficult for Iran to ship whole missiles to Yemen. Another possibility, the analysts say, is that the missiles were acquired by Yemen from North Korea before the current conflict.
In Sana, jets were heard overhead and residents reported airstrikes. Ali Hassan, a taxi driver, said that roads leading to the defense ministry downtown were closed by the police.
“I saw smoke rising from the ministry,” he said, adding that he also saw an airstrike in another area where a weapon depot was located.
The ministry is in a densely populated area, a World Heritage site known as Bab al-Yemen, which has been targeted before. Saudi-led coalition jets could be heard over Sana. The bulk of airstrikes in retaliation reportedly targeted the outskirts of Sana.
