From the vantage of a professional outlier, and ultraconservative at that, he may not be far off the mark.
You won’t find Mr. Binder in the front row of the season’s hottest shows, gushing over the sometimes kinky collections of star brands including Alexander Wang or Marc Jacobs. Nor is he likely to get much love from the left-leaning fashion establishment.
He routinely heaps accolades on the high-profile personalities that style-world insiders, at least privately, tend to scorn. Chief among them is the first lady, whom Mr. Binder exalts as a role model for ordinary American women.
For Mr. Binder, 25, delivering tart commentary is all in a day’s work. He is the fashion critic for Breitbart News.
All the same, he remained enthralled by the celebrity culture that spoke to his more progressive peers. “I loved music, the whole punk rock era, all of those things,” he recalled, such attractions all the more compelling to a boy with a nose perpetually pressed to the glass.
Mr. Binder places her on a pedestal alongside a couple of his other revered tastemakers, “the greatest living women,” in his phrase: Victoria Beckham and the Olsen sisters, Mary-Kate and Ashley.
The first lady, he said, rarely veers from her signature formality, cleaving to a daytime wardrobe of crisp shift dresses or tailored suits. Never mind that she flaunted a $51,500 Dolce & Gabbana coat during a visit to Sicily. Or got down in the dirt at the White House in September, gardening in a Balmain tartan shirt that costs $1,380. Or that she walked tall in stilettos en route to Houston in the aftermath of Hurricane Harvey.
He acknowledged that such views tend to color his coverage. He reported on the harassment charges against the Hollywood mogul Harvey Weinstein but now focuses much of his ire on fashion designers and editors, calling out their silence as disingenuous. “They seemed to know things, but acted as if they didn’t know,” Mr. Binder said.
He is a maverick and ambitious, for sure. But he nurtures no ardent hope of piercing fashion’s fabled glass ceiling. Does he expect one day to get a summons from Vogue or its more rarefied cousin W?
“I don’t think about things like that,” he said.