WASHINGTON — The Trump administration is threatening to sue Harvard University to force it to turn over student and applicant records, as the Justice Department presses forward with an unusual civil rights investigation into whether the university’s affirmative-action admissions practices amount to unlawful discrimination, documents show.
The investigation, which came to light in August, centers on a complaint filed in 2015 asserting that Harvard, in seeking to ensure a racially diverse student body, is illegally discriminating against Asian applicants. It mirrors the allegations in a lawsuit against Harvard filed by a group called Students for Fair Admissions, a nonprofit formed to challenge the use of race in college admissions.
In August, the Justice Department set up a special project in its Civil Rights Division — run out of its front office, where political appointees work, rather than its education section — to scrutinize race-conscious college admissions practices. After initially refusing to talk about it, the department said it was looking at a complaint filed on behalf of Asian applicants, describing it in a way that clearly matched the Harvard dispute.
Letters that emerged Tuesday between Civil Rights Division officials and Seth P. Waxman, a former solicitor general who is representing Harvard, show that little has progressed since then because of an impasse over access to Harvard’s applicant records. In a letter to Mr. Waxman last week, John M. Gore, the acting assistant attorney general of the Civil Rights Division, accused Harvard of dragging its feet on turning over the material and threatened to sue if the university failed to meet a Dec. 1 deadline.
The dispute centers on Title VI of the Civil Rights Act, which bars racial discrimination by organizations that receive federal grants — like Harvard — and the culture-war fight over whether efforts to ensure diversity by giving an edge to members of generally disadvantaged groups, like black and Latino students, amount to discrimination against white or Asian students with otherwise comparable or higher qualifications.
Anna Cowenhoven, a spokeswoman for Harvard, said the university was trying to meet its obligation to provide the federal government with access to records in a way that would also meet its obligation to protect the privacy of its applicants and students.
Edward Blum, the president of Students for Fair Admissions, which he formed to recruit plaintiffs to challenge affirmative action policies and to connect them with donors who want to finance such litigation, said in a written statement on Tuesday that his group was “gratified” that the Justice Department was investigating Harvard’s admissions policies, saying its “racial balancing” efforts amounted to placing a quota on Asian admissions.
The Wall Street Journal first reported on Mr. Gore’s letter, along with another sent that same day by Matthew J. Donnelly, a Civil Rights Division lawyer working on the project. The New York Times separately obtained those letters, along with several sent by Mr. Waxman this fall.
The letters show that Justice Department officials are generally seeking the same records Harvard has already turned over to lawyers for Students for Fair Admissions, which signed a confidentiality agreement. Those records had personally identifying information blacked out, however, and the department wants to see them without redactions.
The Justice Department is weighing whether to file a friend-of-the-court brief in the Students for Fair Admissions lawsuit or whether to file its own lawsuit. If so, it could file a parallel complaint, suggesting that Harvard’s policies amount to intentional discrimination, or it could file a more aggressive complaint, arguing that Harvard’s policies have a “disparate impact” on Asian applicants.
Only the government, not private litigants, can file disparate impact claims. Such a complaint could be easier to prove because it would not be necessary to show that Harvard had a discriminatory purpose, only that its policies had a discriminatory effect. But that would be an extraordinary move, in part because conservatives generally oppose the use of disparate impact standards in civil rights cases.