At the close of business on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 1.23 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 1.37 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 1.05 percent.
Florida Board of Education, $147.3 million of unlimited tax general obligation public education capital outlay refinancing bonds. Competitive.
Johnson County Unified School District No. 229, Kan., $91.3 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. Competitive.
Appalachian State University, N.C., $59.2 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Competitive.
California, $106.9 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.
Iowa City Community School District, Iowa, $59 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. Competitive.
Minneapolis, $60 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. Competitive.
Minneapolis-St. Paul School District No. 1, $54.6 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. Competitive.
St. Paul Independent School District No. 625, $57.5 million of certificates of participation. Competitive.
Virginia Housing Development Authority, $54.1 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.
Washington State, $505.8 million of unlimited tax general obligation refinancing bonds. Competitive.
Wisconsin, $277.7 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. Competitive.
Cook County Community College District No. 512, Ill., $107.1 million of unlimited tax general obligation refinancing bonds. Competitive.
Dublin Unified School District, Calif., $100 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. Competitive.
East Bay Regional Park District, Calif., $50 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. Competitive.
Washington County School District Board of Education, Utah, $65 million of unlimited tax general obligation refinancing bonds. Competitive.
Charleston County, S.C., $93.6 million of unlimited tax general obligation refinancing bonds. Competitive.
Charleston County, S.C., $103.2 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. Competitive.
Dallas, $302.9 million of refinancing bonds. Competitive.
Tulsa County, Okla., Industrial Authority, $53.7 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.
Williamson County, Tex., $75 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. Competitive.
Arizona Industrial Development Authority, $90.4 million of education facility revenue and refinancing bonds. Ziegler.
Bridgeport, Conn., $94.6 million of general obligation and refinancing bonds. Raymond James.
Camas School District No. 117, Wash., $60 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.
Champaign County Community School District No. 4, Ill., $98.1 million of general obligation school building bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.
Chicago Board of Education, $922.3 million of dedicated capital improvement tax and unlimited tax general obligation bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.
Cobb County, Ga., Development Authority, $56 million of Georgia Tech Cobb Research Campus revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.
Colorado River Municipal Water District, $99.7 million of water system revenue refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.
Culver City, Calif., Redevelopment Agency Successor Agency, $80 million of tax allocation refinancing bonds. Stifel, Nicolaus.
Delaware Health Facilities Authority, $100 million of Bayhealth Medical Center bonds. PNC Capital Markets.
Douglas County, Neb., $73.5 million of educational facilities revenue and refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.
Guam Waterworks Authority, $100 million of water and wastewater system revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.
Illinois Finance Authority, $51.3 million of charter school refinancing improvement revenue bonds. Piper Jaffray.
Illinois Toll Highway Authority, $300 million of toll highway senior revenue bonds. Loop Capital Markets.
Irving, Tex., Hospital Authority, $77 million of hospital revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.
Long Beach Community College District, Calif., $85 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. RBC Capital Markets.
Marin Community College District, Calif., $50 million general obligation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.
Metropolitan Pier and Exposition Authority, Ill., $475 million of McCormick Place Expansion Project bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.
New Hampshire Health and Education Facilities Authority, $103.6 million of New Hampshire University System revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.
New Jersey Educational Facilities Authority, $183.9 million of Kean University Issue revenue refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.
New York City Municipal Water Finance Authority, $400 million of water and sewer system second general resolution revenue bonds. Barclays Capital.
New York Housing Finance Agency, $80.7 million of debt securities. Jefferies.
Norfolk, Va., $153.2 million of capital improvement bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.
North Carolina Medical Care Commission, $68.2 million of retirement facilities first mortgage revenue and revenue refinancing bonds. Ziegler.
North Slope Borough, Alaska, $82 million of unlimited tax general obligation bonds. KeyBanc Capital Markets.
Ohio Air Quality Development Authority, $210 million of exempt facilities revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.
Rice University, Tex., $103.2 million of taxable bonds. Morgan Stanley.
Snoqualmie Valley School District No. 410, Wash., $118.3 million of debt securities. D. A. Davidson.
South Jersey Port Corporation, N.J., $255 million of subordinated marine terminal revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.
Tallahassee, Fla., $115.2 million of consolidated utility systems refinancing bonds. Siebert Cisneros Shank.
University of North Carolina Board of Governors, $75.4 million of University of North Carolina at Greensboro revenue refinancing bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.
Waterbury, Conn., $50 million of general obligation bonds. Piper Jaffray.
Whiting, Ind., $80 million of BP Products North America Inc. Project environmental facilities revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.