KUNDUZ, Afghanistan — Rahimullah served in the Afghan Army for two years, deployed to the bloody front lines of the southern province of Helmand. When he quit, it was not because of the combat: It was when the Taliban went after his family back home, telling them that if he didn’t leave the army there would be a fine of one Kalashnikov rifle, seven cartridge magazines and $1,000 — or worse.
Such demands are another way that the Taliban have been able to keep pressure on the Afghan Army, which was already struggling with record casualties and attrition. As the insurgents have made inroads in eastern and northern Afghanistan — long the most important recruiting grounds for the army — they are directly threatening the military’s ability to replenish its dwindling ranks.
Interviews with residents and army recruitment officers across several provinces suggest the Taliban pressure is taking a serious toll, with officials in some provinces reporting recruitment down by as much as 50 percent. Exact data on Afghan forces has been classified by both the Afghan government and the United States, which largely bankrolls the security forces.
Senior officials in Kabul, the capital, admitted to a partial drop in recruitment this year, but said they were hoping to intensify efforts and make up the loss by the end of the year. Gen. Mohammed Ibrahim, the commander of the Afghan Army’s national recruitment center, said the force had recruited 37,000 men last year, and 42,000 in 2015.
The general attributed the recruitment woes as much to the increasing violence as to a decrease in funding for outreach efforts, such as television advertisements.
Taliban pressure includes fines on families of soldiers, physical punishment of soldiers who return home, and even confiscation of land and homes.
Other officials said that the rising number of army casualties in gruesome, high-profile attacks over the past year was also affecting recruitment.
In one recent massacre in Kandahar Province, the Taliban nearly wiped out an entire army unit of 60 men. In April, insurgents drove into the army’s headquarters in the northern province of Balkh and killed at least 140 soldiers in a rampage that lasted several hours. In a March attack claimed by the Islamic State, militants barged into the military’s main hospital in Kabul, slaughtering dozens of soldiers who were being treated there.
While the Afghan government does not publicly disclose exact casualty figures, the coffins are still coming home to villages. In private, officials say on average 20 to 30 Afghan soldiers and police officers die every day as the violence intensifies.
When the new Afghan Army took its initial strides at the peak of the international presence, with the American-led NATO coalition of tens of thousands of soldiers and marines leading the way, most of the heavy fighting was concentrated in the south and parts of the southeast. The soldiers, however, largely came from the north, where jobs were few and the agricultural base was not enough to feed large families.
In recent years, the fighting has spread to the north and northeast of the country, even as the war in the south has intensified. Afghan forces lead the fight, with American help mostly limited to air support, training and advising.
The drop in recruitment is a major blow to a force that is suffering from drastic losses of men and territory. Some of the units struggled so much, losing men and equipment, that they had to be entirely rebuilt. The fighting has also laid bare the leadership woes of the Afghan forces, with many officers proving corrupt or inadequate to the new ways of fighting.
The Afghan Army is rolling out a program to retire hundreds of old generals and colonels clogging the top, in the hopes of promoting a new generation of commanders.
While many families relent under Taliban pressure and call their children back from the army, others resist — and pay the price.
Soon after the Taliban made major gains in Kunduz Province, they came for the Parwan family. The family lived on the outskirts of the city of Kunduz, and two of their sons were serving in the Afghan Army.
“They told us, ‘Either call your brothers and pull them out of the army, or we will take over your land,’” said Arash Parwan, 23.
The family relied on the combined salaries of the soldiers, and they made a calculation that farming the land alone could not sustain them. So they resisted the Taliban, instead deciding to flee to the city center.
