WASHINGTON — The National Academy of Sciences called Thursday for sweeping changes in the pricing, sale and promotion of prescription drugs to make lifesaving treatments more affordable without discouraging the development of new medicines.
The federal government should negotiate drug prices with manufacturers, the academy said, an idea pushed by Democrats for years, embraced by President Trump during the 2016 campaign, but opposed by congressional Republicans. The government, it said, should also deny tax deductions for drug advertising aimed at consumers and set annual limits on out-of-pocket drug costs for Medicare beneficiaries.
The need for change is urgent, the panel said, because more than half of all people in the United States routinely use prescription drugs, and 15 percent regularly take five or more drugs.
In addition, the panel said that public and private health insurance plans should be modified to reduce the financial burden on patients who need costly prescription drugs. The patient’s share of the cost “should be calculated as a fraction of the net purchase prices of drugs” — after rebates and discounts — “rather than the list prices from manufacturers,” the benchmark now widely used, it said.
The report is significant for several reasons. It gives the imprimatur of a respected national organization to a searing critique of the way drugs are bought and sold. It brings together a huge amount of research on the economics of the industry. And it coincides with a groundswell of public concern about drug costs that is reverberating in Congress.
But some of the proposals are anathema to brand-name drug companies, which can be expected to mobilize a small army of lobbyists to oppose ideas like price negotiations with the government or changes in the tax treatment of drug advertising. Such advertising, they say, often benefits consumers, informing them of treatments that can prolong life or improve its quality.
The panel included doctors, lawyers and economists who specialize in health policy, a state health official from Louisiana, a former executive vice president of the UnitedHealth Group, one of the largest insurers, and a former senator, Jeff Bingaman of New Mexico, a Democrat.
The Justice Department and the trade commission, it said, should “vigorously deter” brand-name drug companies from paying other manufacturers to delay the marketing of lower-cost generic drugs and copycat versions of biotechnology drugs.
Moreover, it said, the government should limit manufacturers’ ability to give away coupons that reduce consumers’ out-of-pocket costs for brand-name prescription drugs. “Drug manufacturers tend to use coupons to promote the use of branded expensive products when less expensive alternatives are available,” it said.
The panel said that Congress should establish limits on the total annual out-of-pocket drug costs of Medicare beneficiaries, so they would not have to spend more than the current “out-of-pocket threshold” of about $5,000 a year. Patients now may spend more than that if they use multiple high-cost brand-name drugs or specialty drugs.
In addition, the panel said that doctors and hospitals should tighten restrictions on visits to offices and clinics by drug company sales representatives. They should also curb “the acceptance and use of free drug samples” and “other inducements” provided by drugmakers, it said.
