Like many Americans, Brad Hines spent much of September watching hours of hurricane coverage on television.
For Mr. Hines, a digital marketing strategist in Boston, the storms hit close to home: Several family members in Florida were affected by Hurricane Irma. As the devastation unfolded, he opened his computer and donated money to the Red Cross, but it was not in cash.
He gave in Bitcoin, which the Red Cross has been accepting since late 2014. He could have donated dollars, but, he said, the more he can use the cryptocurrency for buying goods and giving to charity, the more it will be used by others.
It was his first donation with Bitcoin, the virtual currency that was created in 2008, but it will not be his last. As more charities accept digital currency, the more likely he will open his virtual wallet instead of his physical one, he said.
Few people are donating to the Red Cross with Bitcoin, with the group receiving just $2,000 worth of the currency in 2017, but the numbers are rising elsewhere. Fidelity Charitable, a $16 billion donor-advised fund, has received $13.5 million in Bitcoin donations this year, up from the $4.1 million it received from November 2015, when the fund started accepting the cryptocurrency, to December 2016.
Why would someone donate with Bitcoin over dollars? There are two reasons: It can be tax advantageous, and the technology the currency is built on could make it easier to see how a donation is being used, forcing charities to become more transparent.
For many Bitcoin holders, the main impetus for donating their cryptocurrency is taxes. In 2014, the Internal Revenue Service classified cryptocurrencies, which includes Bitcoin and other digital dollars like Ethereum, Litecoin and Ripple, as an asset, like a stock, which means that sales are subject to capital gains.
With a unit of Bitcoin rising to just over $7,000 this month from about $340 in early November 2014, sellers could be subject to hefty taxes depending on when they bought and sold. If they give those coins to charity, the asset is not subject to capital gains and donors still get to deduct the asset’s value from their taxes as a charitable donation.
That’s partly why Fidelity Charitable began accepting Bitcoin donations. Its donors were asking about it, and the fund saw an opportunity after the I.R.S. clarified the rules.
Mr. Nash said that the fund did not accept Bitcoin directly and that it did not hold any cryptocurrencies in its own portfolio. The fund uses Coinbase, a digital asset exchange company, to accept donations and convert them into dollars as soon as they come in.
It’s a similar process with stocks. Fidelity Charitable turns assets it receives into cash right away, but it’s even more important that the fund transfers Bitcoins into dollars because of its volatility. Bitcoin fell by nearly 20 percent from Aug 28 to Sept. 11, for instance. Fidelity does not want to be caught holding something that can decline so quickly.
Some technology entrepreneurs and cryptocurrency enthusiasts say that the system these currencies are built on can alter how people give and track their donations.
Cryptocurrencies use a blockchain, a digital ledger that records transactions. Normally, when someone pays cash for an item in a store, the transaction is seen by only the buyer and the seller. With a blockchain, the transaction is recorded in a digital ledger in near real time that anyone can see. It is also impossible for transaction details to be changed.
Because everything is tracked, donors can easily see that their payments have gone from their digital wallets into a charity’s hands.
It’s this tracking mechanism that has many in the nonprofit sector excited. If everyone who touches a donation accepts Bitcoin, like the charity and the store providing the supplies, then donors can see how their donations are being used.
Raphaël Mazet, a founder of Alice, a London-based software company that helps charities accept donations, said that end-to-end transparency was a long way off. Most of the organizations that charities give their money to do not accept digital currencies, so tracking stops when a cryptocurrency is converted into cash.
Currency volatility is also holding tracking back, Mr. Mazet said. If the value of the currency strikingly drops before it is used, that donation will be worth a lot less than initially planned. His company transfers digital donations into a proprietary coin that’s essentially worth one British pound to avoid those ups and downs.
“There is the potential for currencies to be sent around the world, but these issues make it difficult to work with blockchain right now,” he said.
Can Technology Alter Giving?
Still, technology companies like Alice, and Toronto-based Grace Token, are hoping to revolutionize giving. Both operate on the Ethereum blockchain, which Mr. Mazet said was more sophisticated than the Bitcoin blockchain. It allows people to use smart contracts, which give funders greater flexibility over how their donations are spent.
With Alice, which is working with the homeless shelter St. Mungo’s in London, donations are released once the charity meets its goals, like finding a place for someone to stay and receiving mental health care. Those milestones are verified by the Greater London Authority.
Grace Token, which is still building its software, will work in a similar way. It will allow donors to distribute funds at different times and only if certain goals are met. Funders will also be able to take back unused portions of donations if they feel their money is not being spent properly.
Mr. Mazet will not go as far as to call his technology disruptive, but he does say it is bringing “massive innovation” to how charities track, measure and report gifts.
It is likely that as more people start using digital money, the more cryptocurrency donations will be made. If these currencies keep rising, then it will continue to make sense to donate in Bitcoin purely for the tax advantage, said Mr. Nash of Fidelity Charitable.
For Mr. Hines, who gave money to the Red Cross using Bitcoin, donating with the cryptocurrency is no different from donating anything else.
