Is it our imagination, or are the comments getting better every week?
Below, some of our favorites from forums that saw intense debate, as well as from those that asked for personal or creative responses. And a special shout-out to the students of YC-CLIP who always have interesting things to say, and often participate in many conversations a week.
What are you reading, watching or listening to in The New York Times right now? Add a comment on this post or tag us on Twitter and let us know, or choose one of our recent writing prompts and weigh in.
Please note: All student comments have been lightly edited for length, but otherwise appear just as they were originally submitted.
Comments came in from California, New York, Michigan, New Hampshire, and states in between for our most commented-on prompt this week: “Is the College Admissions Process Fair?” Most — no surprise — think that it is not.
Colleges are a business that must fit their personal requirements in order to make a profit. The socioeconomic diversity and financials -some of which include how able is a student to paying their loans/costs to the college- are two of many factors in the college selective system...My opinion is this very process calls for a dramatic change in the very nature of colleges becoming more of a learning institution than a business needing to meet it’s requirements to gain a profit.
A student has much more to offer than what any number or letter could symbolize and should not represent how capable an applicant is. I personally think that colleges should take a student’s personal talents they posses into account rather than only looking at how well they can perform on a standardized test. Colleges should not look for another student who is just willing to memorize a series of textbooks and material that has already been covered, but rather to seek those who are able to make new advances in our society. I also believe that there should be more methods of displaying a student’s skills such as videos or auditions so that applicants may demonstrate their strengths in a way that suits them best.
I feel like the college admission process is mostly fair. Personally, I like the fact that admissions officers look at more than someone’s grade point average (GPA). They also account for someone’s extra curricular activities or after school jobs. They understand that students have lives too. Some students work to help support their families. Others are so involved in clubs and sports that they spend the rest of the time they have in their day to study and work.That is why a 4.0 student with no extra curriculars may not be accepted while someone with a 3.6 and extracurriculars would.
I don’t have a problem with pro “diversity” policies in admissions. I also don’t have a problem with personality and other kinds of non standard assessments of student potential. I do have a problem with implicit and explicit racism. The idea that Asian students do well on tests and grades yet cannot distinguish themselves as individuals or artists seems racist to the core and very similar to the justifications directed at Jewish students in the 20s to 40s at these East Coast institutions. Or the idea that having more Asian students do not contribute to the diversity of a classroom is also ridiculous.
We know that many ex-admissions officers openly admit to viewing Asians stereotypically (see Daniel Golden’s excellent book for example on affirmative action e.g.). We also know that when prestigious colleges get rid of policies that favor certain other groups Asian numbers go up dramatically such as in Berkeley after Prop. 209... How is disadvantaging the disadvantaged minority group contributing to diversity and a more just classroom environment?
We have been taught for years that all races are equal. But, when we compete for college admission, not all races are equal. Asian American students have to score on average 140 SAT points more than white students to have an equal opportunity of admission.
The college admission process is certainly unfair for Asian students. Asians were historically discriminated against - Chinese slaves building the railroads; Japanese Americans internment, etc. Why does affirmative action not applied for Asian college applicants? Why must an Asian student score 140 points more than a white student in SAT to get a similar chance for admission? We are penalizing Asian students for being diligent and intelligent. We are precluding them from realizing the fullest of their potentials at the detriments of the society. We were taught to that everyone is born equal, but Asian students realize that non-Asian students are more equal than them. Racial consideration in college application must go.
As an Asian American student who has gone through the college admissions process, I find it disheartening that 64 Asian American organizations found it necessary to form a coalition to fight against the “injustice” of needing a higher SAT score to get into an elite school. If this is an effort to advance the Asian American community, what does it communicate about our values? Is admission into an elite college the only measure of success? Also, “injustice”? Using that term to describe the situation makes our community seem rather tone deaf to other societal problems around race.
I grew up among other children of immigrants in Southern California. How many of us, in pursuit of admission to the nation’s best colleges, cheated on tests and lied on our applications? How many of us engaged/are engaging in self-harm and/or struggle with anxiety and depression? I think our community could do with a little self-reflection in this regard. Here’s what confuses me: Asian Americans make up 5.1% of the population. 22.2% of Harvard’s class of 2021 is Asian American. In light of that fact, could you still argue that Asian Americans are facing discrimination in a way that warrants litigation? Don’t get me wrong, going to a quality college/university is a worthy goal, but there are many “good schools” in the country that are not in the Ivy League. I would argue that one’s success is not measured by the name of the college on one’s resume, but what you do at said college and beyond.
The problem with affirmative action is the concept and use of “disparate impact.” Basically, the underrepresentation of a population “proves” discrimination. Therefore, racial identity carries far more weight than socio-economic status in admissions decisions.
When it comes to others, whether it be our friends, family, or our classmates, we are always telling them positive things. “It’s okay!” we say, when they apologize, slip up, or perform poorly on a test. “Don’t say that about yourself,” we reply, when they make stinging comments about their own bodies or personalities. We are always dusting off negative comments from the shoulders of others; whether they are self-inflicted, or from other people.
When it comes to ourselves, whether it be our personalities, our bodies, or our GPAs, we are mostly saying negative things. “You can do so much better than this. What’s wrong with you?” we say, when we slip up, make a mistake, or don’t do as well as we’d hoped for ourselves. “Gosh,” we say, when we detect flaws in ourselves, “Why am I like this?” We rarely extend kindness to ourselves; we are always hunting for the flaws, whether they are visible or hidden to the human eye.
That’s what Mr. Richard is saying in this sketch.
Of course I have had an experience where I extend more grace to others than I do to myself - just about everyone has. I, like many others, must remember to give myself the ability to be human.
This activity really showed me how hard people can be on themselves. I noticed my failure i thought of was just about as bad as the other persons failure and I still had different thoughts about myself than that person.  I think its important so notice how hard you are on yourself and its a good thing to look out for so you can in fact grow from your mistakes and become a stronger person from them.
When I saw Mr. Richards work, I immediately thought of one of my biggest fears: public speaking. Seeing someone speak in front of a crowd, no matter the size, never seizes to astonish me. I think of my palms sweating, knees shaking, and my stomach turning into a sinkhole and have immediate respect for anyone who can stand and speak to an audience. I could hear the most brainless speech known to man and still stand in awe over the courage it must have taken to present it.
However, I can begin working on a speech and be completely confident in its effectiveness and eloquence, but when it comes time to actually propose my ideas all confidence is lost, and I often stray from my original work. My throat gets dry and I start to scratch at the skin around my thumbs, my whole presentation is a blur until I sit down and the last drop of life has left my body. I instantly initiate self destruction on everything I’ve just done, and continue to be embarrassed for who knows how excruciatingly long. My attitude towards myself and others in this situation, I think, fit into the graph depicted by Mr. Richards perfectly. I don’t know why it is that I think more highly of others than myself, but I do know i strongly relate to this drawing as i’m sure others do as well.
When we fail, we are more likely to blame it on ourselves, rather than something external. We chastise ourselves for not being good enough or for not having the right skills. When others fail, well luck just wasn’t on their side or their talent wasn’t recognized. I think this lopsided judgment is born out of a sense of fear. Fear that if we don’t succeed now, we will never be able to succeed...We all can get better at extending grace to ourselves by being a little more forgiving of our failures and working on solving the problem.
How can we as humans form long, healthy, kind relations with others if we can’t form a good relationship with a lifelong partner, yourself. Imagine the world if everyone was as kind to ourselves as we were to others. Everyone would be happy, how great would that be?
Our student prompt “Is This Exhibit Animal Cruelty or Art?” raised profound questions about law, morality and ethics.
The quote at the end of the article from Nicole Hall, an animal activist... explains how reluctant people are to reflect on how their decisions affect other life forms, whether it be other people in their social circles or species as seemingly insignificant as mice.
The artist, Grazi, is so wrapped up in his idea of artistic expression that he’s refusing to hear from concerned activists or even an expert who has devoted their lives to understanding these rodents, such as Natasha Millikan. Millikan says, “You can’t understand how they feel... you’re a predator!” when he asserts his opinion by claiming the mice are happy while their tight glass confinements shake and vibrate with every heavy human footstep. The video clip included shows them peeking their quivering noses through the tiny holes that they are so generously provided, searching for fresh air or, most likely, a way out. I believe strongly that this is animal cruelty and injustice, not because they are being abused, but because Grazi and all that contributed to the project are ignorant to the species that are, quite literally and on the food chain, below them.
Even though I’m not a big fan of mice, I wouldn’t put them in boxes and put them in the floor tiles and treated the way they are. The mice shouldn’t be treated as though they are just for show, and what if one of the kids were to go and stomp on one of the tiles, or pour a drink in their cage? What if some kid were to plug the air holes and the mice were to suffocate? These are the kind of things you have to consider before you put these animals in confined places.
These mice may be prey, but they have souls... How would Joseph Grazi feel if he were used for art against his will? And how would you feel if someone put you in a plexiglass container with only a few air holes, people walking over your cage like you were ‘just a mouse’?
If they have food, water, and shelter, I don’t see the big deal. The mice obviously were not going to be in the situation forever. I like mice and rats a lot, so this is not a biased opinion against rodents. I just think it isn’t really any different than keeping mice in a cage in your house where a good amount of people will be walking around. I don’t think protesting the exhibit is artistic repression, because people have the right to protest anything they want, but I just don’t see the point.
Personally, I believe that while this is a very unique concept, it is also a cruel act. I wouldn’t necessarily consider it inhumane, however it isn’t right to confine animals in inappropriate environments. Animals, such as the mice in the photograph, all have specific needs and they must be accommodated in order for the animals to feel comfortable.
On the other side of the argument, as long as the mice are getting fed and they aren’t in these small, confining spaces for too long then they should be okay once placed back in their appropriate environment. Hopefully, one day people will figure out an appropriate balance between acts that are humane and cruel.
Many commenters wrote about survival.
She saw a big ship come her way near the shore. So she set up booby traps around where they will come through. They were pirates. Jayesh grabbed her weapons and got prepared to defend her land.
I started my hike and came upon an apple tree. I grabbed a couple of apples and headed out once again. Today I was gonna found my way out, I thought. I had a feeling my troop had stopped looking for me and called someone.
I have been walking through the jungle for hours. My feet are throbbing, and I don’t know if I can go on any longer. But my mind tells me to keep moving on. I slash through the vines with the machete I found in the cargo from the plane. The vivid memory of the plane crashing in the heart of the jungle keeps me moving to find help for the other injured passengers. I was the only one awake and in okay shape to go find help. I look at the map and see that I am not that far from a small village. It should only be a few more miles.
Then I heard the sound of a truck engine. He’s home. I didn’t know what his plans with me here were but I didn’t plan on staying to find out. I got up as quickly as I could, trying not to fall. I walked through a door that turned out to be the kitchen and grabbed a knife out of the block. Then I went out of the sliding glass door and ran as fast as I could.
Other readers viewed the image as a metaphor.
This is a strong woman facing her fear. She’s been scared of her future and has done nothing but avoid it. She doesn’t want to grow up and she’s scared of responsibility she’s always ran from her fears. But after running for so long the women knew it wasn’t going to work for her forever. She woke up one morning knowing it was time to face growing up. She always knew she wanted to go to college and she wanted to be on her own successful in a career but getting there for her wasn’t easy. She woke up one morning to an acceptance letter to her dream college and that’s when she knew it was time to get out and explore the world. She was ready to leave her mark. She began packing and said her goodbyes as she began to face her fears all by herself. She was no longer in her little hometown with everyone she knew, it was time for her to come out and face the world alone. She knew she couldn’t be average at everything she did in order to make her mark she would excel in everything she would do. Before she knew it she was done with college with more friends than she had ever known. Her phone was ringing off the hook of so many people impressed with her efforts. She had faced her fear and, her fear had turned into a world better than she could’ve ever imagined. Coming out of her own woods into the big world is the best thing she’d done.
This image makes me think about finding your way to the light or what you really want in life. The woman is coming out of a dark forest. The forest might symbolize something that is holding her back from what she really wants in life. She might be stuck in a job or situation that she doesn’t like and wants to be some place else. I think that the knife is the way she is breaking out of her old job or situation to come into the light area. The light area is where the lady would like to be or the place she enjoys being. Also, the light represents the happiness that you can seek if you keep pursuing your dreams.
I interpret this image as showing someone’s journey. The lady is stuck in all these weeds and vines, symbolizing that she is trapped in one place. But, I see she has a knife and is cutting herself away from the vines. This women is a strong individual who is not letting anything get in her way. She is very strong and is continuing to fight through the hard times.
We could almost hear the sighs of relief in the comments on “What Would You Choose to Do If You Had Unlimited Free Time and No Restrictions?
If I had the chance to do anything in a limitless sense, it would be to change and reshape us and find a way to understand the meaning of being a human in our world of unknowns and problems...I’ve always wondered what are we as humans? Are we just a lucky roll of the dice that the universe created, created by a higher and different god, or are we just a smaller line on an indefinite scale. All of these questions I would look to solve and wonder.
I would like to learn about things that actually interest me. I am interested in going out and trying things first hand instead of reading about them in a book. I would like to learn about medical things because my dream for the future is to volunteer and teach in third world countries with medical knowledge at hand. Having freedom also means no time limits. I would love to learn about what I love, at a pace that I can actually take things in.
If I had unlimited free time and no restrictions, I would want to spend all of my time learning...Not just going to school, but going out into the world. Seeing firsthand where historical events had occurred, interviewing those that have been affected in current events, travelling the world and living the lives of other people besides myself. I would want to see the ancient ruins of civilizations that controlled the world, find out exactly why history unfolded the way that it did, and how people affected the sequence of events in the known world. I want to get out into the world and find out what it has to offer for me.
 To me the beach is the least stressful area where you do not have to worry about anything. You can just clear your mind and relax.
If I had an infinite amount I would catch up on all the TV shows I am behind on. I’d probably sleep till noon everyday, and do nothing but the necessities. Maybe I’d hangout with my friends everyone once in a while.
On the surface having an abundance of free time sounds like a great thing. It may be great not having to go to work or school for a few days. However, it seems like it would become really boring really fast. I know the personally after the first week or so of winter break I get really bored. So if I had nothing but free time, it would be fun for about a week, but it would get really old really fast.
If I had free time and no restrictions, I would do many things. I would definitely sleep in and go to bed late. I would play sports, watch tv and movies, hang out with friends and eat lots of food.
Now if i had the whole day to my self with no priorities I would do what any teenager in my generation would, watch T.V. It would bring so much pressure off my chest and at the same time i would have fun watching entertaining re-runs.
As internet users we need to inform ourselves and take an analytical position, knowing that not everything in the internet is true because those kind of things are made by political fans who are trying to even support or destroy the other candidates. When you see all this memes just laugh and enjoy them but do not forget to inform yourself and find the truth.
Memes are spreading widely through the Internet and obviously, it can be dangerous to democracy because sometimes it can show an idea, style or behavior that doesn’t describe the real personality of a candidate. The memes might influence the people’s votes, their perceptions about political candidates, their platforms, and their personalities.
In reality, a lot of people don’t have time to be watching the candidates on TV or spending hours researching them, so they just make a judgement. Their judgement is based off of what they see on the internet or TV that becomes most popular online, and most aren’t going to research where the source was found. People have freedom of speech, so it is fine to be making them and posting about them, but the facts and sayings on them should be true.
Political memes are not dangerous to Democracy and actually help it. These memes allow each person to express himself, both for and against a candidate. The freedom of expression is the key for sustainable Democracy- without it it is not a real one. Not allowing a person to express themselves using memes can make them express themselves in other extreme ways, like violence.
In addition, these political memes are a tool used by the candidates in order to know better the public opinion of them and to connect to the younger audience.
In response to our Picture Prompt about the World Series, students wrote in about their thoughts on this year’s exciting match-up between the Houston Astros and Los Angeles Dodgers.
This World Series, to date, has probably been the most exciting World Series, and I think that the action didn’t stop in game 5. In game 5 on Sunday NIght, Astros won a thriller by winning 14-13 in 10 innings. That was the highest scoring game in World Series History.
As for the following games, I personally feel as if they are going to be thrillers as well. There have been 22 home runs during this World Series, most in MLB history and we have only been through 5 games of the series. That. Is. Crazy. My prediction for this amazing World Series is the ‘Stros in 7. Astros have not performed very well in away games this postseason but I believe that they will pull through and win the championship in LA and bring the title back to Houston.
I am from the DC area, so I would love to see the Washington Nationals go the World Series. One of the things I don’t understand is that how the Nats have such a good line up and an amazing bullpen and are still able to choke in playoffs. In the past 5 years, they have lost 3-1 in the ALCS or they didn’t make the playoffs at all. To make things better, I would really like to see the World Series be a Battle of the Beltways between the Orioles and the Nationals. I would then die a happy person.
The world series recently just ended and the Astros took the cake on this one. Personally I wanted the Dodgers to win the world series and they did battle hard and we got blown out this game but the total amount of runs scored by both teams in these 7 games were both 35 runs so they are pretty equal in skill level and in the first three innings in game 7 both of the starting pitchers got taken out because they were doing lousy and got relieved and this was a very heated up and enjoyable world series and I can’t wait until next year.
I have never really liked baseball that much but with what has happened recently in Houston, involving hurricane Harvey, and all the homes destroyed, I feel like the Astros aren’t playing just to win a trophy they’re playing for their city and their people. It’s amazing to me how far they have come and how close they are to winning the world series. This would also be their first ever world series and they would go down in history. They couldn’t have come this far without teamwork and so many people in Houston wouldn’t have survived the hurricane if it wasn’t for other people and teamwork.
We were surprised that most readers found the thought of a Driverless-Car future more scary than exciting.
The thought of getting into a vehicle that nobody has control over is very scary. Although the thought of a car driving itself is very cool and could give opportunities to many people who can’t drive, the thought of putting my life in technologies hands, where even the smallest thing in wiring could make the car crash, where the driver has no hope and has to accept the fate.
Self driving cars are a very good idea but there are three downsides to them.
It is known that the cars can be hacked into and in some cases it has been used for some very bad reasons.
Malfunctions are more likely to happen with electrical currents on a motherboard than with an old car that uses the physics of mechanics without a possible “glitch”.
It is known that when G.P.S. came to the public that we lost a little bit of our sense of direction due to depending on it so much and now when it seems you could just watch a movie while driving that takes even the aspect of memorizing locations so that you possibly wouldn’t even need G.P.S. anymore.
Humans are prone to mistakes and distractions, as evidenced by the huge amount of car accidents that occur presently. Therefore, it is likely safer to have a computer make the choices in driving as it can make calculated judgments of safety far more accurately than humans can. However, I think that the true benefit of automated cars will only be complete when all cars have been transitioned to driverless... While human drivers are still on the road, they may make poor decisions that will cause accidents that the driverless cars cannot avoid. Once all cars are driverless, there will be no room for human error and therefore there will not be accidents.
Personally, I would not drive a driverless car. Aside from the possible issues with the car, having driverless cars and possibly replacing regular cars with them would take away from the right of passage that everyone has the opportunity to face; a license. Learning to drive and getting a license is exciting and something that people look forward to. Without needing the knowledge on how to drive, the excitement is lost. No more waiting until 16, no challenge, and a missing step into adulthood. I think that this point above all is one that would cause me to not support driverless cars because I enjoy being able to learn something new and having some control with my life as a teenager.
If the future is driverless cars then can kids drive them? Would you still need a drivers license? I think driverless cars would cause more crashes. Driverless cars are more expensive then a regular car so could people afford them?
Students had many positive answers to the prompt “What Good Can Come from Disagreements?
I think having disagreements help us grow as people. If you disagree with someone you should let them know, because your argument could have a completely different perspective that they never thought of. I think if everyone agreed on the same thing about certain subjects, there would be no argument and without argument no one is able to see the other side of things.
I think that disagreements can help both people see whatever they’re disagreeing about the other way, and help them both really think about the topic they’re disagreeing on, so I do agree with Mr. Grant when he says “We’re at our most imaginative when we’re out of sync” because disagreeing about something helps you see it from another person’s perspective, and that might make you think about things you never saw in the topic before.
I believe disagreements are the most revealing, eye-opening things one can take on. They let you see things from one perspective and from another. It lets you think about what the issue is and why your disagreeing. That’s why I agree with Mr.Grant’s assertion that, “we’re at our most imaginative when we’re out of sync.” I can’t think of one specific idea, but when I disagree with someone I don’t step down from my belief. Even when I could be wrong or a little off, I carry out my idea just to see where it leads me.
This topic reminds me to a story that I had read to my daughter, it was about two kids who have different color block toys, one of them took by mistake the other’s block, so they started to fight and that causes that all their toys were mixed. When they sew that they decided to build together with both block’s color. They made some beautiful things when they mixed the blocks. This simple story means that the disagreement is very important; if those kids didn’t fight they couldn’t succeed to build good things, first time everyone was insisted in his opinion and that lets them fight then they discovered something new.
A person who always disagree with others in respect way that’s reflect in his personality, he will be more confident and successful in his life. In the other hand, a person who always accepts whatever people say, that will not help him to be success in his life because he will be always afraid to tell his opinion and that will be a big barrier prevent him from success. I think some disagreements in some cases helps us to be successful. We shouldn’t be afraid to tell our opinions or disagree with others in some issues.
To convince others, to convince someone, does not mean to force but to show someone a way that we consider best to do things so that she voluntarily decides whether to follow our proposal or not.
Calm down to start talking, feeling obfuscated is normal in a discussion, but to be able to answer or clarify any point, it is necessary to calm down, breathe and then talk. The discussion is temporary but the work or personal relationship can be permanent. Avoid doing or saying something that can cause harm.
When two persons have discussion about something it’s better for them that each one has different idea, because everyone can have learned about each other’s. And every one of them can see different ways from the idea of second person, so every one of them defend about his idea and learn new things in the same time. The disagreement helps people to develop their thought.