Mike Vargas knows how to deal with wrecks, even ones that could take years. The cars he repairs or soups up inside his northeast Bronx auto body shop, East Coast Customs Automotive Playground, seem like easy fixes compared with the devastation in Puerto Rico, where he has family and property. Now, while he works on his cars, a vibrant mural looms over him, constantly reminding him of more dire human challenges. Suggesting the famous photograph, “Raising the Flag on Iwo Jima,” the mural depicts hard-hatted workers lifting a flag-topped utility pole over a devastated landscape.
Not that Mr. Vargas needs reminders. As a Puerto Rican New Yorker, he is always thinking about the island’s humanitarian crisis. Within days of Hurricane Maria, he and a group of local body shop owners started collecting water and emergency supplies, which they shipped to the island in two cargo containers. And though the urgency of the situation may be fading from the headlines, his resolve has not.
The mural was created by two graffiti artists: Alfredo Oyague, better known as Per One of the FX Crew, and Alfred Bennett, known as the Royal Kingbee. Over the years, Mr. Oyague had painted various murals at the shop, and he had been planning to redo the waiting room a few weeks ago at Mr. Vargas’ request. When Mr. Vargas suggested something based on the crisis in Puerto Rico, Mr. Oyague showed him an image a friend had found online, where recovery workers were portrayed as the figures in Joe Rosenthal’s Iwo Jima photo.
Like many Puerto Ricans, Mr. Vargas felt the federal response had been slow and inadequate, a situation made worse by President Trump’s Twitter feed, which reminded people that the cash-strapped island was already “billions of dollars” in debt to “Wall Street and the banks.” And when $4.9 billion in federal aid was proposed to help the island’s government pay its bills, it came as a loan.
Mr. Oyague had deeply personal reasons that inspired him to work on the mural. His mother Ana, 72, a retired Metropolitan Transportation Authority bus driver, lived in Barranquitas, a hard-hit mountain town halfway between San Juan and Ponce. She had planned to ride out the storm along with her sister, an 85-year-old nun. Her brick house was solid, but not immune from wind and water. To prepare for the storm, she had moved a generator and ruptured a disc in her back. Then, during the hurricane, her condition had worsened.
Even though the waters receded, it took eight days for roads to be cleared. His aunt is now staying at her religious order’s Philadelphia convent, while his mother — who is using a wheelchair until her back heals — moved into an apartment in the Soundview section of the Bronx, where Mr. Oyague also lives. In this time of uncertain exile, their thoughts remain fixed on their many relatives on the island, like one uncle who lives close to his mother’s house in Barranquitas.
Given the complicated history between the United States and its island territory, Mr. Oyague sees the mural as a political statement that many can relate to on a personal level. He is still seething over Mr. Trump’s brief — and limited — visit to the island, where he tossed rolls of paper towels to the crowd.
