OAK CREEK, Wis. — The worshipers, hundreds of them, had gathered Sunday for the afternoon meal in the vast, bright dining hall at the Sikh Temple of Wisconsin, just as they do every Sunday.
But before long, the happy din of the congregants was interrupted by a grim bulletin from Texas. People pushed away their plates of cauliflower and rice as the horrific news chirped across their cellphones. A gunman in a house of God. Multiple fatalities. Multiple injuries.
The Sikh temple was 1,300 miles and worlds away from the First Baptist Church in Sutherland Springs, Tex. But at the temple, where a mass shooting left six dead five years ago, it felt sickeningly familiar, as it had at congregations in South Carolina and Tennessee and New York, places on the grim list of religious congregations that have become victims of gun violence. As different as they are, they share both a tragic past and a continuing struggle to move beyond it.
In a nation awash in guns, houses of worship in recent years have been the setting for numerous fatal shootings, including an attack by a white supremacist in 2015 at a historically African-American church in Charleston, S.C., that left nine people dead.
As the news of Sunday’s massacre sunk in, there was a queasy feeling of solidarity in these sacred but violated spaces. Their leaders knew that the members of the First Baptist Church would soon be forced to partake in new rituals, and ask new questions about maintaining both security and a welcoming spirit.
They knew that the answers could not be perfect. And they knew that the Texans would feel the violation in their bones.
“Church may be one of our last places of refuge. Now it’s as if that is even being challenged,” said Joey Spann, the pastor of Burnette Chapel Church of Christ near Nashville, on Tuesday. Mr. Spann was shot in the hand and chest on Sept. 24. That Sunday, a 25-year-old former congregant waited in the parking lot for people to leave the morning service then opened fire, killing a mother of two and injuring seven others.
Violent attacks at houses of worship are not new. White Southerners opposed to racial integration bombed a number of African-American churches in the Deep South in the 1950s and ’60s. Most infamous was the bombing of the Sixteenth Street Baptist Church in Birmingham, Ala., in 1963, which killed four young girls.
But violence has escalated in recent years. The suspect in the attack at Mr. Spann’s church in Nashville, who as a child came here as a refugee from Sudan, left a note in his car referring to Dylann S. Roof, the white man who killed nine black people at the Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church in Charleston.
In the five years since the attack on the Sikh temple, by an Army veteran with ties to white supremacist groups, its worshipers have done their best to move forward. They forgave the assailant, Wade M. Page, “that very day,” Mr. Singh said. They have strengthened their bonds with members of the community, a mostly white, working-class town of 36,000 along the shore of Lake Michigan.
Willi Glee, 77, a member of Emanuel A.M.E. Church in Charleston, believes that for some attackers, religious spaces offer an added attraction, because defiling them is the ultimate taboo.
At Emanuel A.M.E. Church, a bedrock of black Charleston that was founded in 1791, doors once left open are now locked. Visitors are allowed in after they announce their presence over an intercom system. Strangers’ bags are checked before services. A cast of retired military and on- and off-duty police officers remain vigilant.
Something similar happened at the Al-Furqan Jame Masjid, a mosque in Queens, N.Y. A little more than a year ago, the imam, Alauddin Akonjee, 55, and his assistant, Thara Miah, 64, were shot dead after leaving afternoon prayers on a busy street close to the mosque.
A suspect, Oscar Morel, was later brought into custody, before pleading not guilty to murder charges. Since the shooting, surveillance cameras have been set up around the mosque’s perimeter, and the local police precinct has been made aware of prayer times. Inside, vigilance is encouraged.
Inside the Sikh temple, there is another struggle. Family members of the people who were killed still come to worship, despite the lingering trauma. Of the nearly 500 people at the Sikh temple who regularly arrive for Sunday services, many still worry that they are vulnerable to another attack.
“If it happens one time, people are afraid that it will happen again,” Mr. Singh said.
In Charleston, the fear also lingers. In court testimony in January, Felicia Sanders, who witnessed the massacre there, described in aching terms how the shooting had haunted her.
There have also been good days — and stories of adaptation, transformation, healing and hope. 
In Tennessee, Mr. Spann said that his little church has in many ways been rejuvenated since the shooting. Sunday morning is now a celebration, a gathering of people who understand each other.
He acknowledged the differences between what happened at Burnette Chapel and in Sutherland Springs. The sheer scale of death at the church in Texas, the murder of so many children and the smallness of the community will make it harder for them, and will perhaps be a stronger test of faith.
But both congregations have learned firsthand that there is darkness in the world, as much as people may want to deny it.
