Kitasan Black, Japan’s reigning Horse of the Year, won his title in part because of his dominant victory in last year’s Grade 1 Japan Cup. On Sunday at Tokyo Racecourse, he will try to become only the second back-to-back winner of the race that was created to put Japan on the international racing stage.
The Japan Cup was first held in 1981, and unlike all other races at the time, which were restricted to Japanese-bred runners, it was designed to welcome competitors from around the world in order to measure the quality of Japan’s racehorses. It remains an international invitational to this day.
That feeling proved true with the inaugural running, which went to an American mare named Mairzy Doates, who was owned by the New York City art dealer Arno D. Schefler. For the Japanese, the pain of losing did not stop there.
Now Japan has Kitasan Black, who was widely considered a legitimate contender for Europe’s biggest race, the Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe, before his team opted to keep him in Japan.
The 5-year-old has won six Grade 1 races during his career, three of which have come this year, and he is coming into the Japan Cup off a victory in the Tenno Sho (Autumn). He won the spring version of the race in April, making him one of only five horses to achieve the Tenno Sho double in the same year.
After the Japan Cup, Kitasan Black will be pointed toward the Arima Kinen on Christmas Eve, which will serve as his final career start. He is expected to begin stallion duties in 2018.
All 14 horses that ran in last year’s Japan Cup remained in training in 2017, and it is expected many will turn up to challenge Kitasan Black again, including second and third place finishers Sounds of Earth and Cheval Grand.
Another major competitor will come in the form of Satono Crown, who finished second by a neck to Kitasan Black in the Tenno Sho (Autumn). In June, Kitasan Black had an uncharacteristically bad race in the Takarazuka Kinen, which was won by Satono Crown.
The Japan Cup is held over 2,400 meters, about one-and-a-half miles, and this year it is worth 648,000,000 yen, (about $5.7 million), with 300,000,000 yen going to the winner.
Kitasan Black and Satono Crown are likely to be sent off as the betting favorites, and it bodes well for their chances, as the race is not known for featuring huge long shots.
Local horses have dominated the race for the past decade, but organizers still want international runners. A bonus system is in place if the winner of the Japan Cup previously has won any of 24 designated overseas races this year. In October, it was announced that the potential bonus money would be increased to $2 million from $1 million in an effort to attract more high quality horses.
This year, four international competitors are being pointed toward the race. Among them are Germany’s Guignol and Australia’s Boom Time, who are bonus eligible after taking the Grosser Preis von Baden and Caulfield Cup. They are expected to be joined by Germany’s reigning Horse of the Year, Iquitos, and Idaho, from Ireland, who is a full brother to internationally respected runner Highland Reel.
While several American-based horses have won the Japan Cup, it has not happened since 1991 when Golden Pheasant took the prize. Although there are multiple reasons — including different racing rules between countries and travel — it is also as simple as timing. The end of the year championship races for American horses take place at the beginning of the month during the Breeders’ Cup World Championships, which was inaugurated in 1984.
For those in Japan, the race carries a great deal of meaning. Although the Japan Cup is not guaranteed to be the most coveted race among owners and breeders — it is in competition with the likes of the Tokyo Yushun (Japanese Derby) and the Tenno Sho (Emperor’s Cup) — it is the one that lets them consider the possibility of taking their horse elsewhere to compete. As such, it is increasing in popularity with the younger members of the game.
“Derby is Derby, which is the dream for all horsemen, and the Emperor’s Cup is still the most important race for some of the owners and trainers who belong to the elder generation,” Goda said. “On the other hand, the Japan Cup is the most important and most prestigious race for many of owners, trainers, breeders, and jockeys in Japan nowadays.
