SYDNEY, Australia — The government of Papua New Guinea is not required to supply power, water or food to 600 migrants who have refused to leave a shuttered detention center on Manus Island, the country’s Supreme Court ruled on Tuesday.
The migrants, all men seeking asylum who were detained on their way to Australia, sought the court’s intervention, arguing that the government’s decision to stop the services amounted to a violation of their human rights.
“This order shows how we are forgotten people and there is no justice for us,” said Behrouz Boochani, a Kurdish journalist from Iran who is one of the detainees.
Inside the camp, the court’s decision was met with sadness and despair. Several migrants said people were crying.
The men at the camp said conditions had deteriorated in the past day or two.
The United Nations warned last week of an “unfolding humanitarian emergency” on Manus Island after the detainees, mostly from the Middle East and Southeast Asia, refused to leave the camp for housing in the nearby town of Lorengau, where residents had previously attacked other migrants.
The governments of Australia and Papua New Guinea agreed in April to close the center on Oct. 31.
By law, Australia will not resettle any migrants who approach the country by boat, a policy intended to discourage dangerous ocean crossings and human smuggling.
Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull of Australia has urged the migrants to move to the temporary accommodations in Lorengau.
“There are alternative facilities available of a very high quality, with food and all of the facilities,” Mr. Turnbull said on Tuesday.
The Australian Medical Association has called for “independent verification” of the health of the men who remain at the camp.
Mr. Boochani, the Kurdish journalist, said last week that the men were experiencing dehydration, hunger and anxiety. Another detainee said some of the men had fallen ill and were unable to get the necessary medical attention.
Among the men who had already left the camp, many said they felt guilty that they were not able to stand in solidarity with those who had stayed behind.
On Sunday, hundreds of the men holed up in the center signed a letter addressed to the leaders of the United States, Canada and New Zealand, pleading for their help amid the standoff.
About 50 of the men have already been resettled in the United States.