1. Now comes the hard part for Senate Republicans.
A G.O.P. tax plan passed easily in the House. Above, Speaker Paul Ryan and Representative Kevin Brady celebrated. Members of the Senate Finance Committee also approved their version of the tax package, though whether it can pass the full chamber remains to be seen. One Republican, Senator Ron Johnson of Wisconsin, has already said he will not vote for it in its current form.
In the frantic rush to legislate a new tax code by Christmas, the House and the Senate must eventually reconcile their plans, which differ but have a common underlying priority: lasting cuts for corporations.
2. Allegations of sexual misconduct continue to send shock waves through the halls of government and, in Alabama, the campaign trail. Republicans in Roy Moore’s home state voiced firm support for his Senate bid, putting them publicly and bitterly at odds with top Republicans.
President Trump politicized the sexual harassment debate, staying relatively mum on Mr. Moore, above, but swiftly denouncing Al Franken after a radio newscaster accused the senator of forcibly kissing and groping her in 2006. Mr. Franken’s admission and apology did little to silence calls for his resignation, as politicians and comedians tried to assess the line between predatory behavior and an inexcusable mistake.
3. Details continue to emerge about Russia’s multipronged effort to sway the 2016 presidential election, including its attempts to enlist the Trump campaign. The latest: A top Russian official made a backdoor offer to set up a meeting between Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin, which Jared Kushner, above, ultimately rejected.
Under questioning by Congress, Attorney General Jeff Sessions repeatedly claimed not to have been lying in the past, but said news accounts had now jogged his memory about a campaign aide’s offer to arrange a similar meeting.
South Dakota faced a more immediate concern: a 210,000-gallon oil leak, above, from the Keystone Pipeline, which carries crude from Canada. It came just days before Nebraska’s regulators are to decide whether to give final approval to a different, controversial pipeline, Keystone XL, which would be operated by the same company.
5. Robert Mugabe, who has ruled Zimbabwe for 37 years, was ousted on Sunday as leader of his ZANU-PF party.
Mr. Mugabe, 93, is now set to negotiate his departure as the country’s president with the army commander who had him placed under house arrest last week.
Another strongman, known as the Crocodile, has been named Mr. Mugabe’s successor as party leader. The party vote came a day after thousands of Zimbabweans took to the streets to celebrate Mr. Mugabe’s stunning fall from power, which began with a military takeover.
Above, Mr. Mugabe in 2012 with his wife, Grace, a significant player in Zimbabwe’s politics who was barred from the party for life on Sunday.
On a separate note, the Trump administration paused a decision related to Zimbabwe that set off an international uproar: allowing U.S. hunters to bring home trophies from elephant hunts there.
The buyer’s identity remains unknown.
The takeaway for the rest of us: marketing! And the recognition that art figures as much as stocks in financiers’ portfolios.
7. An exhaustive, on-the-ground investigation presented in The Times Magazine reveals that the U.S.-led coalition is killing far more Iraqi civilians than previously acknowledged in its “precision” air campaign against the Islamic State — 31 times more, in fact.
At the same time, Iraq is trying to come to grips with the number of those killed by the Islamic State. At least 70 mass graves have been found. Our new Baghdad bureau chief shares the story of an Iraqi shepherd left to bury the bodies of his neighbors.
Neighboring Iran continues to pick up the pieces after suffering the world’s most deadly earthquake this year.
8. There’s a new Great Migration.
Puerto Ricans are turning up in droves in Florida, particularly Orlando, in a post-Hurricane Maria exodus so large it rivals those from New Orleans to Houston after Hurricane Katrina and from Cuba to Miami during the Mariel boatlift. Many are staying with friends and family, above.
Back on the island, the state of constant uncertainty caused by a faltering power grid and a flimsy economy has unleashed a mental health crisis.
9. “Saturday Night Live” took aim at Al Franken, an alumnus of the show, over a 2006 photo showing him with his hands extended over a sleeping woman’s breasts.
10. Finally, single men in China are turning to a distinctly 21st-century coach for a leg up in the dating scene. In a country where last year men outnumbered women by 33.6 million, the “Fall in Love Emotional Education” school offers instruction in grooming, dressing and, critically, making an approach.
The school’s founder says 90 percent of its graduates, who are trained in personal style (“sleeves should be folded up above the elbow”) and the art of the pensive profile picture, end up with girlfriends.
Your Weekend Briefing is published Sundays at 6 a.m. Eastern.
And don’t miss Your Morning Briefing, weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern, and Your Evening Briefing, weeknights at 6 p.m. Eastern.
Want to look back? You can browse past Morning and Evening Briefings.
