The Securities and Exchange Commission took a first step on Wednesday to head off the recent trend of celebrities endorsing new virtual currencies, warning that they could be breaking laws.
Entrepreneurs have been issuing the digital currencies through so-called initial coin offerings, or I.C.O.s, which have become a hot but largely unregulated method of fund-raising for technology projects.
So far this year, some 270 projects have raised over $3 billion by selling new currencies to investors. The vast sums of money have drawn in celebrities, like the socialite Paris Hilton and the rapper the Game, who have promoted particular projects, generally in exchange for a payment of some sort.
The S.E.C. said in a statement released on Wednesday afternoon that celebrities who promoted coin offerings could be violating multiple laws, including antifraud regulations and rules that govern investment brokers.
The Centra founders, from left, Sam Sharma, Raymond Trapani and Robert Farkas.
The regulatory warning followed an article in The New York Times in the past week about such celebrity endorsements. The article focused on a troubled project, known as Centra, that was promoted by the boxer Floyd Mayweather and the rapper DJ Khaled.
Centra raised $30 million with the help of the famous names. But the project’s founders appear to have misled investors on several points, including the ability of the project to issue debit cards, its primary product.
The S.E.C. said in July that the entrepreneurs in charge of coin offerings could end up in trouble for violating securities law. But the statement on Wednesday focused on people promoting the coins. It said celebrities could be violating the law if they did not disclose that they were compensated for making an endorsement.
Centra’s founders said they had paid Mr. Mayweather and DJ Khaled to promote the project’s virtual currency, known as Centra tokens, in social media postings. But neither of the celebrities disclosed in his postings that he had been paid.
After being reached by The Times, Mr. Mayweather deleted some of the social media posts that endorsed Centra. Ms. Hilton deleted her post promoting a project known as Lydian Coin after Forbes wrote about the problematic legal history of the project’s founder.
Few of the other celebrities who have promoted I.C.O.s have acknowledged being paid for their endorsements.
Beyond the potential issues around disclosure, the S.E.C. said celebrities could end up violating several other laws, such as those that govern people who are categorized as brokers of securities.
The S.E.C. put out a separate investor alert on Wednesday, warning investors to be wary of endorsements from prominent people.
