Even during her years as an opera star, renowned for her intense performances, Natalie Dessay saw herself as something more: an actress, a chanteuse. She has long revered Barbra Streisand, and now — at 52, having retired from the opera stage in 2013 — Ms. Dessay is finally completing a decades-old project originally conceived for Ms. Streisand.
The seeds were planted in 2008, when Ms. Dessay was putting together a live revue of songs by the composer Michel Legrand and they struck up a friendship. Since then, she and Mr. Legrand have toured Europe and Canada with a jazz trio; she has appeared in a stage version of his movie musical “The Umbrellas of Cherbourg”; and in 2013 they released an album, “Entre Elle et Lui,” that included “Papa Can You Hear Me?” and “What Are You Doing the Rest of Your Life?” — both songs by Mr. Legrand that had been immortalized by Ms. Streisand.
And yet Ms. Dessay felt she wasn’t done with her new collaborator’s catalog. Might he, by any chance, have a little something special laying around?
The oratorio followed the life of a woman from birth to death, via romance, marriage and motherhood. Mr. Legrand and the lyricists Alan and Marilyn Bergman had pitched it to Ms. Streisand in the early 1970s, but she did not want to commit to the full project, which was set aside.
And there was another, more practical impediment.
In the 1990s, Ms. Dessay rose to coloratura fame in the opera world for the vividness and commitment of her acting, both in comic roles (she was brilliant as the doll Olympia in “Les Contes d’Hoffmann” and the spunky Zerbinetta in “Ariadne auf Naxos) and tragic ones (she opened the Metropolitan Opera’s 2007-08 season in “Lucia di Lammermoor”).
And since stepping away from staged opera, she has redirected her energies toward theater, touring France in Howard Barker’s “Und” and currently rehearsing the Stefan Zweig drama “Legend of a Life.” Portraying Mr. Legrand’s unnamed woman came naturally to her; she switches to a little-girl tone in “Mother and Child” without sounding cloying.
All of those styles can be heard on the lush “Between Yesterday and Tomorrow,” which feels like the summation of a prodigious career and allows Ms. Dessay to dart with agility and confidence from girlishness to seduction and even, on “The More You Have,” gentle swing.
The catchy immediacy of Mr. Legrand’s tunes masks how difficult it can be to sing them. “There’s a feeling of water, somehow, abandoned and never-ending, combined with tricky melodic surprises that require great pitch precision or you miss the key details that make each phrase special,” said the singer Melissa Errico, who is among his most capable contemporary interpreters, starring in his only Broadway show, “Amour,” in 2002, and releasing the album “Legrand Affair” in 2011.
“Between Yesterday and Tomorrow” abounds with delicious touches that reward close listening. Ms. Dessay points out, for instance, that she exhales during the birth song and inhales during the death one, and that the album works as a continuous loop.
