When it came to making political donations for Mayor Bill de Blasio, Jona S. Rechnitz liked to think of himself as a yes man, always quick with the pen. For his generosity, Mr. Rechnitz was provided access to City Hall: The mayor took his calls, problems with agencies were addressed, questions got answered.
Yet as the mayor neared the end of his first year in office, Mr. Rechnitz grew restless. He felt he was no longer getting his money’s worth.
Not long after, Mr. de Blasio called Mr. Rechnitz with his biggest ask yet: a six-figure donation to help Democrats win the State Senate. Mr. Rechnitz said he could not turn down the mayor and wrote a check for $102,300.
Suddenly the gears of government began spinning again for Mr. Rechnitz, a real estate investor. A city official emailed him with an offer to set up a meeting to discuss hefty fines that Mr. Rechnitz claimed were levied unfairly against a Manhattan building that he owned. About the same time, city officials began answering his long-stalled questions about another property in Brooklyn.
Mr. Rechnitz, once among the mayor’s biggest donors, is the key government witness in a corruption trial in Federal District Court in Manhattan against a powerful former correction union boss, Norman Seabrook. Mr. Rechnitz, who has already pleaded guilty to crimes involving bribery, has been testifying against Mr. Seabrook.
But in his days on the stand, beginning last week, he delivered his characterization of Mr. de Blasio as a politician ready and willing to swing wide the doors of City Hall to an obscure young real estate investor — as long as Mr. Rechnitz kept the donations coming.
His testimony, corroborated in many parts by a series of emails provided by the city in response to a Freedom of Information law request, describe a City Hall where donors had top-level access. They show the mayor asking Mr. Rechnitz for ever greater sums of money; he received access and the cachet that came with it. And Mr. Rechnitz kept opening his wallet, leveraging the access his largess bought him to schmooze business associates and pose as a big shot.
Mr. de Blasio has dismissed Mr. Rechnitz as “a liar and a felon,” and in court Mr. Rechnitz has come across at times as self-promoting and untrustworthy. But the revelations have come at an inopportune time. As the mayor closes in on what is expected to be a lopsided re-election on Tuesday, tabloid headlines have accused him of putting government up for sale, and Mr. de Blasio was forced to face questions about the testimony at a televised debate on Wednesday.
Mr. de Blasio, whose fund-raising practices were once the subject of federal and state investigations, is not a defendant in the trial. But Mr. Rechnitz’s testimony has given New Yorkers a glimpse of what prosecutors had as potential evidence, as they ultimately decided to not bring charges against the mayor.
Jeremy Reichberg, leaving a federal courthouse after his arraignment last year, introduced Jona Rechnitz to key city officials, paving the way toward a relationship with Mayor de Blasio.
Mr. Rechnitz cooperated with the federal investigation and with a separate probe by the Manhattan district attorney, agreeing to plead guilty to honest services wire fraud, admitting, according to his court testimony, to “giving money to the mayor of New York in exchange for favors” and to a scheme to bribe Mr. Seabrook.
The son of a wealthy California family, Mr. Rechnitz, 34, attended college in New York and then stayed, eventually starting a real estate business. Along the way he met Jeremy Reichberg, a Brooklyn man who had connections in the Police Department.
Over time, Mr. Rechnitz and Mr. Reichberg befriended Mr. Seabrook and top police officials, including Philip Banks III, once the highest-ranking uniformed member of the department. He lavished gifts on the police officials and Mr. Seabrook and took them on trips. In exchange, he got favors, such as police escorts.
In 2013, Mr. Rechnitz turned his sights on City Hall. “We had the police going for us and now it was time to get into politics,” he testified.
He said Mr. Offinger asked how much Mr. Rechnitz and his associates could raise. Mr. Rechnitz said he offered to raise up to $100,000.
Mr. Rechnitz said he called the mayor often during the campaign and afterward. But Mr. de Blasio has said that they were never close.
Mr. de Blasio said during the debate that he gave his personal email to “thousands” of people, but he refused to make public cellphone records that could show how often the men were in contact. He has also repeatedly said he cannot remember key elements of his dealings with Mr. Rechnitz.
But Mr. Rechnitz said that some concerns were not getting proper attention. One involved a building he owned on Madison Avenue in Manhattan, which city inspectors said was being used illegally as a hotel, through Airbnb rentals; another involved the Brooklyn property, where he said that a sale had been held up because the Police Department saw it as a potential site for a precinct station house.
That was when Mr. Offinger contacted Mr. Rechnitz to ask for money to help Democrats take over the State Senate — a priority of Mr. de Blasio’s.
Mr. Rechnitz wrote a check to the New York State Senate Democratic Campaign Committee from one of his companies, JSTD Madison, on Oct. 22, 2014, according to campaign finance records.
On Oct. 29, Mr. Rechnitz received an email from an official at what was then known as the Mayor’s Office of Criminal Justice, which was responsible for enforcing violations like those at his Madison Avenue building, offering to schedule a meeting.
The head of the office, Elan Parra, later sent Mr. Rechnitz an email asking to meet with him “so that we can discuss some of the issues/concerns you raised.” A meeting was eventually scheduled in December.
Besides the State Senate donation, Mr. Rechnitz and his wife, Rachel, each made the maximum contribution of $4,950 to Mr. de Blasio in 2013. Mr. Rechnitz also contributed $50,000 to a nonprofit group created by Mr. de Blasio and bundled $41,650 in donations from other people to the mayor, although he admitted during the trial that a portion of that was his own money, funneled to the mayor through straw donors.
Mr. de Blasio has said that Mr. Rechnitz did not get his fines on the Madison Avenue building reduced and did not receive special treatment. He said he treated all constituents the same.
The testimony is not likely to alter the course of the 2017 election, with the vote on Tuesday. But it provided fodder for Mr. de Blasio’s opponents during the Wednesday debate.
