Most sports teams try to conduct coach or manager searches privately. The Yankees are parading their candidates in front of the news media, one by one.
In professional sports, the search for a new coach or manager is typically done in the shadows, to protect a team’s competitive advantage as well as the candidates’ privacy. Private jets may be dispatched — and even scrambled — to conduct interviews. The chattiest general managers suddenly become taciturn.
The rule of thumb: Be discreet with those you meet.
But industry standards, including this one, do not always apply to the Yankees. In their search for a replacement for Joe Girardi, whose contract as manager was not renewed after last season, the Yankees are not only making little effort to hide candidates but also crowdsourcing the vetting process by parading them in front of the news media.
So far, each of the five people the Yankees have interviewed — the Yankees bench coach Rob Thomson, the former Cleveland Indians and Seattle Mariners manager Eric Wedge, the San Francisco Giants hitting coach Hensley Meulens, the broadcaster and former player Aaron Boone and the Dodgers third-base coach Chris Woodward — has been placed on a conference call with the news organizations that regularly cover the team.
General Manager Brian Cashman said there were two purposes for the highly unusual decision to publicize the list of candidates.
First, the news media may dig up information on a candidate that the Yankees’ own background search has not — the cautionary tale being the Arizona Diamondbacks’ hiring of Wally Backman after the 2003 season. The Diamondbacks fired him four days later after The New York Times published an article detailing his arrests on domestic violence and drunken driving charges, and his filing for bankruptcy.
The other benefit is to observe how the candidates might handle questions from the news media — a significant and often stressful part of a Yankees manager’s duties. The manager is required to do it twice a day, 162 times a year in front of what is typically the largest media contingent in baseball.
Many general managers seem to think it’s a brilliant idea — for the Yankees.
Luhnow, who has hired two managers, paused for a moment.
The Yankees’ practice might be more renowned if only they fired managers the way they did in George Steinbrenner’s impetuous heyday. But Cashman has changed managers only twice in his 20 years as general manager. He also made candidates available to the news media when he interviewed three people to replace Joe Torre in 2007 — Girardi, Don Mattingly and Tony Pena.
Cashman could not remember how the idea occurred to him.
In fact, Cashman seems to have pilfered it from his friendly old rival Theo Epstein.
Epstein was just 29 years old and one year into his job as general manager of Boston when he fired Red Sox Manager Grady Little in the aftermath of the heartbreaking Game 7 loss to the Yankees in the 2003 American League Championship Series. He held news conferences for each of the four candidates to replace Little.
Epstein sat quietly in the back while the Boston news media queried Terry Francona — who eventually got the job — and Joe Maddon, DeMarlo Hale and Glenn Hoffman.
The teleconferences the Yankees are conducting are hardly contentious — or particularly enlightening. The Yankees limit the questions to one per entity, undercutting any chance for some back and forth.
It’s unclear if the Yankees — or the news media — will be interviewing any more candidates. There is not an incandescent personality in the group, which may well be by design.
Cashman is looking for someone who can relate well to his young players, is versed in analytics and is willing to collaborate with the front office on everything from lineups to roster makeup.
And somebody, the Yankees hope, who can get a message across.
