Guillermo del Toro’s latest film, “The Shape of Water,” which picked up 13 Oscar nominations on Tuesday, is not easy to classify. It genre-hops through fantasy, science fiction, thriller and romance to tell the tale of a mute janitor (Sally Hawkins) at a laboratory who falls for an amphibious, scaled creature (Doug Jones). Imagery expresses the story better. And one image in particular, that of a woman and a merman floating in an underwater embrace, distills the movie to its soulful essence. That concept, which comes to life in the film, is the focus of the movie’s intricately hand-drawn teaser poster. Here is how the poster evolved, as explained by Mr. del Toro and its designer, James Jean.
Five or six years ago, when Mr. del Toro was deep into other projects, he imagined this embrace and worked with the storyboard artist Guy Davis to get it down on paper. Fast-forward to preproduction on “The Shape of Water,” when the Los Angeles illustrator Natalie Hall was asked to make another sketch based on Mr. del Toro’s conception. That’s what appears in the movie (and the trailer): the woman’s face partly obscured by the creature’s, the two melding in a kind of yin and yang.
Using charcoal on paper, Mr. Jean got to work on the poster, pictured above in progress. He used screen grabs and photos of the creature costume from various angles as reference points to create an accurate duplication of the merman’s look. And he was inspired by Gustav Klimt’s painting “The Kiss” when thinking about how to intertwine the characters.
The sequence in the movie shares the haunting, ethereal qualities of the drawing. But to ground it in a kind of realism, Mr. del Toro insisted it be shot “wet for wet,” meaning that the actors were truly immersed. Other underwater scenes in “The Shape of Water” use wires and tricks to get the submerged effect, but not this scene. Mr. del Toro said he wanted to capture “the grace of the way the bodies float.” So he put Sally Hawkins and Doug Jones (who wore an elaborately designed suit to play the creature) on a set with a platform to accommodate the camera crane. They sunk that set into a pool and filmed the floating actors and the beams of light around them. A version of this still was used in a different poster design, the final theatrical poster in which the creature has Ms. Hawkins’s character in his fin-adorned arms.