For the past few years, the singer-songwriter Nellie McKay has been creating eccentric biographical concerts about quite a motley crew: the convicted murderer Barbara Graham, the environmental activist Rachel Carson and the cross-dressing jazz musician Billy Tipton. She has performed them all over the United States without a hitch, and without official permission. So when Ms. McKay decided to tackle Joan Rivers, her main concern was how to organize her material.
To that end, she worked on “The Big Molinsky” (Rivers’s real name) the way a comedian would: solo at barely publicized midnight gigs.
In these performances, held on Fridays at Joe’s Pub in Manhattan, she alternated between anecdotes drawn from Rivers’s first autobiography, “Enter Talking” (1986), and covers of seemingly unrelated songs, such as Harry Nilsson’s “Coconut” and David Yazbek’s “Wasted.” Ms. McKay’s portrait of a woman looking for her break — like the book, the show ended with Rivers’s first appearance on “The Tonight Show” in 1965 — was affectionate. But it also felt unfocused and tentative, and the pace was halting.
Then the lawyers swooped in.
On Nov. 1, a few days after the second show, representatives for the Rivers estate sent Ms. McKay a letter expressing concern about potential copyright infringement and requesting the script. Reached this week, the representatives had no further comment.
Fast-paced, angry and frequently hilarious, the evening was to a scripted show what Todd Haynes’s Bob Dylan movie “I’m Not There” was to a traditional biopic, trading literal illustration for imaginative retelling.
It was unpredictable, thrilling. Ms. McKay has two more midnight engagements at Joe’s Pub, on Friday and on Nov. 17, and there is no telling what she will do.
For Joan Rivers, things started to click in 1962, when, she wrote in her book, “I began freeing my mouth, letting things pop out of it, letting it bring a bit of surprise and shock into the act.” Perhaps Ms. McKay experienced something similar last week; she has always been a charismatic performer, but the new constraints spurred her.
To evoke the Catskills resorts where “this person” plied her trade, the musician played a fiery medley of Liberace’s “Boogie Woogie” and the standard “Willow Weep for Me” (it is likely to be on her next album, due in the spring). The references were allusive rather than pointed, and exceptions included an appropriately lewd Harvey Weinstein joke Rivers would probably have loved.
In the first two shows, Ms. McKay generally paraphrased rather than directly quoted “Enter Talking.” In the third one, the references were cryptic.
At one of Rivers’s favorite haunts, Sarabeth’s on Central Park South, Ms. McKay said, “It’s the best book about show business I’ve ever read.” She switched to a 1940s moll voice: “And I’ve read them all! My mother said I read it at a very impressionable age, but I must still be at an impressionable age because I still love it.” She added that she is keen to eventually submit a script to the estate and get back on the Rivers track.
Since her debut album “Get Away from Me” (2003), Ms. McKay, a firebrand who can quote the radical feminist Shulamith Firestone and Doris Day in the same breath, has settled somewhere between the worlds of cabaret and singer-songwriter pop without fitting into either.
Last Friday, her set list swung between originals and white-hot covers of such songs as Richard and Mimi Fariña’s “Bold Marauder.” The banter was tighter, which seems paradoxical given that it was mostly devoid of specifics. But Ms. McKay succeeded in bringing to loving life what drew her to “Enter Talking” in the first place: a faded era of American “showbiz,” as she likes to put it, with its cigar-chomping agents and musty clubs.
A question asked of any live performer is whether they can duplicate the magic night after night. It’s especially salient for Ms. McKay, a loose cannon who thrives in the moment. How, and if, she ends up folding in more Rivers-themed material may make the show that much more exciting.
