Illustrated. 133 pp. Alfred A. Knopf. Paper, $22.
Is there any new way to tell a story about suburbia — its cheerleading practices, its sneaked cigarettes and kidney-shaped swimming pools?
Unlike that generally traditional if sprawling book, the novella is self-consciously experimental. It’s arranged in a series of 63 vignettes, each headed by a capitalized guideword (usually an abstract noun like “Grief,” “Privacy” or “Tenderness,” though occasionally more workaday options like “Mortgage” sneak in), which relates to the paragraph below it in ways that may or may not be obvious.
If all that sounds like rather a lot of work for a novella, well, it is — particularly since the story Hallberg is telling is, in the end, a pretty simple one. We follow the Harrisons and the Hungates, two families on the North Fork of Long Island, each with a son and a daughter. Through sketches written from more than a dozen perspectives, from an omniscient third person to the family members themselves to tangential figures — an antagonistic neighbor, a chatty doctor — we piece together a kind of narrative. There’s a death; there are a couple of infidelities (maybe three, if you believe one narrator, though he lies about plenty else); there is a divorce and a serious accident. There are middle-aged dissatisfactions and listless teenage drug use and, happily, young love, which is a pleasure to read in Hallberg’s rich, empathic prose.
Experimental fiction demands that the experiments justify their existence, and this novella only half does.  Though the cross-references serve as a useful guide to experiencing the story nonlinearly, it is often difficult to parse the motivation behind which story redirects where.
I wish Hallberg had written these sketches equipped with slightly more faith in his readers’ willingness to concentrate without needing their attention distracted by editorial baubles. (Cross-references, O.K.; but secondary cross-references?) The photos, especially, don’t add much.
But the Rashomon effect of the multiple perspectives and jumbled timelines is powerful. The book echoes the way gossip, the lingua franca of neighborhoods like these, functions: The reader gets an inkling of some event in one story, then sees it confirmed a dozen pages later.
If the novella’s bells and whistles arose from a concern on Hallberg’s part that without them his subject would seem too familiar — another white M.F.A. grad takes on the banal betrayals of middle-class suburban families — he needn’t have worried. When the novelty of the Choose Your Own Adventure aspect of Hallberg’s narrative wears off, the reader is left with the book’s true pleasure: Hallberg’s delicate excavation of those moments, relationship dynamics and angsts that haven’t become the clichés of the genre.
Hallberg inhabits each of his characters completely, and there is some gorgeous image or turn of phrase on almost every page. Especially impressive are the voices of the kids in the story, which feel natural and true. The younger ones are dreamy and defiant, not precious, and the older teenagers are given the space to feel and express subtle, complex emotions.
To set out to tell a story about two families, their kids, their midlife crises and backyard cookouts is indeed unremarkable. But there are things about the Harrisons and Hungates — Tommy’s little lies; the way Jackie talks to Alphonse, her stuffed lion — that will stay with me for a long time.