A man’s unusually small size, which invited the jeers of bullies in his youth, became a key to his role as a “living statue” in Greenwich Village.
Tourists visiting Washington Square stop cold. New Yorkers do, too — even jaded ones, impatient ones, “I’m-walkin’-here!” ones. Street performers, panhandlers, passing police officers — they stop and stand before the south side of the Washington Arch and watch.
The best vantage point to observe this phenomenon is near the southeast corner of the arch, looking up toward Fifth Avenue as unsuspecting people walk closer. They notice a crowd staring and phones pointing at the arch, and invariably turn to see why.
A few feet off the ground, a statue appears to have been mounted on the arch, its hands overhead clutching a small ledge, feet resting on another below. The statue is short, not five feet tall, and classical in appearance, a bare-chested male with a garb around his waist. It is the same marble gray as the looming city landmark that supports its weight.
Then the statue moves.
Jaws go slack. There are small, startled squeals, quiet curses. And it is not as though this sort of thing is new — “living statues,” as they are known, are common in Europe, and there are some in New York City. But none are quite like this one.
The performer’s attention to detail is impressive — the stony texture of his skin, the weathered look. But what is most striking — the performer’s greatest asset behind the illusion — is his size: too tall to be a dwarf, but much shorter than an average man. He stands 4-foot-11 and weighs 83 pounds.
“Sometimes 84,” he said later.
He is Johan Figueroa-González, 30, a transplant from Puerto Rico who has brought the physique, which once invited cruel taunts in his adolescence, to a corner of Manhattan where he has quite literally found his niche, on the back side of a 122-year-old monument to the nation’s first president.
“I’ve seen these street performers all over the world,” Mr. McCurry said in an interview. “But he seems more of a true artist in that he wants to create something interesting.” Other people posted videos and pictures to YouTube or Yelp (“Cool but a little creepy.”).
He went on to study at the University of Puerto Rico, and he worked as a tour guide at a museum. There he met a professor who was teaching an art class and needed a model for her students to draw. He volunteered.
He began performing around the Plaza de Armas in Old San Juan, a fountain with a four-seasons theme. He dressed as a clown, recited poetry, told stories — “everything,” he said. There were four actual statues in the fountain, one for each season, and they gave him an idea.
He bought white clown paint and smeared it over his face and body. He wasn’t very good at being a living statue, he said, and gave it up for a while to travel. It was 2015.
He drew a big enough crowd to draw the attention of the mayor’s office, which wanted to put him to work as a city attraction, he said. “They try to control me, when I perform and when I’m not,” he said.
He wanted a change. Someone suggested New York. A friend directed him to an apartment building in Mott Haven in the Bronx, and in 2016, he paid cash up front to rent a tiny room with a shared bathroom down the hall.
“I spent all my savings,” he said. He had heard of Central Park and wanted to visit to scout performance spaces, but he didn’t know where it was. Someone suggested Washington Square instead, with its tradition of performers.
He bought a waist-high pedestal and hauled it to the park. He applied greenish paint and stood on it, looking like a statue long exposed to the elements.
He approached the Washington Arch and climbed on. “My feet fit in the bottom ledge,” he said.
He reached up.
Before a performance, Mr. Figueroa-González spends about two hours near the arch, getting ready. He neatly applies white paint on his face and narrow frame, then dusts himself with a layer of baby powder or flour to create the texture of a sculpture.
He wraps a gray cloth over his buzz cut and shapes it like a statue’s headpiece, using pins to keep its shape. When he’s ready, he approaches the arch with flourish and bows.
One obstacle he cannot overcome is dropping temperatures. He sneaked in what he assumed was a final performance for the year on a recent unseasonably warm Friday afternoon before setting aside the statue costume until the spring.
He is something of a perfectionist, his room filled with art books; a recent afternoon was spent at the Metropolitan Museum of Art with his sketchbook, seeking new poses and costumes.
Casting around for a performance suitable for winter, he came across a picture of a giant, inflatable ball with a person inside. He got an idea.
He is still working out details, but if all goes as planned, Washington Park will soon have a new attraction: The Living Snow Globe.