The music that Hayes recorded from 1969 through 1971 has since supplied the hooks, beats and textures for more than 500 songs by other artists. When Hayes died in 2008, however, the proto-disco “Theme From ‘Shaft’” and his voice performance as the character of Chef on “South Park” crowded his extraordinary legacy out of obituary headlines. A recent boxed set, “The Spirit of Memphis (1962-1976),” not only gives an overview of the most fertile years of Hayes’s career, but also shines a light on the versatile musicians who consistently backed him: One of the four discs is entirely dedicated to spotlighting the band’s interplay.
Like many studio musicians, Mr. Snell and his peers, who spoke of their work in telephone interviews, were often not listed in album credits. With no documentary film to attest to their contributions, they haven’t yet enjoyed the kind of history-correcting rediscovery afforded James Brown’s bands, or Motown’s Funk Brothers, or the Los Angeles-based session players known as the Wrecking Crew.
In early 1969, after Stax lost its back catalog when Warner Bros. bought its distributor, Atlantic Records, Stax’s president ordered the rush production of 28 new albums. In this frenzy, Hayes, a staff writer and producer — who, along with his songwriting partner David Porter had generated hit records for Sam & Dave (“Soul Man”) and Carla Thomas (“B-A-B-Y”) — was given a green light to record a solo album with complete creative control. Hayes chose the rhythm section of the Bar-Kays for accompaniment.
The young Bar-Kays had already been through plenty. Stax had hoped to groom them as the next Booker T. and the MG’s, the house band that had broken out as a headliner in its own right. But only months after their song “Soul Finger” became a hit, four of the Bar-Kays perished in the same 1967 plane crash that killed Otis Redding. The group’s 20-year-old trumpeter, Ben Cauley, was the sole surviving passenger; the bassist James Alexander, 19, had not been on the flight.
It wasn’t long afterward that Hayes began sitting in with the group at Memphis club gigs, and leading the musicians through chord changes while he rhapsodized at length. By the time they were backing him in the studio, a musical intuition had formed. Mr. Alexander’s relentlessly agile bass lines bandied with Mr. Hall’s stop-time rhythms; Mr. Toles’s finger-stretching guitar figures cut through Hayes’s thick organ.
When the guitarist Harold Beane stopped by the studio for a mixing session, Hayes asked him to improvise freely.
“He told me, ‘I want to take it out of the box,’ so I turned on the fuzz tone and turned up the tremolo,” said Mr. Beane, whose lengthy “Walk on By” solo evokes both buzz saws and Morse code. “Then I took my guitar, and I slid it up and down the microphone stand. The arranger in Detroit heard that, and he matched that sound with strings.” Mr. Beane then began playing in Hayes’s touring band, before joining Funkadelic.
“Hot Buttered Soul” became a sensation, and, thanks to the stubbornly long running times of its four songs, carved out a place for album-oriented black radio. Mr. Toles and Mr. Hall left the Bar-Kays band (which had hired a lead singer and begun moving toward more dance-oriented funk on its own very popular albums). Adding a second guitarist, Charles Pitts, known as Skip; the keyboardists Mr. Snell and Sidney Kirk; and horn players, including the trumpeter Mickey Gregory, the group was rechristened the Isaac Hayes Movement.
The band members worked hard for their $75-a-week salaries, and Hayes kept the players on their toes. The first time Mr. Snell played with Hayes was in front of 70,000 people, he recalled, with no set list or rehearsal. Hayes opened with a song Mr. Snell had never heard before.
Recording could be similarly unpredictable. “He was a night owl,” Mr. Hall said of Hayes. “He’d say, ‘Hey, man — session tomorrow night at 7.’ But then he may not show up until 11, depending on which chick had just flown into town.” If the musicians started to get sleepy rehearsing ballads in the wee hours, Hayes would dispatch his assistants to take attractive women to the studio.
“At that point, all the crooked backs straightened up, everybody’s got their hips shaking, and grinning, and boy, now you got something going on,” Mr. Hall said.
The jaw-dropper on the boxed set is the recently unearthed 33-minute version of “Do Your Thing,” from 1971. With its swirling organ, boogaloo fugues and aggressively atonal guitar bursts, this extended improvisation suggests a musical showdown between the jazz guitarist Sonny Sharrock and the avant-garde German group Can.
That spirit of discovery couldn’t last forever. After “Shaft,” Hayes began a drift toward acting, bankruptcy and rote disco. Mr. Alexander dedicated himself fully to the Bar-Kays, who would amass their own series of Top 10 R&B singles. By the end of the 1970s, the members of the Isaac Hayes Movement had found other work.
The former members of the Movement continue their contributions to the Memphis music scene today. Mr. Beane, Mr. Toles and Mr. Gregory have all played with Elmo and the Shades; Mr. Hall joined the Bo-Keys, along with Mr. Pitts, who died in 2011.
Mr. Alexander is shepherding the Bar-Kays into their sixth decade. They’re holding auditions for a singer.