“Masseduction” is your fifth album in 10 years. How does your songwriting process work? I just walk around, and I collect things. When it’s time to write, I dump them all out at the landfill and sort through them. I start grouping things by color or by texture, slowly but surely. I just made a bunch of robots out of trash: That’s what it feels like.
You’ve mentioned that the artist Jenny Holzer was influential in figuring out the aesthetic of the album and the tour. In a lot of ways. I called the tour “Fear the Future,” because it made me laugh — it’s so ominous and prescriptive that it’s absurd. It reminded me of the big, bold edicts that Jenny Holzer would have superimposed on a building or a billboard, or of the billboards that you pass in the South: “JESUS IS COMING SOON” or something else apocalyptic. It just made me laugh.
Does it make you laugh when you see it now? Yes, but I think everyone’s in on the joke.
It reminds me a bit of Kraftwerk. I’ll take that.
This is a much more straightforward pop album than your previous works. Did you consciously try to go in a new direction? I knew that I wanted programmed drums and that I wanted pedal steel and that I wanted to write about power.
How much did the current social climate affect you? I was very affected — as everyone is, or was. We’re staring into the face of annihilation — what are we going to do? Blink? I was ruminating on sex and power and seduction and then thinking about something William S. Burroughs once said to the singer Genesis P-Orridge of Psychic TV: “Your task, Genesis, is to short-circuit control.” I would happily stand and be counted to be one of those, helping dismantle the power structure as it is. I think we’re going to see a really massive and exciting sea change toward more justice and more equality for the most marginalized. I did not start out to write a “political” album, because, frankly, I’m not convinced those work. The way to hearts and minds is to be honest about your own heart and mind, but my person is politicized as a result of the time we’re living in. You can’t help but be political.
There’s a striking promotional image of you at a lectern and all the microphones, which seems a little political. I do so many things because I think they’re funny or ridiculous. It felt so absurd to do a lot of pomp and circumstance about announcing an album, so part of that was being absurd and self-effacing too. It’s dismantling the pretension of having an album but also poking fun at the imperious cult-leader kind of imagery of the last record. I wanted to be a little bit sillier with the presentation of it. Like, how can you be sexy “Pee-wee’s Playhouse”? How can it be sexy but totally absurd and self-aware and menacing?
The cover image is very sexy and menacing: There’s a woman bent over and stuck in a wall. After the flood of stories of sexual harassment and assault in Hollywood, I’ve been thinking about whether, say, a disembodied butt can be an image of power. Do you take people’s reactions to statements like this as a litmus test? Not really. I’m not necessarily trying to be provocative. My reality of what’s been funny or acceptable or normal is different from other people’s. I’m not necessarily thinking, What’s going to get people riled in any way, shape or form? Though I’m happy for people to write a thesis unpacking it, I really just go off instinct. Is this intriguing to me? Is this funny to me? How does this make me feel? Maybe it’ll make other people feel that way.
Have you had to answer a lot of questions about whose butt it is? It’s my friend Carlotta.  