Fans gathered as usual outside the “Today” studio on Thursday morning. Some took time to discuss the firing of Matt Lauer and the allegations against him.
A day after the announcement that Matt Lauer was fired as co-host of the “Today” show, hundreds of tourists and die-hard fans gathered outside the NBC studio on Rockefeller Plaza. It is a daily occurrence that has become as much a part of the show as Al Roker’s weather forecasts. On Thursday, many fans carried homemade signs proclaiming their affection for the morning show, but they were also processing the sexual misconduct allegations against Mr. Lauer, who, for some, has been a part of their morning ritual for decades.
The couple, who work in radioactive waste management, said visiting “Today” was a priority during their trip to New York. They made posters before their arrival.
Being outside the studio on a day when the “Today” anchors were reporting on Mr. Lauer’s firing also made for some surreal moments.
“The crowd, each time the news would come on, they were subdued and solemn and just a little sad,” Mr. Burns said.
New port Richey, Fla.
Ms. Napolitano, a travel agent, said she had debated standing outside “Good Morning America” but had decided on “Today” once she heard the news about Mr. Lauer.
Mr. Blake, an airline pilot, and Ms. Linton-Blake, a real estate agent, were visiting New York with friends. The couple said they weren’t surprised by the revelations about Mr. Lauer.
Ms. Linton-Blake said she felt sorry for Mr. Lauer’s former co-anchors, who had to go on the air and deliver the news about their colleague.
Ms. Douglas said her husband had wanted them to go because of the news surrounding Mr. Lauer.
“I thought: ‘Well, you know what? This might be fun,’” she said. “And it was.
The mother and daughter are longtime fans of the program and were excited to visit the studio while on a girls’ trip to New York.
“It was very sad to hear. Shocking,” Ms. Bramlett, a nurse practitioner, said of the allegations against Mr. Lauer.
But it didn’t stop them from going to the plaza, and it won’t stop them from watching the show.
Mr. Frederiksen, who restores old houses, has been watching the show for 27 years and has been to a live broadcast six times.
Mr. Frederiksen said he had seen abuses of power throughout his former career as a city planner.
Mr. and Mrs. Swoope, who were in New York on a four-day bus tour, watch “Today” every morning, saying they feel that it’s lighter and more positive than the other morning shows.
