Over six days on the witness stand, Mr. Rechnitz said he facilitated a kickback scheme between Mr. Seabrook and Murray Huberfeld, a financier, who was also on trial. Mr. Rechnitz said he paid Mr. Seabrook $60,000 in return for Mr. Seabrook steering $20 million of union money into Mr. Huberfeld’s hedge fund.
But defense lawyers seized upon inconsistencies and unsavory details in Mr. Rechnitz’s testimony to discredit his narrative.
They emphasized that Mr. Rechnitz had admitted lying to family, friends and law enforcement, and they pointed to Mr. Rechnitz’s account of trying to buy influence with key city officials, including Mayor Bill de Blasio, as evidence of his history of self-interest. They said Mr. Rechnitz was framing Mr. Seabrook to win leniency at his own sentencing for fraud conspiracy.
That argument seemed to have gained a foothold in jurors’ minds.
Jurors who had trouble stomaching the content of Mr. Rechnitz’s testimony may also have taken issue with the length of it: His time on the witness stand took up more than half of the days of testimony during the trial, which began on Oct. 23.
The judge, Andrew L. Carter Jr. of Federal District Court in Manhattan, declared the mistrial on the sixth day of deliberations, after jurors sent a note telling him they could not reach an agreement, their second such note in three days. After the first note, on Tuesday, Judge Carter directed them to continue deliberating.
Defense lawyers moved for a mistrial; prosecutors did not object.
Mr. Seabrook and Mr. Huberfeld, both 57, were each charged with one count of honest services wire fraud and one count of conspiracy to commit honest services wire fraud. Mr. Roldan said the jury had been leaning toward a split verdict, with a majority voting to find the defendants not guilty on the first count and guilty on the second. Eventually, they deadlocked with 10 jurors voting to find the defendants guilty on the conspiracy charge and two voting to acquit, and 11 jurors voting not guilty on the fraud charge and one voting to convict, he said.
Mr. Seabrook’s lawyer, Paul Shechtman, was clear on what he said had caused the mistrial.
But Mr. Roldan, a chef who lives in the Bronx, was more measured when asked if Mr. Rechnitz was the reason for the jurors’ split.
“It was a tough decision,” he said, adding that he had initially voted to acquit on both charges, but he was persuaded to change his vote on the conspiracy charge.
Still, a renewed attempt at convicting Mr. Seabrook may not be prosecutors’ only incentive to restore Mr. Rechnitz’s credibility. Mr. Rechnitz is also expected to testify in the government’s case against several New York Police Department officers.
He also figured prominently in federal and state investigations into the mayor’s fund-raising practices, although prosecutors eventually decided not to bring charges.
A spokesman for Mr. de Blasio declined to comment on the mistrial.
Mr. Seabrook thanked each juror as each filed out of the courtroom. But his remarks to the news media were more subdued than they had been on Tuesday when the jury first reported it was at an impasse. At the time, he had declared the deadlock proof of his innocence.
If acquitted, he said, he plans to return to his role as president of the union that he led for more than two decades. When he was arrested in June 2016, he was suspended without pay from the Department of Correction and his second-in-command in the union assumed the interim presidency. Last week, 13 of the union’s 14 board members signed a resolution to remove Mr. Seabrook from his post.
Mr. Seabrook dismissed the move as illegal.
But Joon H. Kim, the acting U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York, indicated that he has no intention of allowing that return.
