Tzipora Jochsberger, who left Nazi Germany as a teenager in the late 1930s to study music in Palestine and later immigrated to the United States, where she started a school in Manhattan to help Jewish children appreciate their heritage, died on Oct. 29 in Jerusalem. She was 96.
Her death was confirmed by Lydia Kontos, the executive director of the Kaufman Music Center, which Ms. Jochsberger founded as the Hebrew Arts School for Music and Dance.
During her 33 years as its founding director, the Hebrew Arts School grew into an influential educational and cultural institution that has taught the arts to generations of children (and numerous adults), many of them Jewish.
Ms. Jochsberger (pronounced YOKS-ber-ger) had a particular passion for Israeli folk songs, many of which she felt were powerful enough to stir one’s heart. She played them on the recorder, which she taught herself.
From the start, her main educational focus was the children who came to her classrooms on Sundays and after school.
“I wanted to use music as a means to strengthen the identity, to get the feeling that it’s wonderful to be a Jew, to see the beauty in Judaism through the arts,” she said in 1984 in an oral history for the American Jewish Committee.
Ms. Jochsberger, who also composed instrumental and choral music, was a driven educator who let the school’s teachers employ unorthodox techniques if they generated results.
She was born Hilda Jochsberger on Dec. 27, 1920, in the small Bavarian village of Leutershausen. Her father, Nathan, was a cattle dealer, and her mother, the former Sofie Enslein, was a homemaker. Music surrounded her — from the sound of the organ at a local church to the brass music that emerged from the dance hall opposite her family’s home.
Ms. Jochsberger’s mother bought her a piano when she was about 5 years old “and just hoped probably that I would take to it,” she said in the oral history. She did. By age 8 she was taking private lessons from a teacher in nearby Ansbach.
But anti-Semitism surrounded her as well. The Jochsbergers were one of the few Jewish families in Leutershausen at the time. Ms. Jochsberger recalled the restrictions placed on Jewish education by the Nazis. She also recalled being struck with stones by other children because she was Jewish.
But her studies at the Jewish Teachers Seminary in Würzburg led to an unexpected escape from the Third Reich.
When she was 16 or 17, a classmate told her that he was going to Berlin to audition for the Palestine Conservatory of Music in Jerusalem. Intrigued, she wondered if she should try out. And when the friend sent her a postcard telling her that he had been accepted, she asked her father to take her to Berlin.
In the few months before leaving for Palestine — then still administered by Britain before the state of Israel was declared in 1948 — she studied Hebrew and sewing. But while she was away from Leutershausen, Nazi violence against Jews increased. Her parents hid from an attack and were forced to sell their house and move to Nuremberg. Ms. Jochsberger asked her family to accompany her to Palestine, but they would not go.
She left in early 1939, traveling by train from Munich to Trieste, Italy, and by boat to Haifa. Her mother shipped her piano and other belongings to Jerusalem. After graduating in 1942, she taught music at the Women’s Teachers’ Seminary for Arab Girls in Jerusalem and designed a music curriculum for all Arab schools at the request of the British authorities.
The opportunity to study in Palestine almost certainly saved her life. Her parents were killed in Auschwitz.
She had no siblings and never married.
Ms. Jochsberger continued to teach music in Israel until 1950. But then, imbued with a heartfelt belief that Israeli music could arouse the spirit of Judaism among postwar American Jews, she moved to New York City.
The Hebrew Arts Center started in two borrowed classrooms at the Ramaz School on the Upper East Side of Manhattan. About 15 children attended that first Sunday morning; she taught the recorder in one room, and Fred Berk taught dance in the other. In time, she added more classes in piano, guitar and other instruments, and in theater.
To accommodate its growing enrollment, of adults as well as children, the school relocated to buildings on the West Side and finally, in 1978, to the new Abraham Goodman House at West 67th Street, a building that also includes Merkin Concert Hall.
When Ms. Jochsberger retired in 1985, enrollment at the school totaled about 400; today, the significantly more diverse student body (with much less of a Jewish presenence) totals about 2,800 children and adults, including a full-time kindergarten-to-12th-grade public school for musically gifted children.
After her retirement, Ms. Jochsberger — who earned her master’s and doctoral degrees in sacred music at the Jewish Theological Seminary of America — returned to Israel, where she founded the Israel Music Heritage Project. As part of the project’s work, she was the executive producer of a 10-part documentary series, “A People and Its Music,” about the Jewish communities in Israel that had their roots in Eastern Europe, Northern Africa and other parts of the Middle East.
