Joost Vreeswijk isn’t your usual watch company owner.
In his day job, he is a managing partner at Ernst & Young, advising multinational companies on operating models and business restructuring.
But since 2007, Mr. Vreeswijk also has been creating a new Lonville, the Swiss watch brand established in 1873 that had stopped operations in the early 1950s.
Virage’s four variations have the brand’s LV1 caliber, a movement made in the watchmaking heartland of La Chaux-de-Fonds, Switzerland, and quirky names like Kind of Blue (for the jazz album by Miles Davis, a favorite of Mr. Vreeswijk’s) and Fuel Tank (its power reserve indicator looks like a car’s fuel gauge).
There are two variations of G24, which has the LV2 caliber made in Les Brenets, Switzerland, was designed by Matthew Humphries, the creator of the Morgan Aeromax sports car. It was named for a Lonville prototype worn by Gabriele Gardel when he won his class at the 24 Hours of Le Mans race in 2011 (“The G is for Gabriele and 24 is for the 24 hours of the race,” Mr. Vreeswijk said).
The cases are manufactured and both models are assembled in Lugano, Switzerland, near Lonville’s headquarters.
A watch collector since his university graduation in the Netherlands, Mr. Vreeswijk stumbled across the Lonville brand during an online auction, where he bought a gold-plated Lonville pocket watch from the early 1900s.
Among his friends and acquaintances, he found seven investors — from backgrounds such as retailing, yachting and video production — to take 1 percent each of the company. They bring, Mr. Vreeswijk said, “experience, expertise and networks” to the effort. And one is the company’s full-time general manager, Matt Faoro.
Adapting business know-how from other industries has helped the company, Mr. Vreeswijk said. For example, he reduced costs by having some components made in volume and by “getting the customer to pay me before I’ve even made the watch,” he said, “I can use my cash to keep the boat floating.
Lonville watches are sold online, but Mr. Vreeswijk also holds events for about 50 guests each in cities such as London and Amsterdam. And his preference for such personal interaction with potential buyers is what prompted him to bring “what we have so far,” as he described the selection, to the independents’ room at Salon QP.
“I don’t want to be in a big market square shouting louder than the person next to me because this isn’t the right feeling of buying a beautiful watch,” he said.
Lots of watch companies are working to create communities of owners these days but few have Lonville’s flair.
Two days after Mr. Vreeswijk met with a reporter in the art-filled Ernst & Young London overlooking the Tower of London, he headed to Inverness, Scotland, and the seventh annual Lonville Classic car rally. He and his blue 1969 Jaguar E-Type sports car were joined by 22 watch owners and car enthusiasts in their 14 vintage cars for a four-day run through the city and the Highlands: “Whiskey, Wheels and Watches,” as the poster promised. And the 2018 event, from St. Moritz to the Italian coast of Liguria, already is planned.
“It started as a thing I liked as I couldn’t find anything like this, and it’s created a real experience of having fun with friends, even though we might not know each other beforehand,” Mr. Vreeswijk said.
For Lonville’s next models, Mr. Vreeswijk is planning to collaborate with designers from other industries, like speedboat designers, “as they come to it a little bit differently, like me,” he said.
