HONG KONG — An American shareholder that challenged Sina, the Chinese internet pioneer, has lost its fight to shake things up.
Aristeia Capital, a hedge fund based in Connecticut, forced a referendum among Sina’s shareholders over whether the company should consider changes in its business to make more money for the shareholders.
It was the first time that an American hedge fund and a New York-listed Chinese company had found themselves in this type of public spat, known as a proxy fight. The campaign was seen as a test case for similar campaigns at other Chinese companies.
But Aristeia’s closely watched appeal appeared to have fallen on deaf ears on Friday, when Sina announced that the investor’s two nominees had not been voted onto the board.
The company said that three-quarters of its shareholders voted against Brett Krause, one of Aristeia’s nominees to the board, while just over half voted against Aristeia’s other nominee, Thomas Manning.
More than three-quarters of investors voted to keep Yichen Zhang, a board member who was seeking re-election, Sina said in a statement.
The proxy fight came to an end on Friday afternoon, after a group of about 20 shareholders and company executives gathered in a conference room on the 42nd floor of a high-rise in Hong Kong.
During the 25-minute meeting, a representative for Aristeia was given the opportunity to make a statement, according to two people who were present but who asked not to be named because they were not authorized to speak publicly.
Sina — which controls Weibo, one of China’s biggest social media platforms — seemed an unlikely target for an activist campaign. It has seen its share price soar over the past year as investors piled into technology stocks hoping to get a piece of China’s internet growth.
But the New York-traded internet company found itself in the cross hairs of Aristeia earlier this year when the shareholder accused Sina of “failing to hold itself to the standards expected of U.S.-listed public company boards.” Aristeia pushed Sina to consider a sale or merger of Sina or Weibo.
Sina’s operations include online entertainment and news. But its most valuable asset is a 46 percent controlling stake in Weibo, which is listed separately. The separate listing helped to trigger the proxy fight. Even as Sina’s shares jumped by nearly three-quarters this year, Weibo’s shares have more than doubled. Weibo is now more than twice as valuable as Sina.
The campaign was seen as a rare test of the power that American shareholders have in Chinese companies that are listed in the United States. It also touched a nerve for some investors who have complained about fewer shareholder rights in Chinese companies that are incorporated in business-friendly countries like the Cayman Islands. These investors have expressed frustration that some companies appear to be managed for the sole benefit of top executives.
