Charlie Brown gets the holiday blues. And amateur magicians try to fool Penn & Teller.
A CHARLIE BROWN CHRISTMAS (1965) 8 p.m. on ABC. This network’s Thursday lineup features two starkly different approaches to the holidays. The “Peanuts” gang tackles the anxieties and shortcomings of the season head on, as Charlie Brown desperately tries to salvage a pitiful Christmas tree; the understated, intimate piano trio score from Vince Guaraldi sets the mood. In contrast, THE WONDERFUL WORLD OF DISNEY: MAGICAL HOLIDAY CELEBRATION, at 9, is a sparkling global blowout hosted by Julianne Hough and Nick Lachey, with showstopping musical performances and lighting ceremonies at Disney castles from Florida to Shanghai to Paris.
PENN & TELLER: FOOL US 9 p.m. on the CW. Dozens of magicians have stepped up to the stage on “Penn & Teller: Fool Us,” hoping to perform a trick so perplexing that the show’s veteran magician hosts are unable to decode its process. But only a quarter succeed and go on to land a performance slot with Penn & Teller in Las Vegas. This is the Season 4 finale; Alyson Hannigan (“How I Met Your Mother”) is a co-host and willing participant in many tricks.
DEADPOOL (2016) 9:45 p.m. on Cinemax. Perhaps hoping to contrast with the unyielding gloom of DC’s “Batman v Superman,” Marvel pivoted toward buddy comedy in “Thor: Ragnarok,” the newest installment of that franchise. It wouldn’t be surprising if Marvel’s own “Deadpool” had provided some inspiration: The superhero title character, played with obvious delight by Ryan Reynolds, mugs at the camera like Jim from “The Office,” quips at his victims while slicing them to bits, and banters a mile a minute with his best friend, Weasel (the droll T. J. Miller). The plot, which includes some malevolent mutants, is mostly beside the point.
BROADCHURCH on Netflix. For the last few years, David Tennant and Olivia Colman have forged one of television’s most compelling partnerships as Alec Hardy and Ellie Miller, detectives who trade stinging barbs as they crack cases together on the imposing British coastline. “Broadchurch” builds suspense with deliberate, often agonizing pacing and then explodes in dizzying bursts of action. Season 3 arrived this week on Netflix.