Shows to watch with your family, or to help you avoid talking to the relatives.
MACY’S THANKSGIVING DAY PARADE 9 a.m. on CBS and NBC. Floating down Central Park West this year: Hello Kitty, Charlie Brown, an Angry Bird, a Power Ranger, and Olaf from “Frozen.” Performers include Gwen Stefani, Andra Day, Common, Smokey Robinson, marching bands and more.
NATIONAL DOG SHOW 12 p.m. on NBC. They’re good dogs, America.
N.F.L. FOOTBALL: VIKINGS VS. LIONS 12:30 p.m. on Fox. The later games will likely be slogs, as they feature four teams at or below .500. But tune in early for this showdown of division rivals, with the 6-4 Lions, who mount a Top 5 offense behind Matthew Stafford, scrapping for a playoff spot and looking to gain ground on the 8-2 Vikings, whose deep defense has propelled them to six straight wins.
ANNE OF GREEN GABLES — THE GOOD STARS 9 p.m. on PBS (check local listings). For 110 years old, Anne Shirley is looking quite refreshed these days. The spunky, spirited title character of L. M. Montgomery’s beloved 1908 novel “Anne of Green Gables” was the subject of a Netflix adaptation, “Anne With an E,” which received shining reviews. Now she returns in PBS’s continuing series, starring Martin Sheen as Matthew. In this installment, Anne (Ella Ballentine) turns 13 and faces complex issues with her friends and a closer relationship with Gilbert.
SHE’S GOTTA HAVE IT on Netflix. Spike Lee’s debut film, “She’s Gotta Have It,” felt radical when it arrived in 1986, with its brash depiction of modern sexuality, casual monologues delivered straight to the camera, black-and-white tones and pellucid jazz soundtrack. But so much has changed in 21 years in terms of sexual and racial politics, as well as the fundamental landscape of Brooklyn, where gentrification has filled neighborhoods like Fort Greene with artisanal crafts and cocktails. Mr. Lee’s Netflix update both condemns and delights in all these changes, centering on a millennial, Nola Darling (DeWanda Wise), who refers to Kanye West, O. T. Genasis and Black Lives Matter as fluidly as she does Malcolm X. Anthony Ramos (“Hamilton”) takes on the classic Spike Lee role of Mars Blackmon with a hyperkinetic glee. Meanwhile, revisit the original film (on Netflix) for its excruciating Thanksgiving dinner shared by Nola (Tracy Camilla Johns) and her three disgruntled lovers.
NEW GIRL on Netflix. “New Girl” was never really about the girl — it’s more about the makeshift family that unexpectedly blossoms in a Los Angeles loft. The show’s push toward communal and familial intimacy makes its Thanksgiving episodes particularly gratifying. In Season 1’s “Thanksgiving,” Jess (Zooey Deschanel) scrambles to impress a colleague (played by a delightfully bumbling Justin Long) by cooking a turkey in the dryer, while glimmers of the zany, enduring chemistry between Schmidt (Max Greenfield) and Cece (Hannah Simone) emerge. Season 4’s “Thanksgiving IV” is looser and raunchier, but reveals the show’s compassionate core.