• Thirteen Republicans voted against the bill, and no Democrats voted for it.
• A new analysis from Congress’s bipartisan tax referee shows that under the Senate’s version of the bill, lower-income Americans would see their taxes go up in 2021.
• The analysis roiled the Senate Finance Committee, which is debating the bill ahead of a vote that could happen as soon as Thursday night.
• Before the House vote, President Trump visited Capitol Hill to rally the Republican lawmakers behind the legislation.
Under the Senate bill, taxes will rise on low-income Americans.
The Joint Committee on Taxation, Congress’s bipartisan referee on tax policy, said on Thursday that the amended Senate’s version of the tax bill will raise taxes on low-income Americans beginning in 2021, in what appears to be a side effect of the bill’s decision to repeal the so-called individual mandate that requires most people buy health insurance under the Affordable Care Act.
Because of this decision, the joint committee’s analysis showed that taxpayers earning less than $40,000 would see their tax bills go up in the second half of the next decade.
The committee also forecast that taxpayers earning $75,000 or less would see, as a group, large tax increases in 2027, if the individual tax cuts in the bill expire as scheduled at the end of 2025. Those tax increases would be relative to current law — meaning that those taxpayers would be worse off in 2027 than they would have been if the bill had not become law.
Senator Ron Wyden of Oregon, the ranking Democrat on the Finance Committee, called the joint committee analysis “astounding” and warned that middle-class taxpayers would get “clobbered” under the latest Republican plan.
“When you’re reaching for the cranberry sauce, Republicans are going be reaching for your pocketbooks to give handouts to multinational corporations,” Mr. Wyden said.
Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah and the chairman of the Finance Committee, said that the appearance of a tax increase was a mirage that is the result of arcane scoring rules. Because people will no longer have to purchase health insurance, they may no longer receive tax credit subsidies for insurance that they do not purchase.
“Without those credits, they see an overall uptick in their tax liability,” Mr. Hatch said.
Uninterested in letting go of numbers that supported his argument that the Republican tax plan is bad for the middle class, Mr. Wyden dismissed Mr. Toomey’s concerns.
“I’ve never heard a senator try to psychoanalyze a Joint Committee on Taxation table,” he said.
See how every member of the House voted on the tax plan.
Representatives voted along party lines, with the exception of 13 Republicans, many of whom fought to keep the deduction for state and local taxes.
“I just have too many constituents who are going to see their taxes go up,” Representative Lee Zeldin, Republican of New York, who voted against the bill, said at a news conference. “You’re taking more money from a place like New York in order to pay for deeper tax cuts elsewhere,” Mr. Zeldin said.
Of the 13 Republicans who voted against the bill, nine were from New York and New Jersey: Mr. Zeldin, Dan Donovan, John J. Faso, Peter T. King, Elise Stefanik, Rodney Frelinghuysen, Christopher H. Smith, Leonard Lance and Frank A. LoBiondo. Three California Republicans voted against the bill, Darrell Issa, Dana Rohrabacher and Tom McClintock, as did one North Carolina Republican, Walter B. Jones.
Mr. Donovan, the lone House Republican from New York City, said he and his New York colleagues wanted to cut taxes. “But not on the backs of our constituents,” he said.
“For the first time in 31 years we are wiping the tax code clean and replacing it with one that is fairer and simpler for everyone,” said Representative Devin Nunes, Republican of California.
“We are on the precipice of passing a fairer, flatter, simpler, more competitive tax code, one built for three percent-plus economic growth,” Mr. Hensarling said.
Paul D. Ryan, Republican of Wisconsin and the House speaker, took to the floor to loud applause, where he called the tax bill a “generational-defining moment.” He held up several charts that showed tax savings for typical households, along with the “postcard” he said most Americans will be able to use to file their taxes. “Not only do people get to keep more of their own money in their own pocket, but we dramatically simplify the tax system,” he said.
Another Democrat, Representative Joseph Crowley of New York, began shouting from the lectern about the drawbacks of the bill.
Your move, Senate.
The Senate now has to take up its own version of the tax bill, which is still being debated in the Finance Committee.
A vote by the panel could come as early as Thursday night, and the full Senate is planning to vote on the legislation after Thanksgiving. It remains to be seen how the Senate and House will resolve the differences in their bills if the tax cut does, indeed, pass the full Senate.