After nearly a year of the Trump presidency, do you regret your criticisms of Barack Obama? Oh, no. I told the truth. When I said drone strikes are crimes against humanity, when I said Obama bailed out Wall Street rather than Main Street — I shall forever support that. I was just speaking to the reality that people are hurting, and we have to do the same thing under Trump as we did under Obama.
Do you feel as if the black community punished you for that? I think most black people disagreed with me, but they didn’t call for my punishment. They just disagreed in terms of the timing and the intensity of it. But somebody’s got to tell that truth and be pushed to the margins no matter what — every generation has it, and I don’t mind being it.
In the original introduction to “Race Matters,” you wrote that there was a crisis of black leadership. Now we’re seeing this whole new generation of black activists: Black Lives Matter, or even N.F.L. athletes taking a knee during the national anthem. Do you still see this crisis? Well, I was talking about the crisis of black elite leadership. When it comes to black leaders, if the model is to be successful but not publicly attack white supremacy — well, then that’s really about success to fit in. Fitting in, in a neoliberal world, is to be well adjusted to injustice. I’ll give you an example: Dear brother Ta-Nehisi Coates has just come out with a new book.
Yes. “We Were Eight Years in Power.” Who’s the “we”? When’s the last time he’s been through the ghetto, in the hoods, to the schools and indecent housing and mass unemployment? We were in power for eight years? My God. Maybe he and some of his friends might have been in power, but not poor working people.
There are a lot of black intellectuals dissecting these issues. Coates is just one them. That’s true. But I mention him because he is currently the darling of the white and black neoliberal establishment.
At one point, someone might have said the same thing of you. Oh, they tried to make me the darling of the liberal establishment. I refused it.
You’ve weighed in on the debate on how liberal college campuses treat visiting conservative speakers. What do you think this generation is getting wrong when it comes to discourse? We’re losing the capacity to learn from and listen to one another. I’m not supporting low-quality left and right voices: You don’t need the Milos of the world to gain access when you’ve got some right-wing folk who actually have something to say.
The argument you often hear from students is that they ought to be able to protest language they object to. They have a right to protest. But the shutdown of speech is qualitatively different from protesting against speech.
You’ve always written about the role of music in social movements. What are you listening to these days? For the most part, I listen to old-school rhythm and blues, but I like some of the young hip-hop artists. What I miss among the younger generation is that they don’t have too many group performers. There’s a sweetness in the soul groups that’s missing these days. Tenderness is what I want. The young folk grew up with the song “Say My Name.” We grew up with “Try a Little Tenderness.” There’s a major cultural shift in those songs.
Given the provocativeness of your own language, your asking for tenderness is pretty interesting. Remember what James Baldwin said about Malcolm X? He said that Malcolm X was one of the most gentle men he ever met. He exemplified tenderness. Now, was Malcolm’s language tender? Hell, no. He had to be very harsh in talking about harsh conditions, but it doesn’t mean he’s not a tender person. I believe in tenderness, but I’m not going to be tender for those folk who are engaging in policies that crush poor working people, women, gays, lesbians, trans people, black people, indigenous people. No, no, no, no, not at all.