Tina Landau was giving instructions through a bullhorn inside the Palace Theater just days before a show 10 years in the making was set to debut. It was dress rehearsal for “SpongeBob SquarePants: The Broadway Musical” and the outlandishly costumed cast was preparing the finale, getting ready to make music on instruments including a trombone, guitars, ukuleles and marching tenor drums.
“Don’t be insulted if we suddenly say, ‘Oh, pretend you’re playing, but don’t play,’” Ms. Landau, the director, warned.
She was trying to contain the cacophony. That’s not to say the roughly $20-million musical, based on the Nickelodeon cartoon that made an unlikely superstar out of a yellow kitchen sponge, means to be low-key.
If nautical nonsense be something you wish, Nickelodeon’s first foray on Broadway hopes to land with a big splash: an extravagant production, based on its most prized possession, with music by stars like John Legend and Cyndi Lauper, that pulls out every bell, whistle and pool noodle.
If this sounds like an unserious show that will drop on the deck and flop like a fish, Nickelodeon wants you to believe otherwise: as the theater’s signage says, “The Broadway Musical for Everyone” — not just kids, or college students under the influence.
But if sensory overload is the goal: mission accomplished.
The animated “SpongeBob SquarePants” had its premiere in 1999 and is now viewed in more than 200 countries. Set in the underwater town of Bikini Bottom, it captures the goofy friendship of its cheerful title character and the simple sea star Patrick. SpongeBob and his neighbor, a cranky octopus named Squidward, work at the Krusty Krab, an underwater fast-food outlet owned by the money-hungry Mr. Krabs.
Stephen Hillenburg, a writer and director for Nickelodeon’s “Rocko’s Modern Life,” drew on his college marine biology studies in creating the series. It has spawned two feature films, with a third on the way, and has generated more than $13 billion in retail merchandise sales.
Still, SpongeBob’s adenoidal voice and unyielding optimism can become grating over the course of a 30-minute TV show, let alone two and a half hours live.
And adapting family entertainment to Broadway has brought mixed results, especially when not from Disney. Recent examples include “Matilda” (a hit), “Charlie and the Chocolate Factory” (a failure) and two outright bombs, “Seussical” and “Shrek the Musical” (though both have ended up with longer lives in high schools). If “SpongeBob” sinks on Broadway, it could damage a carefully cultivated two-decade-old brand.
Cyma Zarghami, the Nickelodeon president, was initially skeptical about the idea.
“I was worried that somebody would take SpongeBob and put a square character on the stage and it would look like a skip and a wave show for little kids,” Ms. Zarghami said in an interview at the corporate headquarters for Viacom, which owns Nickelodeon.
When Ms. Landau was invited to pitch, she quickly declined. “All that went through my head was an image of a kind of theme park show with people in big mascot costumes,” she said.
When Mr. Hillenburg created Bikini Bottom, it was out of whole cloth: a brand-new universe from nothing. Ms. Landau’s challenge was to take the existing vision and make it fresh.
She proposed a show that “explodes off the stage.” Undersea creatures would be played by actors recognizable as humans and not overwhelmed by costuming. (The costumes are still rather elaborate. For claws, Mr. Krabs wears boxing gloves roughly the size of twin infants.) And Ms. Landau wanted a varied pop music score provided by A-list musicians.
The pitch worked, and Nickelodeon put its flagship character in the hands of an unconventional director, known more for new-wave vaudeville and quiet, emotional musicals (“Floyd Collins”) than Broadway blockbusters.
Before there was a script — or a commitment to fully produce the show — Ms. Landau held workshops, pairing traditional actors with clowns, acrobats, dancers and magicians.
Ethan Slater, a redheaded sophomore at Vassar College, was invited to audition for the role of SpongeBob.
Three more workshops over four years, each featuring Mr. Slater, followed. (Kyle Jarrow, an offbeat musical-theater writer, was brought in to write the book, which centers on SpongeBob trying to save Bikini Bottom from an erupting volcano.) Eventually the network gave the go-ahead and the musical had its debut at Chicago’s Oriental Theater in June 2016.
There, and now in New York, David Zinn’s set design for Bikini Bottom encompasses the whole theater. Fish hooks and boomboxes hang from the ceiling. A Rube Goldbergesque device delivers bouncy-ball boulders onto the stage. And items that might be discarded in the ocean, like cardboard boxes and hula hoops, figure prominently.
After Chicago, Nickelodeon insisted on one change, even over Ms. Landau’s initial objections: “The SpongeBob Musical” was retitled “SpongeBob SquarePants: The Broadway Musical,” to more closely adhere to the television branding.
Stephanie Lee, the president of Group Sales Box Office, described ticket sales as strong. “What’s really interesting is that we’re booking elementary through universities — and that’s not typical of a Broadway musical,” she said.
During the first week of previews, it took only a split-second for the packed house to recognize the rather ebullient sponge at home in his pineapple. The crowd erupted in applause when Patrick insisted he get a verse in the show’s opening number.
There was indeed a diverse audience, including families and young adults. Among them was Michael Hansen, 25, who received tickets as a birthday gift from his girlfriend, Madeline Culkin.
She seemed a bit embarrassed as he described his SpongeBob fandom, including a “Spongesquad” text message group he has with friends.
“He sends me memes of SpongeBob weekly and I hate it,” Ms. Culkin, also 25, added with a sheepish laugh.
The explosion of confetti that Ms. Landau excitedly described during rehearsal fell from the ceiling at the finale, and beach balls were batted about by the audience. In this crowd, at least, the cheerful yellow sponge had defied his doubters.
