The discovery of racist graffiti galvanized the Air Force Academy in September, and the superintendent of the Colorado campus turned that into a teaching moment with a speech about diversity and tolerance that found more than a million viewers on the internet.
Now officials say the scrawled slur in a dormitory was a hoax by one of its targets, a black cadet candidate.
The words “Go home,” followed by a racial slur, were found scrawled in marker on message boards outside the rooms of five black cadet candidates at the Air Force Academy Preparatory School in late September. The discovery led to an uproar on campus, and the widely shared video of a speech by the superintendent, Lt. Gen. Jay Silveria.
Although the slurs were discovered at the preparatory school, a 10-month program that prepares candidates for admission to the academy proper, General Silveria said “it would be naïve” to think the episode did not reflect on the academy and the Air Force as a whole.
Academy officials swiftly began an investigation. They said in a statement on Tuesday that the cadet candidate had admitted to writing the slurs and was no longer enrolled at the school.
General Silveria said Tuesday that he stood by the underlying message of his speech, which invoked some of the nation’s most divisive racial events.
That was an apparent reference to the report by The Gazette, which said the candidate had committed the act in a bid to get out of trouble for other misconduct.
The episode over the racist graffiti was propelled into national attention weeks after white supremacists rallied in Charlottesville, Va., and amid protests by N.F.L. players over racial inequality, events that General Silveria discussed in his speech.
As news spread online that a black student had written the slurs, some called on General Silveria to directly address the episode as a hate crime hoax.
The episode renewed concerns that falsely reported hate crimes could make it more difficult for people with legitimate grievances to be taken seriously, particularly in a time when the reports of hate crimes are highly politicized.
One such instance came in December 2016, when an 18-year-old Muslim woman who claimed that three men attacked her on a Manhattan subway and tried to pull off her hijab was charged with filing a false report.
