Sports|How Should High Schools Define Sexes for Transgender Athletes?
How Should High Schools Define Sexes for Transgender Athletes?
The question is relatively new, and guidelines so far differ from state to state. “It has been a challenge” one Texas official said.
INDIANAPOLIS — The calls to high school sports officials from athletic directors and administrators began several years ago and have only become more frequent and difficult: How are you handling transgender students who want to play sports?
With widespread disagreement over where the line should be drawn between sexes for purposes of athletic competition, the question has challenged the people who set rules for Olympics sports and those who govern college sports in the United States. At the high school level, the issue has been even more vexing.
The issue has touched off debate among coaches, athletes, parents, doctors and medical ethicists. Established guidelines at the youth level that address things like hormonal treatment and sex reassignment surgery are nonexistent.
Harrison said the issue first emerged in Texas in 2012, when the state governing body — the University Interscholastic League — had rules that required female athletes to compete on girls’ teams and males on boys’ teams, but no rule that addressed how to decide someone’s sex.
Transgender students — those who identify as a different gender than their biological sex — did not fit into an existing category.
With no national governing body laying down rules, individual states have navigated the issue independently, weighing the shifting beliefs of schools, parents and athletes.
In Texas, superintendents from member schools voted in a referendum that the governing body should use birth certificates to determine a student’s sex. Indiana uses anatomical sex to determine what team a student can play on. Other states, including California, have adopted rules that allow students to use bathrooms and locker rooms and participate on the teams that align with the gender the person identifies as.
The issue is particularly nettlesome with individuals who have transitioned from male to female because of the belief that they might still have a physical advantage until their hormone therapy — which not every transgender person chooses to have — is complete.
“When you start talking about transgender athletes, a male-to-female individual, we want to ensure that that is truly a decision that is permanent,” said Bobby Cox, the commissioner of the Indiana High School Athletic Association. “It is not a decision that, ‘I just decided today that I am going to be a girl and I am going to go play on a girls’ team’ and perhaps, disadvantage those kids that are on the team and imbalance the competition.
There is no reliable data on the number of transgender high school athletes. Only about 0.6 percent of the adult population identifies as transgender, according to federal data from 2016. Researchers from the Williams Institute, who conducted the study, reported that 0.56 percent of adults in Indiana reported identifying as transgender.
In Texas, 0.66 percent of adults said they identify as transgender, the fifth-highest percentage in the country (behind Hawaii, California, New Mexico and Georgia). Still, transgender children are considered an at-risk minority outside of sports. According to The New England Journal of Medicine, the rate of suicide attempts among transgender people is 40 percent, compared to 4.6 percent among those who are not transgender.
Relatively new policies are already being massaged and amended. In July, the Indiana state association voted unanimously to adjust its surgery requirement. It now no longer requires transgender students who are transitioning from female to male to have sex reassignment surgery in order to compete in the gender with which they identify. But that stipulation is still in place for someone transitioning from male to female.
The group asserts it is acting in the name of fairness, but transgender rights activists accuse members of simply not wanting transgender people to participate, out of fear that those athletes will have an unfair advantage.
Olivia, who asked to be identified by first name, is transgender — born with male sex organs but now identifying as female. A high school sophomore in Indiana, she kept her gender a secret from her coaches while playing freshman tennis so that she could play on the girls’ team. A handful of her teammates know that she is transgender, but it had not come up as a problem. Olivia’s mother, Melissa, said that she did not think the tennis coach knew that she was not biologically female.
When the state sports association did not loosen its surgery requirement for male-to-female athletes, Olivia and her family decided to fight the ruling.
Indiana is not the only state that uses biological sex to determine what team an athlete is eligible to play on. The Nebraska School Activities Association assembles a Gender Identity Eligibility Committee composed of a physician, psychiatrist, a school administrator and an association staff member. One criterion the committee may consider when deciding whether the student’s Transgender Student Application is approved is if the student has had surgery.
Dr. Dennis Fortenberry, who facilitates a clinic for transgender youth at Riley Hospital in Indianapolis, said that he is concerned that the Indiana state association’s rule is “essentially a full prohibition” of transgender participation in high school sports.
Harrison said the Texas association did not consult medical personnel when the birth certificate rule was initially implemented in August 2016. A medical advisory subcommittee that included Texas Children’s Hospital endocrinologist David Paul was formed when Senate Bill 2095 was proposed in February. The bill would have allowed the state athletics association to disqualify athletes who are taking steroids, including testosterone, if it deemed a student was getting an unfair competitive advantage. The committee met once and Dr. Paul called in to the meeting.
Dr. Paul said that if fairness is the concern, schools should be looking at students’ testosterone levels. Testosterone helps build muscle mass. Before puberty, boys and girls have similarly low testosterone levels, causing them to have similar builds and physical capabilities. After puberty, a healthy adult male will have testosterone levels far above that of a healthy woman.
Dr. Paul said that if someone is taking enough testosterone to be within the post-puberty male range, even if he was born biologically female, he should be competing against males. And to have balanced competition, people who are transitioning from male to female should have to have their testosterone levels within female range in order to compete against women, he said.
Joanna Harper, a medical physicist, conducted a study examining the race times of transgender athletes, trying to prove whether taking hormones had an effect on their performances. Over a period of seven years, she collected transgender female runners’ race times. The study found that “collectively, the eight runners had much slower race times in the female gender than as males.” The study suggests that it is possible to achieve athletic fairness through hormone therapy.
Some transgender activists argue that no one should be forced to alter their body with hormones or surgery. Hormone therapy can be expensive and inconvenient.
Despite complications with individual state policies, Harrison and Cox said they had reservations about having a national institution set rules for all high school sports.
