MAR DEL PLATA, Argentina — It was a routine mission to interdict illegal fishing boats off the coast of Patagonia.
The first hint of trouble came shortly after 7:30 a.m. on Wednesday, when the captain of the Argentine Navy’s ARA San Juan submarine called his home port to report damage to the vessel’s battery system.
Supervisors on land ordered the vessel to abort its mission and head home. They expected it would do so at “periscope depth” — close enough to the surface to call shore if it was in danger. And last they heard, that is what the submarine was doing.
Then there was only silence.
Now, six days later, the worried families of the 44 crew members know little more than that, despite one of the largest international maritime rescue efforts in modern times.
A small armada of ships and planes is scouring a 186,000-square-mile stretch of ocean off Argentina’s Patagonia coast. But the enemy is time. If the vessel sank, there will be limited oxygen in the submarine’s cramped quarters.
If the crew members are lucky, they will be rescued in time, like seven sailors on a Russian submarine who had only three to six hours of air left when a British submersible cut the vessel clear of a fishing net in 2005.
But not all search stories end that well. In August 2000, more than 20 crew members of another Russian submarine, the Kursk, survived a blast that sunk their vessel and huddled in a compartment where they later died. One sailor scrawled a goodbye note to his family. “None of us can get out,” it said.
Argentines and others around the world have been following the search for the San Juan since Friday with growing angst, as inclement weather, and the absence of a distress signal from the crew, dim hopes of a safe return.
The region has not been captivated by a life-or-death saga of this magnitude since 2010, when 33 Chilean miners were extracted from a collapsed mine aboard a custom-made capsule after 68 days underground.
On Monday, President Mauricio Macri of Argentina traveled to the naval base here to reassure relatives of the missing crew that the government was sparing no effort to bring them home.
The mood among the dozens of relatives here has swung dramatically in recent days amid little promising news and a realization that the worst-case scenario becomes more likely by the hour.
A low point for relatives came Monday morning, when the navy dismissed what had once seemed the most promising news: Satellite phone calls recorded from the area around the vessel Saturday were not, as the Argentine defense minister had asserted, from the San Juan.
Upon learning that, at least five women at the base became physically ill, and some fainted, according to mental health care providers supporting the relatives.
Monday afternoon brought a new spark of optimism when the navy reported that it was analyzing a sound recorded roughly 160 miles from shore, fairly near the path the submarine would have taken home. But following the satellite phone reports debacle, Capt. Enrique Balbi, a navy spokesman, warned that pinning too much hope on “a sound in the sea” could create “false hope.” And later in the day, the navy said the sound had not, in fact, been from the submarine.
The main focus of Argentina’s three-vessel submarine fleet is to train for combat missions. But the country’s military has been increasingly drawn into the effort to curb illegal fishing off its shores.
From December to April, the high season for fishing, as many as 450 fishing boats from China, South Korea, Taiwan and Spain flock to the area to dredge up Argentine shortfin squid, said Milko Schwartzman, a marine conservation expert who has studied the trade. Illegal fishing in the area generates an estimated $1 billion per year, he said.
“It’s very difficult for any state to control illegal fishing, even if they have unlimited resources,” Mr. Schwartzman said.
Last year, the Argentine Navy sank a Chinese fishing ship for the first time, drawing a sharp rebuke from Beijing.
Catastrophic episodes aboard submarines are exceedingly rare in peacetime, and by most accounts, the missing crew members took to their trade more with passion than with a sense of sacrifice. Still, accidents in vessels designed to ply the depths of the ocean are among the most agonizing to contemplate.
Argentine submariners speak of their field with pride rather than a sense of foreboding. Veteran submariners described it as a hallowed field with both perks and quirks.
“I’ve always loved the halo of mystery around submarines, the secrets of their operations,” said an Argentine Navy captain, Carlos Acuña, who was an officer on the San Juan.
Sailors coexist for long periods in cramped quarters and sleep in bunk beds packed together, each with a curtain that offers a modicum of privacy.
One of the perks, he said, is excellent food, at least by navy standards.
