A day after President Trump threatened to send the suspect in the Manhattan truck attack to the military prison at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, Attorney General Jeff Sessions on Thursday said the administration would “use all lawful tools at our disposal,” including the federal courts and military system, to prosecute terrorism suspects.
Mr. Sessions’s remarks on Guantánamo Bay reiterated a long-held position in favor of continuing to detain terrorism suspects without trial there and to prosecute some before a military commission. He said earlier this year that he would advise Mr. Trump to send newly captured terrorism suspects to the wartime prison, which he called a “very fine place,” rather than to bring them to civilian court for prosecution by the Justice Department he runs.
But his comments took on new urgency when Mr. Trump on Wednesday said he was open to transferring the Manhattan truck attack suspect, Sayfullo Saipov, 29, from civilian courts into the military system set up for foreign terrorists. A short time later, just more than 24 hours after the attack, federal prosecutors filed charges accusing Mr. Saipov of being inspired by Islamic State propaganda videos to carry out the plot and of timing it to inflict maximum damage.
By Thursday morning, the president backed off his threat to send Mr. Saipov to the military prison. He once again called for Mr. Saipov to be executed, a public intervention that could make it more difficult for prosecutors to secure a capital punishment in any future trial.
In Mr. Sessions’s remarks, made at the Manhattan office of the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, which is prosecuting Mr. Saipov, he defended the Justice Department’s antiterrorism work.
Mr. Sessions did not mention Mr. Saipov by name and he did not take questions from reporters after his remarks.
For all his rhetoric, Mr. Sessions, who leads the Justice Department, has brought some terrorism suspects to the United States for trial. This summer the Trump administration brought a man suspected of belonging to Al Qaeda to the United States to face trial in federal court. And officials have said a second suspect in the 2012 attacks in Benghazi, Libya, captured this week in the area of Misurata, Libya, would be brought to the United States to face criminal charges.
Mr. Sessions also applauded how the New York Police Department analyzes crime data, a topic he said he had discussed with city police officials during a visit to the 13th Precinct station house in Gramercy Park on Thursday morning.
“That is a proven success, and I believe that it can work around the country,” he said.
During morning roll call, Mr. Sessions commended the officers for their work, said Stephen P. Davis, the department’s chief spokesman. Afterward, during a stop at Police Headquarters, Mr. Sessions spoke to the department’s executive staff at the start of a routine CompStat meeting, where officials generally map and measure serious crimes and hold local commanders accountable for efforts to address crime trends.
Mr. Sessions observed the meeting for an hour, Mr. Davis said, before moving on to a meeting with senior department leaders, including the commissioner, James P. O’Neill, and John J. Miller, the deputy commissioner of intelligence and counterterrorism.