Two days after a pickup truck struck and killed eight people in Lower Manhattan in what the authorities called a terrorist attack, runners preparing for the New York City Marathon on Sunday sought to beat back anxiety as the police announced additional security measures.
Competitors picking up their race materials on Thursday chatted excitedly about the course and the doughnuts, beer, pizza and other rewards they would treat themselves to after they crossed the finish line.
But many also admitted that the attack, which occurred on a bike path along the Hudson River, rattled them and left them hoping race organizers and the police were doing everything possible to keep the event safe.
At a news conference, officials with the New York Police Department discussed a range of additional security measures.
Carlos Gomez, the chief of department, said there would be more sand trucks and other vehicles to block intruders from entering the course. Chief Gomez also said the department had doubled the number of rooftop observation posts and countersniper teams in all five boroughs. More uniformed police officers, counterterrorism officers and police dogs will patrol the event.
Since the 2013 Boston Marathon bombing, in which three people were killed at the finish line, security at New York’s marathon has increased. Runners are no longer allowed to run in baggy costumes that could conceal weapons. Backpack water containers and other bags are prohibited; runners may carry only a clear plastic bag provided by race organizers.
Chris Weiller, a vice president for New York Road Runners, which organizes the marathon, said the dropout rate for this year’s race had not been higher than in previous years.
More than 50,000 runners from more than 125 countries and all 50 states are expected to pass before some 2.5 million spectators.
Reinhold Fuelle, who traveled from Germany to compete in his 15th New York City Marathon, said he trusted law enforcement and needed to focus on his run, not the prospect of an attack.
“It can happen all over the world at any time,” he said with a shrug.