NEWARK — The jury in the federal corruption trial of Senator Robert Menendez, a Democrat from New Jersey, told the judge on Monday that it could not reach a unanimous decision on any of the charges in the case, raising the prospect of a mistrial.
Mr. Menendez’s political future is being closely watched by both parties. After months of testimony, any outcome could further rattle an increasingly fragile Senate, where Republicans hold a narrow majority.
The lack of progress in the deliberations came hours after several jurors admitted that they had followed news accounts about a fellow juror who was excused last week. The excused juror then told reporters that she believed Mr. Menendez was not guilty and that the panel was having a difficult time achieving consensus.
Abbe Lowell, a lawyer for Mr. Menendez, said he believed that the judge’s instructions to come back on Tuesday and continue deliberating could be interpreted as a mandate to reach a verdict. Judge Walls noted his objection, but disagreed.
Outside the federal courthouse here, Mr. Menendez again professed his innocence and his belief that the jurors would find him not guilty.
Mr. Menendez and a co-defendant, Dr. Salomon Melgen, a wealthy eye doctor from Florida, have been accused on various corruption charges, including bribery and conspiracy. Prosecutors say Mr. Menendez used his office to provide favors to Dr. Melgen in exchange for gifts, rides on his private plane and political contributions. Both men have denied the charges.
As he awaits his fate, any changes to Mr. Menendez’s political future have the potential to reverberate far beyond New Jersey. With Republicans holding a slim majority in the Senate, much of President Trump’s legislative agenda has stalled or failed. If Mr. Menendez were to be exonerated, or if there were a mistrial, and he decided to run for re-election, he could face an uphill battle after weeks of politically damaging testimony. But the senior senator from New Jersey has shown no willingness to step down.
The note from jurors came three hours after they had started a new round of deliberations after the juror was excused on Thursday so she could go on a vacation that had been planned before the trial began. Her excusal, and subsequent media interviews, injected drama into a case that had been relatively staid.
“I’m praying for him that they do not find him guilty,” Evelyn Maultsby, the excused juror, told reporters on Thursday.
Ms. Maultsby’s comments, including accusing fellow jurors of preventing her from expressing her opinion, were widely broadcast, bringing national attention to the trial.
On Monday morning, four jurors admitted in court to having seen news reports about Ms. Maultsby’s comments, even though they had been warned by Judge Walls against following any trial coverage.
Nonetheless, the judge asked the jurors if any of them had seen news reports about Ms. Maultsby. He then interviewed those who had said yes in his chambers, with the defense and prosecution present, before returning to the bench and instructing the jury to restart deliberations.
Ms. Maultsby’s comments represented a rare moment: an excused juror offering a window into the usually secretive deliberation process while sitting jurors were still debating.
Excusing a juror because of a planned vacation, while uncommon, is not unheard-of. What is unusual is learning details about an ongoing deliberation.
Ms. Scheindlin said that “jurors are always free to speak to the press after the verdict,” but “not while it’s going on.” And while a judge cannot legally prohibit an excused juror from speaking to reporters, they often issue a warning to wait until a verdict has been rendered. Judge Walls did not give any such warning.
Now in its 11th week, the trial had been estimated to last six to eight weeks. During jury selection in August, Judge Walls agreed to let Ms. Maultsby go on vacation if the trial had not concluded by Nov. 10.
As the day approached, Judge Walls reminded both sides and the jury of the arrangement.
