What goes around comes around, and on Tuesday, karma came for President Trump and his Republican acolytes. From Washington to Maine, New Jersey to North Carolina, Trumpist ugliness was met and vanquished, sometimes by the very targets of right-wing scorn.
In January, a local New Jersey Republican politician, John Carman, mocked the anti-Trump Women’s March by asking on Facebook whether the protest would be “over in time for them to cook dinner.” That so upset Ashley Bennett, a 32-year-old health care worker, that she challenged Mr. Carman for his seat on the Atlantic County Board of Chosen Freeholders. “Elected officials shouldn’t be on social media mocking and belittling people who are expressing their concerns about their community and the nation,” she said during her campaign. If Mr. Carman does it again, it will be as a private citizen. Ms. Bennett defeated him on Tuesday.
Plagued by division over a law that restricted transgender people’s access to public restrooms, and anger over the police shooting of a black man named Keith Lamont Scott, Charlotte, N.C., elected Vi Lyles, a 66-year-old former city administrator, as its first black female mayor.
In New York, Nassau County Republicans have seen their fair share of corruption and controversy, but Jack Martins was unable to overcome that legacy with race-baiting tactics in which he accused his Democratic opponent for county executive, Laura Curran, of wanting to “roll out the welcome mat” for the vicious MS-13 gang. Ms. Curran will be only the third Democrat in 80 years to hold the post.
Democratic victories were not just a matter of diversity overcoming division, though.  Yet he also had, in the end, a progressive economic program, as did Phil Murphy, the victorious Democratic gubernatorial candidate in New Jersey.
Voters in Virginia said health care was among their top issues. In Maine, voters answered Republicans’ repeated efforts to slash their health care coverage under the Affordable Care Act by becoming the first state to approve expanding Medicaid through a ballot proposal, which won by 59 percent to 41 percent. About 80,000 low-income residents will gain access to health care in a vote that was a slap at Gov. Paul LePage, a Republican who has vetoed Medicaid expansion bills five times. With Virginia’s legislature possibly falling to the Democrats, Medicaid expansion may be in Virginia’s future, and activists and lawmakers in Idaho and Utah are trying to put it on next year’s ballot.
Mr. Northam and down-ticket candidates energized voters on issues big and small — and knocked on hundreds of thousands of doors to translate outrage into votes.
What welcome inclusiveness at a time when the president stews in a hate-filled bubble, appealing only to the shrinking fraction of Americans unrepulsed by his behavior.
