BEIJING — When President Trump and President Xi Jinping turned away from their flower-draped lecterns here on Thursday without taking questions from reporters, the sense of a missed opportunity spread through the cavernous room in the Great Hall of the People.
American presidents typically use such visits to persuade inaccessible, often autocratic, foreign leaders to face the news media. I was a beneficiary of that custom in 2014, when Mr. Xi stood next to President Barack Obama in the same building, having grudgingly agreed to take two questions — one from a Chinese and one from an American correspondent.
And so, on Nov. 12, 2014, as I was preparing to join my colleagues for the bus ride from our hotel to the Great Hall of the People, I was pulled aside by Eric H. Schultz, then Mr. Obama’s deputy press secretary, who told me to expect to be called on at the news conference.
The White House’s choice of The New York Times was laden with symbolism. At the time, the Chinese government had declined to renew the visas of several Times correspondents in China as a reprisal for its coverage of the financial dealings of Chinese leaders and their families.
Asking questions of a president is nerve-racking under any circumstances. But when I heard my name called by the press secretary, Josh Earnest, in the Great Hall, it felt like stepping to the plate at Yankee Stadium.
I stood up and, with camera bulbs flashing, asked Mr. Xi two questions: Did he view Mr. Obama’s Asia pivot as a threat to China? And would China ease its refusal to give visas to correspondents in light of a broader visa agreement it had just signed with the United States?
I also asked Mr. Obama a somewhat long-winded question about the rise of anti-American sentiment in China, which prompted him to say, “Come on, Mark,” and joke, after I was finished, that he had forgotten my question (I assumed that was for the benefit of his host).
It turned out that Mr. Xi was merely biding his time. After he answered the Chinese journalist, he circled back to me and delivered a curt lecture. No, he said, the pivot was not about containment. And the visa problems of The Times were of our own making.
The whole negotiation was somewhat opaque, Mr. Earnest recalled this week. Even as he stood next to the leaders in the Great Hall that day, he said he was not sure the Chinese would follow through on the agreement.
Former aides to Mr. Obama and Mr. Bush criticized the Trump White House for not trying harder.
In Tokyo and Seoul, Mr. Trump took questions with the leaders of Japan and South Korea. But striking a blow for press freedom did not seem high on his list of priorities in Beijing. He did not say whether he had pressed Mr. Xi behind closed doors on human rights issues.
Mr. Obama, by contrast, got mileage out of the episode. Two days later, he was standing next to Aung San Suu Kyi, the Burmese pro-democracy leader, in the garden of her lakeside house in Yangon, and brought up the tense Q. and A. in the Great Hall of the People.
