HARARE, Zimbabwe — Robert Mugabe, who ruled Zimbabwe since independence in 1980 and once proclaimed that “only God will remove me,” resigned as president on Tuesday shortly after lawmakers began impeachment proceedings against him.
Lawmakers erupted into cheers, and jubilant residents poured into the streets of Harare, the capital. It seemed to be an abrupt capitulation by Mr. Mugabe, 93, the world’s oldest head of state and one of Africa’s longest-serving leaders.
After nearly four decades in power, Zimbabwe’s notorious strongman, Robert Mugabe, resigned after a military takeover in 2017. How did he keep his opponents at bay for so long?
“The one thing we will never allow anyone in the world to interfere with is our sovereignty.” Robert Mugabe, Zimbabwe’s former leader and once the world’s oldest head of state, has died at 95. Before his ouster in 2017, Mugabe was the only leader Zimbabweans had ever known since independence. And his 37-year rule defied the odds. Mugabe started as a celebrated leader of Zimbabwe’s liberation movement, but came to rule with an iron fist. To stay in power, he deployed tactics long used by dictators. Here’s how. In the early 1980s, Mugabe sent the military to crush a resistance movement. Over 10,000 people were killed, including many civilians. And in 2008, security forces and Mugabe loyalists attacked, intimidated or killed opposition supporters, forcing the opposition leader to quit the race. Mugabe went on to win the second round of the vote, but international pressure pushed him into a power-sharing government. In 2014, longtime Mugabe loyalist, Joice Majuru, was pushed out of his inner circle after Mugabe’s wife accused her of plotting a coup. Majuru’s husband, who is also part of Zimbabwe’s political royalty, had died a few years earlier in a mysterious fire that she says was an assassination by forces loyal to the president. In 2017, Mugabe fired his vice president, Emmerson Mnangagwa, clearing the way for Mrs. Mugabe to succeed him as president. In the early 2000s, Mugabe supported the seizure of white-owned farms in an effort to increase his popularity. Later, he said that the government could take farm land without paying compensation. And if anyone ever wants to protest in Zimbabwe, Mugabe has even raised the price of cellular data to prevent online organizing. Mugabe’s reign over Zimbabwe ended in 2017. And his death leaves a complicated legacy: a pariah who resorted to despotism later in life, but in many corners of Africa, he was an elder statesman, thanks to his liberation pedigree.
Mr. Mugabe, who controlled the nation by handing out the spoils of power to his allies and crushing dissent, had refused to step down even after being expelled on Sunday from ZANU-PF, the political party he had led for four decades.
Then on Tuesday, party members introduced a motion of impeachment, invoking a constitutional process that had never before been tested.
The party’s political rival, the Movement for Democratic Change, seconded the motion, a striking sign of the consensus in the political class that Mr. Mugabe must go — one that formed with astonishing speed after the military took Mr. Mugabe into custody last Wednesday.
Lawmakers were still discussing the impeachment motion when Mr. Mugabe’s justice minister, Happyton Bonyongwe, walked up to the stage. He was booed, because of a rumor that he had been offering bribes to sway votes against impeachment. Then he whispered into the ear of Mr. Mudenda, the speaker, and handed him a letter.
Calling the lawmakers to order, the speaker announced that he had received an urgent communication from the president. As the crowd grew quiet, Mr. Mudenda — with a wide smile across his face — read out the letter.
Lawmakers immediately screamed and shouted. Once-bitter rivals from ZANU-PF and the Movement for Democratic Change shook hands and hugged.
In Africa Unity Square, the capital’s main public area, scattered shouts were heard a few minutes after the announcement by the speaker. Then, as word began spreading by mouth and by phone, the shouts, cries and honking of cars rose in a deafening crescendo. Hundreds of people ran to the square, hugging and jumping, as the crowd soon swelled into the thousands.
The state broadcaster interrupted its programming to report that Mr. Mugabe had resigned and that a new leader could be sworn in as early as Wednesday. Emmerson Mnangagwa, the vice president whom Mr. Mugabe abruptly fired last week, setting off an internal revolt, is widely expected to lead the country, at least until national elections scheduled for next year.
For nearly four decades, Mr. Mugabe ruled through a heavy mix of repression of his opponents and rewards for his allies. He oversaw the massacre of thousands of civilians in the 1980s and outmaneuvered rivals in his party and in the opposition. Even in his 90s and weakened by age, he kept potential successors at bay.
But he pushed too hard by trying to position his wife, Grace, 52, as his successor. Despite being a newcomer to politics who had no role in the nation’s liberation war, she made clear that she wanted to be president and ridiculed politicians who had been waiting decades to succeed her husband.
The chain of events leading to Mr. Mugabe’s downfall started on Nov. 6, when he fired Mr. Mnangagwa, clearing the way for Mrs. Mugabe to take over the presidency at some point. Mr. Mugabe then tried to arrest the nation’s top military commander a few days later.
Mr. Mnangagwa’s role as the likely successor to Mr. Mugabe has raised many concerns. He was accused of orchestrating the crackdown in the 1980s in which thousands of members of the Ndebele ethnic group were killed. He was also accused of being behind deadly violence in 2008 a bid to rig polls in favor of Mr. Mugabe, a claim he denies.
At least a semblance of legitimacy — especially for a government under Mr. Mnangagwa, who is known as the enforcer of some of Mr. Mugabe’s most ruthless policies — will be critical in gaining recognition from regional powers, Western governments and international lenders. Zimbabwe, which no longer has its own currency and perennially struggles to pay government workers, became a pariah in the West after the state-backed invasion of white-owned farms in the early 2000s.
On Tuesday, Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain, Zimbabwe’s former colonial ruler, welcomed news of Mr. Mugabe’s departure, saying it presented “an opportunity to forge a new path free of the oppression that characterized his rule.” The United States Embassy in Zimbabwe issued a statement welcoming “an historic moment” and urged “unwavering respect for the rule of law and for established democratic practices.” It said that “the path forward” must lead to free, fair and inclusive elections.
With the end of the Mugabe era, some who have found themselves on the losing side of history were quickly readjusting their positions on Tuesday night.
In an interview with The New York Times in 2016, Mr. Chiyangwa said he was a member of G-40, the faction that had been led by Mrs. Mugabe. But on Tuesday night, he denied ever having been a member.
“No, no,” said Mr. Chiyangwa, one of the country’s most prominent businessmen and also president of the Zimbabwe Football Association.
On Tuesday night, it was unclear what guarantees Mr. Mugabe and his family had received in return for resigning — whether they had been granted immunity, would be allowed to live in the country or keep their wealth.
In recent days, there had been indications that some allies of Mrs. Mugabe had left Zimbabwe. Jonathan Moyo — a leader of Mrs. Mugabe’s G-40 faction — said in a tweet Monday that he had left the country along with 50 other people. He quickly deleted it.
While Mr. Mugabe’s resignation caused immediate jubilation in the streets, for many the reaction was more complex. Mr. Mugabe had occupied a central role in the nation’s four-decade history and in its founding mythology, which all Zimbabweans are taught in primary school. He was a tyrant, many said, but he was also the nation’s father figure.
Even as military leaders met Mr. Mugabe in recent days before the cameras, their body language showed extreme deference. His fiercest critics saved their harshest words for Mr. Mugabe’s wife and her allies, often describing the president, who has become visibly frail in the past two years, as a victim of the people surrounding him.
Christopher Mutsvangwa, the head of the war veterans association and one of Mr. Mnangagwa’s closest allies, led efforts to remove Mr. Mugabe from power. But as ZANU-PF lawmakers met before Parliament convened, he sometimes sounded melancholy about Mr. Mugabe, with whom he had worked decades before a falling out last year.
Mr. Mutsvangwa, who once served as Zimbabwe’s ambassador to China, compared Mr. Mugabe and his wife to Mao Zedong and Jiang Qing, the Chinese leader’s fourth wife, who, toward the end of Mao’s life, assumed great power.
“He’s a traumatized old man,” Mr. Mutsvangwa said of Mr. Mugabe.
Even among the celebrants in Unity Square, some wore quiet, almost sad expressions.
David Mushakwe, 35, a car electrician, stood quietly as he watched hundreds of mostly young men jumping on trucks in front of Parliament. Lawmakers had met in the building in the morning and then moved to a hotel in another section of the city for a joint session of Parliament in the afternoon.
