Just want the music? Listen to this Playlist on Spotify here (or find our profile: nytimes). Like what you hear? Let us know at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| and sign up for our Louder newsletter, a once-a-week blast of our pop music coverage, here.
Eminem has been self-lacerating before, but perhaps never this soberly. And there are feelings here that are alarmingly, and arrestingly, stark: “Always in search of the verse that I haven’t spit yet/Will this step just be another misstep/To tarnish whatever the legacy, love or respect I’ve garnered?” Rapping about rapping is among his strongest skills, but for every deft turn of phrase here, there are deeply awkward moments, too (“It’s true, I’m a Rubik’s/A beautiful mess”).
A song like this, misguided though it may be — Beyoncé sings the chorus, reduced to an unimaginative avatar of dignity and goodness, and Rick Rubin produces what’s little more than a glum piano — can only come from a place of savvy. Eminem is alive to the way he is seen, and astute enough to know he has few moves available to him, especially in a cultural moment likely to abjure his scathing, violent early work. “Now I’m getting clowned and frowned on,” he laments.
You could call it a protest, but that would imply that Sturgill Simpson actually cared deeply about what was happening inside the Bridgestone Arena in Nashville on Wednesday night at the annual Country Music Association Awards. It seems very likely he did not. Mr. Simpson won this year’s Grammy for best country album, but has little in common with the genre’s mainstream, which is what the C.M.A.s celebrate. He wasn’t bitter, though. Instead, he set up on the street outside, opened up his guitar case (with his Grammy inside) to take donations for the A.C.L.U. and took questions from fans on Facebook Live. He played a couple of songs, spoke of his love for bluegrass and Kanye West, and when asked to deliver a hypothetical C.M.A. acceptance speech, said this: “Nobody needs a machine gun, coming from a guy who owns quite a few guns.” He continued: “Gay people should have the right to be happy and live their life any way they want to and get married if they want to without fear of getting drug down the road behind a pickup truck. Black people are probably tired of getting shot in the streets and being enslaved by the industrial prison complex. And hegemony and fascism is alive and well in Nashville, Tenn. Thank you very much.” That, for sure, was a protest. J.C.
Should you be nostalgic for the self-confident rock ’n’ roll urgency of the mid-2000s, take comfort in the fact that no amount of social, cultural or political change has convinced Evanescence to veer from its lite-opera-rock theater. “My Heart Is Broken” is one of the better songs on “Synthesis,” the group’s fourth album and first since 2011, which sounds like an only mildly restrained version of its earliest work. Amy Lee’s voice remains vibrant, soaring and sweet. She makes disappointment sound like romance. J.C.
“To see the rot in no disguise/Oh what a time to be alive,” Mac McCaughan of Superchunk sings in the title song from an album due in February. The distorted blare and galloping beat are true to the band’s indie-rock beginnings, back in 1989; the furious disillusionment is from right now. J.P.
Simbiatu Ajikawo, the British songwriter who calls herself Little Simz, raps, sings and plays guitar in “Poison Ivy,” a tale of a “toxic” romance that she can’t pull away from. Its minor-key groove transforms itself into R&B, psychedelia and North African desert blues, circling through four chords that offer no way out. J.P.
On “÷,” the most recent album from Ed Sheeran, he teamed up with the Ghanaian-British rapper-singer Fuse ODG for a light, charming duet, “Bibia Be Ye Ye.” Now, he has returned the favor, singing in Twi on Fuse ODG’s new single, “Boa Me,” a song that effectively blends the two artists’ brands of exultant optimism. J.C.
“F.U.N.K.” is part of “Nasty Gal,” the 1975 album by Betty Davis, who was briefly married to Miles Davis in the late 1960s; the full album is to be reissued early next year. Raw and often raunchy funk was her calling; Ms. Davis rasps, teases, moans and screams through songs like “F.U.N.K.” Its lyrics list a funk pantheon, while its groove, elaborated through the crosstalk of guitar and clavinet, and Ms. Davis’s vehement, hopped-up vocals, tell a wilder story. J.P.
“Half Life” is a freeze frame at the moment of a breakup: “We pull apart so patiently,” sing the two women in the Australian folk-pop duo Oh Pep! They’re backed by a plush orchestra and a brisk drumbeat, sharing a melody that’s both angular and affectionate, already looking toward the aftermath: “You will become an echo of a sound once heard/scattered through my universe.” J.P.
Errorsmith, which just released the album “Superlative Fatigue,” is the very occasional project of the electronic musician and software designer Erik Weigand; its previous album came out in 2004. The music uses a bare handful of sounds in ways that are transparent, propulsive and, in tracks like “Internet of Screws,” downright comedic. With its minimal vocabulary of syncopated drum taps, nearly nonstop mechanical blipping and silly, sliding tones, the track is like five minutes of sped-up slapstick. J.P.
“Unfiltered Universe” is the third album in a trilogy from Rez Abbasi, a guitarist of Pakistani descent, who has used each record to look at a different South Asian musical tradition. This one is focused on the Carnatic lineage of South India, and like the others it features Mr. Abbasi’s powerful band, Invocation: the saxophonist Rudresh Mahanthappa, the pianist Vijay Iyer, the cellist Elizabeth Mikhael, the bassist Johannes Weidenmueller and the drummer Dan Weiss. On “Propensity,” each instrument seems to be advocating for a distinct interpretation of the song’s rhythm; sparks flash between them. Mr. Abbasi flies into the fray after a darting solo from Mr. Mahanthappa, using his creamy distortion and patient phrasing as a ballast in the swarm. G.R.
Don’t do this. J.C.