A longtime outsider in New York State politics has been identified as the link between WikiLeaks and Roger J. Stone Jr., an adviser to Donald J. Trump who appears to have had advance knowledge about hacked emails related to Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaign.
The outsider, Randy Credico, a comedian who has frequently run for office, posted on Twitter on Tuesday that he had received a subpoena requiring him to appear before the House Intelligence Committee next month. The panel is investigating Russian meddling in the 2016 campaign.
Mr. Credico could not be reached on Wednesday for comment.
A person familiar with the House efforts said that Mr. Credico had been identified as the intermediary between Mr. Stone and Julian Assange, the founder of WikiLeaks.
Mr. Credico, who also hosts a radio show, interviewed Mr. Assange on his program in April, and Mr. Stone, who worked with Mr. Credico on efforts to reform New York’s drug laws, has also appeared on the show.
On a separate occasion, Mr. Credico traveled to London to interview Mr. Assange at the Ecuadorean Embassy, where he has been granted asylum against extradition to Sweden to face questioning on allegations that he sexually abused two young women in 2010.
The question of Russian meddling in the 2016 campaign — including what United States intelligence agencies say was the publication of hacked emails by WikiLeaks — has loomed over Mr. Trump’s presidency, and Mr. Credico’s cameo role in that inquiry has added a surreal note.
Mr. Stone is an admirer of Mr. Assange, dating at least to 2011, when he wrote a column supporting Mr. Assange against the allegations of sexual misconduct in Sweden.
Congressional investigators examining accusations of Russian interference have zeroed in on Mr. Stone and his possible connections to WikiLeaks. Their interest has centered in particular on predictions that Mr. Stone publicly made about damage that Mrs. Clinton’s campaign would face.
Mr. Stone had resisted efforts by congressional investigators to determine the identity of his source about WikiLeaks’ plans. He has previously indicated that he had a source and that the source had simply confirmed what Mr. Assange had publicly tweeted.
Mr. Stone told the House Intelligence Committee that he had merely asked Mr. Credico to confirm that Mr. Assange had told the comedian that he had Clinton-related documents, according to a person familiar with the testimony. Mr. Stone also said that Mr. Credico never mentioned that he knew of the source or content of that material and never indicated whether he had confirmed the information with Mr. Assange.