After emigrating from the Dominican Republic in 1980 and working long hours in New York as a construction worker, Ramón Ortiz found a sense of stability in a five-bedroom apartment in the Hamilton Heights neighborhood of Upper Manhattan.
It was spacious enough to house his wife, daughter and three grandchildren. The rent was a bargain when he moved in and still was: $1,387 a month. There was also a sense of community in the six-story building as the majority of tenants were from the Dominican Republic.
“It was perfect,” Mr. Ortiz, 66, said in Spanish in an interview on Saturday.
That was all thrown into chaos on Friday afternoon when a colossal fire raged across the brownstone building at 565 West 144th Street, near Broadway, obliterating its top two floors.
A tenant and a police officer were treated for smoke inhalation, and seven firefighters had minor injuries, James Leonard, the chief of the Fire Department, said at a news conference. The cause of the fire remained under investigation.
One tenant who lived on the sixth floor was unaccounted for as of Saturday.
Over 250 firefighters and emergency personnel responded around 3:15 p.m. on Friday, the Fire Department said. Neighbors said the fire continued to roar well into the night, forcing dozens to evacuate.
“At the height of this fire, the winds were at their peak and the angle that the wind was hitting this building caused the rapid spread of this fire across the top floor,” Chief Leonard said. The building had extensive fire and water damage, he said.
On Saturday, tenants returned to their neighborhood to stare at the scorched remnants of what had been their home and contemplate their losses.
When he evacuated the building, he took his most precious possession, his United States passport. As Mr. Ortiz stared at the fifth-floor window of his apartment, he spoke of his collection of Latin-American landscape paintings and dozens of history books, all gone.
He said he had not yet thought of living arrangements. The building will remain closed as the Buildings Department investigates safety conditions, the Fire Department said.
Mr. Ortiz and 10 other families were relocated by the Red Cross to hotels and shelters on Friday night. Other tenants helped each other find refuge with friends and family. Many were concerned for documents proving their residency.
As they started to navigate their new reality, tenants banded together. About a dozen families met at a community center on Saturday afternoon for legal advice and to discuss how they would move forward.
Outside, Mr. Ortiz trembled as he checked text messages on his phone. He was still wearing the clothes from the day of the fire — a light fleece pullover and green sweatpants. Another tenant approached and gave him a brown shopping bag with a jacket.
