SYDNEY, Australia — The public opinion survey that yielded majority approval for same-sex marriage in Australia on Wednesday was an emotional breakthrough born of a long, curious and still-continuing struggle.
The survey drew a huge response, and the margin of victory sent a clear message about where Australians stand. But the costs of the mail-in survey — both financial and psychological — have been staggering.
So even as the “yes” side celebrates, many Australians are frustrated. Their country, they believe, could have gotten to this point faster if lawmakers and Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull had simply done their jobs and passed a bill reflecting what previous polls showed most Australians wanted.
Lawmakers introduced a bill on Wednesday with bipartisan support that could legalize same-sex marriage by the end of the year. But critics point out that it could have been introduced a year or two ago, and debate over the details has only just begun.
Australia’s Parliament is exceedingly weak at the moment, having spent months booting out members for being dual citizens, leading to special elections that could force a change of government.
Many gay couples argue that passage of a bill is already overdue.
Participation in the survey was higher than initially expected. It beat participation in the referendum in Britain on leaving the European Union (72.2 percent) and far surpassed the percentage of Americans who voted in the 2016 presidential election (58 percent). The youngest eligible voters, 18 and 19 years old, were especially eager, with 78.2 percent returning their mail-in ballots, more than for any other age group below 45.
“The fact that 80 percent of the population — including a large cohort who had probably never sent a letter in their lives — were prepared to do it shows that we are engaged,” Mr. Lewis said.
Australia has turned social issues directly over to the people before. On May 27, 1967, 91 percent of Australian voters agreed by referendum to delete two discriminatory references to Aborigines in Australia’s Constitution.
Like the same-sex marriage vote, the 1967 vote was highly symbolic.
It is often celebrated (incorrectly) as the referendum that gave Australia’s Indigenous population the vote, but that had been approved in 1962. What it really did was lay the groundwork for the process — still unfinished — of achieving racial equality. It cemented, in law, a broader idea of Australian identity.
But for many Aboriginal Australians, the referendum process — being forced to ask the more powerful white majority for inclusion — was also humiliating and painful.
What made the same-sex marriage vote even more controversial was that it had nothing to do with the Australian Constitution, and could have been avoided.
In August, Mr. Turnbull turned to it as a Plan C after failing to persuade fellow lawmakers to go along with either a bill in Parliament or an actual plebiscite with a binding resolution — as Ireland did in 2015 when it approved same-sex marriage. That choice, to have an expensive vote that was not even binding — it cost 122 million Australia dollars, or about $97 million — has rankled voters on all sides of the issue.
If public engagement in the vote showed the health of Australia’s democracy, the survey itself points to its opposite: a dysfunctional, out-of-touch legislature that often lags behind the world and its own constituents on many of the most important issues of the day.
In Prince Alfred Park, among the celebrants, this was the view arising quickly and at increased volume after the first expression of pride.
She was referring to a “no” campaign that fought a no-limits losing battle.
The “yes” campaign could focus on mobilization; opinion polls had already shown that most Australians supported the cause. The “no” side faced a different challenge: getting people who might be complacent or undecided to agree with their position and care enough to send back the survey.
This led to campaign videos with mothers arguing that legalizing same-sex marriage would lead boys to dress like girls; leaflets sent to millions of Australians that warned of child abuse and compared homosexuality to a mental disorder; and a never-ending discussion on Australian television and radio about the dangers of gay families like the Duggan-Tierneys.
Some “no” voters said that while they did not necessarily endorse all of what was said, they were glad to have a chance to confront the other side.
Gay couples (among others) were horrified during the campaign, and still are.
Some voters said they were especially disappointed in Mr. Turnbull. The head of Australia’s center-right Liberal party, he supports same-sex marriage, but his handling of the issue has contributed to a widening frustration with his leadership, or lack of it.
But for now, many Australians are still trying to figure out how to make sure that the vote moves beyond symbolism to actual impact.
