BEDOUINE at Joe’s Pub (Nov. 16, 7:30 p.m.). The songs on the Syrian-born artist Bedouine’s self-titled debut album, from this spring, reveal her as a gifted folk artist in the classic mold: sweet-voiced, lyrically knowing, partial to easeful harmonies and softly picked acoustic guitar patterns. At her best, she sounds like a future legend — the sort of musician one will later wish to have seen back when, at a small performance like this Thursday-night show.
BULLY at Music Hall of Williamsburg (Nov. 13, 9 p.m.). Alicia Bognanno, this rock act’s lead singer and songwriter, is also a trained recording engineer. That’s why the songs on Bully’s 2015 debut, “Feels Like,” and its recent follow-up, “Losing,” hit so hard, not only in her blunt lyrics and howling delivery, but also in every drumbeat and guitar riff, all calibrated by Ms. Bognanno for maximum emotional payoff.
DEAD & COMPANY at Madison Square Garden (Nov. 12 and 14, 7 p.m.). Is Dead & Company a reunion of the Grateful Dead? Yes and no. Yes, in that it includes three of that band’s founding members, has the word “Dead” in its name and primarily performs Grateful Dead songs; no, in that its lineup has room for the singer-guitarist John Mayer and others, but not for the Dead’s longtime bassist, Phil Lesh. Be that as it may, the group’s shows are reliable fun for connoisseurs of psychedelic Americana.
NILÜFER YANYA at Mercury Lounge (Nov. 14, 9:30 p.m.). Naming a song “Baby Luv” is a bold move in a world where the Supremes’ classic 1964 hit “Baby Love” exists. Then again, boldness is warranted when you’ve got a hook as devastating as the one that the 22-year-old London singer Nilüfer Yanya repeats with mounting intensity on her post-punk-tinged single of that name: “Again, again, again, again/Do you like pain?” At this, her first show in the United States, Ms. Yanya will seek to confirm and expand her impressive critical reputation.
BRIAN BLADE AND THE FELLOWSHIP BAND at Jazz Standard (Nov. 14-19, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). One of jazz’s most distinctive and sought-after drummers, Mr. Blade is known for his broad, forceful playing, which can both pummel and levitate. He’s not concerned with projecting a rhythmic concept so much as evoking something wholesale, cathartic and consuming. His Fellowship Band has been together for 20 years, and here it celebrates the release of a new record, “Body and Shadow.” The album — collecting seven original tunes and two takes on a Christian hymn — reflects the group’s ethereal, communal approach. The Fellowship Band appears here in a five-piece iteration, with Melvin Butler on alto saxophone and bass clarinet, Myron Walden on tenor and soprano saxophone, Jon Cowherd on piano and Chris Thomas on bass.
STANLEY CLARKE BAND at the Blue Note (Nov. 14-19, 8 and 10:30 p.m.). One of the early virtuosos of the electric bass, Mr. Clarke is often associated with Chick Corea and Return to Forever, the seminal jazz-rock band that was partly defined by his exacting and expansive bass playing. But Mr. Clarke’s catalog of albums as a leader is remarkable, spanning from the landmark fusion record “School Days,” from 1976, to a number of film soundtracks to the wide-ranging “Up,” released in 2014. He appears here with a cast of deft companions: Beka Gochiashvili on keyboards, Lenny White on drums and Salar Nader on tablas and other Indian percussion.
SYLVIE COURVOISIER TRIO at the Cell (Nov. 11, 8 p.m.). Ms. Courvoisier, a pianist, plays with a serious but open-minded demeanor; she crafts bright improvisations out of starkly defined parts. Ms. Courvoisier hails from Switzerland but lives in New York; her style is influenced by free improvisers from both sides of the Atlantic. She has a new album due early next year, “D’Agala,” featuring the bassist Drew Gress and the drummer Kenny Wollesen. This concert features that trio.
JONATHAN FINLAYSON AND SICILIAN DEFENSE at the Jazz Gallery (Nov. 16, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Mr. Finlayson is a young trumpeter who has apprenticed and performed for over a decade with the alto saxophonist and experimental jazz luminary Steve Coleman. With his own group, Sicilian Defense, Mr. Finlayson uses his pen to play with your ear — and its connection to your body. That puts him in line with Mr. Coleman, but his approach is original. His phrases stop short without making you lose balance, and shift key often to avoid the illusion of grounding. Sicilian Defense released a beguiling album this year, “Moving Still”; the band appears here in a slightly different — but equally remarkable — lineup: Miles Okazaki on guitar, David Bryant on piano, Chris Tordini on bass and Craig Weinrib on drums.
ERIC REED QUARTET at Smoke (Nov. 10-12; 7, 9, 10:30 p.m.). Mr. Reed, a pianist, came up in the era of the Young Lions — those fresh-faced neo-classicists who made midcentury jazz au courant again in the late 1980s and early ’90s. Ever since, he’s remained one of the more respected pianists of his ilk, that is, those following in the footsteps of straight-ahead jazz giants like Mulgrew Miller and Kenny Kirkland. Here he celebrates the release of a new disc, “A Light in the Darkness,” with a formidable quartet: Tim Green on alto saxophone, Ben Williams on bass and McClenty Hunter on drums.
ROSWELL RUDD BIRTHDAY CELEBRATION at Dizzy’s Club Coca-Cola (Nov. 16, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Mr. Rudd is a trombonist of bulbous tone and lively, free-ranging attack. He started out in the 1960s on New York’s avant-garde jazz scene, but nowadays he tends toward music of clearer, gentler beauty. His mirthful new album, “Embrace,” features the vocalist Fay Victor, the pianist Lafayette Harris and the bassist Ken Filiano. Mr. Rudd recently received a diagnosis of cancer, and will not perform at this show. But the personnel from the album will, along with the vocalist Sheila Jordan, the saxophonist Archie Shepp and other all-star guests.
JOHN ZORN’S MASADA at the Village Vanguard (Nov. 14-19, 8:30 and 10:30 p.m.). Mr. Zorn, an alto saxophonist and downtown jazz doyen, has been writing music for his “Masada” series since the 1990s. Calling it “radical Jewish music,” he uses the composition series to explore Hebrew scripture and Jewish folk song, as well as the free jazz styles that have long informed his approach. Here he performs music from the project’s third book of music, with a different team each night.
