The police in New York on Friday said that they were developing a strong criminal case against the producer Harvey Weinstein after an actress’s claim that he raped her seven years ago.
Speaking at a news conference at Police Headquarters in Lower Manhattan, officials in the Police Department said they were gathering evidence with an eye toward preparing a warrant to arrest Mr. Weinstein, whose representatives have said he is undergoing therapy outside New York.
The claims of the actress, Paz de la Huerta, have been a focus of investigators in the department’s Special Victims Division for several days, since Mr. Weinstein’s long history of allegations of sexual harassment and sexual assault of women was detailed in reports by The New York Times and The New Yorker early last month. Those reports prompted a mountain of tips to the police in New York and London about other episodes.
If Mr. Weinstein had been in the city, and so much time had not passed, the Police Department’s chief of detectives, Robert K. Boyce, said that his investigators would have sought to arrest him immediately. But with him out of the jurisdiction of the New York police, and with seven years having elapsed since the attacks are said to have taken place, the police will instead continue gathering evidence.
Despite the strong words from Mr. Boyce, officials in the office of the Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus R. Vance Jr., issued a statement suggesting they were not ready to charge Mr. Weinstein. Mr. Vance’s office would be responsible for prosecuting Mr. Weinstein if he were arrested.
Ms. de la Huerta’s claims resemble those by other women who have come forward. But even as the number of alleged Weinstein victims has increased, with a growing number of women across the world claiming that he harassed, assaulted or raped them, it is unclear whether Mr. Weinstein will face criminal charges. Law enforcement officials in Los Angeles and Britain have also confirmed that they are investigating accounts of sexual assault and abuse by Mr. Weinstein, but the announcement by the New York police is the first indication of a possible arrest.
Through a representative, Mr. Weinstein has steadily denied allegations of nonconsensual sex.
But in interviews with The Times and a statement through her lawyer, Ms. de la Huerta described a series of harrowing encounters in 2010. First, she said, Mr. Weinstein raped her in her TriBeCa apartment. “I know you’re ready to become a real actress,” she said the producer told her as he forced himself on her.
“I was terrified,” she said, explaining why she did not go to the police and instead confided mainly in her therapist. “You keep quiet about it,” she added, describing why she stayed silent.
She had been drinking that night because she was nervous, she said.
When she arrived in the lobby, Mr. Weinstein manipulated her into letting him into her apartment, saying they would have a calm discussion upstairs, she recalled. Once they got upstairs, he pushed her on the bed, overpowered her and raped her a second time, she said.
Afterward, Ms. de la Huerta said, she had an emotional breakdown and struggled to work. Her therapist, Sue Ann Piliero, did not return phone calls seeking comment but provided a short statement to the lawyer, Aaron Filler, who provided it to The Times. The statement partially backed Ms. de la Huerta’s recollections.
Mr. Boyce faced questions about the case on Friday because a report in Vanity Fair quoted a New York police detective, Nicholas DiGaudio, saying the police were ready to move forward.
In New York, the statute of limitations for prosecuting rape and other sex crimes depends on the force alleged and the charges considered, but it can range from two years to no time restrictions for the most serious offenses.
Two officials in the district attorney’s office, speaking on the condition of anonymity to discuss a continuing investigation, said one of the office’s most experienced sex crime prosecutors, Maxine Rosenthal, conducted the initial interview with Ms. de la Huerta.
But the officials cautioned that the investigation was still in the early stages and that detectives and prosecutors were still gathering evidence.
In general, the Manhattan district attorney’s office will not go forward with a sex crimes prosecution unless prosecutors in its sex crimes unit are absolutely convinced they have enough evidence. This high bar for sex crimes exists largely to avoid subjecting a victim to a humiliating cross-examination that would doom the case and deter other victims from coming forward, prosecutors say.
That is one reason Mr. Vance has said he decided not to prosecute Mr. Weinstein in 2015, when Ambra Battilana, an Italian model, accused him of groping her during a job interview at his office.