Good Tuesday morning. Rupert Murdoch and his sons have effectively put the bigger of their family empires, 21st Century Fox, in play. Will Disney come back, or will an entity like Apple swoop in instead? We’re also watching to see if Broadcom will go hostile in its $105 billion pursuit of Qualcomm. And we’re wondering if there will be more changes to the tax code after the introduction of restrictions on carried interest.
This just in: “Bridgewater Associates paid a settlement to a woman who was pushed out after engaging in a consensual relationship with top executive Greg Jensen and shortly after, heard from another female employee that Mr. Jensen had groped her buttocks, according to people familiar with the matter,” the WSJ reports.
Will the Murdochs really break up Fox?
It’s the question that’s on every media mogul’s mind today, after CNBC and others reported that Fox had held preliminary talks to sell most of its assets to the Walt Disney Company. And it’s a striking change of heart for Rupert Murdoch and his sons, who tried to buy Time Warner three years ago but now seem to believe that smaller may be better.
The talks are off for now. But offers could come out of the woodwork. Disney could try again, hoping that Fox’s movie studio and cable networks could bolster its video-on-demand offerings to counter Netflix, according to Brooks Barnes of the NYT.
Or other companies could have interests in owning content like the X-Men and Avatar franchises: Apple or Amazon, perhaps, according to Meg James of the LAT. Expect the Fox C.E.O. James Murdoch to get plenty of questions about all of this when the company reports earnings tomorrow.
What would be left: Fox News, Fox Sports and the local Fox broadcasting operations. Those are still valuable assets, according to Dawn C. Chmielewski and Dade Hayes of Deadline.
Wall Street’s reaction: It’s “a dream come true,” the research analyst Laura Martin of Needham told CNBC.
Observers say that a good personal connection will be key to achieving diplomatic breakthroughs, according to Jane Perlez and Mark Landler of the NYT.
American patronage has afforded China many special dispensations that have helped its economy boom over the past three decades. But now that China has had such success, it’s time to level the playing field.
From earlier in the president’s Asia trip: While in South Korea, Mr. Trump said that he saw “a lot of progress” in diplomatic efforts to contain North Korea, according to the NYT.
Will the biggest tech takeover bid go hostile?
It’s worth noting how aggressively Broadcom has pursued Qualcomm, especially since all of its previous acquisitions have been consensual. Its C.E.O., Hock Tan, had a conversation with the Qualcomm C.E.O. Steve Mollenkopf last year about a potential deal. But the two didn’t really communicate again until late Sunday, when Mr. Tan called his counterpart and told him about the impending $105 billion bid.
Broadcom: Moelis & Company, Citigroup, Deutsche Bank, JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Morgan Stanley and the law firms Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz and Latham & Watkins.
Qualcomm: Goldman Sachs, Evercore Partners, Centerview Partners and the law firm Paul, Weiss.
But not private equity firms, venture capital funds or real estate firms like the one Mr. Trump owns. That’s because a new rule proposed by the House Ways and Means Committee chairman, Kevin Brady — requiring firms to hold investments for at least three years to qualify for the 23.8 percent long-term capital gains rate — doesn’t really touch their business models.
Which millionaires benefit from the Republican plan: “It would likely cut the taxes paid by Robert Kraft, the owner of football’s New England Patriots, while likely raising taxes on Tom Brady, the team’s quarterback,” Jim Tankersley of the NYT writes in a helpful analogy.
Skeptical tax study is withdrawn: The Tax Policy Center, whose report had concluded that the middle class would pay more under the Republican plan, said that it had found errors in its study, according to Bloomberg. But its findings still largely fell in line with those from the Joint Committee on Taxation, Congress’ official tax scorekeeper.
“We don’t stash money on some Caribbean island,” Tim Cook told a Senate investigative subcommittee in 2013. That’s true: The island that Apple uses is actually in the English Channel.
Why was Leonid Mikhelson, Russia’s richest oligarch, a customer of the bank? He was one of many wealthy foreigners who legally obtain American registrations for their aircraft while shielding their identities from public view. These aircraft trust accounts are often packaged with a tax avoidance plan on the Isle of Man, in the Irish Sea.
Legal watchers will be keeping an eye on this, after the New Yorker reported that the lawyer had helped Harvey Weinstein hire private investigators to stop publications, including the NYT, from looking into sexual harassment accusations against the movie mogul.
Mr. Boies’s firm has done legal work for the NYT over the past decade.
— George Clooney, who with Randy Gerber and Mike Meldman sold the Casamigos brand of tequila to Diageo for as much as $1 billion, to the Sunday Times.
