SUTHERLAND SPRINGS, Tex. — As Lorenzo Flores Jr. pulled into the Valero gas station on Sunday morning, he caught sight of an armed man in black stalking the First Baptist Church across the highway — and knew in his gut that tragedy was descending on this blink-and-you-miss-it town of trailer homes and rusting pumpjacks.
By the time the shooting stopped, at least 26 people at the First Baptist Church would be dead or dying.
“There’s no sense to these things, I guess,” Mr. Flores continued, still reeling after he learned that two of Ms. Ward’s young daughters, Emily and Brooke, were killed along with their mother.
Residents like Mr. Flores were left trying to grasp how nearly one-tenth of a community’s population could be cut down in the span of a few minutes, and how such a thing could happen in a house of worship.
Everyone in Sutherland Springs seems to know the mustachioed Mr. Flores, who runs the little eatery with his girlfriend, Terrie Smith, 54. He normally greets people with a smile and relishes taking a few minutes to catch up on local gossip or talk about the weather. But the day after the shooting, Mr. Flores obsessed about the victims he knew.
One friend, who died in the church with his wife, was known to Mr. Flores by a Spanish nickname: “We just called him Chiquitín” — the Little Guy.
At each turn in Sutherland Springs, others were grappling with the same kind of despair on display in the parking lot of the Valero station.
Bob Baker, 57, who has lived two blocks from the First Baptist Church for 26 years, said the shooting had devastated the town. He said one of his sons knew two boys on the junior high school football team who attended the church most weeks, but overslept on Sunday — and are now dealing with the wrenching emotions of accidental survivors.
Most Sundays, about 40 people would attend services at First Baptist, which can seat about 75. About half the congregation was Hispanic. Everyone knew everyone else.
Parishioners said the church building had not been updated in a while. A red-carpeted center aisle divided rows of cushioned wooden pews. Hymnals were provided, but attendees brought their own Bibles. Younger congregants sometimes played contemporary Christian rock songs on electric guitars.
Fredda Connally, 64, a hairstylist who lives near the church with her husband, recalled that “The Old Rugged Cross” was often sung toward the end of the service. The couple knew the pastor and his wife; one of the pastor’s daughters was killed in the massacre.
“She was just a sweet little girl,” Ms. Connally said. “I’ve known her since she was very small. She was playful and outgoing.” The girl used to sit in the front row near her father during worship, Ms. Connally recalled.
On the edge of town, just a five-minute walk from the church, a stoical homeowner welcomed a visitor for a chat in his driveway.
His granddaughter, Lensie Butler, had planned to attend the service at First Baptist Church on Sunday with her two children. But when she pulled into the parking lot, she realized she was an hour early — she had forgotten to set her clock back with the end of daylight saving time. So she drove to another Baptist church in nearby Stockdale. During the service there, people’s phones began ringing with news of the horror in Sutherland Springs.
Just as Mr. Flores had done, Ms. Butler listed all the people she knew who were killed, though without naming them: “a friend’s husband and sweet baby” that Ms. Butler’s son, Hesston, had played with; “a sweet friend expecting in April;” that friend’s husband’s parents — all gone.
