Through Dec. 3. Bridget Donahue, 99 Bowery, second floor, Manhattan; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , bridgetdonahue.nyc.
In a sumptuous airy exhibition titled “Run Prayer, Run Café, Run Library,” Susan Cianciolo’s already generous art has become more so, opening out and rising up to an inviting new vibrancy of the architectural kind. The artist’s signature accumulations of small found objects, collages and improvised artworks, previously presented in boxes meant to be sifted through, are now part of more outgoing displays placed in houselike frameworks dedicated to the activities of the show’s title.  Tapestries hand-sewn from scraps of fabric cover the floors of these structures, where they sometimes join drawings by the artist’s daughter; other tapestries hang from the gallery’s walls, in one case incorporating sketches of garments for RUN, Ms. Cianciolo’s idiosyncratic fashion line. In a piece titled “Pray Circle,” another tapestry covers the floor while chairs, arranged in a ring, function primarily as pedestals for drawings and collages.
Ms. Cianciolo’s work owes much to Robert Rauschenberg’s already loosely structured combines of the 1950s, built from found objects and images. But Ms. Cianciolo daringly forgoes most traditional building. Hers is primarily an art of arrangement, exquisitely precise for all its seeming casualness, and rarely less than challenging to conventional taste. She proposes an art as social and shared as it is experiential and aesthetic, immersing us in the fleeting beauty of this bountiful intersection.
Through Nov. 27. The New School, Arnold and Sheila Aronson Galleries, Sheila C. Johnson Design Center, Parsons School of Design, 66 Fifth Avenue, Manhattan; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , veralistcenter.org.
In previous centuries, sailing ships carried conquistadors, colonists, migrants and slaves around Europe and the Americas. Traveling with them was soil filled with billions of seeds, used to balance the ships and dumped at ports to make room for more freight. Since 2002, the Brazilian artist Maria Thereza Alves has explored this phenomenon through a project that has appeared in several European port cities. Now “Seeds of Change: New York — A Botany of Colonization” is making its debut in the Americas, at the Vera List Center for Art and Politics at the New School.
Like much research-based art, however, Ms. Alves’s project involves elements that can’t be seen at a glance. For the New York version of “Seeds of Change,” she collaborated with horticulturalists and organizations such as Pioneer Works, the High Line and Weeksville Heritage Center, and organized a series of lectures and talks that extend the conversation and help us think about today’s migrant crisis or the microbes that travel with us on airplanes. In these formats, the art comes alive, connecting history vitally with the present.
Through Dec. 2. Eric Firestone Gallery, 4 Great Jones Street, No. 4, Manhattan; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , ericfirestonegallery.com.
Art history is in constant flux, as you can see by the recent rise of artists who were left out of earlier narratives. This year, the exhibition “Inventing Downtown: Artist-Run Galleries in New York City, 1952-1965,” at the Grey Art Gallery, featured many overlooked artists whose contributions to mid-20th-century art are noteworthy. One of them is the painter Marcia Marcus, whose work is currently on view in “Role Play: Paintings 1958-1973” at Eric Firestone Gallery.
In the 1950s, Ms. Marcus studied with Edwin Dickinson at the Art Students League and alongside the painter Alex Katz at Cooper Union. (Now 89, she is no longer a practicing artist.) Ms. Marcus painted the human form in flat color with a muted affect. Sparse in detail and expression, the paintings feel perfect for an era in which Pop Art and Minimalism reigned. But they also recall the stiff, official poses of everything from Egyptian friezes and Minoan frescoes to early Renaissance portraiture. Many of the subjects were art world figures: the critic Jill Johnston; the curator and art historian Henri Zerner; the artists Bob Thompson, Lucas Samaras, Red Grooms, Emily Mason and Hazel Belvo. But Ms. Marcus also painted her friends and neighbors from the Lower East Side and Provincetown, Mass.
Textile patterns and gold leaf are incorporated into the compositions, and oval and diamond-shaped canvases occasionally frame her figures. You can detect similarities not only with the portraiture of Mr. Katz, but also with that of Barkley L. Hendricks, Sylvia Sleigh and particularly Alice Neel in one respect: Like Ms. Neel, Ms. Marcus painted a range of ethnicities, reminding us that the art world, in its best moments, was not ruled by the same sexist white supremacy that has often plagued art history.
Through Dec. 10. Martos Gallery, 41 Elizabeth Street, Manhattan; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| ; martosgallery.com.
Jessica Vaughn’s New York solo debut slices through Martos Gallery like a razor. A recent iteration of “After Willis,” her wall-mounted reclaiming of de-accessioned seats from the Chicago Transit Authority, which also appeared in a gallery group show earlier this year, serves as a kind of gentle introduction: Mass produced but individually worn, locked together by circumstance, with subtle but unmistakable civil rights resonance, they’re a social metaphor as well as a handsome variation on the ready-made.
But her six new pieces up this ante spectacularly. Rectangularly framed upholstery remnants, mounted on plexiglass, with irregular seat-shaped cutouts, they lie in a neat row dominating the room from the floor. “Untitled (Dark Blue), #2” is the fullest box and the most neatly cut out; “Boomer Blue No. 340 #2,” a lighter shade with a hideous pattern of orange swooshes, is frayed and full of gaps, like broken teeth; and “Pacific Grey No. 48306” is barely there.
The social metaphor still operates, along with as cynical — and as accurate — a take on the art market as anyone could want. But it’s the way the work’s formal properties interact with its high-concept content that makes it really mind-bending. Ms. Vaughn is investing value not only in a series of discarded objects, but also in negative space itself. And that’s not all — she’s discovered that it’s much more interesting than the positive.
