“Morning walks and chocolate,” the Worcester, Mass., resident and onetime oldest living American told the steady stream of inquisitors that marked her final years.
“I try to live the truth,” said Shelby Harris, who threw out the first pitch of the local minor league baseball team’s 2012 season a few months before he died at 111 in Rock Island, Ill. Emma Morano of Verbania, Italy, still cooking her own pasta until a few years before she died last April at 117, prescribed raw eggs, and no husband.
The full genetic sequences of Ms. Michelson, Mr. Harris and Ms. Morano are among some three dozen genomes of North American, Caribbean and European supercentenarians being made available this week by a nonprofit called Betterhumans to any researcher who wants to dive in.
A few additional genomes come from people who died at 107, 108 or 109. If unusual patterns in their three billion pairs of A’s, C’s, G’s and T’s — the nucleobases that make up all genomes — can be shown to have prolonged their lives and protected their health, the logic goes, it is conceivable that a drug or gene therapy could be devised to replicate the effects in the rest of us.
“I hope you find something that does someone some good,” said Clarence Matthews, 110, who allowed his blood to be drawn as a final contribution to the database last year at his Indian Wells, Calif., home while I watched at his side.
The New England Centenarian Study, one of a handful of longevity research groups around the world focusing on supercentenarians, now turns down prospective DNA donors under age 103: “We tell them they’re too young,” said Dr. Thomas Perls, the study’s director.
A professed citizen-scientist, Mr. Clement collected blood, skin or saliva from supercentenarians in 14 states and seven countries over a six-year period. Many were still gardening, arguing, driving and flirting. Ms. Michelson, for one, was fond of reading and reciting Shakespeare.
The usefulness of such a small group for a genetic study is unclear, which is one reason Mr. Clement’s company, now defunct, has turned into a crowdsourcing project.
Zeroing in on which variations affect which phenotypes requires the statistical power of tens of thousands of DNA samples — almost certainly a dealbreaker when it comes to supercentenarians, whose verified number, worldwide, hovers at around 150.
On large swaths of the planet, where birth records are sketchy or nonexistent, identifying verified supercentenarians is virtually impossible. In the United States, researchers say supercentenarians account for about one in five million people.
A secretive Google spinoff called Calico, for California Life Company, is said to be scrutinizing the genome of the naked mole rat, celebrated for a life span 10 times longer than that of most of its rat cousins. Federally funded scientists are testing a drug on monkeys based on an experiment that doubled the lives of roundworms.
But what works in shorter-lived organisms often does not translate to humans, whose average life span in developed countries is approaching 80 years. So despite the limitations of Mr. Clement’s database, several prominent researchers have already expressed interest in it.
An account of what Mr. Clement calls the Supercentenarian Research Project offers a glimpse at what that might entail, including perseverance, compassion and a sense of humor that trends toward dark.
It was an inauspicious start, Mr. Clement admitted in an email to a friend in January 2011. The first supercentenarian Mr. Clement had lined up to visit, Mississippi Winn, had died at 113 before he could get from his home in San Jose, Calif., to hers in Shreveport, La.
“RIP Miss Winn,” he posted on the Facebook page that family members had set up for Ms. Winn, believed to be the last living child of African-Americans born into slavery.
Once that milestone is reached, as Mr. Clement quickly learned, the chance of dying within the next year is roughly 50 percent. After 113, the odds are closer to 66 percent. The oldest person on record, Jeanne Calment, was 122 when she died in 1997; only one other person is known to have lived beyond age 118.
“Even while you’re packing the car, the person may fall ill and say they’re not up to it,” Mr. Clement said, after the first of several plans for me to observe a DNA donation was abruptly canceled.
Mr. Clement could extract DNA from post-mortem samples, with permission from the family and assuming he could reach the funeral home in time. Exhumation is also possible, in theory, to obtain samples.
Guided by the World’s Oldest People email list, whose moderator, Robert D. Young, verifies ages on behalf of Guinness World Records and tracks supercentenarians for the Gerontology Research Group, Mr. Clement placed decal dots designating the locations of prospective participants on a map pinned to the wall of his home office.
But with a business plan that, even to some of his investors, sounded more like a research project, Mr. Clement seems to have undertaken the task largely because it provided the chance to act on a longstanding interest in human longevity, including his own.
A self-described transhumanist who eats mostly low-glycemic vegetables and nuts and walks seven miles a day, Mr. Clement has accumulated an eclectic résumé that includes starting a brew pub, practicing international tax law and cofounding a futurist magazine.
“My hat was off to someone who was willing to take the time out of his life to go get these precious specimens,” said Dr. Church, the Harvard geneticist, who has devoted a portion of his laboratory to research into the reversal of aging.
The kind of ultrarare mutations that supercentenarians might harbor, Dr. Church believed, were not likely to be detected with standard techniques, which scan only the places in the genome where DNA is already known to vary between individuals.
To look for as-yet-uncataloged variations would require sequencing all of the supercentenarians’ six billion genetic letters, a far more expensive procedure. When he and Mr. Clement first discussed the idea in 2010, the cost was about $50,000 per genome.
Even with the Harvard name as a calling card, several of the families he contacted over the next few years did not respond to his inquiries. A few, Mr. Clement knew, had already been approached by laboratories at Stanford and Boston University, which were collecting their own stashes of supercentenarian DNA.
“She already did her DNA donation,” Paul Cooper, the grandson of Besse Cooper, a 116-year-old former suffragist, told Mr. Clement, who had driven several hundred miles to her Monroe, Ga., nursing home in 2012.
Walter Breuning, of Great Falls, Mont., one of just a handful of men known to have lived to 114, replied in late 2010 that it was his preference not to risk winter meetings. He died early the next spring.
An invitation to the 111th birthday party of James Sisnett in Barbados finally served as Mr. Clement’s entree in February 2011. He died two years later.
Mr. Sisnett, who grew his own food until he was 105, was “still fascinated by seeing a nice-looking backside” when he was in his 110s, his daughter, Everine Carter, 88, recalled in a telephone interview.
The best time to get DNA from a supercentenarian, Mr. Clement found, is midmorning. By lunchtime, they would prefer to be eating. After lunch, they might be groggy or napping.
Most, like Dorothy Peel of London, then 108, had sharp minds. Ms. Peel inspected the informed consent form through her reading glasses and peppered him with questions about other supercentenarians he had met.
Crisscrossing Europe in 2011, Mr. Clement hit his collecting stride. But there were some bumps.
Mr. Clement confessed the news to Dr. Church in a meeting at his Harvard office. “You didn’t test the cards?” the geneticist asked him gently.
Still, Mr. Clement had 23 good samples in hand, and the cost of sequencing by this time had fallen to some $15,000 per genome. With his remaining funds, he sequenced 15, leaving the rest in cold storage.
Mr. Clement quickly discovered 2,500 differences between the supercentenarian DNA and those of controls. But even with help from graduate students in Dr. Church’s lab, it was hard with such a small group to know which, if any, were significant.
So over the next few years, Mr. Clement, working without a salary, collected samples whenever he could, adding another dozen from supercentenarians across the United States.
In the spring of last year, a company Dr. Church had co-founded, Veritas Genetics, announced that it would sequence human genomes for $1,000 each. Dr. Church told Mr. Clement that Veritas would sequence the remaining samples, and so he set out to collect a few more.
In July 2016, I was invited to accompany Mr. Clement to Mr. Matthews’s home in California. As much as I looked forward to meeting my first supercentenarian, I was not prepared to envy his win in the genetic longevity lottery.
The prospect of shifting today’s average life span to that of the known limit of all humanity is disorienting. An average life expectancy of 80 in some ways seems generous — it was just 48 when Mr. Matthews was born in 1906. Most of us expect around 80 years on the planet, assuming nothing horrendous happens.
“When you have children the first time, it don’t come with a manual, and it don’t come with a manual when your dad gets to be 100, then 105, then 110,” said Mr. Matthews’s son, Steve, 75, who also gave blood the day we visited.
At 110, he said he had never been diagnosed with a serious illness. The younger Mr. Matthews recalled that his father had played a one-under-par, 18-hole golf game on his 99th birthday. Having built a successful real estate business, he provided financial support to his last surviving sibling, a sister who was 105.
