Fixing New York City’s subway crisis will require taking the drastic step of creating a state-controlled corporation dedicated solely to rebuilding and modernizing the city’s teetering subway system, according to a new report from an influential urban research and advocacy group.
The Regional Plan Association, whose board includes business and civic leaders, called on Thursday for a “subway reconstruction public benefit corporation” that would have “a focused mandate, streamlined authority, and sufficient funding to rebuild the entire subway system within 15 years.” It was one of the key proposals in a sweeping new report that addresses the many problems confronting a growing New York region, including decaying transportation and infrastructure, a shortage of affordable housing and the threat posed by climate change.
The subways are currently operated and financed by the state-run Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which oversees a sprawling network of subways, buses, railroads, bridges and tunnels. The report described the authority as “an enormous legacy institution” hobbled by competing internal priorities, bureaucratic rules and practices, and a lack of funding. As a result, the report said, it has been too slow to make improvements and adopt modern technology, leaving a backlog of critical infrastructure projects.
“We’re talking about building a subway system for the 21st century, and we can’t rely on a 20th-century agency to do it,” said Scott Rechler, a real estate executive who is the chairman of the Regional Plan Association and also a board member of the transportation authority.
One of the group’s boldest suggestions takes aim at one of the subway’s most cherished qualities — that it never closes. The association said the subway should be shut down in the wee hours to more rapidly fix what is broken and add the upgrades that are sorely needed.
The report took five years to produce and aims to provide a comprehensive blueprint for the future. It is only the fourth such report to be released by the association in nearly a century. Three previous reports — in 1929, 1968 and 1996 — helped lay the groundwork for public works projects, including bridges and highways, economic development, and preservation of parkland and open space. The 1996 report called for building a Second Avenue subway and creating a business district on the Far West Side of Manhattan, both of which are now a reality.
The fourth report looks broadly at the transportation system in the New York region, saying its failures are the consequence of years of underinvestment even as demand for services grew and advancing technology raised customer expectations. It proposes building a second bus terminal under the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center on Manhattan’s West Side to consolidate intercity buses and free up space at the crowded Port Authority Bus Terminal, and expanding subway and regional rail service and connections.
Nowhere are the problems more urgent than in the city’s subways, which have been crippled by constant breakdowns, soaring delays and overcrowding. The city comptroller, Scott M. Stringer, recently estimated that subway delays were costing the city economy as much as $389 million annually in lost wages and productivity.
State and city officials have feuded over finding money to fix the problems. The authority has announced a roughly $800 million emergency rescue plan for the subway system that includes faster response to mechanical issues and more aggressive repairs to trains and tracks, among other measures.
Mr. Rechler said a more efficient and focused organization was vital to lead the subway overhaul. While details would be worked out later, he said that the new subway corporation could operate with more flexibility than traditional government agencies, which are often bound by outdated rules and regulations.
The report did not provide any cost estimates for creating a subway corporation, but noted that there would be “upfront legal and administrative costs” in addition to capital expenses for the subways. It said that dedicated revenue sources would be necessary to support the subway corporation, such as taxes, fees or congestion pricing. Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo is expected to announce a congestion pricing plan early next year for the city.
The report’s to-do list for the subways includes building new subway lines to underserved areas and reducing crowding at stations by creating larger entrances, enlarging corridors and mezzanines, and moving nonessential structures such as newsstands from platforms. It also advocates increasing access for riders with disabilities and making subway stations more bearable through better ventilation and more natural light. Though the authority has already started to make some improvements, such as updating signals, the report said the pace is so slow it could take decades to finish.
The report calls for closing the 24-hour subway system in the early morning hours during the week for routine maintenance and increasing bus service as an alternative. An average of 85,000 riders are on the subways between 12:30 a.m. and 5 a.m., or just 1.5 percent of the total daily ridership, according to the report.
It also recommends taking advantage of longer closings of subway lines not only to make necessary repairs but also to focus on enhancements like power and track upgrades. Tom Wright, the president of the Regional Plan Association, pointed to the L train tunnel between Brooklyn and Manhattan, which will close in 2019 to repair damage caused by Hurricane Sandy.
“It makes sense for the M.T.A. to shut the L train down for 15 months, but they need to deliver a better system when it reopens so riders see the benefits and will support more lines undergoing similar treatments,” Mr. Wright said.
Denise Richardson, the executive director of the General Contractors Association of New York, an industry group representing contractors involved in public works projects, said more can get done if they are not trying to work piecemeal around existing service. When the Montague Street subway tunnel linking Brooklyn and Manhattan was shut down in 2013 for Sandy-related repairs, it reopened the next year — ahead of schedule and on budget, said Ms. Richardson, who is a member of the Regional Plan Association’s board.
“We saw a greater level of efficiency and ability to get projects done,” she said.
For riders, a dedicated subway corporation could bring faster relief from the constant delays and overstuffed subways.
“The key to repairing the subway is creating a sense of urgency and accountability, not just for Governor Cuomo but also for the governors who come after him,” said John Raskin, executive director of the Riders Alliance, an advocacy group.