Is the Age of the Artistic Recluse Over?
Part of the myth’s allure, naturally, was the notion of the artist as a kind of fragile oracle whose genius must be protected from the world, historically by “muses” (often wives who dealt with domestic and managerial affairs). But as the boundaries of private life dissolve, there’s not much space for reflection, to say nothing of vulnerability. No one wants to imagine Virginia Woolf on book tour, or Joseph Cornell submitting to a magazine profile, showing off his files of Hedy Lamarr cutouts in his Utopia Parkway basement. Once upon a time, not turning up for an awards ceremony held a kind of clout: “When a writer doesn’t show his face,” as DeLillo wrote in his 1991 novel, “Mao II,” about a reclusive novelist who becomes a prisoner of a terrorist organization, “he becomes a local symptom of God’s famous reluctance to appear.” Now it feels a little rude, like not showing up to a dinner party held in your honor. Terrence Malick, who disappeared for two decades following 1978’s “Days of Heaven,” reappearing in 1998 with “The Thin Red Line,” may be the last person in Hollywood with the God-like privilege of opting out of self-promotion. To be left alone with one’s work, in an era in which even Banksy is on Twitter, is an uncommon luxury.
What could be more noble or pure than forsaking society and vanity for one’s art? Henry David Thoreau’s call in 1854 to “simplify, simplify” was a kind of recluse’s mantra, as well as an act of protest against the modern world that would serve as a future model for solitary artists, but as Kathryn Schulz argued in a Thoreau takedown in The New Yorker in 2015, reclusiveness can also breed narcissism and sententiousness. Today, it can feel a little adolescent. It’s hard to buy into Thoreau’s concept of self-reliance while knowing that his mother was doing his laundry. Reclusiveness can also appear to arrest people in time, rendering even the most brilliant high-mindedness eccentric and sad, the most famous example being the late J.D. Salinger, who was still railing against “the phonies” and writing to teenage girls from his New Hampshire farmhouse well into middle age, 20 or so years after he began his self-imposed exile in the 1950s. Thomas Bernhard’s neighbors in his Austrian village used to warn their children when they misbehaved that they would send “that weird recluse” after them.
Now that we have terms like social anxiety disorder and agoraphobia and drugs like Paxil, retiring to one’s bedchamber feels less Emily Dickinson, more hikikomori. It’s all too easy to believe the age of the artistic recluse is over, given that most artists now cultivate a cyclical relationship with the spotlight, intermittently stepping into and receding from it. It’s almost impossible for the artist not to engage with the public today, and so the standards of privacy have lowered. These days, using a painting of yourself as an album cover (Lorde) or limiting press interviews (Frank Ocean) seems to count as mystery.
But what has increased in the age of distraction is our concern for the necessary conditions in which art could flourish. No longer can the world be kept at bay with the closing of a door; Woolf’s room of her own is now wired for internet. To look at my shelves of favorite novels written in feverish solitude and think that they might never have come to pass is also to know there must be many more today that are simply not being written. And so the greater truths found in solitude — in nature, like the Romantics’ “thoughts of more deep seclusion,” or in a country in which you don’t speak the language, in which no one knows your name — have never felt more rare and hard-won. The hermit sits alone no longer; he has a Facebook page to update.
The desire to uncover our one true voice, the dread of hearing what it has to say: This seems to me the tension of modern life, the thing that has us searching for a cell signal on yoga retreat. Being in a place where nothing has an agenda for your attention, as Axelrod found, means looking and listening in an unguarded way. “Natural curiosities and affinities emerge,” as he puts it, “becoming the filters for experience.” How we breathe in the world, then, defaults to a function of an unbidden part of identity, rather than a function of what others want us to be — or, perhaps even more crucially, how we want others to think we are.
Elena Ferrante, the Italian author whose pseudonymity became part of her mystique, once wrote to me in an email interview, “If my book were publicly mine from the beginning, I would be careful not to damage my image, I would censor myself.” Writing was a “battle against lying. Only with the confidence of anonymity can I decide occasionally to publish. In the end, if I’m forced to choose, I prefer to lose the role of writer rather than spoil my passion for writing — that’s the way it’s always been.” When she was allegedly unmasked by an Italian investigative journalist, her fans were outraged at the violation. It was invasive, they argued, which it was, but it seemed to me that not only were they defending Ferrante from the indignity of having her financial and real-estate records unveiled, they were also defending their own right not to know, to be free to imagine that she was, in fact, Elena Greco, the narrator of her Neapolitan Novels, the woman they knew with the intimacy and deep interiority only possible in literature.
And so contemporary artists find ways to battle for truth on their own terms. I think of young women like Emma Cline, who push back against having their photos on the dust jackets of their books, or David Hammons, who declines to participate in the accepted machinations of the art world, or Bob Dylan, who took nearly two weeks to even publicly acknowledge that he won the Nobel Prize in literature last year. But maybe the best display of resistance against the role of artist-as-performer was the quietly myth-demolishing article by this year’s Nobel laureate in literature, Kazuo Ishiguro, who wrote for The Guardian about the four-week period of seclusion in 1987 he and his wife called the “crash,” a desperate attempt to “reach a mental state in which my fictional world was more real to me than the actual one.” The result was “The Remains of the Day,” a monumental yesteryear portrait of renunciation, and a life passed by, tragically unlived. Now, of course, all is reversed: It’s renouncing the world that requires nerve and imagination, and the roar of silence that dares us to listen.