Q. I am about to close on a house in New Canaan, Conn., and my move-in date is flexible. What tasks are best done while the house is still vacant?
A. Buy a house, and finishing the to-do list can take months — or even years. While many chores happen in bits and pieces over the time that you live in your home, a few essential tasks should be done right away. Dispense with the disruptive ones before the moving truck arrives, and you will thank yourself later.
So, where to start? Look no further than the front door, and change the locks. By now, the previous owner’s friends, neighbors and brokers may have copies of the keys. So make new ones. If you plan to install a home security system, do so before your valuables arrive. Get a certificate of installation from your security company to send it to your homeowner insurance carrier so you can get a discount on your policy.
Schedule an appointment with your internet, television and telephone providers to wire your home for service before you arrive. “Nowadays, if people don’t have a Wi-Fi network installed, it’s hard to even function,” said Jaime Sneddon, an associate broker with Halstead in New Canaan.
Next, hire a housekeeping service to give the house a deep clean. Make sure the package includes details like cleaning the inside of light fixtures, windows, closets and cupboards, the basement and the attic. “Do it once, and do it right,” Mr. Sneddon said. Get the ductwork, heating and cooling systems serviced.
And look at your floors. If you plan to refinish them or replace wall-to-wall carpeting, do the work while the house is still empty because refinishing floors “is such an invasive process,” said Scott Elwell, a salesman with Douglas Elliman in Greenwich.
The same goes for interior paint. If you have the time and plan to paint rooms or remove any wallpaper, get the job done before moving day — and give the house a few days to air out. “It’s nice to get in there with a fresh coat of paint,” Mr. Elwell said.
As for other projects, if a house full of people and stuff won’t complicate the work, then those chores can wait, as the list of home repairs is one that never really ends.