Good morning on this toasty Friday.
Will more foreign visitors avoid New York now?
With the New York City Marathon on Sunday and the holiday season approaching, we asked Christopher Heywood, a senior vice president of NYC & Company, the city’s tourism arm, how terrorism affects tourism.
When would we see, if at all, the ripple effects on tourism to our city?
“Normally, with something like this, you would see the effects pretty quickly,” he said. Signs of a slowdown could include a decline in hotel demand or the cancellation of meetings, conventions or groups. That hasn’t happened, he added. A positive indicator is that the city continued with the Halloween parade and the marathon. “Generally, if transportation and infrastructure have not been affected then you’re going to see an immediate bounce-back,” Mr. Heywood said.
How did the attacks on 9/11 affect tourism?
Which countries do the most tourists come from?
In 2016, the five largest international markets to the city were the United Kingdom (1,239,000 visitors), China (951,000), Canada (928,000), Brazil (818,000) and France (745,000).
Has the attack affected Sunday’s marathon?
Chris Weiller, a spokesman for New York Road Runners, which runs the event, said that, typically, 1 percent of runners cancel for personal reasons. There hasn’t been an uptick in cancellations this year, he said. The police department is stepping up security measures, like doubling the number of sniper teams and adding more sand trucks, to protect the 51,000 runners and more than 2.5 million spectators expected at the event.
Visitors to our city are going to get the wrong impression.
It’s November and we’re expecting another day of sunshine and high near 72.
Saturday will cool off, with an expected high of 57. Marathon watchers should pack a plastic poncho: There’s a chance of rain before noon.
• Knicks host Suns, 7:30 p.m. (MSG). Devils at Oilers, 9 p.m. (MSG+). Nets at Lakers, 10:30 p.m. (YES).
• Watch “The New York Times Close Up,” featuring The Times’s Paul Krugman and other guests. Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 1:30 p.m. and Sunday at 12:30 p.m. on CUNY-TV.
• Alternate-side parking remains in effect until Nov 7.
• Discussions and round tables about policing women of color, part of the “Invisible No More” conference, at Barnard College in Morningside Heights. 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.
• Rangers at Panthers, 7 p.m. (MSG).
• The New York City Marathon kicks off at 8:30 a.m. in Staten Island and ends in Central Park. You can watch along the course.
• Giants host Rams, 1 p.m. (FOX). New York Red Bulls at Toronto F.C. 3 p.m. (ESPN). New York City F.C. host Columbus Crew S.C. 5 p.m. (ESPN). Islanders host Avalanche, 6 p.m. (MSG+). Knicks host Pacers, 7:30 p.m. (MSG). Devils at Flames, 9 p.m. (MSG+).
The Times interviewed the two leading candidates for New Jersey governor — Philip D. Murphy, a Democrat, and Lt. Gov. Kim Guadagno, a Republican — to ask them questions on a range of topics before Tuesday’s election. Here are their answers to a question about the possible expansion of New Jersey Transit. Their replies have been edited for length and clarity.
What are your thoughts on expanding the New Jersey Transit network?
Ms. Guadagno: There’s a lot of talk about the need for light-rail expansion up in Bergen County. Certainly it’s one of the most congested areas in the state and something we need to look at. But talk is cheap. You’ve got to find somebody who’s an expert, and there are experts in regional planning that can identify where the portal has to be. But do we need a light rail down in South Jersey? I’ve never seen any evidence of that.
Mr. Murphy: I think there’s a densification of bus routes needed in the southern part of the state. You’ve got a lot of communities with huge unemployment, where you’ve got to travel significantly to get to your job. And we’ve got the Transportation Trust Fund reality, and road work down there matters more as a result, and the densification of bus routes matters more down there because of that.
