Who made you judge and jury? It might seem like a selfless public service to tie down a child molester and feed him to a ravenous pit bull — but what if you got the wrong guy? That’s the challenge Linwood Barclay throws down in PARTING SHOT (Doubleday Canada, $27), a tough-minded crime novel about the dangers of vigilantism.
Cal Weaver, the low-key private eye last seen in Barclay’s “Promise Falls” trilogy, has been tasked with protecting 18-year-old Jeremy Pilford from the nameless and faceless internet mob that would like to see him dead. Jeremy’s sin was evading a charge of vehicular homicide on the grounds that he’d been “so pampered, so excused from ever having to do things for himself, for ever having to accept responsibility for any of his actions,” that he never developed a sense of right or wrong. That earned him both a nickname, “the Big Baby,” and the intense hatred of the public. “The boy had been reduced online to a caricature,” Weaver notes. “A whining, pampered infant.” As a protective move, Weaver bundles his charge off to Jeremy’s great-aunt’s summer home on Cape Cod, where the detective sees a side of this young man that makes him question his own assumptions.
Barclay introduces some creative variations on his theme, including a theatrical stunt that involves capturing a suspected offender and tattooing a confession on his back. The most cynical is posting a candid photo of the Big Baby on an internet website that goes by the name of “Just Deserts.” There’s good money in that, according to one amateur paparazzo who has been stalking Jeremy. Real crimes, unspeakably nasty ones, including murder, figure in this well-built novel. But what stays with you is Jeremy, hounded by strangers competing to report sightings of him as if he were an insentient avatar in some violent video game.
In DEADLY CURE (Pegasus, $25.95), Lawrence Goldstone presents a chilling account of the deadly respiratory diseases (and even deadlier medical treatments) that are claiming the lives of Brooklyn children during the hard winter of 1899. With effective cough medicine as yet undiscovered, parents are dosing their babies with dubious patent potions like “Orangeine” that kill some of them, sicken many more and cause others to become addicted. Dr. Noah Whitestone, the civilized sleuth in this medical mystery, understands the distinctions between two new wonder drugs, acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin) and acetalized morphine (heroin), and promptly sounds the alarm. But greedy pharmaceutical companies race their offerings into production before the government can ensure their safety. The Pure Food and Drug Act won’t be passed until 1906, and not even New York’s governor, Theodore Roosevelt, has the clout to rein in the “vast web of corruption in our pharmaceutical industry” that has cost so many lives and introduced the world to some killer drugs.
There’s always a solid sense of history in Arnaldur Indridason’s moody Icelandic mysteries. Although set in present-day Reykjavik and featuring a retired cop named Konrad, THE SHADOW DISTRICT (Thomas Dunne/Minotaur, $25.99), translated by Victoria Cribb, looks back on World War II, when Iceland was “a poor farming community … torn up by its roots and dragged into the maelstrom of world events.” Newly independent in 1944, the republic was politically neutral during the war, although occupied by Allied troops, mainly Americans, who were warmly welcomed by some of the local women. But when one of them was strangled behind the National Theater, suspicion fell on an American soldier.
Konrad enters this story in modern times when he investigates the murder of a very old man who kept a horde of newspaper clippings about that wartime crime. With his usual delicate touch, Indridason weaves in just enough folklore about the huldufolk (elvish “hidden people” who create havoc when disturbed) to remind us that a nation can never live down its legends.
How is a librarian like a bartender? This particular bartender, Brian McNulty, and this particular librarian, Raymond Ambler, are both the creations of Con Lehane, who clearly admires those who toil selflessly in the helping professions. McNulty makes no more than a cameo appearance (just enough to remind us that, like Hickey in “The Iceman Cometh,” he’s been sorely missed) in MURDER IN THE MANUSCRIPT ROOM (Thomas Dunne / Minotaur, $25.99).
The second title in a nicely bookish series, this one highlights the formidable memory and ratiocinative skills of Ambler, the curator of crime fiction at the landmark New York Public Library building on 42nd Street, whose work on a planned exhibit called “A Century-and-a-Half of Murder and Mystery in New York City” (and doesn’t that sound positively delicious!) is interrupted by the discovery of a corpse stuffed among the shelves of murder mysteries. “It’s a big building,” the cop who’s been assigned to the case notes, “lots of places to hide a body” — an observation that no doubt gave Lehane the idea for this warm and cozy new series.