WASHINGTON — Everyday Advanced Hemp Oil, Bosom Lotion and CBD Edibles Gummie Men may have their fans, but the Food and Drug Administration is not among them.
Four companies selling those and dozens of other marijuana-derived dietary supplements have been warned by the F.D.A. to stop pitching their products as cures for cancer, a common but unproven claim in the industry.
The businesses — Stanley Brothers Social Enterprises, Green Roads of Florida, That’s Natural and Natural Alchemist — each sell products that falsely claim to cure cancer, Alzheimer’s disease or other illnesses, the agency said.
The supplements allegedly contain cannabidiol (CBD), a component of the marijuana plant that is not approved by the F.D.A. for any use. Unlike medical marijuana, CBD contains only a fraction of the tetrahydrocannabinol, known as THC, needed to cause a high, according to the manufacturers.
The companies sell CBD over the internet in a wide range of oil drops, capsules, syrups, teas and creams. The websites feature endorsements from people — generally identified only by first names and last initials — who claim that they or their loved ones have been miraculously cured of terminal diseases and other illnesses.
Stanley Brothers, a leading marijuana product company based in Colorado, notes on its website that other cannabis companies have also gotten F.D.A. warning letters. As of Wednesday afternoon, there were no references to its products as cancer cures on the website.
Dara Kaplan, a spokeswoman for CW Hemp, one of the names under which Stanley Brothers operates, said the company would work with the F.D.A. to better monitor third-party testimonials. “We take regulatory compliance very seriously,” Ms. Kaplan said.
The F.D.A. said that other claims on the website of the company’s affiliated nonprofit group, called Realm of Caring, show that Stanley Brothers recommends using its products as drugs, which would require the company to go through the normal drug approval process.
John Hudak, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution and the author of “Marijuana: A Short History,” said companies that sell traditional cannabis products and those derived from hemp often skirt the edges of the law or violate it outright.
The businesses have 15 days to submit evidence to the F.D.A. that they have corrected the violations or to explain why more time is needed.
Some of the other companies did not respond to requests for comment.