Over four decades, Mr. Keillor, 75, had created a financial juggernaut for the radio network with his weekly broadcast of songs, skits and tales of his fictional hometown Lake Wobegon, along with related books, recordings and other products.
It will also change the name of American Public Media’s current incarnation of the show, which Chris Thile, a songwriter and mandolinist, took over in October 2016, after Mr. Keillor stepped down.
Later on Wednesday, The Star Tribune of Minneapolis published an email from Mr. Keillor in response to a reporter’s questions, giving his version of an encounter with an unidentified woman.
Mr. Keillor is one of many public figures to face consequences after allegations of sexual misconduct in recent weeks. Indeed, just a day earlier, he had come to the defense of his friend and fellow Minnesotan, Senator Al Franken, who is fighting for his political life in the face of accusations of improprieties from four women.
The fallout with the network came as Mr. Keillor was slowly receding from the public stage, though he has still been touring, with appearances around the Northeast this week. On Wednesday, he canceled a performance scheduled that night in Pittsfield, Mass.
He originally came up with the idea for his own Americana variety program in 1974 after he traveled to Nashville to write about the Grand Ole Opry for The New Yorker.
“A Prairie Home Companion” became a radio institution, peaking at 4.1 million weekly listeners a decade before he retired, with lucrative live performances and merchandise that included recordings, books and clothes.
Famous artists who appeared on his stage included Emmylou Harris, Chet Atkins, Gillian Welch and David Rawlings, Taj Mahal, Bonnie Raitt, Willie Nelson, Keb’ Mo’ and Wilco.
He was credited with shaping the early profile of public radio.
Mr. Keillor, in his statement on Wednesday, which he also published on his website, said he was “deeply grateful” for all the years appearing on the radio and touring the country.
