At the corner of Greenwich and Chambers Streets, women pushed strollers, others walked briskly with small children and dogs by their sides. Students sat on the edge of a wall surrounding an elementary school, eating Halal chicken over rice from a nearby food cart, their backpacks between their legs. Across the street, children frolicked on a jungle gym at Washington Market Park while their parents and nannies watched, nearby businessmen ate their lunch under a warm autumn sun.
A couple of blocks away on West Street in the shadow of the World Trade Center – 1,776 feet of glittering glass-and-steel – joggers and cyclists journeyed along a bike path near the Hudson River. It seemed like a typical day in TriBeCa but for a horde of reporters, cameramen, police officers and several growing memorials stocked with bouquets of roses — a stark reminder of the terror when a pickup truck sped down the crowded bike path on Tuesday, killing eight people and injuring 11.
But TriBeCa has been through this before. Three times in recent decades it has been the center of terror: residents recount the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center that left six dead and the collapse of the twin towers after they were struck by hijacked jetliners in 2001. That time, 2,753 people were killed.
So despite the cheery sight of strollers on the streets, those who’ve lived in the neighborhood long enough were transported back to darker days this week.
Ms. Cheyns who was walking her dogs, a Papillon named Dino, and a Pomeranian named Lucy, stood on the corner of Greenwich and Chambers Streets across from the Washington Market Park, where residents created one of several memorials dedicated to the victims killed in the Tuesday attack. Ms. Cheyns has lived in TriBeCa on Warren Street for 20 years and is from Belgium, where suicide bombers killed 32 people and injured about 300 in an attack last year.
“Nowhere is safe anymore,” she said.
 Others stood and starred in silence as traffic roared behind them.
And she did, even though she was trembling nervously. By riding, she said, she wanted to make a statement.
The bike lane was crowded with bicyclists, joggers, and tourists, many who stopped along the way at three memorials dedicated to the dead — a Belgium mother of two, five Argentine tourists, a computer scientist from Manhattan and a financial worker from New Jersey.
“It’s heartbreaking,” said Anna Kaminska, 33, who traveled with her friend, Marta Malarska-Walczak, 34, from Poland.
They were visiting the 9/11 memorial and museum when they learned about the terrorist attack, in which Sayfullo Saipov, 29, has been charged.
TriBeCa has long attracted tourists from around the globe, and even more so with the opening of the 9/11 memorial and museum in 2011, and the new World Trade Center in 2014. They also flock to restaurants and the views by the Hudson River.
TriBeCa — “Triangle Below Canal Street” — was once home to warehouses and distribution centers for produce. By the 1960s and 1970s, TriBeCa had become a gathering point for artists and actors, some who had squatted in the sprawling industrial cast-iron buildings that are now lavish loft-style apartments where one-bedroom units go for about $6,800 a month.
As the population expanded over the years residents demanded more schools, and since 2000 five new ones have opened, said Michael E. Levine, a consulting planner to Manhattan Community Board 1e. Much of the neighborhood’s success is because of its longtime residents who improved the area, kept once-vacant lots clean and remained even as terror hit close to home, Margaret Chin, the area’s City Council member, said.
“The community has gone through so much, but the resiliency of the people there is tremendous,” she said.
Take Yvonne Fox, 80, who moved into the neighborhood in 1975 and in 1992 opened Dudley’s Paw, a small pet supply shop on Greenwich Street named after her dog. Mrs. Fox raised her children in TriBeCa. And in those four decades lived through the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center and the Sept. 11 attack.
She remembers seeing the first plane lodged in the side of the north tower. Then a second plane crashed into the south tower. She said she knew then that the country was at war.
Mrs. Fox recalled overhearing a conversation between a small child and her mother. That child pointed toward the twin towers and remarked that there were “a bunch of birds” in the sky. But those were not birds, Mrs. Fox said, they were people jumping.
Mrs. Fox returned home and to her pet shop a month later. She vowed to stay.
“This is our neighborhood, and we’re not leaving,” she said. “I felt like, ‘O.K., this can’t happen again,’” but then it did, and, for her, it was all too familiar.