Around 9 a.m. Sunday, a man who called himself Bill walked out of his home in Kaneohe, Hawaii, and took a cab to the airport. He chartered a flight from Oahu to Maui, then flew from Maui to San Jose, Calif., where he landed at 7:30 p.m. local time. The journey was uneventful.
But there was a problem. “Bill” was actually an alias used by Randall Saito, whom prosecutors described as a pathological predator. Home was the Hawaii State Hospital, a psychiatric facility where Mr. Saito, 59, had been held for more than 35 years after being acquitted of murder by reason of insanity. He should not have been able to leave the hospital grounds unaccompanied, much less book a plane ticket online, clear airport security and fly 2,300 miles across the Pacific Ocean.
More than 10 hours passed before the nursing supervisor at the hospital was notified, at 7:13 p.m. Hawaii time, that Mr. Saito was missing. By the time hospital officials informed the police — just after 7:30 p.m., said Michelle Yu, a spokeswoman for the Honolulu Police Department — he had been in California, which is two time zones ahead, for two hours.
“They’ll never find him,” a hospital employee told KHNL, an NBC affiliate in Honolulu.
But they did, three days later, after the San Joaquin County Sheriff’s Department received a tip “from an alert taxi cab driver,” the department said in a statement. Around 10:30 a.m. Pacific time on Wednesday, sheriff’s deputies arrested Mr. Saito in Stockton, Calif., more than 75 miles by road from the San Jose airport.
In a photo provided by the sheriff’s office, Mr. Saito appeared calm, almost smug, looking directly at the camera as the deputies handcuffed him.
Mr. Saito was committed to the Hawaii State Hospital in 1981 after he was acquitted. He was accused in the 1979 killing of Sandra Yamashiro, who was shot in the face with a pellet gun, stabbed repeatedly and left in her car. Prosecutors said Mr. Saito had chosen her at random in a Honolulu shopping mall.
Mr. Saito and his lawyers have sought his release at least twice, to no avail. A court denied one request in 1993, saying his psychiatric evaluations showed evidence of sadism and necrophilia. In response to another request in 2000, a prosecutor said Mr. Saito fit “all the criteria of a classic serial killer,” according to The Associated Press.
It was not clear on Wednesday how he had managed to escape, where he had gotten the money to buy plane tickets, or how he had made it through airport security under a fake name. Ms. Yu said those questions were being investigated.
Seven employees have been suspended for 30 days while the investigation proceeds, Ms. Okubo said, and the department is “taking immediate action to relieve from duty without pay identified staff who may have been involved in the incident.” In addition, she said, off-campus excursions and unescorted trips within the hospital complex have been suspended, members of the security staff have been reassigned, additional fencing is being purchased, workers are conducting more unannounced searches of patient areas, and visitation policies are under review.
As for Mr. Saito, a court will hold an extradition hearing to determine whether he will be kept in custody in Hawaii or California going forward, Ms. Okubo said.
Mr. Saito was known within the hospital as a skilled manipulator, according to Hawaii News Now. Documents from 1993, when he requested a conditional release, reveal that he had had sex with at least three hospital employees and obtained contraband, including pornographic materials.
Surveillance video from the cab he took on Sunday showed him rifling through a bag that contained a cellphone charger and other items, Hawaii News Now reported. He had not had that bag when he left the hospital.