The problem? Three of the four New York Republicans who voted for the measure said they had not spoken to Mr. Cuomo.
And the one who had, Representative Tom Reed of Corning, said the governor was “outright lying” about their conversation.
Representative Chris Collins, a Republican from western New York, said that he has never spoken with Mr. Cuomo. “Not only is he a bold-faced liar, but he also is fabricating quotations,” Mr. Collins said.
Mr. Cuomo made his comments when he was speaking to reporters on Long Island on Thursday. The governor has made the defeat of the tax measure a top priority in recent weeks because it would roll back the ability of taxpayers in New York and elsewhere to deduct state and local taxes from their federal tax bill.
“It’s very bad for New York. It’s very bad for California, and basically 10 other states in the country. Now, coincidentally, the 12 states that are affected are primarily Democratic states,” Mr. Cuomo said.
Richard Azzopardi, a spokesman for Mr. Cuomo, tried to clarify the governor’s remarks. “The governor’s point was the Republican congressmen he spoke to said they were under pressure from their political leadership to vote yes,” Mr. Azzopardi said.
Mr. Reed, the only New York Republican congressman to acknowledge speaking with the governor, adamantly denied that he said any such thing.
There is no love lost between the governor and the four Republicans; earlier this year, Mr. Cuomo said he would do whatever he could to help unseat them in next year’s midterm elections.
Mr. Reed said that in their call, Mr. Cuomo expressed concern that ending state and local tax deductibility could drive even a small number of the highest earners from the state, blowing a hole in the budget. He added that it had been several years since the last time the two spoke.
Representative Claudia Tenney, the third Republican who voted for the bill, said she had not spoken with the governor for several years.
A spokeswoman for Representative John Katko, the fourth New York Republican to vote for the tax bill, said he, too, did not speak with the governor.