At first glance, it seemed as if Greg Kelly soared into Judith Grey’s world straight from the colorful panels of a comic book series.
When they met for a first date in December 2015, Mr. Kelly was already a millionaire playboy with an alter ego — a broadcast journalist with a fighter pilot’s past — that would make a superhero blush.
He was also at the beck and call of a police commissioner, who happened to be his father, in a place known as Gotham City, and Mr. Kelly had a reputation for fighting bad guys.
Despite his celebrity, Mr. Kelly was nary a blip on Ms. Grey’s radar screen when they were first made aware of each other by a mutual friend who had sent them an introductory email in September 2015.
“I had never heard of Greg, but then I Googled him and saw this gorgeous guy, with gorgeous green eyes,” said Ms. Grey, a 47-year-old freelance creative director in advertising from Melbourne, Australia.
“I was like, ‘Yeah, set me up, let’s do this,’ ” she said.
But Ms. Grey, by all accounts a rock star in her industry, was given short shrift by a lifelong bachelor whose television career had given him a good measure of fame and fortune, and a predominantly female fan club to go with it.
She noted that the introductory email, albeit well-intentioned, provided a fairly “underwhelming” profile of herself.
Mr. Kelly, 48, who said that the email “really undersold Judith to me and did not do her justice,” ran into another mutual friend three months later who offered a much brighter endorsement of Ms. Grey.
This time he did call, and soon after they were on a first date at the Park, a restaurant in Manhattan.
Ms. Grey was equally impressed when she saw Mr. Kelly, who was wearing a gray pinstriped double-breasted suit.
Two days later, they went for drinks at another Manhattan restaurant, the Red Cat, where they continued moving easily from topic to topic, all the while learning the things that ultimately put them on the road to each other.
Ms. Grey, the youngest of three children born to Eva Menahem, a real estate investor, and Samuel Menahem, a pediatric cardiologist and professor at Monash University in Melbourne, Australia, graduated from the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology with a bachelor of fine arts degree and received a bachelor of science in neuroscience from Columbia.
“Judith is simply brilliant,” said Jennifer Pybus, a friend and business partner.
Ms. Grey, who no longer had a need to look up Mr. Kelly online, learned firsthand that he was the son of Veronica and Raymond W. Kelly and had grown up in Garden City, N.Y. His father, also a former Marine, served two stints as New York City police commissioner.
Mr. Kelly graduated from Fordham University with a bachelor’s degree in political science and went on to serve nine years as an attack pilot in the United States Marine Corps, specializing in flying the AV-8B Harrier jet. During his service, Mr. Kelly amassed 158 aircraft carrier landings and flew over Iraq in Operation Southern Watch, enforcing the United Nations-imposed no-fly zone.
Mr. Kelly’s news job took him back to Iraq, where he provided extensive coverage of the war, including four long-term assignments in Baghdad. During the 2003 invasion, he was embedded with the Army’s Third Infantry Division, Second Brigade, and was the first television reporter to follow American forces infiltrating Baghdad as they stormed Saddam Hussein’s presidential palace.
During that particular battle, Mr. Kelly was wounded, struck in the face by shrapnel.
Mr. Kelly’s injuries proved minimal, however, and he was “out of action for about half an afternoon,” as he put it.
There were other challenges for Mr. Kelly, however: In January 2012, he was the subject of a very public sexual assault claim in Manhattan; after a two-week investigation, prosecutors decided not to file charges.
Mr. Kelly, a licensed commercial pilot, later went on to achieve the rank of lieutenant colonel in the Marine Corps Reserves, which he left in 2014.
Ms. Grey and Mr. Kelly turned a serious corner on their third date, when he took her to a brunch in West Point, N.Y., then surprised her by driving to his family’s 40-person Christmas party in Breezy Point, N.Y., where she met his parents, as well as his brother, Jim Kelly.
The former police commissioner, who, at times, playfully interrogated his son about settling down, had a hunch that Ms. Grey was in their lives to stay.
“Judith is a beautiful, amazing, multitalented individual,” said the elder Mr. Kelly, who served as New York’s top cop from 1992 to 1994 under Mr. Dinkins, and again, from 2002 to 2013, under Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg.
As it turned out, he almost had.
Though he eventually caught up to her, Mr. Kelly would lose Ms. Grey again in March of this year. They split up that month. The inevitable talk of marriage put a strain on their relationship.
“He was nervous about committing,” Ms. Grey said.
Mr. Kelly did not disagree.
After nearly seven months apart, they began talking through some issues and came to realize that they were meant to be.
“Judith is the love of my life,” Mr. Kelly said. “From the first time we met, I knew she was good for me.
They were married at the University Club of New York on Nov. 12, where the cocktail reception was also held. Mr. Dinkins led the ceremony, a first marriage for both, which did not include religious traditions (the bride is Jewish and the groom is Roman Catholic).
“You must always remember that it is rarely the great things that destroy a home, it is more often the small things,” Mr. Dinkins told the couple and their 200 guests, including François Delattre, the permanent representative of France to the United Nations in New York, John Catsimatidis of supermarket fame and Rhona Graff, President Trump’s longtime executive assistant.
But she doesn’t miss taking calls about him.
