“We just get rid of the evidence before they subpoena,” the lawyer says.
“O.K., great, do it,” his client responds.
As the client barks his retort (“Raul, I pay you not to tell me things like that”), a man sitting in the sixth row of the Thursday night audience chuckled knowingly.
It was Preet Bharara, the former United States attorney for the Southern District of New York. Though Mr. Bharara was just barely in high school during the go-go years of Michael Milken and Ivan Boesky, his own tenure as a United States attorney from 2009 to 2017, when he brought to heel a new generation of Wall Street miscreants, most notably Steven Cohen, lent a certain familiarity to the scenes unfolding in front of at Lincoln Center’s Vivian Beaumont Theater.
Since that acrimonious parting, Mr. Bharara has begun to build a nascent media empire. In addition to signing on as a visiting professor at New York University School of Law, he is also a paid commentator on CNN, has signed a book contract with Knopf (the thought of the July deadline for his manuscript is “a bit scary,” he said), and has started a podcast, "Stay Tuned With Preet Bharara,” with his brother Vinit, a technology entrepreneur.
At the “Junk” opening, Mr. Bharara, dressed in a Boss suit and a Canali tie (close to, but not quite the “Brooks Brothers and Brioni” uniform of the predatory Wall Street “kings” cited in the play’s opening lines), seemed as much as celebrity as the some of the actors who had also been invited, among them Gretchen Mol, David Schwimmer, Jonathan Groff and Aasif Mandvi.
Does this kind of thing occur often? Mr. Bharara was asked.
As he walked back to his seat, pointed the way by an usher who said she had once worked for Bear Stearns, Mr. Bharara noticed that the stage was now dominated by a huge Time cover featuring the image of the Steven Pasquale, the actor playing the Michael Milken-like character. “My picture was better,” Mr. Bharara said, laughing.
Once seated, he said that he was enjoying the play (“It’s quite well written”) and added that one scene in particular seemed especially knowing about the world he once inhabited — one that showed a government informant fumbling his attempts to draw out incriminating statements from his boss in a wiretapped phone conversation.
At the after-party, a surprising number of people wanted to talk about Mr. Bharara’s podcast, which seems to have attracted a devoted following in its short tenure.
“Preet? You are Preet, aren’t you?” an elegantly dressed woman called out as Mr. Bharara passed by on his way to the buffet station of sliders and french fries. She beckoned him over to her table. "I just wanted to tell you I love your podcast,” she said. “It’s just tremendous."
“Thank you,” Mr. Bharara said. “It’s No. 5 on iTunes this week.” Then he laughed, and added, “Not that I’m checking.
With that, he was soon out the door, on his way home to Westchester.
