Arts|Review: Amazon’s New Pilots, the End of an Era?
Review: Amazon’s New Pilots, the End of an Era?
In recent months Amazon has articulated a new original-content strategy: go “Game of Thrones” or go home. It wants “big shows,” genre dramas with automatic fan appeal, and it’s signed up creators like the film director Wong Kar-wai and the “Walking Dead” impresario Robert Kirkman to provide them.
So the three new Amazon comedy pilots may be the last of their breed — mildly eccentric, indie-style half-hours with no tent-pole names attached. It’s also notable that each, in its different way, is centered on a woman who deserves more from life. If Amazon is abandoning the art house (online-streaming division) for the multiplex, we won’t see shows like these any time soon.
Glenn Close stars as Bernie, an aging maiden aunt who in quick succession is demoted from her job as a cashier and killed in her living room by an unseen intruder. But she doesn’t stay dead, and when she comes back, she’s a new, fiercely angry Bernie, awake to the indignities of the monochromatic, subsistence-level life she’s led.
Mr. Murai gives “Sea Oak” (the name of the housing complex where Bernie lives with a gaggle of adult nieces and nephews) the slightly anesthetized, Jim Jarmusch vibe he and Mr. Glover bring to “Atlanta,” but Mr. Saunders’s Rust Belt magic realism doesn’t carry the same force onscreen, at least in this initial half-hour.
It’s easy to see how this collaboration of the comedian and cabaret star Bridget Everett and the showrunner Michael Patrick King (“Sex and the City”) could translate into a fairly conventional series, even though some of its elements — like an enthusiastic sex scene with the Amazonian Ms. Everett and a diminutive, chatty, very well-endowed man she picks up in a bar — push boundaries.
The bulk of the half-hour, in which Ms. Everett’s character, Karen, works with the young residents of a home for people with Down syndrome, is standard sitcom stuff (even with an A plot that involves a teenager with a propensity for touching Karen’s breasts). It’s the biggest showcase so far for Ms. Everett’s knowing, tough but vulnerable persona, and it gives her occasions to sing, including a production number about buying a bra (which is, once again, focused on her body).
Stealing attention from Ms. Everett is a tall order, but Loni Anderson manages it in a supporting role as Karen’s guileless older roommate.