Imagine a world where power literally flows from women’s hands, where the mere touch of a woman’s fingers can shock, stun and ultimately kill. Naomi Alderman’s new novel, “The Power,” conjures up such a world, and the consequences are electrifying. John Grisham returns with a legal thriller centered on for-profit law schools; James McBride tries his expert hand at short fiction; and Edward St. Aubyn reimagines King Lear as that contemporary version of king, a media mogul. In nonfiction, “Sticky Fingers” tells the story of a real-life media giant, Jann Wenner, the founder of Rolling Stone; and Peter Manseau explores the eerily lit world of 19th-century spirit photography.
FIVE-CARAT SOUL, by James McBride. (Riverhead, $27.) In his delightful first story collection, the author of the National Book Award-winning novel “The Good Lord Bird” (and a biographer of James Brown) continues to explore race, masculinity, music and history. McBride’s stories often hum with sweet nostalgia, and some even dispatch a kind of fairy-tale moral.
THE APPARITIONISTS: A Tale of Phantoms, Fraud, Photography, and the Man Who Captured Lincoln’s Ghost, by Peter Manseau. (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, $27.) Manseau’s expedition through the beginnings of photography and its deceptions is a primer on cultural crosscurrents in mid-19th-century America. He tells the story of William H. Mumler, who took so-called spirit photographs that subjects swore contained images of their late beloved. We know Mumler was a fraud, but we don’t know what kind of fraud — self-deceived true believer, confidence man or both?
GIRL IN SNOW, by Danya Kukafka. (Simon & Schuster, $26.) Danya Kukafka’s bewitching first novel spins a spell of mournful confession around a “Twin Peaks”-like centerpiece. In Kukafka’s capable hands, villainy turns out to be everywhere and nowhere, a DNA that could be found under the fingernails of everybody’s hands.
DUNBAR, by Edward St. Aubyn. (Hogarth, $26.) In this latest entry in Hogarth’s series of contemporary reimaginings of Shakespeare’s plays, “King Lear” is recast as a struggle for control over an irascible father’s corporate empire, with Lear reborn as a 21st-century media mogul. St. Aubyn’s version, not unlike the play itself, turns out to be a thriller.
THE POWER, by Naomi Alderman. (Little, Brown, $26.) In this fierce and unsettling novel, the ability to generate a dangerous electrical force from their bodies lets women take control, resulting in a vast, systemic upheaval of gender dynamics across the globe. Through immersive prose and a riveting plot, Alderman explores how power corrupts everyone: those who gain it, and those resisting its loss.
BLACK DAHLIA, RED ROSE: The Crime, Corruption, and Cover-Up of America’s Greatest Unsolved Murder, by Piu Eatwell. (Liveright, $26.95.) This account of the brutal killing of a beautiful young woman also delves into the broader culture of post-World-War-II Los Angeles. “Her story,” Eatwell writes, became “a fable illustrating the dangers posed to women” by Hollywood.
AFTER THE ECLIPSE: A Mother’s Murder, a Daughter’s Search, by Sarah Perry. (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, $27.) This memoir moves swiftly along on parallel tracks of mystery and elegy, as Perry searches through the extensive police files pertaining to her mother’s murder, when the author was 12. Perry’s scrupulous research and painstaking rendering of her experiences make her a trustworthy guide through such emotionally charged terrain.
THE DARK NET, by Benjamin Percy. (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, $26.) The fate of the world in Percy’s novel depends on the ability of a motley gang of misfits to head off the satanic forces emanating from the murkiest recesses of the internet. It’s one of the best Stephen King novels not written by the master himself.
GHOST OF THE INNOCENT MAN: A True Story of Trial and Redemption, by Benjamin Rachlin. (Little, Brown, $27.) Rachlin writes about Willie Grimes, imprisoned for 24 years for a sexual assault he did not commit, in this captivating, intimate profile. Alongside Grimes’s story, Rachlin chronicles a young lawyer’s efforts to create one of the nation’s first state-sponsored agencies dedicated to looking at claims of innocence.