The “Nutcracker” season is upon us — but what’s a “Nutcracker”? And why should anyone care? Before I ever saw it, the idea of “The Nutcracker” seemed to embody all that was trivial about ballet: overfamiliar hit tunes, dancing children, dancing toys, dancing sweets.
Yet those standard numbers change when you hear them in context. And those children, toys and sweets become moving in a production that takes childhood seriously. The ballet, building brilliantly, is one of the great 19th-century children’s stories.
The original two-act production, in 1892 in St. Petersburg, was the brainchild of Ivan Vzevolozhsky (director of the Mariinsky Theater), Marius Petipa (choreographer) and Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky (composer), adapting Alexandre Dumas’s version of E.T.A. Hoffmann’s story. Compromises, as in so many theatrical ventures, abounded. Tchaikovsky had to make changes and cuts to his original score. When Petipa fell ill during work on the first act, he was replaced by his assistant, Lev Ivanov, who, under pressure, farmed out at least one dance to a colleague. Tchaikovsky died the next year. Further revisions have gone on ever since.
Somehow, however, “The Nutcracker” became a Christmas fixture in the mid-20th century. Every year productions pop back into life by the hundred, from Vienna to Hawaii. Most still follow the same basic conventions established by that first version: a little girl heroine, her mysterious godfather (the magician Drosselmeyer), a battle between toy soldiers and mice, a forest glade of dancing Snowflakes, a ballerina Sugarplum Fairy in a tutu presiding over a realm of Sweets. But variations abound.
Many people crave a traditional “Nutcracker,” often the one they grew up with. But frequently it turns out that their notion of “Nutcracker” tradition goes back only to the mid-20th century. And does even a “Nutcracker” connoisseur really want a production that makes no departures from the original? That way pedantry lies.
Still, it helps to follow “The Nutcracker” with a clear idea of what its makers envisioned. If we find that we prefer some of the alterations that have been made in the last century, that gives us new hope: “The Nutcracker” is a work in progress. And the chief reason for this is the marvel of the score — there’s always more going on in this music than any one staging can fulfill.
So here are 10 “Nutcracker” checkpoints to help you work out where your “Nutcracker” is or isn’t true to the ballet’s heart and (a different thing) its tradition.
1. THIS IS NOT A LOVE STORY Unlike almost every other ballet from the 19th century, “The Nutcracker” isn’t about falling in love. So if you see the heroine Clara dancing a romantic pas de deux with the Nutcracker prince, you’re watching an alternative version; I call this anti-“Nutcracker” behavior. You’re also watching an unnecessary cliché.
2. PATHS THAT MUST NOT CROSS Drosselmeyer should be seen only in Act I, the Sugarplum only in Act II. Part of the story’s mystery is that they never meet. Only the two lead children — the heroine and the Nutcracker Prince — meet both.
3. THE OVERTURE: JUST LISTEN If you see any character during the overture, you’re watching a modern version. Tchaikovsky’s overture — with instruments playing high, fast and bouncy — is on the miniature scale of childhood itself, with passages of rhythmic syncopation that embody the excitement of a child’s eager anticipation. Just listen, listen, listen. But many productions, mistrusting an audience’s ability to cope without spectacle, try to distract from the music by starting to tell the story.
6. DON’T MESS WITH THE SCORE Tchaikovsky’s musical composition has such integrity and variety that it should never be revised, cut or supplemented. And yet, and yet …. I know only two productions that play all of Tchaikovsky’s score in the right order — Mark Morris’s “The Hard Nut” and Alexei Ratmansky’s American Ballet Theater production, both of which count as alternative versions, changing the story more than most.
7. ACT I’S BALLERINA? The Christmas tree must grow huge. As Balanchine said when fighting for money for his production’s tree in 1954, the tree is the ballerina of Act I. Some productions can’t afford an upwardly mobile tree; and some take the opportunity to turn the show into a psychodrama here. But the music, a gigantic crescendo of ascending phrases, tells you what’s needed.
8. TRANSFORMATION (NO DANCING, PLEASE) This is the most controversial of all. After the tree grows and after the battle between the toy soldiers and mice comes phenomenal music that should never be danced. True, Tchaikovsky gave it a strong dance-like rapture — but, like the overture, he meant it to stay undanced. This is transformation music in which the whole stage changes and we see the unknown territory through which the children will pass. Where there was one huge Christmas tree, now we see a whole snow-clad forest.
9. KEEP THE PANTOMIME DAME Act II has to include Mother Ginger (or Mère Gigogne). She’s a larger-than-life fertility figure, a pantomime dame (drag character) whose crinoline hides multiple children — they dance their way out from under it and then back in. Audiences adore her, but for some reason European productions omit her. She’s not in good taste — and that’s the point. “The Nutcracker” is not just a show for the polite and pretty.
10. THE PAS DE DEUX The big Act II pas de deux has to be danced by the Sugarplum Fairy and her cavalier. If your cavalier doesn’t get his solo, you’re probably watching Balanchine’s version (which takes his “Ballet is woman” policy one degree too far). If you see Clara and her Nutcracker dance the Sugarplum numbers, you’re probably watching a production by someone who grew up in the Soviet Union, and you’re far into a mind-set light-years from the vision of 1892.
There are other points to consider in “Nutcracker” tradition. After all, no production is completely faithful to the original. How, for example, does it end? In 1892 it was with a vision of bees dancing around a hive — something nobody has staged for over a century. Can we therefore say that any one ending is better than another?
I think so. Listen to how the score ends — with flowing music that implies travel, echoing the start of Act II. It does not take us back (as many productions do) to the start of Act I. Clara and the little Prince are, as in the original E.T.A. Hoffmann story, departing to yet other realms; they aren’t going back to her native Nuremberg.
The best productions of classics aren’t about puzzle-solving or filling in some 19th-century prescription. They’re about discovery and imagination, the very things at the heart of the “Nutcracker” story.