In 1986, Maddie Corman was a 16-year-old actress performing Off Broadway as her mother lay dying in a hospital bed, hours after having a stroke. Backstage, Ms. Corman was consoled by Israel Horovitz, the show’s 47-year-old playwright and her mentor. As she prepared to go on, he pressed her against a wall and forcefully kissed her, she said in a recent interview.
Jocelyn Meinhardt was 19 when she began a summer fellowship in 1989 with Mr. Horovitz at the Gloucester Stage Company in Massachusetts, where he was artistic director. She knew Mr. Horovitz; one of his sons, Adam Horovitz, who would go on to fame with the Beastie Boys, had been her high school boyfriend. That first night, she said, Mr. Horovitz drove her in his convertible — its license plate read AUTHOR — to the family home. He locked the door, then kissed and fondled her. 
Inspired by the revelations about Harvey Weinstein, Louis C.K. and others, a total of nine women have come forward publicly for the first time to describe a pattern of sexual abuse and violations of trust by a man they considered a mentor and friend. Mr. Horovitz is an award-winning author of more than 70 plays, including “The Indian Wants the Bronx” (starring Al Pacino in 1968); “Park Your Car in Harvard Yard” (on Broadway in 1991); and “Out of the Mouths of Babes,” which ran Off Broadway last year.
Over his five-decade career, Mr. Horovitz has been an influential player in the theater world. As the founding artistic director of Gloucester Stage, a respected regional theater that called itself a “safe harbor for playwrights,” and as an Obie-winning writer whose work was produced frequently in New York and Paris, he has had the power to offer roles, jobs or a helping hand to generations of actors.
Last week, the theater cut ties with Mr. Horovitz after learning of the accusations by Ms. Ermansons.
The nine women who spoke with The Times described Mr. Horovitz as a complicated man who was, at times, a charismatic mentor and empathic friend. He taught at several universities and nurtured young writers, was generous with his wisdom and dazzled with tales of his famous friends. “He was very dynamic and a real creative force,” said Ms. Corman, the actress.
But he also preyed on them, the women said, striking in moments of vulnerability and manipulating his role as director — as auteur — to take advantage of young women who were professionally dependent on him and often working far from home.
“He was a good mentor, until he was the worst, probably most nightmarish mentor you could have,” Ms. Meinhardt said.
The relationship was complex for Ms. Meinhardt. She said that after she was raped, she continued to work for Mr. Horovitz and went to extreme lengths to avoid being alone with him. But it was impossible: He was her boss. She said she and Mr. Horovitz had sex on two other occasions — consensual, she said, “in that I didn’t say no clearly.” Like some of the other women, she stayed friendly with him for years.
The nine women recounted experiences with Mr. Horovitz that had chilling similarities. Each woman’s story was corroborated independently by people in whom they confided.
Kathleen Nickels was the subscription manager of the Gloucester theater when she was 21, during the 1985-86 season. There, she said, Mr. Horovitz would corner her when she was in the office alone, kiss and fondle her, and once forced her hand down the front of his pants.
Elizabeth Dann and Laura Crook were also in their 20s when they were an actress and an understudy in a 1990 Gloucester production of “Strong-Man’s Weak Child,” which Mr. Horovitz wrote and directed. Along with Kim Senko, the technical director, the women created a “buddy system” to avoid being alone with Mr. Horovitz, who they say harassed them repeatedly. Ms. Senko recounted how he pushed her against a wall in a dark hallway as she locked up the theater and shoved his hand down her pants as he pressed his mouth on hers.
Ms. Dann said Mr. Horovitz once advised her to go home, get naked, powder her face white, put red lipstick on and masturbate while she practiced her monologue in the mirror. Another time as they rehearsed the monologue alone, at Mr. Horovitz’s request, he lunged forward, backing Ms. Dann into a wall and forcing his tongue into her mouth. “I said, ‘Oh my god, what are you doing?’ And he said, ‘Oh no no no, respond in character,’” she recalled. The more she spoke up, she said, the more he wielded his power, like putting in her understudy and threatening to replace her with another actor.
For a brief time, it seemed like Mr. Horovitz might face consequences. Prompted by an anonymous note, Bill Marx, a freelance theater critic for The Boston Phoenix, published articles in 1993 about sexual misconduct accusations against Mr. Horovitz from seven actresses and Gloucester staff members and three nannies.
The Boston Phoenix article on Mr. Horovitz in 1993.
In an interview, Mr. Weiner characterized those 1993 comments as “less-than-sensitive.” He recently stepped down from an advisory panel at the Gloucester theater.
In 2009, Ms. Meinhardt and Ms. Giffard separately confronted Mr. Horovitz about the abuse.
Mr. Horovitz continued to gain stature over the years. In honor of his 70th birthday, in 2009, the Barefoot Theater Company in New York organized “The 70/70 Horovitz Project” — a yearlong, worldwide performance of 70 of his plays. In 2014, he made his feature film directorial debut in “My Old Lady,” starring Kevin Kline and Maggie Smith. According to his website, Mr. Horovitz is the most-produced American playwright in French history.
But then the Weinstein revelations began. One after the next, the women found themselves typing “Israel Horovitz” into their computers. What they found was Ms. Ermansons, who had written her accusations about Mr. Horovitz on Facebook and Twitter.
A few months later, Ms. Ermansons received a voice mail message from Mr. Horovitz, apologizing for the “terrible, terrible misunderstanding.” She saved it as an MP3.
Soon the women began to find one another. They said they have drawn strength, even a measure of peace, by sharing their numbers.
And yet there is an element of stolen ambition to it all. Ms. Meinhardt was a dramatic writing student at New York University at the time of the alleged assault. Afterward, she won her class’s senior playwriting award and was the recipient of a prestigious scholarship. But she also struggled with depression and writer’s block.
The other women faced different versions of the same. Ms. Mestecky took a year off and moved home. Ms. Nickels left theater altogether. Ms. Dann veered from theater to more commercial work.
