SANTIAGO — Former President Sebastián Piñera of Chile, a conservative billionaire, on Sunday won the first round of an election to choose a successor to President Michelle Bachelet.
Mr. Piñera, 67, who won 36 percent of the vote, will compete in a runoff election on Dec. 17 against a center-left journalist and former news anchor, Alejandro Guillier, 64, who received 22 percent of the ballots cast.
The biggest surprise of the day was the surge of the left, representing a shift in Chile’s political map.
Coming in a close third was another journalist, Beatriz Sánchez, 46, who had no political experience but became well known for her acid political critiques on radio and television.
Ms. Sánchez represented the leftist coalition Frente Amplio, which was founded early this year. Expected to draw less than 10 percent of the vote, she won over 20 percent.
For the first time, as of next year political power will not be wielded solely by the two major coalitions that have governed Chile since the end of military rule in 1990. Preliminary results on Sunday evening showed significant gains by the Frente Amplio in Congress, as well as a stark generational shift and a greater number of women elected as lawmakers.
The election — which was also for the lower house of Congress and for half the seats in the Senate — was the first to be held under new electoral rules that limit campaign spending and impose greater transparency. The rules make voting voluntary and allow for more proportional representation in Congress. They also grant Chileans living abroad the right to vote, though only 11 percent of those eligible to vote in 62 countries registered to do so.
Voter turnout was low, about 45 percent, in keeping with a consistent fall in electoral participation since the return to democracy in Chile after 17 years of military dictatorship. Marta Lagos, director of the polling group Latinobarómetro, said the apathy could be explained in large part by a general view that politicians are corrupt and public institutions are not to be trusted.
Four members of Congress have been stripped of immunity from prosecution and dozens of politicians, their associates and relatives are being investigated for illegal campaign financing in earlier elections, influence-peddling and other white-collar crimes.
On Sunday morning, a group of demonstrators forced their way into Mr. Piñera’s campaign center to protest the elections. More than 20 were arrested. In the Araucanía region, about 400 miles from Santiago, the capital, unidentified individuals intercepted a bus that was going to transport voters from rural areas to voting places and set it on fire.
In all, eight people — an ideologically diverse array of candidates — were on the ballot on Sunday.
Both the right-wing opposition and the governing coalition, New Majority, had two candidates competing against each other for the presidency. Mr. Piñera was flanked to the right by the extremely conservative José Antonio Kast, who advocates building a physical barrier along Chile’s northern border with Peru and Bolivia, withdrawing from international treaties and organizations, and abolishing a recently approved law permitting abortions in some cases.
Against all predictions, Mr. Kast drew nearly eight percent of the vote.
Mr. Guillier was competing with a political ally, Carolina Goic, of the more conservative wing of the centrist Christian Democratic party. The remaining three candidates were all to the political left of Mr. Guillier.
Ms. Bachelet will finish her four-year term in March. Under Chile’s Constitution, she cannot run for immediate re-election. Battered by criticism, sagging popular support and a high-profile corruption case involving her son and daughter-in-law, Ms. Bachelet has publicly vowed that she will not seek any elected office in Chile in the future.