As the sexual misconduct scandals continue to unfold, our new gender editor, Jessica Bennett, will provide updates, analysis and reflections on the coverage and conversation in a new newsletter. Sign up here to keep up with this watershed cultural moment, and tell us what you think at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Even then it sent Twitter into a flurry: “tough to be a woman running for president,” the pundit Norman Ornstein noted, while a variety of journalists mused that Mr. Lauer would have been far less likely to interrupt a male candidate that way.
In the weeks since The New York Times and The New Yorker first broke stories of the Hollywood producer Harvey Weinstein’s decades-long abuse of women he worked with, the hashtag #MeToo has exploded on social media as a vehicle for women to share their stories. For perhaps the first time in history, powerful men are falling, like dominos, and women are being believed.
But the #MeToo moment has become something larger: a lens through which we view the world, a sense of blinders being taken off.
What do we do about the fact that men accused of mistreating women shaped the story of the first female presidential nominee of a major party?
What does it mean that men who have masturbated in front of, groped, threatened, paid off, and in some cases raped their colleagues also made so many films and plays and comedy acts that made us laugh or cry?
And what to make of the reality that Roy Price — the Amazon executive who quit last month after being accused of whispering “you will love my dick” in a junior employee’s ear — has the power to cancel shows made by and about women?
This newsletter will explore those and other questions amid the mass of news coverage and morass of public conversation. We’ll provide updates and analysis, reflections and reporting, and ask you, our readers, to share your insights, viewpoints, stories and ideas.
I started as The Times’ gender editor on Oct. 30 — or, if you like, the day The Times published this article documenting sexual assault claims against Mr. Weinstein dating to the 1970s, and this one about harassment claims surfacing in the British Parliament.
Last year, HarperCollins published my book, Feminist Fight Club, an illustrated guide to battling sexism at work that seems, suddenly, both more relevant and out of date.
Now I, like you, am racing to keep up with the news and the fallout.
Below, we’ve highlighted some key articles from The Times and other publications, as well as some reader comments from the lively conversations on our articles.
Please write to us at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| and tell us what you think.
Two of our television critics, James Poniewozik and Margaret Lyons, published this conversation in which they wrestled with how to process these new, seedy images of men whom millions of us had welcomed into our living rooms each morning.
In our Opinion section, Elizabeth Nolan Brown argued that NBC’s decision to fire Mr. Lauer reflected, in part, the increasing power of consumers — their voices amplified through social media — to pressure companies.
I really appreciated this walk-through of Mr. Lauer’s highs and lows, including his tense goodbye with the “Today” co-host Ann Curry; the time he told Anne Hathaway he’d “seen a lot of you lately” (referencing paparazzi photos taken up her skirt); and yes, that time he interrupted Mrs. Clinton.
I would also suggest re-reading this provocative piece from Rebecca Traister in New York magazine a few weeks ago, about how our national narratives have been shaped by lecherous, powerful men.
Our reporting on sexual misconduct has prompted, literally, thousands upon thousands of comments on our articles and on social media. We pulled out a few here from Wednesday’s coverage of Mr. Lauer’s firing, and will surface more in future newsletters.
Those of us women of a certain age, retired now, have dealt with these behaviors across decades for our entire careers.
We had no one to turn to when our professors, supervisors, and colleagues made raucous comments, touched us without permission, or pushed themselves up against us in hallways, offices, and classrooms. We’ve lost our jobs, along wth our dignity along the way.
We learned to be guarded, and focus within towards our own behaviors and actions, as these were the only measures we could control. Sexual impropriety among men towards working women and students was, and is still, pervasive.
How Far Does This Have to Go?
Now that they’ve got the ball rolling, it would probably be easier to identify the few men who HAVE NOT sexually harassed a woman in the workplace or in public or private.
I wonder how far this has to go before proper behavior will be expected. Should a line be drawn? Like from today on you all will be fired for your bad behavior.....because in the end 99% of all men will be guilty of some form of sexual harassment from the maintenance guy on up to the president.
I sure hope this was not a rush to judgement on NBC’s part. We are on the verge of McCarthy tactics applying to men’s personal behavior.
Sexual harassment or assault are terrible things, but not all cases rise to the level of actual assault. Feeling uncomfortable is not assault, and some women seem to have a low bar for what constitutes harassment.
