Welcome to the Smarter Living newsletter. The Smarter Living team emails readers once a week with tips and advice for living a better, more fulfilling life. Sign up here to get it in your inbox every Monday morning.
It’s almost holiday season! That means it’s time to book our flights, make plans to see old friends, eat too much at dinner with the family and, most crucial, set your out-of-office email vacation responder.
Tons of your auto-replies were fantastic, so this week I’m highlighting some of my favorites!
I think it sounds also a bit rebellious, because it shows that, sometimes, I need to live life on my own terms. Although, rebellious is probably not the right term, it’s more of a self-preservation mechanism, which sometimes take the form of pushing back.
At the University of Pennsylvania facilities department, we receive a training on office collaboration, etiquette and ethics. One lesson was: Don’t lie when you write your out of office message.
We were traveling to Wyoming to see solar eclipse totality. No one commented, which leads me to believe that most people do not read the auto-reply.
I am on vacation. Vacations are not for checking email, so I won’t be doing that. Fortunately, we rarely encounter life and death situations in the world of exporting, and aren’t we all glad for that?
No explanations, no apologies, no promises to respond, no redirects to other colleagues. It works.
This reminded me of a time when I shouldn’t have written.
We went to New Zealand and I informed everyone in my OOO that I was “Bungee jumping in Queenstown,” which seemed like what I should do in Queenstown.
When I got there and found out the bungee was 134 feet high I got terrible cold feet, but I felt that since I wrote it, I had to do it. So I did. It was terrifying and indeed a lesson on making bold claims in a public way!
How to Fulfill Your Dreams When the Magic-Wand Fairy is Late A hard-working waitress wonders if she’ll ever be able leave her small town and get a higher education. The answer is yes! And the secret is a list.

A Scaredy-Cat’s Investigation Into Why People Enjoy Fear Each person’s threshold for experiences that provoke fear, like Halloween haunted houses, is made up of a unique recipe that blends nature and nurture.
5 Bargain Destinations for Fall Travel Here are selections from our coverage of some of those recommendations, including the percentage of savings for that destination.
When a Man Needs a New Suit Our critic, who prides himself on not needing to wear a suit, explores the options at Brioni and Boglioli.
How Fiction Becomes Fact on Social Media Platforms like Facebook and Twitter offer up memes designed to feel real, if only for an instant — long enough for our minds to make a false connection.
■ Misunderstanding does not begin with other people. It begins with you.
■ Science can help you become a more interesting person.
■ We sure do trash a lot of coffee grounds!
■ Your friends seem to have more friends and a social life because you’re not there to see them binge Netflix at home.
■ Want to stay young? Kill zombie (cells).