BELFAST, Northern Ireland — The Northern Ireland Assembly’s palatial building in Stormont, in the hills that overlook Belfast, is an eerie place these days.
This time last year, its grand lobby bustled with lawmakers, lobbyists and civil servants, but this week it is empty and lifeless. Further inside, a few tourists warmed the blue seats of the debating chamber, rather than the 90 lawmakers elected to work there. Even their microphones had been removed.
And so it has been since as long ago as January, when Northern Ireland’s governing coalition collapsed. That created a power vacuum at Stormont that has still not been filled, paralyzing the region’s already pinched institutions and threatening a 1998 peace deal that largely ended three decades of fighting between nationalist and unionist factions.
Since that deal, known as the Good Friday Agreement, Northern Ireland has been run mostly by a devolved regional government that must, in effect, be led by a coalition between the region’s largest nationalist party and its largest unionist counterpart.
“This is a more profound crisis than we’ve had at other times in the last 20 years,” said Stephen Farry, the deputy leader of the Alliance Party, a centrist group that does not identify as either nationalist or unionist.
The government was shaken again this weekend, with the news that Gerry Adams would stand down as president of Sinn Féin. His departure at the end of the year may help the party achieve its goal of becoming a palatable coalition partner in the Irish government, but for Northern Ireland the implications are less clear.
Optimists have expressed hopes that his absence could give the political parties in Belfast more room for maneuver. But combined with the death in March of Mr. Adams’s former colleague, Martin McGuinness, it deprives the government of established leaders who are willing or able to make compromises on both sides of the sectarian divide.
The assembly has previously been suspended, most memorably between 2002 and 2007. “But then there was the sense that this was a blip and the problems would be overcome,” Mr. Farry said.
In the short term, civil servants have been left in charge of the day-to-day management of the region. But if the impasse continues, many fear that decisions will be made by ministers in London, a system known as “direct rule” that the 1998 agreement was meant to end. In the absence of a Northern Irish finance minister, the British government has already made the first step toward “direct rule” — passing an interim budget for Northern Ireland on Monday to ensure that salaries can be paid until March.
The specter of Brexit compounds the crisis: When the United Kingdom leaves the European Union, border controls may be reintroduced between Northern and southern Ireland for the first time since the Good Friday Agreement was introduced.
Some now question whether the agreement has in essence collapsed, and fear, if not a return to anything like a full-blown conflict, then at least a rise in sporadic acts of paramilitary intimidation.
“I don’t mean to be dramatic or anything, but I do think the Good Friday Agreement is effectively dead,” said Ms. Hanna, who represents the Social Democratic and Labour Party, Sinn Fein’s main nationalist rival.
For now, civil servants are keeping the machinery of the state in motion. But as unelected employees, they must simply apply the decisions made by the elected government during the last financial year, meaning that they can neither react to changing circumstances nor increase their budgets in line with inflation.
This has led to stasis and, in some cases, cuts to jobs and services. In one high-profile case, officials were forced to scrap an intensive support program for around 1,000 of the region’s most vulnerable children and teenagers, even though the program had led to a significant drop in antisocial behavior and a rise in school attendance.
The health system has also been affected. With the longest wait times in the United Kingdom, the sector had been due for a major overhaul this year. But that has been on hold since the start of the crisis, said Janice Smyth, the Northern Ireland director at the Royal College of Nursing, the world’s largest nursing union. “It cannot happen until we get a minister,” she said.
Across the region’s charitable sector, which is significantly dependent on state funding, charities have become wary of starting new projects or hiring staff, making them less able to respond to social problems that require new strategies.
Yet these administrative challenges have not yet encouraged politicians to reach a settlement. In fact, their differences have increased as the year has developed.
Both sides have been accused of not being truly invested in a compromise.
The D.U.P. dismisses this argument and says that in fact, it is Sinn Fein that has ulterior motives for maintaining the standoff. Since Sinn Fein also operates in the Republic of Ireland, it fears that it will harm its reputation among left-wing voters in Dublin if it is forced to pursue neoliberal policies while in government in Belfast, said Sammy Wilson, a D.U.P. lawmaker.
To resolve the crisis in the long term, some suggest reshaping the Good Friday Agreement to allow for other kinds of coalitions, instead of a mandatory partnership between the region’s two largest nationalist and unionist factions. Others predict a referendum on Irish reunification within a decade, arguing that the current dysfunction, coupled with the fallout from Brexit, may encourage moderate nationalists to see a united Ireland as a more urgent priority than they did previously.
Whereas Stormont was once seen as a symbol of hope and progress, citizens of all backgrounds now see it as an embarrassment.
Ricky Rowledge, the head of a homeless charity who meets lawmakers at Stormont as part of her work, said she once felt a sense of civic pride on her visits there.
