Ohio State University has canceled all its fraternities’ social and recruiting activities to investigate allegations of hazing and alcohol abuse, becoming the latest institution in the United States to crack down on Greek campus life after reports of misconduct.
Ryan Lovell, the senior director for sorority and fraternity life at Ohio State, made the announcement on Thursday in a letter to the university’s 37 fraternities, 11 of which have come under investigation for possible misconduct since the school year started, the largest number in years.
Campus officials declined to provide information about the alleged misconduct beyond saying most of it involved hazing and alcohol abuse. It was also not immediately clear how many complaints were made against each of the fraternities.
“Ohio State is taking this proactive step based on the significantly high number of investigations this semester, not on the nature of any specific case or cases,” said David Isaacs, a spokesman in the office of student life.
Ohio State is the second university this week to take steps to address reports of fraternity misconduct, part of a wave of efforts to stop the excesses that in some cases have led to death and injury. On Tuesday, Texas State University suspended all fraternity and sorority activities after the death of a Phi Kappa Psi pledge — the latest in a string of similar episodes on campuses across the country.
Parties and pledging activities at most of the University of Michigan’s fraternities were suspended last week after reports of sexual misconduct and alcohol abuse, and Florida State University suspended all activities at fraternities and sororities after the death of a pledge, possibly because of alcohol abuse, and the arrest of a fraternity member on drug charges.
Ohio State imposed the ban during the recruitment period for new fraternity members, and just before several football games, a period of heightened social activity among students. On Saturday, the football team will play a home game against the University of Illinois.
Mr. Lovell said that the suspension of activities would give fraternities time to come up strategies to align themselves with the code of conduct. He also said the university would hold forums to improve communication.
The university, a public institution, has more than 66,000 students on its main campus in Columbus and on smaller regional campuses across Ohio.
Sgt. Dean P. Worthington, a spokesman for the Columbus Police Department, said in an interview on Friday that the department had not noticed an increase in number or severity of police calls to fraternity houses this semester. City police officers respond to complaints about fraternities in coordination with the campus police, sometimes with patrols on bicycles.
Sergeant Worthington said most calls involve what he called typical behavior, particularly during football games, such as parties in yards that spill over onto sidewalks, underage drinking, loud music and public urination.
He said that the investigations into the 11 fraternities could reflect an increasing awareness about hazing at the school.
“Maybe they are just getting better at enforcing the hazing stuff, because they are more sensitive” to it, he said.