Barely two hours after the deadly truck attack struck Lower Manhattan on Tuesday, Mayor Bill de Blasio convened a news conference at Police Headquarters, where police and elected officials were to address the cameras that rolled for viewers around the world.
Mr. de Blasio, speaking a week before a mayoral election that he is widely expected to win, presented himself as the head of the nation’s largest city at a time of pain. He responded with resolve, calling the attack terrorism in his first public remarks, and he vowed, as his predecessors had done in other moments of crisis, not to let the actions of those bent on terrorism alter the life of the city.
Almost immediately afterward, the mayor and Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo made a series of appearances — at the site of the attack, at a news conference and at the annual Halloween parade Tuesday night — and put aside, for the moment at least, the destructive political rivalry that plagued much of the mayor’s first term.
“Everyone is here in common cause,” the mayor said in remarks at Police Headquarters on Wednesday, flanked by Mr. Cuomo, the city’s police commissioner and an array of grim-faced city, state and federal law enforcement officials.
Sixteen years earlier, the Sept. 11 terror attacks had a profound effect across the United States, but nowhere more than in New York, where the World Trade Center was lost and the majority of the 2,977 victims from that day were killed.
Those attacks occurred on Primary Day in New York, and they transformed the contest for mayor that year; many observers believe that they propelled Michael R. Bloomberg, a Republican, to victory by the narrowest of margins over his Democratic opponent, Mark Green, who was then the public advocate.
The truck attack’s effect on the election this year is likely to be far more subtle.
Mr. de Blasio, as he did after the bombing in Chelsea that injured dozens of people last fall, has shown himself to be in charge, competent and reassuring. He took to the morning television news programs on Wednesday to deliver words of calm; to praise New Yorkers for going about their lives; and to say that the New York City Marathon would go on as planned on Sunday.
His response to the attack may well solidify his position in an election where he carries a lead in some polls of more than 40 percentage points over the Republican candidate, Assemblywoman Nicole Malliotakis.
The attack — the deadliest in New York City since Sept. 11, 2001 — also swept from the city’s front pages and local newscasts reports about a major political donor to Mr. de Blasio who has been testifying in the federal corruption trial of a union leader. The donor, Jona S. Rechnitz, a real estate investor, made a series of embarrassing revelations about a culture at City Hall in which donors got access to the mayor and other top city officials.
Front-page tabloid headlines and withering editorials soon followed. Crain’s New York, the business weekly, took a highly unusual stand by saying that it would not endorse anyone for mayor. The New York Post and The Staten Island Advance endorsed Ms. Malliotakis. A liberal weekly newspaper, The Chief-Leader, which has a wide readership among union members and city workers, endorsed Sal Albanese, the Reform Party candidate.
The attack occurred the day before Mr. de Blasio, Ms. Malliotakis and Bo Dietl, a former police detective and businessman, took part in their second and final televised debate. Questions about terrorism and security took up the first 14 minutes of the one-hour debate Wednesday night. All the candidates praised the Police Department, and Mr. de Blasio’s rivals spoke soberly and largely held back from criticizing him directly on security.
“I believe strongly that we need to give our police officers the tools they need to do their job,” Ms. Malliotakis said.
Mr. Dietl, who is running as an independent, emphasized his experience as a police detective who went on to run a private security firm. “Security’s been my life,” he said. He also favored police surveillance of mosques, and at one point said the suspect arrested in Tuesday’s attack, with his long beard, looked like a terrorist.
Because of the attack on the World Trade Center, the 2001 primaries were postponed for two weeks, and the Democratic mayoral primary led to a highly contentious runoff. Mr. Green emerged from that battle into an extremely short general election campaign against Mr. Bloomberg, who spent tens of millions of dollars of his own money on the race.
Mr. Green noted that the scale of this week’s terror attack is different from the attacks in 2001, and would not have similar political ramifications. “New Yorkers seem to have completely absorbed it and gone back to normal after this tragedy,” he said.
”No one up here wants to politicize any of this,” Mr. de Blasio told reporters at Police Headquarters.
Mr. Cuomo agreed. “That plays right into the hands of the terrorists,” he said about Mr. Trump’s tweets after the attack, which included criticism of Senator Chuck Schumer of New York for supporting a visa lottery program that the president blamed for allowing the suspect into the country.
