Navigating the city is a thrill for Ramel Paredes. He is well-versed in the interconnectedness of New York City’s subway system, always knowing which routes are the most expeditious to get to his Brooklyn home.
Navigating personal relationships, however, is a struggle.
Mr. Paredes, 27, is on the autism spectrum and has a mild intellectual disability. It is often difficult for him to compile his thoughts and articulate his desires. When that happens, his pessimism can get the best of him.
Since 2015, Mr. Paredes has been attending Community for All Day Habilitation, a Brooklyn Community Services program that provides services to adults with intellectual disabilities to help them cultivate domestic skills and become more independent. Brooklyn Community Services is one of the eight organizations supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
Mr. Paredes joined the program to help him socialize better.
Several subway lines have hubs that can connect Mr. Paredes to the Cypress Hills neighborhood, where he lives with his mother and two brothers. He is loyal to the J train, and emphatic about his preference.
“I can’t stand the B and D,” Mr. Paredes said on a recent morning.
Ms. Garcia immediately put up opposition. “Don’t say that you can’t stand it,” she said.
It is deliberate pushback, part of a frequent effort to discourage Mr. Paredes’s negative thoughts, major or minute.
Although he is aware of his intellectual limitations and understands that they stifle his educational and vocational prospects, they do not get him down.
“He says he’s different, and that’s just how it is,” Ms. Garcia said.
To expand his knowledge, Mr. Paredes carries a small dictionary at all times, tucked away in his backpack. Whenever he hears, or more often reads, a word he does not know, he will reach for the dictionary.
Ms. Garcia extols his research skills and his fondness for obscure factoids. He has taught her about many subjects, most notably, the existence of the H train, a defunct transit line in Far Rockaway, Queens, that was temporarily restored after Hurricane Sandy in 2012.
Plenty of other topics excite Mr. Paredes, like superheroes, video games, mixed martial arts and the New York Liberty basketball team. He loves a variety of music, although some genres, including rap and hip-hop, can be a trigger for his anger. Mr. Paredes has intermittent explosive disorder, which can lead to outbursts of rage and sometimes violence for seemingly innocuous reasons.
On occasion, when the radio is playing during lunch or birthday celebrations at the day program, Mr. Paredes will put his headphones on to drown out any unfavorable music.  Similar behavior led to his expulsion from other programs.
Ms. Garcia says that staff members handle each outburst as best they can and work assiduously to address Mr. Paredes’s behavior. That effort includes constant positive reinforcement.
At one point, Mr. Paredes contemplated what he might want to eat for lunch. “I only have $6,” he said, disappointed.
Progress has been incremental, she said, but a change is taking place.
Mr. Paredes volunteers once a week at Prospect Park, picking up litter. He receives $735 monthly Supplemental Security Income, but he could not afford seasonal footwear that would allow him to continue volunteering through the winter. Brooklyn Community Services used $145 from the Neediest Cases Fund to buy Mr. Paredes a pair of winter boots.
He says he feels at home in nature and dreams of one day moving to the countryside. Mr. Paredes savors the bucolic scenery from train windows when he rides north to visit relatives in Westchester County and Connecticut.
Even with his varied interests, Mr. Paredes says downtime often leaves him frustrated and hyperaware of his limited finances.
If he had the means, Mr. Paredes said his ideal outing would be taking a girlfriend on a romantic date, maybe a nice dinner in Koreatown or Little Tokyo. He repeatedly expressed his desire to be in a relationship, a craving to make deeper connections.
