CANBERRA, Australia — On a Sunday afternoon in October, Rabbi Shmueli Feldman was hosting a small celebration at his home in a Canberra suburb.  
Rabbi Feldman reported the incident to the police and gave them the car’s license plate number, but nothing came of it.
“They said the men were drunk, and the driver wouldn’t tell them who yelled out the words, and there was nothing further they could do,” the rabbi said.
The list of anti-Semitic abuses directed at Rabbi Feldman and his community over the past year or two is long. He says that he has been egged, and that a rock was thrown through his child’s bedroom window.
Objects have been hurled through the window of his Jewish center on several occasions: rocks, a chair and, in one instance, the building’s security camera. In May, he told the police that swastikas had been scrawled in a park near his synagogue, but the graffiti was not removed until August.
His experiences are not isolated ones. An annual report on anti-Semitism compiled by the Executive Council of Australian Jewry, released Sunday, found an increase of almost 10 percent in racially motivated incidents against Jews in the past year, and almost 20 percent over the past two years. The council represents about 200 Jewish groups.
Between October 2016 and September this year, the Australian Jewish council logged 230 episodes of anti-Semitism, an increase of 9.5 percent over the previous year. They ranged from the distribution of leaflets expressing extreme views to street violence.
In particular, the council and other Jewish groups are concerned by the rise of far-right activists who are singling out Jews. The group Antipodean Resistance, formed just over a year ago and claiming just a handful of members, has already caused alarm. On April 20 — Hitler’s birthday — the group put up posters at universities and near high schools in parts of Melbourne and Sydney that called for Australia to legalize the execution of Jews.
Another study, conducted by Western Sydney University in 2015 and 2016, found that while 80 percent of respondents said that multiculturalism was a good thing, almost the same number said that racism existed in Australia.
And the Australian Reconciliation Barometer, which records attitudes toward indigenous groups, found that both indigenous and nonindigenous Australians believed that racism had increased in just the past two years.
For his part, Rabbi Feldman said he was trying to bridge the divide between the perpetrators and victims of racial abuse. After the police caught the young man who had hurled the security camera though the Jewish center’s window, the rabbi invited him to the center and explained the impact of his actions.
