Join Jaron Lanier, the father of virtual reality, as he contemplates his two obsessions: VR and music. “Musical instruments are the best user interfaces that have ever existed,” he says.CreditCredit...Kevin Hagen for The New York Times. Technology by Samsung.
BERKELEY, Calif. — Jaron Lanier is the most unusual person I’ve ever met.
And I’ve met a lot of unusual people.
A barefoot Buddha with dreadlocks, perched in a crazy fun house in the leafy hills of Berkeley, Mr. Lanier is a founding member of the digerati. The 57-year-old computer scientist, musician and writer has been christened the father of virtual reality.
Mr. Lanier is one of the few prophets who admits that the spawn of Silicon Valley could become evil, but he tries to stay on the sunny side. It helps that he avoids all social media.
Recently, the creepiness has been on display.
Mark Zuckerberg stumbled into more trouble for tone-deafness when he used his cartoon avatar to take a disaster adventure trip, a “magical” 360-degree virtual reality tour of hurricane devastation in Puerto Rico to promote his new Facebook Spaces app.
Even though he’s prone to whimsical, esoteric tangents, I know I can get a straight answer on that from Mr. Lanier.
We sit down at his dining room table amid a wild cornucopia of stuff, including a lamp with a hot pink feathered shade and black cats lounging on chairs and hanging, Cirque du Soleil-style, from carpeted staircases. There are also musical instruments — a golden Wurlitzer pedal harp; a rare pre-Depression Mason & Hamlin piano that Mr. Lanier says has “a uniquely American sound,” a 19th-century Chinese opium bed filled with saxophones, flutes, clarinets, lutes and ouds; mandolins covering the walls, and over a thousand more instruments, from a medieval cornetto to a shakuhachi, a Japanese flute — all of which Mr. Lanier can play.
Like his house, his new book is crammed full of strange and mesmerizing stuff.
Right after he was born, his mother, a Marlene Dietrich look-alike and Viennese pianist and stock trader who had talked her way out of a concentration camp by passing as Aryan, and his father, whose family had been mostly wiped out in Ukrainian pogroms, took Jaron someplace they thought would be safe: the westernmost corner of Texas. There, he had to confront more than his share of bullies growing up, once by swinging a baritone horn at them.
His mother died when he was about 9, when her car flipped over on the freeway as she was coming back from getting her driver’s license. His father, who worked for a time as the science editor of “Amazing,” “Fantastic” and “Astounding” pulp science-fiction magazines, then let his 11-year-old son design their new house in New Mexico: a geodesic dome.
He tosses out that his father may have been the one to start the rumor about alligators in the sewers of New York.
After a takeout chicken and macaroni dinner, Mr. Lanier bids a loving good night to his wife, Lena, a child psychologist, and their 11-year old daughter, Lilibell. Then he brings out his Microsoft HoloLens headsets and a big mug of chocolate milk. “I’m more like the child than the parent, I’m afraid,” he says.
I spend some time wearing the headset painting graffiti in the air with my hand, and Mr. Lanier explains why the brain can see more than the eyes.
I ask about social-media sites getting hijacked by Russians pushing propaganda aimed at putting Donald Trump in the White House. Vanity Fair has compared this juncture, with anxious lawmakers demanding accountability from the resistant tech companies, to the moment when we all had to start taking off our shoes at airports.
“Expect some smelly feet,” Mr. Lanier says.
Unlike many here, he does not think of humans as ants in his experiments.
“The whole internet thing was supposed to create the world’s best information resource in all of history,” he says. “Everything would be made visible. And instead we’re living in this time of total opacity where you don’t know why you see the news you see. You don’t know if it’s the same news that someone else sees. You don’t know who made it be that way. You don’t know who’s paid to change what you see. Everything is totally obscure in a profound way that it never was before.
“And the belief system of Silicon Valley is so thick that my friends at Facebook simply still really believe that the answer to any problem is to do more of what they already did, that they’re optimizing the world.
“The Facebook business model is mass behavior modification for pay. And for those who are not giving Facebook money, the only — and I want to emphasize, the only, underlined and in bold and italics — reward they can get or positive feedback is just getting attention. And if you have a system where the only possible prize is getting more attention, then you call that system Christmas for Asses, right? It’s a creep-amplification device.
Why would Facebook change its business model when it’s raking in billions?
I point out that after the stunning Trump win, President Obama took Mr. Zuckerberg aside and warned him to take the threat of political disinformation seriously, but the young billionaire dismissed the idea that it was widespread.
I remark that Facebook’s Sheryl Sandberg expressed surprise that their fiendish little invention could do something so nefarious.
So what happens when fake news marries virtual reality?
I ask Mr. Lanier about the sexual harassment and gender inequity problems roiling the Valley.
“Well, sometimes, I think there’s a kind of emerging new male jerk persona of the digital age, which would be some kind of a cross between the Uber guy and the pharma bro and maybe Milo Yiannopoulos and maybe Palmer Luckey and maybe Steve Bannon,” he says. “Because, there’s this sort of smug, superior, ‘I’ve got the levers of power, and I know better than you.’ It’s sort of this weird combination of a lot of power and a lot of insecurity at the same time.” He believes that Gamergate led to the alt right. “It was one of the feeders,” he says.
He talks about another personality that is emerging from the digital age.
Then he confides his fear that one of his older cats, Loof, would have been a Trump supporter.
As I get ready to leave, the grand illusionist offers an intriguing theory about why the internet is more obsessed with cats than dogs.
RELATED: Jaron Lanier submits to a round of Confirm or Deny, here.