Real Estate|The Window Air-Conditioner: Should It Stay or Go?
Few appliances are as unwieldy and unsightly as a window air-conditioner. Install it in a window in June and its rattling hum delivers a daily reminder that come fall, you will want it out — a task that would be a headache even without the palpable fear that the thing could tumble out the window onto the sidewalk below.
Hence, the New Yorker’s dilemma: resign yourself to living with an unsightly object year-round or go to the trouble of removing it?
Window units pose two main problems: They diminish natural light and cause a draft.
In some cases, the downside is tolerable. If you’re fortunate enough to have more than one window in the room, you might be willing to tolerate the diminished light. Or if your apartment feels like a balmy August afternoon in the middle of January, you might like the draft.
If you plan to keep your window unit in place, wrap the inside of the unit with a padded cover to reduce draft and insulate the area around it. Another option: Cover the entire window in plastic sheeting.
If your apartment gets drafty or your light is limited, you probably want the air-conditioner out. But before you enlist a friend to help, remember that should anything go awry, you will be liable.
“All it takes is one air-conditioner dropping out the window and killing someone,” said Ellen Kornfeld, the vice president of the Lovett Group, which manages residential properties in New York.
Instead, ask a professional. Your superintendent or other building staff may do the job, although some buildings do not permit staff to handle air-conditioners. Since people take their units out anytime from Labor Day to Thanksgiving, you should not have too much trouble finding time in the super’s schedule to get the work done.
Just be prepared to pay, since it might be considered an off-the-clock job. “Lots of people will give the super $20 or $100 and have him do it, which is generally fine,” said Daniel Wollman, the chief executive of Gumley Haft, a Manhattan property management company.
Find out if you can store the unit in the basement. If not, be prepared to sacrifice the bottom of a closet to the appliance — or, worse, to pretend that the hulking object on the floor is an end table.
Some New York City companies, like CoolAir in Queens and Air-Wave in the Bronx, will store your air-conditioners in their warehouses. Both companies charge about $279 to remove, clean, store and then reinstall an air-conditioner.
Come spring, you will have to put the dreaded thing back in place, unless you want to swelter all summer long. Make sure whoever does the work follows city installation rules designed to prevent air-conditioners from falling out of windows.