306 pp. Alfred A. Knopf. $26.95.
“Few sons are the equals of their fathers,” Athena says in the “Odyssey.” “Most fall short, all too few surpass them.” Odysseus, the great storyteller, traveler, survivor, husband, lover, warrior and revenge-hero, is one; Daniel Mendelsohn, the distinguished critic and classicist, may well be another. But that is the question this subtle and profoundly moving book poses. Can a man surpass his father? Can he even know enough of his father to know if he has surpassed him? And is that Oedipal urge, the desire to take the father down, to be as good or better than he was, really the right one? Do not love and honor have in the end something more to say?
Just like the “Odyssey,” which it consciously mimics, “An Odyssey” is an intricately constructed journey, conglomerating the stories of a son and his father and their travails through life and love. Like Homer, Mendelsohn weaves his basket with many wands: first, the story of the “Odyssey” itself, which patiently, book by book, he explicates with exemplary and generous clarity.  These many stories of a man’s life, a family and a father-son relationship are themselves set within a frame of the undergraduate “Odyssey” seminar Mendelsohn teaches at Bard College, which, amazingly, Daniel’s 81-year-old father, Jay Mendelsohn, decides to attend, as well as a 10-day “Retracing the ‘Odyssey’” cruise that Daniel and Jay take together when the seminar is over.
Described like that, the book might sound dense and impossible, overladen with structural elements, but Mendelsohn’s skill as a verbal architect and manager of scenes — he began his academic career as a brilliant critic of Euripides — means that this complexity is a route to revelation. Nothing is plodding here. He rearranges time, as the “Odyssey” does, working and reworking different moments from the poem itself, the seminar and the cruise into one intricately woven fabric — the image that Homer himself repeatedly uses of poetry and the poetic. The complexity seems natural, an account of the quality of life itself, transcribed as it needs to be, not formalized or homogenized, but ripplingly various and multidimensional, as Homer, Odysseus and their stories all are.
It is, in many ways, the poignant account of a search for a father, looking beyond the curt, undemonstrative and frightening figure of childhood and reaching after the reality of the person. The poignancy comes from a repeated mismatch. Mendelsohn’s subtle, investigative mind, so often able to see clearly and empathetically into the texts of a remote and long-gone civilization, and to lead his students to that shared understanding, finds himself reaching in the dark, drawing “a blank,” when looking for the man who may be closer to him than any other.
Jay Mendelsohn is a retired research scientist, a reductionist, a simplifier, a solution-finder, for whom “x is x,” not a weaver of tales but a doubter of them, with “a reverence for struggle” and a love of baseball because of its “geometries.” He had been involved in the designing of early target recognition systems, a technological task he described to his son as “teaching computers to see,” and believes that there is “a deep and inscrutable essence to things” if only one took the trouble to find it. He is appalled by the flux of life, can’t stand traffic and has to predict every part of a journey before he sets out on it, even identifying the final parking spot before he leaves. It seems to his son that for Jay, as Poseidon was for Odysseus, “some implacable traffic god” was always against him.
And so the book arranges itself around the polarities of fixity and flux, certainty and doubt, rigidity and tenderness. Like Odysseus, Mendelsohn sees in existence a pattern of eddies and back-turnings, an endlessly shifting density field in which identity and truth come and go. Homer describes Odysseus as poikilometis, meaning dapple-skilled, spotty-skilled, essentially various. That beautifully flickering self is at the heart of Homer’s meaning in the “Odyssey,” which, as Mendelsohn says, effectively buries the “Iliad,” moving beyond the beefcake vision of the heroes at Troy to something much more subtle and adaptable — and modern. Odysseus’ unreliability is his virtue.
Mendelsohn père cannot see that. For him Odysseus is not a real hero because he lies and cheats on his wife, tells false, self-inflating stories, is always relying on the gods to get him out of trouble, is not really all-man in the way of more singular, self-sufficient heroes, but is always shifting into difference, like the shimmering polychrome cloths with which the Homeric world was entranced.
Jay begins to treat his son not as a son but as another man, with the mysterious quality on those first, changed interactions, not of manliness or man-to-manliness, but of humility and gentleness. He allows himself to talk in front of the seminar about his life-shaping love for Daniel’s mother. Daniel learns that when his father was young a beautiful boy had fallen in love with him and that Jay had in that experience come to understand something of his son’s own homosexuality. It emerges that Jay’s childhood was deeply isolated and that his early life had been dogged by defeat and repeated failures of nerve, so that time and again he had not dared to embrace the life he might have had. His awkward, prickly, undemonstrative self became the price of a protected vulnerability. It was not Odysseus who was unheroic but Jay Mendelsohn; and his son comes to love him for that fragility.
“The best way to tell a certain kind of story,” Mendelsohn says of Homer but knowing that it applies also to what he has written, “is to move not straight ahead but in wide and history-laden circles.” Turning back and looking again, confessing ignorance and accommodating failure is truer to human experience than any mathematician’s diving for the answer. A consciousness of mortality, the great and final failure, plays its part. “Good teaching is like good parenting,” he says of himself and of the man his father was slowly allowing himself to become; both “arise from an acceptance of the inevitability of death.” And it is with Jay’s death, about a year after the seminar and the cruise, that the book ends, as it must.
Homer calls Odysseus the man of “twists and turns,” but he is also the man who knows “the minds of many men.” The two qualities are one: Indirection is the route to understanding and the shimmering, beautiful, dapple-skilled intelligence of this book, fueled by the belief that what you feel is intimate with what you know, is all the evidence of that you will ever need.