Creating a gallery wall is a simple way to bring style and personality to any room — no painting or wallpapering required. All you need is a hammer, some frame hooks and a collection of your favorite art.
But arranging that collection can be intimidating when you’re confronting a blank wall. To help you make a statement — rather than a haphazard jumble — art installers, museum staffers and others with expertise in hanging art offered a few tips.
Beatrice Fischel-Bock, the chief executive and a founder of the home décor app Hutch, recently added a gallery wall to the bedroom in her Los Angeles Spanish-style bungalow using a combination of art she bought online, at garage sales and flea markets. “The art pieces range from traditional still life to edgy photography, yet they all work together to provide an elevated and collected grouping,” said Ms. Fischel-Bock, who grew up going to galleries with her mother, an artist.
CHOOSE YOUR STYLE Gallery walls tend to fall into two categories: a grid or linear arrangement and a salon, an eclectic grouping of images and objects. Think about the feeling you want to create in the room, said David Kassel, owner of ILevel, an art-placement and picture-hanging service in Manhattan. “Grids result in a clean, crisp, formal arrangement, and work nicely in a dining room to replace one larger piece,” he said. “If a more relaxed, personal style is interesting to you, consider a salon-style arrangement,” which can include a diverse range of pieces, from oil paintings to tattoo art and three-dimensional objects.
FRAMING IS KEY “Using good matting and frames can elevate the look of the work and help to create cohesion in the larger context of the wall,” Ms. Griffith said.
She offered a simple recipe for maintaining balance and proportion with different frames and sizes. The ratio you should aim for, Ms. Farmer said, is one extra-large piece, two large pieces, two medium pieces and three small ones.
USE THE FLOOR Now that you have assembled and framed your collection, measure the wall you plan to hang it on and mark that space out on the floor with painter’s tape. Arrange your collection within the outline on the floor, moving pieces around until you find a balanced composition. “Always start in the middle, usually with the largest piece, and work out from there to keep it balanced,” said Ms. Douglas-Pennant of Etalage.
GET OUT THE TAPE MEASURE “Use uniform spacing to provide a cohesive feel if your frames and images don’t match,” said Mr. Kassel of ILevel.
A consistent measurement — two inches between frames, for example — works well for a grid installation, but for a salon wall you can be less precise. If you want a guidepost, Mr. Kassel said, try building out your collection along a common horizontal line, hanging half of the images two inches above the line and the other half two inches below, to add structure.
HOLD THE HAMMER “These installs do have a major downside: They create a lot of holes,” said Becky Shea, an interior designer in New York. In addition to arranging your collection on the floor, she recommends mapping it out using a computer modeling program like SketchUp.
To avoid a crooked installation, Mr. Kassel advised using D-rings rather than wire. But if you’re not comfortable with a level and a drill, he added, you should consider hiring a professional.
“We’ve patched the holes in many failed D.I.Y. gallery wall projects,” he said.