THURSDAY PUZZLE — First, Wordplay would like to wish everyone a happy and a healthy Thanksgiving. On behalf of The New York Times Crossword team, I’d like to say that we are truly thankful that you all show up to solve the puzzles and join us here talk about it.
Howard Barkin returns with a twisty Thursday theme that is actually very easy to figure out, once you gain a foothold in his puzzle.
My secret? I solve using the Downs. They tend to be gentler, since they cross the theme entries, which are generally the long Across entries. My first gimme was at 5D, actress Meryl STREEP, which got me MOVIE and subsequently EBERT. That gave me OBAMAS, VENI, IRAN and ET TU, so I was able to guess that the second word in the theme entry at 20A was ___ MINUTES. Eventually, I had enough of 20A so that when I reread the clue, “Halftime show?” I knew it had to be half of “60 Minutes,” or THIRTY MINUTES.
After that, the rest of this fresh theme is just doing the math and figuring out what phrase is applicable.
At 38A, for example, I had RICHARD ___, and knew the “Triple play?” would be “Richard III,” so it was easy to figure out that the clue was misdirection for RICHARD IX.
69A: A clue to read carefully: “The star Mars” is not talking about the planet, but the music star, BRUNO Mars.
Hello solvers, hope that this one wasn’t too rough on you. All comments on my puzzles are welcomed, in any forum that you choose.
When mentally wandering some months ago, upon hearing the phrase “halftime show,” I thought that this could apply to the show “60 Minutes”; perhaps I could work that into a puzzle theme.
That idle thought remained dormant for awhile, until one day I thought back on this and realized the (also sports-related) phrases “double/triple play” might be similarly used, and off we went.
I apologize for any inelegance on the “Fourth estate” clue. I did think that a “quarter” phrase would be more apt, but I could not really find an appropriate phrase that met the full theme.
Keep on puzzling!
What Mr. Barkin said.