War has long made heroes of women and men. But animals have also shown gallantry in battle stretching back centuries, including dogs, bears, cats, a duck and even a goat called Sergeant Bill.
In World War I, Sergeant Bill, who hailed from Saskatchewan and was called Billy by his comrades, was credited with helping to save three Canadian soldiers by butting them into a mud-filled trench just seconds before a shell exploded.
During his military career, Bill was also arrested after chewing army property and suffered from trench foot. After the war he returned home to Canada and, following his death, was stuffed and put on display at the Broadview Historical Museum in Saskatchewan.
Decades later, an American carrier pigeon called G.I. Joe saved as many as a thousand lives during World War II by flying 20 miles in 20 minutes with a message warning Allied forces not to bomb an Italian village that had been retaken by the British.
Now, in the latest example of animal valor, a Belgian Malinois dog — a sort of golden German shepherd — that was badly injured by shrapnel in Afghanistan has been awarded the Dickin Medal, Britain’s highest award for animal bravery, for helping to sniff out Taliban militants and their booby traps during a mission by Afghan and British Special Forces in Afghanistan in 2012.
The People’s Dispensary for Sick Animals, the veterinary charity behind the award, said on Friday that the dog, Mali, was being recognized for saving lives during a treacherous assignment when British and Afghan forces were deployed to secure a building in Kabul where armed insurgents were hiding.
The charity said that Mali had braved gunfire to search for explosives, and had also played a pivotal role by helping to sniff out enemy militants. He “indicated the presence of insurgents numerous times, giving the assault force vital milliseconds to engage the enemy in close quarter combat,” it said in a statement.
The dog’s handler, whose name was not given by the charity for security reasons, said in a video tribute that Mali had proved steadfast during the eight-and-a-half-hour raid, even as several grenades exploded, helping prevent soldiers from losing arms and legs.
Mali recovered from his injuries and, following the battle, was relieved of front line duty. Now, at 8 years old, he is a member of the Royal Veterinary Corps where, among other tasks, he assists in the training of dog handlers.
Animals have been used in warfare or conflict since ancient times.
In the sixth century B.C., the Persians are said to have trounced the Egyptians during the Battle of Pelusium, according to the Ancient History Encyclopedia, after the Persian king ordered his soldiers to paint images of cats on their shields and dispatched a crowd of animals to lead the army into battle. The Egyptians, for religious reasons, were unwilling to harm the animals and capitulated.
In World War II, a beer-drinking duck called Siwash proved a loyal mascot to the Marines during the Battle of Tarawa in 1943, where it went ashore and was lauded for fiercely fighting a “rooster of Japanese ancestry,” according to a 1944 issue of Life magazine, with “utter disregard” for its own safety.
More recently in 2010, Israel rejected an apparent suggestion by an Egyptian official that its espionage agency, the Mossad, might have sent killer sharks into the Red Sea to attack civilians.
