A Washington correspondent for a provocative conservative website who spoke at the University of Connecticut was arrested on Tuesday night after he appeared to grab a woman who had taken papers off the lectern at which he had been speaking, officials said.
The correspondent, Lucian Wintrich, who works for The Gateway Pundit, followed the woman who took the paperwork as she went back into the audience, and the altercation occurred as he tried to retrieve the papers, according to the university and video recordings of the event. He was eventually led out of the Andre Schenker Lecture Hall by the authorities.
Mr. Wintrich, 29, was charged with breach of the peace, a misdemeanor, and was released late Tuesday after posting $1,000 bond, said a university spokeswoman, Stephanie Reitz.
As the crowd was leaving the lecture hall around 9 p.m., someone broke one of the lecture hall’s windows and a smoke bomb was thrown inside the hall, Ms. Reitz said. The bomb detonated and the person ran away, she said.
Ms. Reitz noted that Mr. Miller had not been charged in connection with the smoke bomb, which remains under investigation. Mr. Miller was also released after posting a $1,000 bond, she said.
The police interviewed the woman who had taken the papers off the lectern, but Ms. Reitz said no other arrests were made on Tuesday. It was not clear whether the woman was a student.
No injuries were reported in connection to the evening’s mayhem, she said. The case remains open and additional charges or arrests could be forthcoming, she said.
Mr. Wintrich had been invited to speak at an event organized and hosted by the UConn College Republicans club, Ms. Reitz said. The event started around 8 p.m. and was to last about an hour.
About 300 people attended; some who attended were supporters, others were critics and still others came from the surrounding community and were not students, Ms. Reitz said.
Mr. Wintrich’s conservative website, The Gateway Pundit, gained notice last year for its fervent pro-Trump coverage and its penchant for promoting false rumors about voter fraud and Hillary Clinton’s health.
