LONDON — Jeremy Hutchinson, a British barrister whose sometimes theatrical courtroom tactics and rhetorical panache secured victories that helped reshape society’s attitudes toward obscenity, secrecy and sexual manners, died on Monday. He was 102.
The law firm his father helped start, Three Raymond Buildings, confirmed his death on its website. It did not give a cause or say where he died.
From the 1960s to the ’80s, Mr. Hutchinson, ennobled by the British royal family in 1978 as Lord Hutchinson of Lullington, joined or led legal teams in some of the most celebrated cases of that era, establishing himself as a top criminal defense lawyer.
It was a time in which the erosion of moral taboos in the swinging ’60s and the cloak-and-dagger machinations of the Cold War combined to produce a steady supply of dramatic trials.
Mr. Hutchinson defended Penguin Books for publishing D. H. Lawrence’s “Lady Chatterley’s Lover”; represented the model Christine Keeler in the so-called Profumo Affair, which combined sex, spies and scandal; and sought unsuccessfully to avert a 42-year jail term for George Blake, a Soviet double agent who later escaped from a British prison and fled to Moscow.
Mr. Hutchinson often fought against the prevailing definitions of obscenity in cases that were seen as landmarks in Britain’s transition from a prudish and hidebound society to a more open and tolerant one.
In 1960, as a junior counsel in the “Lady Chatterley” case, he played a prominent part in examining prestigious witnesses, including the novelist E. M. Forster, to support the argument that the novel, which explicitly describes the physical relationship between an upper-crust married woman and her husband’s gamekeeper, was a work of literature, not pornography.
“I believe you have written some novels,” he said in addressing Mr. Forster before the court to establish the author’s credentials.
The trial fascinated ordinary Britons and seemed to illuminate the gulf between them and a judiciary largely drawn from the elite. Indeed, the prosecutor in the trial, Mervyn Griffith-Jones, went so far as to ask whether “Lady Chatterley” was “a book you would wish your wives or servants to read” — a question redolent with assumptions about class, gender and lifestyle from an earlier era.
Mr. Hutchinson, for his part, was the first to admit that as he tilted in court against the British establishment, he was also very much a product of it, having been educated at private school and Oxford University.
In 1963, he defended Christine Keeler, a model and showgirl who pleaded guilty to committing perjury as a witness in earlier trials relating to the Profumo Affair, which almost brought down the conservative government of Prime Minister Harold Macmillan.
The scandal involved John Profumo, the minister for war, who was accused of sharing Ms. Keeler’s sexual favors with Yevgeny Ivanov, a Soviet naval attaché, thereby possibly endangering national security. Mr. Profumo was forced to quit, while Ms. Keeler acquired a reputation in the press as a temptress.
Mr. Hutchinson, by contrast, depicted her in court as a vulnerable young woman who had been used by many male partners and should not suffer retribution. “I know your lordship will resist the temptation for what I might call society’s pound of flesh,” he told the judge.
She was given a relatively brief prison term of nine months.
In 1982, in another well-publicized case that again involved the issue of obscenity, Mr. Hutchinson defended the director of a play called “The Romans in Britain” against charges of gross indecency. 
But Mr. Hutchinson demonstrated with theatrical gestures that what Mr. Ross-Cornes had really seen was an actor’s thumb. The case against the director was dropped.
Mr. Hutchinson attended private school at Stowe in Buckinghamshire, west of London, and studied at Magdalen College, Oxford.
During World War II, he served in the Royal Navy and was aboard the destroyer H.M.S. Kelly when German warplanes sank it off the Greek island of Crete in May 1941. He was rescued after hours at sea, clinging to debris and singing vaudeville songs with other survivors, including the ship’s commander, Lord Louis Mountbatten, a descendant of Queen Victoria. Mountbatten became First Sea Lord and mentor to Prince Charles, the heir to the British throne.
A year earlier, Mr. Hutchinson had married the actress Peggy Ashcroft after a whirlwind romance. They divorced in 1966. Shortly afterward, he married June Osborn, the aristocratic widow of the concert pianist Franz Osborn. She died in 2006.
Mr. Hutchinson had two children by his first marriage — a daughter, Eliza, an artist who died in 2016, and a son, Nicholas, an actor and director. Complete information on his survivors was not available, though some biographical sources say he had grandchildren.
After the war, Mr. Hutchinson stood unsuccessfully for Parliament in the Westminster district of central London, where one of his constituents was Winston Churchill. Mr. Hutchinson, resolving to canvass the district for support, went to 10 Downing Street, the official residence of British prime ministers. Churchill was not home, however, so Mr. Hutchinson delivered a political speech to Churchill’s staff.
He financed his early days as a barrister by selling a painting by Monet, which he had inherited.
Among his less successful trials as a senior barrister was his defense of George Blake, unmasked in 1961 as a double agent who had used his position at Britain’s foreign intelligence service, MI6, to aid the Soviet K.G.B. in the earliest days of the Cold War. He was sentenced under the Official Secrets Act to three consecutive 14-year terms in prison for his offenses.
Mr. Hutchinson said the severity of Mr. Blake’s punishment would provoke either madness or escape — a prophecy fulfilled in 1966 when Mr. Blake broke out of Wormwood Scrubs prison in London and was spirited to Moscow, where he is believed to still be living at 95.
Mr. Hutchinson was also said to have been one of the real-life lawyers who inspired his friend John Mortimer, a barrister and author, to create Horace Rumpole, a fictional character in books and on radio and television shows known as Rumpole of the Bailey.