Want to know how tough is it for many Americans to talk about their financial concerns?
About as tough as any topic you can imagine. Kathleen Burns Kingsbury lays it on the line in her new book, “Breaking Money Silence (Praeger, $37).
It’s a worthwhile objective, even if she stumbles occasionally. More on that later, but first the good news.
Ms. Kingsbury forces you to think about several things that are important to achieving financial health, starting with the phrase that comprises part of her title “money silence,” her term for someone’s refusal to talk and ask questions about personal finance.
She scatters explanations throughout the book for why the sounds of (financial) silence might occur.
They range from embarrassment — people may be reluctant to talk about money because they are ashamed that they haven’t saved enough, or that they don’t know much about personal finance and so they don’t want to ask “dumb” questions — to relationship discord. If one person is a spender and another is not, discussions can get heated when the credit card bill arrives, and so people avoid money discussions.
There are more subtle reasons as well. Parents who are struggling financially may not want their adult children to know about their financial woes, for example, so they keep quiet and that may create ambivalence. If you aren’t sure how you really feel about money — Is it the root of all evil, as some people believe, or a potential force for good in your life and the lives of others? — you may not want to think about it.
All this is on top of what Ms. Kingsbury believes is the biggest reason for money silence: misplaced propriety. Some people feel it is simply wrong to talk about their personal finances, even if they need help — or can help someone else.
You can understand any or all of those reactions, but none of them are helpful to your overall financial health.
As Ms. Kingsbury points out, “Money silence contributes to the high divorce rate in the United States,” citing research done by TIAA among others.
Curating the research on the nonfinancial part of personal finance is where she shines.
And she is also good on basic advice.
Unfortunately, as Ms. Kingsbury is laying all this out, she has a tendency to get in her own way.
She also tends to repeat herself. You can find a variation on her excellent opening quote about money just six pages later, and her seemingly constant mention of her previous books gets annoying.
The result is that this book is uneven, which is too bad because Ms. Kingsbury’s message is important. We do need to talk and know much more about money. The nation’s financial literacy is remarkably low. When asked five basic questions about personal finance in 2015 as part of the Finra Investor Education Foundation’s Financial Literacy Quiz, only 37 percent of the people surveyed got at least four right — and that number has been trending downward since Finra started conducting the survey in 2009.
It is difficult to learn about a topic unless you are willing to ask questions. If Ms. Kingsbury’s book encourages people to engage and seek more information, it will have performed a valuable service.