SETTING The house is in Beverly Grove, a neighborhood near Beverly Hills and West Hollywood that is convenient to Melrose Avenue and Beverly Center shopping, and Cedars-Sinai Medical Center.
INSIDE Period details include Saltillo terra-cotta tiles; hardwood floors; beamed, wood-covered and vaulted ceilings; French doors; and an abundance of nooks and built-ins. New plantation shutters have been installed throughout the house.
The foyer, which is large enough to hold a home office, opens to a living room with a fireplace and an adjacent formal dining room. The kitchen has decorative tile, high-end appliances and a breakfast area, as well as a washer and dryer.
Among the three spacious bedrooms is one with a wall of built-in shelves and a pair of doors opening to the pool area. Both bathrooms were recently redone.
OUTDOOR SPACE The .15-acre property is buffered from the street by a tall hedge and includes a front lawn. Behind the main house, a tumbled-stone-paved area contains a heated in-ground pool and hot tub, and a covered patio with a modern firepit. A separate pool house has a two-car garage, downstairs bathroom and upstairs guest quarters with a half-bath and a wraparound terrace.
SETTING The house is on almost 15 rolling acres in the Columbia County town of Taghkanic, about 20 minutes from Hudson, N.Y., and two hours from Manhattan.
INDOORS Designed by Adam Dayem, a New York architect, the building is known as the Sleeve House, Mr. Dayem said, “because it is a smaller rectangular box inserted into a larger one, like an arm being inserted into a sleeve.” The exterior walls are burnt Accoya wood siding with metal, glass and concrete. The charred wood, created using the Japanese shou sugi ban technique, also appears inside. Electricity is provided by a solar tracking panel with battery backup.
The ground level has an open living-and-dining area with raw, radiant-heated concrete floors and a suspended Fireorb wood-burning stove. It connects to an open kitchen with breakfast bar, custom millwork and Corian countertops. Next to the kitchen are a pantry, half-bath and coat and utility closets.
A flight of metal stairs leads to a second floor with a master suite, guest bedroom and bathroom and a den (or third bedroom) between them. There is also a laundry room.
OUTDOOR SPACE A 375-square-foot roof terrace is equipped with electricity and water. A paved carport and gravel parking area have room for up to five cars.
SETTING The three-story stone house with finished basement is in the Chicago suburb of Naperville, near downtown restaurants, boutiques and the city’s Riverwalk path.
The kitchen has a black walnut island with granite countertops and a hammered copper sink; a Thermador range with six burners; and a Sub-Zero refrigerator built into a ceiling-high cabinet. An adjacent family area with a wet bar leads to an herb garden outside. Across from the kitchen is a breakfast nook with built-in seating and, next to it, a powder room.
The second floor has two bedrooms and two bathrooms, including a master suite with a fireplace, a closet more than 40 feet long and a small laundry room. There is also a den. The third floor contains a two-bedroom suite, an additional bedroom and bathroom with steam shower, a media room, a gym with vaulted ceiling and an outdoor terrace.
 An elevator provides access to all four levels.
OUTDOOR SPACE The fenced, densely planted .2-acre property has a loggia, dipping pool, fountain, pergola and area with built-in grill. Many rooms in the house open onto patios or balconies. A three-car heated garage has an upstairs loft.
