Library books are free, until they aren’t: Patrons who rack up $15 in late fees at the city’s public libraries are blocked from taking out more books until the fine is paid.
Among those with suspended privileges are 160,000 children, most of them from the city’s poorest neighborhoods, who cannot afford to pay.
On Thursday, the city’s three library systems — the New York Public Library, which serves Manhattan, the Bronx and Staten Island; the Queens Library; and the Brooklyn Public Library — will forgive all fines for children 17 and under and unblock their cards. The one-time amnesty is being underwritten by the JPB Foundation, a philanthropy that supports civic causes, which will make up $2.25 million of the shortfall in revenue from the forgiven fines.
At the Hamilton Grange Library in Hamilton Heights, a Manhattan neighborhood where around half the school-aged card holders have their borrowing privilege suspended because of fines, Venice Beckford, 36, a child care provider, rejoiced at the news.
All three of her children — Amelia, 3, Makayla, 12, and Rohan, 16 — have had their library borrowing privileges suspended. She estimates that they owe at least $180 in unreturned book fees and fines.
The one-time amnesty will be brief: Fines for new late materials will start accruing again the same day. It also does not apply to adult card holders. Dennis M. Walcott, the president of the Queens Library system, described the move as a necessary “experiment” that may help determine if a fine-free future is possible.
The library systems currently rely on the revenue from fines to fund certain programs, said Mr. Marx. Abolishing fines would threaten those, he said. Fines are also seen as a deterrent to theft and a way to ensure books are available on the shelf for the next reader.
Other systems, though none as vast as New York City’s, have offered more sweeping versions of amnesty.
Since 2015, the District of Columbia’s Public Library System has not penalized children 19 and under for late or lost materials, expanding on its already fee-free policy for children’s books. “We didn’t want the reason you didn’t come to the library to be fear that you owed money,” said George Williams, a spokesman for that library system.
San Francisco offered a six-week fine forgiveness period this year, during which it unblocked the cards of more than 5,000 people and recovered nearly 700,000 items, including one book that was overdue by a century.
Fayeline Hines, 40, a homemaker, was working with her 9-year-old son, Joshua Laidley, on his reading homework a few stacks over. She said that while fines were burdensome, they had value. She thought there should be some “catch” to make sure books get returned on time. For several years, the Queens library has had that catch: a program that permits children to settle up their fine by reading more books under a librarian’s monitoring.
On Thursday, the day the amnesty goes into effect, Ms. Beckford said she plans to march her children to the library to return their overdue books. “When the day comes that they waive the fines, we will be the first people in line with books in our hands,” she said.