When a group of Cub Scouts met with a Colorado state senator this month, they asked her about some of the most controversial topics in the nation: gun control, the environment, race and the proposed border wall between the United States and Mexico.
On Oct. 14, five days after the event with Ms. Marble, Ms. Mayfield was asked to meet the leader of the Cub Scout pack who oversees a number of dens in Broomfield, including the one Ames belonged to.
“He communicated that my son was no longer welcome back to the den,” she said.
Ms. Mayfield said the den leader’s response might have been fueled by her decision to post the videos of the senator’s interaction with the scouts online, where they were picked up by the local news media.
She also said she was told the den leader had been upset by other references in Ames’s long question, such as pointing out that the senator was a Republican and that gun ownership was considered a right while health care was seen as a privilege.
On Friday, in response to questions about why Ames was removed from the den, the Boy Scouts of America said only that Ames was now in another unit.
“The Boy Scouts of America and the Denver Area Council are pleased that the family will continue their participation in Scouting,” the statement said.
“We are committed to working with families to find local units that best fit their needs,” it said.
The organization declined to respond to multiple requests for more details about what Ms. Mayfield had been told by the local pack leader.
On Friday, Ms. Marble, the state senator, did not respond to an email or a voice mail message seeking comment.
But the meeting and its backlash sent ripples through the organization and the community. The local Boy Scouts group in Broomfield distanced itself in a short statement at the top of its website.
The incident was also covered extensively by news outlets in Colorado, partly because, in addition to gun control, Ames had asked Ms. Marble about remarks she made in 2013 about the causes of health issues among black people.
“I was astonished that you blamed black people for poor health and poverty because of all the chicken and barbecue they eat,” Ames said.
After the Cub Scout event, local news outlets reported on the gun question but also resurfaced Ms. Marble’s remarks from 2013 and the controversy they posed at the time. Among the objections were those of an African-American state legislator, Representative Rhonda Fields.
“When you look at life expectancy, there are problems in the black race,” Ms. Marble said in 2013. “Sickle-cell anemia is something that comes up. Diabetes is something that’s prevalent in the genetic makeup, and you just can’t help it.

Last week The Post published separate editorials about Ms. Marble’s comments and Ames’s dismissal. In one, it said Ms. Marble should have seen the event and Ames’s questions as an educational opportunity. “We’re sad to see her trying to lie them away now,” it said.
Ms. Mayfield said she had chosen a new pack for Ames, who is set to become a Boy Scout in February. She said Ames had felt let down by the den leader’s decision because he thought they shared a close relationship.
