WASHINGTON — President Trump threatened on Tuesday to use federal tax law to penalize the National Football League over players who kneel in protest during the national anthem, but the White House later backed off, saying he was only making a point.
The tax break for the N.F.L. has been a point of controversy for years, and other conservatives have taken up the cause in recent weeks as the president has repeatedly assailed the league over the player protests. But the idea would be more about symbolism than impact. The tax break applies only to the central office, not the teams, which are the real moneymakers and already pay taxes as for-profit organizations, and the N.F.L. voluntarily gave up the office’s tax exemption in 2015.
At a news briefing later in the day, Sarah Huckabee Sanders, the White House press secretary, said the president was making a statement, not a proposal. She noted that professional football teams benefit when local and state governments help them build stadiums but did not suggest that Congress should try to block those lower governments from doing so.
Mr. Trump on Tuesday also focused his fire again on Jemele Hill, the “SportsCenter” host on ESPN who previously called the president a white supremacist. Ms. Hill was suspended on Monday for suggesting that fans boycott advertisers of the Dallas Cowboys after the team owner, Jerry Jones, threatened to bench players who knelt during the national anthem.
“With Jemele Hill at the mike, it is no wonder ESPN ratings have ‘tanked,’ in fact, tanked so badly it is the talk of the industry!” Mr. Trump wrote on Twitter.
ESPN has faced significant challenges recently and is now available in just under 88 million homes, compared with 100 million homes in 2011. In the first half of 2017, its prime-time ratings were up 1 percent compared with the same period in 2016, although its total day ratings were down more than 5 percent. But ESPN is still a ratings behemoth and still highly profitable. In the third quarter, it led full-time cable networks in total day and prime-time ratings among the key demographics of men ages 18 to 54.
The president continues to be animated by his fight with the sports world. He has enthusiastically kept up his attacks on the N.F.L., with which he has a long history of antagonism. A onetime owner of the New Jersey Generals in the upstart United States Football League, Mr. Trump persuaded other owners to sue the N.F.L. using antitrust law. The U.S.F.L. won the case, but the jury awarded only $1 in damages — tripled to $3 by law — and Mr. Trump’s league ultimately folded.
Last month, after the kneeling controversy erupted, a Republican congressman, Representative Matt Gaetz of Florida, introduced legislation stripping professional sports leagues of tax-exempt status, an idea that has been debated on Capitol Hill for years.
In a conference call with reporters on Tuesday, Joe Lockhart, the N.F.L. spokesman, said the league receives no “massive” tax breaks, as Mr. Trump contended.
Regarding the player protests, Mr. Lockhart said the league’s 260-page game operations manual has not changed and he highlighted the precise language governing the anthem. The players, he said, “must” be on the sidelines during the playing of the anthem and “should” stand for the anthem. The league, however, has “not chosen to discipline any of the players” who have not stood for the anthem, he said.
Sports teams have benefited in other ways under tax law. Many franchises have built new stadiums in cooperation with cities and states that floated bonds to finance construction. Municipal bonds are exempt from federal taxes, leading critics to complain that taxpayers are subsidizing profitable private businesses. Mr. Lockhart said local government subsidies hade been an “economic engine” for those communities.
A study by the Brookings Institution last year concluded that three dozen sports franchises from the N.F.L., Major League Baseball, National Basketball Association and National Hockey League had financed stadiums since 2000 using tax-exempt municipal bonds.
The biggest beneficiary was not a football franchise but the New York Yankees, the president’s hometown baseball team, which Brookings estimated saved $492 million as a result. Among the football owners who have benefited from such bonds was Mr. Trump’s friend Mr. Jones, whose Dallas Cowboys saved $88 million in building AT&T Stadium.
It was unclear how Congress might prohibit states, counties and cities from deciding how to spend their tax revenue, or whether it could undo deals that were approved years ago. It is also unclear whether it would be possible for legislators to target teams in one league, like the N.F.L., and not another, like Major League Baseball.
The federal government has limited room to act against the N.F.L. in other areas. The league has all but abandoned its policy of blacking out games in home markets when teams fail to sell out their stadiums, giving the Federal Communications Commission less oversight over professional football. The league, however, does have something akin to an antitrust exemption, thanks to a 1966 law, that allows every team to band together to negotiate television deals.
As part of his campaign against sports figures who have criticized him, the president on Tuesday hosted the N.H.L. champions at the White House. He invited the Stanley Cup winning Pittsburgh Penguins a day after disinviting the Golden State Warriors of the N.B.A. because its star, Stephen Curry, said he would vote against attending.