The sculptor, firmly entrenched in downtown New York, is an original Pop Art star with an undeniable legacy.
This story is one of the seven covers of T Magazine’s Greats issue, on newsstands Oct. 22.
IT SEEMS SOMEHOW fitting that the only permanent public artwork in New York City by Claes Oldenburg — the undisputed master of Brobdingnagian outdoor sculpture and a New Yorker for more than 60 years — is a piece you can’t see and that practically no one knows exists. Even to say that it exists may be stretching things. Called “Placid Civic Monument,” it was made over the course of a few hours on a bright Sunday in October 1967, when Oldenburg, with the city’s permission, enlisted two union gravediggers to shovel out one of their standard earthen receptacles — a hole 6 feet by 3 feet by 6 feet deep — behind the Metropolitan Museum of Art, in view of the ancient Egyptian obelisk; after lunch, they filled the hole up again.
Oldenburg’s art grave always reminds me how profoundly strange an artist he has been. And how easy it is, because of the impact of his work on successors as varied as Jeff Koons and Rachel Harrison, to forget just how radical his work was when it first appeared, expanding the definition of sculpture by making it somehow more accessibly human and more cerebral at the same time, a feat that has kept it resonant in a rapidly changing art world.
Yet when compared to the ice-cold irony of Warhol’s silkscreens or the colorful exuberance of paintings by James Rosenquist, Tom Wesselmann or Rosalyn Drexler, Oldenburg’s work, especially his enduring innovation — rendering sculpture literally soft, through re-creations of everyday things (ice cream cones, typewriters, toilets) that sag from the wall or bag on the floor — looked, and still look, like marvelous reprobates. In the Pop room of any museum gallery, they smirk and slouch and revel in playing at art, seeming to be both the comedians and the clinical depressives.
THESE WORDS in mind, you don’t fully expect what greets you when you walk into the studio and home Oldenburg has kept on the still-gritty far west side of SoHo since 1971, a five-story warehouse where naval propellers were once manufactured. Inside, it’s as immaculate and organized as a museum. Surfaces gleam and light falls beautifully on the maquettes for public sculpture that line the walls. Slim in khakis and tennis shoes, Oldenburg was sitting in one of the large office spaces with an assistant and wasn’t able to get up to greet me. A fall last year broke his hip, forcing him to get around with a cane or by propelling himself across the floors on rolling office chairs. His daughter, Maartje Oldenburg, who spent most of her childhood in this rambling building and is now an expert on his career, had arrived just as I did, and we convened at a big table her father had piled with boxes of files, like a lawyer preparing for a deposition.
“I guess I was always an archivist,” he said, smiling, surveying the spread, his glasses and ponderous forehead giving him an owllike bearing.
 But today he seemed to be in the mood for some serious retrospection: The first drawings he pulled from a folder were ones he made in middle school and high school in Chicago, where his father, Gosta, a Swedish diplomat, had moved the family in 1936 from Oslo upon being posted to the United States as a consul.
Growing up in wartime Chicago gave Oldenburg, a bookish child of Europe, a firm purchase on America’s brashness, inseparable from its boorishness and brutality. That sense informed the ragtag, anxious nature of his early pieces, work that seems to gain political relevance with each passing year. His childhood drawings — schematics of war planes, storyboard cartoons, caricatures of classmates — aren’t anything special. But they immediately reveal three things: He was a preternaturally talented draftsman from the start; he was always wickedly funny; and he has always had an engineer’s passion for the built world. It’s no accident that many of his best drawings over the years have taken the form of grandly elaborate blueprints and architectural renderings, making him a charter member of what I like to think of as the schematic school of late Modernism (other members would include Bruce Nauman, Lee Lozano and Chris Burden).
But his wandering, he said, gave him the courage to try New York. He moved there in 1956, and it was as if the city had been waiting for him. The Abstract Expressionist revolution was running low on gas. The year before, Robert Rauschenberg had made “Bed,” one of his first so-called combines, a melding of painting and sculpture, by drawing and splashing paint on his pillow and his patchwork quilt and stretching them on a wooden frame. Not long before, Jasper Johns had begun his edge-to-edge American flags, rendering an icon not as an image in a painting but as an object in itself. Formal orthodoxies were being detonated in studios all over Manhattan, and Oldenburg could feel the tremors.
Drawing on a longstanding interest in the primitivism of Jean Dubuffet and thinkers about ritual and symbolism like Sigmund Freud and his pupil Wilhelm Stekel, he began making raw pieces that seemed to come straight from the id. They included the first iterations of Ray Gun, a mutable symbol for himself roughly in the shape of a toy laser pistol, a form that continues to fascinate him to this day. (On a visit to the studio’s second floor, he came across a piece of cardboard with three ray-gun shapes on it that appeared to be old raisin cookies nibbled into shape and then glued down. “Not sure what this was for,” he said, looking it over quizzically.) His other alter-ego, my favorite, is a geometrically minimalist mouse head that evokes Mickey and the reels of a film projector, as well as a kind of twilight-zone Modernist future. This symbol took its most improbable physical form in his “Mouse Museum.” An obsessive collection of small pieces and punning found objects (plastic bananas in conversation with dildos), the museum was born in his studio and eventually came to inhabit a snug, vitrine-filled, gallery-size structure shaped like the mouse head, designed by him and van Bruggen; the collection has been periodically exhibited, including a showing at Documenta 5 in Kassel, Germany, in 1972.
AS HE APPROACHES his ninth decade, Oldenburg has slowed his once-furious pace of productivity, but he is still at work on public projects and large-scale sculpture. He’s finishing a private commission in California called “Dropped Bouquet,” a colorful maquette of which sits in his studio, and he’ll have a show of new works at Pace Gallery this month in N.Y.C. His energy — some of which goes into a stationary bike he is using to strengthen his legs — remains remarkable. Nearing the end of the third hour of our interview, he kept trying and failing to bring it to a close, spotting other things to talk about, ferrying me up and down in the building’s creaky old freight elevator, big enough to fit a small car.
Unlike some other old masters of the New York downtown scene (Jasper Johns, who now lives in Connecticut; Rauschenberg, who died in 2008 and spent much of the later part of his life in Florida) Oldenburg has remained resolutely in the city that nourished his work, with only a couple of periods away in Los Angeles and France, where he and van Bruggen bought and renovated a chateau.
As if to prove her point, he took us to see some small assemblage works he has been tinkering with, simple but unruly arrangements of inconsequential junk on small metal shelves. One in progress consisted of not much more than a cardboard figure of a pinup girl, a brown foam Berenstain Bears novelty headband, some paint-dipped stirrers and a piece of red rope. It looked unaccountably like a deconstructed view of Cezanne’s bathers.
