Amazon Studios declined to order another season of the feminist series “Good Girls Revolt” last year, just as the show’s relevance was on the rise.
The series, set in 1969 and ’70, told the story of a fictional magazine, “News of the Week,” where women were harassed and barred from being reporters. In Episode 10, the women filed a lawsuit seeking equal treatment. That was the finale of the first season, and the show was not picked up for a second.
That might have been the end of it — just another show, cut short at a cliffhanger, good while it lasted.
But conversations about equal rights for women in the workplace have heated up in recent months as a series of prominent men — including the producer Harvey Weinstein, the director James Toback, the journalist Mark Halperin and the news anchor Bill O’Reilly — have faced multiple allegations of sexual harassment or assault from women in their respective industries.

Now, fans of the series are wondering whether it might have survived under different leadership.
Still, she was surprised to learn — the very next day — that it would not be picked up for a second season. “It didn’t line up. It was confusing. It just didn’t make sense,” she said.
The series was inspired by a nonfiction book, “The Good Girls Revolt,” by Lynn Povich, a journalist who worked at Newsweek during the 1960s. She was one of dozens of women who filed a sex discrimination lawsuit against the newsmagazine in 1970.
The actor Joy Bryant played Eleanor Holmes Norton in the series, a character named for the real-life lawyer who represented the women suing Newsweek.
“All the actors who worked on the show understood the importance of what we were doing, and how we really needed to honor the story and honor these women,” Ms. Bryant said in a phone interview.
She spent time getting to know Ms. Norton, who became the first woman to lead the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in 1977 and is now the District of Columbia’s delegate to the United States House of Representatives.
Ms. Bryant said she was “blindsided” when the show was not picked up for a second season, and the drama was heightened by real-world events. Season 1 began streaming on Amazon in late October, just before Donald J. Trump beat Hillary Clinton in the presidential election.
“That happened, and that happened, and it was like … we’re really operating against some crazy forces right now,” she said.
Anna Camp, who played the strait-laced magazine researcher Jane Hollander, said she was “shocked” when the series was not renewed.
Ms. Povich said the outcry reminded her that “there is power in numbers,” a lesson she learned at Newsweek during the 1960s and 1970s.
“It was a complicated time,” Ms. Povich said, adding that the newsmagazine resisted hiring permanent female writers even after the 1970 complaint. A second lawsuit in 1972 laid out more concrete goals and seemed to achieve better results, including Ms. Povich’s appointment to a senior editor position in 1975.
Ms. Povich worked with Ms. Calvo to shape the show and said she was sorry to see it end. “I cannot tell you how many young women I heard from who loved the series, and who also had no idea what my generation or their mothers’ generation or their grandmothers’ generation went through,” she said.
Amazon Studios, the company’s original programming division, does not release viewership data. “We had high hopes for Good Girls Revolt when it was green-lighted, but it had a low season completion rate, and did not perform well on the service,” the company said in an emailed statement.
A spokesman would not speculate on whether the company might consider signing on for a second season, and declined to confirm who made the decision not to renew in 2016.
