Theater|In ‘The Honeymooners’ on Stage, the Kramdens Don’t Just Squabble. They Sing.
In ‘The Honeymooners’ on Stage, the Kramdens Don’t Just Squabble. They Sing.
MILLBURN, N.J. — Here on the stage of Paper Mill Playhouse, Michael McGrath and Leslie Kritzer were rehearsing what appeared to be a conventional scene from “The Honeymooners,” the 1950s sitcom.
Against the backdrop of a luxurious apartment far beyond their modest means, Mr. McGrath, playing the rotund blowhard Ralph Kramden, was apologizing to Ms. Kritzer, as his endlessly forgiving wife, Alice, for another harebrained scheme gone awry.
With a busload of catchphrases and a cultural impact as estimable as Ralph Kramden’s waistline, “The Honeymooners” was bound to be a musical adaptation someday. Now, after a yearslong development process, this stage show will have its opening on Sunday, Oct. 8.
“The Honeymooners,” in its best-known incarnation as a CBS series, starred Jackie Gleason and Audrey Meadows (playing the Kramdens) and Art Carney and Joyce Randolph (as their neighbors, Ed and Trixie Norton), a pair of blue-collar couples with big dreams that perpetually elude them.
The simple dynamics it depicted – the relationship between a man and his wife, and between that man and his best friend – are fundamentals that the cast and creators of the “Honeymooners” musical hope to duplicate.
The “Honeymooners” musical, which also stars Michael Mastro and Laura Bell Bundy as Ed and Trixie, has its share of winking references to the original sitcom. Even Mr. McGrath and Ms. Kritzer’s brief number suggests the TV show’s opening credits, in which New York is lit by a full moon bearing Mr. Gleason’s face.
But as the musical is refined for its world premiere – and a hoped-for Broadway transfer – the people behind it must consider whether it can be more than just a re-enactment of an old TV show, and what this venerated property might have to say to a modern audience.
Though many have tried, sitcoms haven’t often been successfully adapted into straight-faced musicals. A “Happy Days” stage show, with a book by the series creator Garry Marshall, played a few regional productions (including at Paper Mill in 2007) and a national tour but never Broadway. “The Addams Family,” a musical adapted from the macabre Charles Addams cartoons that also tried to leverage nostalgia for the 1960s sitcom, was buried on Broadway but has toured widely.
With a book by the TV writers Dusty Kay (“Roseanne”) and Bill Nuss (“Pacific Blue”), music by Stephen Weiner and lyrics by Peter Mills, “The Honeymooners” tells a new story that would not have felt out of place on the original sitcom.
Working together, the pair not only win the jingle-writing contest but also land new jobs at a Madison Avenue advertising agency, putting them on a path to what they hope are better lives for themselves and their spouses.
The project has been in the works since at least 2011, when Jerry Mitchell (“Kinky Boots”) was attached to direct and Jim Belushi was slated to play Ralph.
Mr. McGrath, a Tony winner for “Nice Work if You Can Get It,” said that when he was approached for the lead role, it irresistibly conjured up a childhood spent watching “Honeymooners” reruns with his father.
Though Mr. Gleason’s portrayal of Ralph could be brusque, Mr. McGrath said his version tries to find a sympathetic side underneath the bombast and the fat suit.
“Whenever he goes berserk, blows his stack or says the wrong thing, he learns a lesson, and it’s usually Alice that teaches it to him,” Mr. McGrath said.
Ms. Kritzer, who has previously performed in the Broadway adaptations of “Legally Blonde” (with Ms. Bundy) and “A Catered Affair,” said the challenge of playing Alice was realizing the full potential of a character who, in her era, was not allowed to be much more than an apron-clad housewife.
That request, Ms. Kritzer said, was satisfied in part by a new musical number, called “A Woman’s Work,” which was added to the show after a recent workshop.
As “The Honeymooners” begins its first performances in front of paying audiences, Mr. Rando said he and his colleagues are still trying to find a balance between the comedy that audiences expect and the romance that a musical can provide.
There is no guarantee that any abiding affection for the TV show will translate into critical or commercial success for the musical. A “Honeymooners” movie, which was set in the present day and starred Cedric the Entertainer and Mike Epps, was a box-office dud in 2005.
If done right, “The Honeymooners” could have a life beyond its limited monthlong run at Paper Mill.
Still, Mark S. Hoebee, Paper Mill’s producing artistic director, sought to temper expectations that “The Honeymooners” was being groomed for a similar transfer.
At the moment, Mr. McGrath and Ms. Kritzer were focused on fine-tuning their performances to resemble their TV alter egos as best they could.
Mr. McGrath said he had been attempting to style his hair to mimic Mr. Gleason’s greased-up coif without much success.
