Roy Price, the executive in charge of Amazon’s growing investment in movies and television shows, was suspended by the company on Thursday after a Hollywood producer publicly accused him of making unwanted sexual advances toward her.
Mr. Price, the head of Amazon Studios, was accused of lewdly propositioning Isa Dick Hackett, a producer of one of its most popular shows, in an interview with The Hollywood Reporter published earlier in the day.
In the interview, Ms. Hackett, an executive producer of the Amazon series “The Man in the High Castle,” said that Mr. Price had repeatedly made unwanted sexual advances toward her two years ago after a dinner at Comic-Con in San Diego.
When reached by The New York Times on Thursday, Ms. Hackett said she was “talked out” but said that the details in the article, written by Kim Masters, were accurate.
“I just wanted to get that out,” Ms. Hackett said in the brief phone interview.
According to the Hollywood Reporter article, Ms. Hackett entered a cab on July 10, 2015, with Mr. Price and Michael Paull, then an executive at Amazon and now the chief executive of BamTech, as they were making their way to an after party. Ms. Hackett said that Mr. Price repeatedly propositioned her in the cab, once making use of a vulgar term for male genitalia. At the party, Ms. Hackett said, Mr. Price approached her while she was speaking to other executives and shouted “Anal sex!” directly in her ear.
Isa Dick Hackett in 2015.
In The Hollywood Reporter article, Ms. Hackett said she had been inspired to come forward after the publication of articles in The Times and The New Yorker that detailed accusations of abuse from numerous women against the film mogul Harvey Weinstein.
Mr. Price has been with Amazon since 2004, and became the head of Amazon Studios three years ago. When The Information story was published, he was represented by Lisa Bloom, the lawyer who recently resigned as an adviser to Mr. Weinstein. Ms. Bloom has also represented women who brought sexual harassment claims against the actor Bill Cosby and the former Fox News host Bill O’Reilly.
Earlier Thursday, Rose McGowan, an actress who reached a settlement with Mr. Weinstein in 1997 after an episode at a film festival, posted a series of tweets directed at Jeff Bezos, the chief executive of Amazon, saying she had told the head of Amazon Studios that Mr. Weinstein had raped her. Ms. McGowan did not mention Mr. Price by name and did not respond to a message on Twitter asking for clarification.
