That 68-year-old Broadway ingénue, Bruce Springsteen, was nowhere to be seen at the Hard Rock Cafe in Times Square on Thursday night, having briefly slipped in and out of the after-party being held to celebrate the opening of his show at the Walter Kerr Theater a few hours earlier.
But for many in the crowd, happily lining up at the buffet station or waving down waiters as they walked by with platters of pigs-in-a-blanket, the absence of Bruce as a fellow party guest (as well as most of the opening-night notables, including Tina Fey, Steven Spielberg, Tom Hanks, Jon Stewart and David Geffen) didn’t seem to take away from the thrill of what they had just witnessed on that Broadway stage a few blocks away.
Some guests swapped tales of how many times they had seen Mr. Springsteen in concert before — “Six times,” one said; “This is just my third,” responded another — or complimented the singing voice of his wife, Patti Scialfa, who joined her husband for two duets, including a moving rendition of "Brilliant Disguise.” Others opined that, at times, the 15-song performance seemed like a particularly excellent episode of the old VH1 “Storytellers” series.
But it was a Springsteen newbie, the theater director Rachel Chavkin (“Nope, I have never seen him perform live before”), who seemed to be most moved by the experience.
She said she was particularly moved by Mr. Springsteen’s full-throated performance of “The Rising,” written in response to 9/11. The song’s “lack of sentimentality, and the fierce feeling — so much more potent now than even when it was written — that the country will rise again” had her dissolving into tears yet again, she said.
“We were clinging to each other all throughout the show,” interjected her friend, Libby King, an actress.
In another room at the party, the producer Jordan Roth was accepting congratulations for bringing “Springsteen on Broadway” to life. The show did extraordinarily well at the box office in its first week of previews, with an average ticket price of $497, and the entire four-month run is sold out except for a few tickets held back each day for an online lottery. It is also one of two blockbuster shows that Mr. Roth will be producing this Broadway season. The other is a much-anticipated revival of “Angels in America,” starring Nathan Lane and Andrew Garfield, that starts at the Neil Simon Theater in late February.
“Just a fantastic night, wasn’t it?” Mr. Roth said, clad from head to toe in Alexander McQueen red leather.
But, Mr. Roth said, based on what he had seen so far in the previews running up to opening night, audiences have not come to the 939-seat theater expecting the same kind of experience they may have gotten over the years at Madison Square Garden or the Prudential Center.
This is not a concert; this is a piece of theater, Mr. Roth reiterated.
With that, the producer turned to pose for publicity photos. “Great show,” someone called out. Mr. Roth beamed.