SETTING One of a cluster of old double-layered brick buildings that were possibly used as ice houses, this home is in the popular North End neighborhood of Boise, half a mile from downtown and near several parks and the riverside path known as the Green Belt.
INDOORS The building has been stripped back to its walls and rafters, and updated with new plumbing, electrical, HVAC and insulation. The flooring is reclaimed lumber from an Idaho hops-drying barn. A new birch spiral staircase opened up space for a living/dining/kitchen area on the ground floor. The custom kitchen includes an island with walnut veneer, glass shelves, abundant storage and a library ladder for reaching all of it. A bathroom has a shower with subway tile.
Upstairs, the master suite has a bathroom with custom cabinetry, a free-standing tub, a glass-walled shower and a patio with mountain views. A 1,000-square-foot basement is not included in assessments of the house’s total area.
Two structures have been added to the property: a one-car garage and an unfinished 500-square-foot commercially or residentially zoned building with electricity, gas, sewer and water hookups.
OUTDOOR SPACE A narrow door on the ground floor (too “cute” to sacrifice, the developers said) leads to a patio with new lighting, irrigation and plantings of weeping hemlock, purple fountain beech, Serbian spruce and white pine. Screens were installed to grow vines for added privacy. In addition to the garage, a space at the back of the house has room for three cars.
SETTING The house is in the Columbia County town of Hillsdale, several miles west of the Massachusetts border. The Hawthorne Valley Waldorf School, with a biodynamic farm of more than 700 acres, is a two-minute drive down the road.
INDOORS Designed by Adam Rolston, a New York architect, the energy-efficient house was built with low-maintenance cedar wood and has a standing-seam metal roof. The two bedrooms, each with its own bathroom, flank a large interior space that contains the living, dining and kitchen areas and has sliding glass doors opening to the front and back of the house. The floors are polished concrete, warmed with radiant heat that can be supplemented, when necessary, by the wood-burning stove. The kitchen has custom walnut cabinetry and a stainless-steel-topped island with integrated sinks. The master bathroom has a cast-iron tub and steam shower; the guest bathroom a shower and washer/dryer.
OUTDOOR SPACE The current owners extended the rear deck and installed a heated gunite swimming pool with a retractable cover on the three-and-a half-acre property. Beyond the pool is a large, rolling lawn with a vegetable garden. A berm partially obscures the house from the road, and there is a gravel parking area on the side.
SETTING The house is on a corner lot in a historic section of Traverse City once known as Silk Stocking Row. It is a short walk from downtown restaurants and boutiques and several blocks from the bay and beaches.
INDOORS Restored millwork is the house’s calling card, beginning at the front entrance, where the wood surrounds panels of leaded glass, and continuing to the grand coffered staircase and coffered ground-floor ceiling.
Stretching alongside the foyer is a 12-by-31-foot parlor that includes a fireplace with ionic columns and a tiled hearth. This room connects to the original formal dining room, and beyond that to the kitchen, pantry area and powder room.
Upstairs, the ceiling decoration shifts to painted stars, diamonds, flourishes and florals. On this floor are four large bedrooms and two full baths, one with a claw-foot tub and walk-in shower.
OUTDOOR SPACE A wraparound porch can be used for dining and entertaining. The quarter-acre property includes a fenced yard with an in-ground pool, fountain, brick patio and two-car garage reached by a rear alley.
