New York|Drama Book Shop Celebrates Its Centennial. But Is It Too Late?
Drama Book Shop Celebrates Its Centennial. But Is It Too Late?
In planning for the 100th anniversary celebration of the Drama Book Shop in Midtown Manhattan on Monday, no detail was overlooked. Fresh blue carpeting was installed on the stairs. The 50-seat basement theater was stocked with black cushioned chairs. And the bookshelves — lined with scripts, plays and monologues — were dusted off.
But in preparing for the centennial event, the owners uncovered a slight problem: The shop may have been founded in 1916, meaning their milestone celebration would be — oops — one year late.
When asked about the shop’s history, Mr. Hubby would tell friends and customers that the bookstore started in 1917, not as a physical shop, but as a stack of books sold from a card table in the lobby of the ANTA Theater (now the August Wilson Theater). That is, until he recently learned that the theater didn’t exist until 1925.
But this is what is known, and true: Stars like Katharine Hepburn, José Ferrer, Marlene Dietrich, Bette Midler and Alan Cumming have graced the shop’s aisles of theatrical works. Lin Manuel Miranda, the creator and former star of “Hamilton,” wrote most of his musical “In the Heights” on the black Yamaha piano in the Arthur Seelen Theater in the basement. And the store has a Tony Award, given for “Excellence in Theater” in 2011.
The bookshop has always been adored by New York City theater enthusiasts, actors and scholars in search of a specific work or handbook — such as a monologue for an imminent audition, an instruction manual on making a 19th-century Englishwoman’s dress, or a guide to speaking with a Yiddish accent.
As for its beginnings, the shop began in the offices of the Drama League, a membership association for theatergoers and practitioners that began operating in New York in 1916, said Gabriel Stelian-Shanks the executive artistic director of the Drama League.
According to the League’s records, the first president of the New York Drama League, Edward Fallows, established the bookstore, thought to be the nation’s first and oldest performing arts bookshop, in 1917 at 7 West 42nd Street. The League had declared 1917 to be the “American Drama Year,” to promote American theater, and part of that project would be the creation of a Drama League Bookshop for Plays, according to a Dec. 10, 1916 article in The New York Times.
When the bookshop was no longer financially stable, Mr. Stelian-Shanks said, it was sold to Marjorie Seligman, a wealthy member of the League. It was incorporated as a business in 1923.
Under Ms. Seligman, the store met the growing demand at the time for plays among the general population, not just theatergoers.
Indeed, the most popular titles at the shop in the early 1930s were plays on Broadway at the time: “Once in a Lifetime,” by Moss Hart and George S. Kaufman; “Private Lives” by Noël Coward; and “Tomorrow and Tomorrow” by Philip Barry. Also popular were plays for schools and amateurs along with modern classics from writers like Eugene O’Neill and George Bernard Shaw, Ms. Seligman told the Brooklyn Daily Eagle in 1931. The work of J.M. Barrie, who created Peter Pan, was the most requested.
The bookshop was not without its scares. A fire ravaged its stacks in 1979, ruining a collection of signed first editions of books. A broken pipe flooded the store in the winter of 2016, damaging the advice for actors section, among others.
“I thought that was going to do us in,” Ms. Seelen said of the flood. But Mr. Miranda along with school groups and others came to the rescue because of their affection for the store.
Today, the shop is often filled with the sound of music and murmurs from the Story Pirates, a children’s theater group that practices upstairs. Customers can find international plays in translation from Russia to Argentina, musical libretti from current Broadway plays and a collection of works by and about Shakespeare (their largest section). There are also rarer items, like a 31-volume set of the works of George Bernard Shaw ($1,550) and eight signed copies of “Hamilton: The Revolution” (priced at “whatever you’re willing to pay,” Mr. Hubby said).
Both Mr. Hubby and Ms. Seelen say it is their knowledgeable staff — who know just the script for that art school audition or even the phone number for a good agent — that keeps customers returning.
“And we’re willing to chase a title down the street,” Ms. Seelen said.
Caroline Woods, 50, a theater director who was browsing the shop last week, would agree.
As for the Drama Book Shop sign and website, which still carry the description “Since 1917,” don’t expect a change anytime soon.
