CHICAGO — Dusty Baker has managed almost 1,800 games since that fateful night, so many years ago, when ghosts still haunted Wrigley Field and played their cruelest trick. The Chicago Cubs banished them forever last autumn, finally capturing a World Series title after more than a century of anguish. In the end, perhaps, the torment of waiting made the triumph even sweeter.
Baker is still waiting, and before he leaves town, he could be back in the National League Championship Series for the first time since that doomed 2003 playoff run in which he was managing the Cubs. After splitting the first two games of this best-of-five division series, Baker’s Washington Nationals will play the Cubs in Games 3 and 4 here on Monday and Tuesday.
After Terry Collins, 68, resigned as the Mets’ manager at the end of the regular season, Baker — also 68 — became the oldest manager in the majors. He is unsigned for next season but is almost certain to return after leading the Nationals to their second National League East title in a row.
That was no surprise, because Baker has won at all of his managing stops: three playoff appearances with the San Francisco Giants, one with the Cubs, three more with the Cincinnati Reds and two with Washington. Just 13 managers have more regular-season victories than Baker’s 1,863, and all are in the Hall of Fame except Gene Mauch. All have won a championship, too, except Mauch.
Baker stayed three more seasons with the Cubs after they lost the 2003 National League pennant to the Marlins, who infamously scored eight runs in the eighth inning of a Game 6 comeback in the N.L.C.S. A Cubs fan deflected a catchable foul ball, a shortstop made an error, a bunch of Marlins got hits — the warmed-over details are well-known here.
But if Baker still felt connected to the Cubs, it did not show up in his rooting interest last fall. After the Nationals lost by one run to the Los Angeles Dodgers in the fifth game of their division series, Baker watched the World Series as a neutral observer. He had friends with both the Cleveland Indians and the Cubs.
Indeed, October heartbreak has stalked Baker’s teams since 2003. Before last October’s excruciating division series loss, his Reds lost in the same round in 2010 (Philadelphia’s Roy Halladay pitched a no-hitter in the opener) and in 2012, to the Giants, after winning the first two games on the road. The Reds replaced Baker after they lost the N.L. wild-card game in Pittsburgh the next season.
The Nationals hired Baker before the 2016 season after negotiations with another candidate, Bud Black, collapsed. A team that had underachieved in its final season under Matt Williams coalesced around Baker.
In a way, Baker’s pursuit of a title mirrors his team’s. Washington has won a World Series before, and so has Baker, but both were much different then. The Washington team that won it was the Senators, a precursor to the Minnesota Twins, in 1924. When Baker won it, in 1981, he played left field for the Dodgers.
This is Baker’s 14th trip to the postseason (four as a player, one as a coach, nine as a manager), and he does not change with the seasons.
The Cubs had a light, optional workout on Sunday morning, with many players appearing on the field only to sample the breakfast arranged on the warning track behind the plate. Joe Maddon, the Cubs’ irreverent manager, has done this before in October, complete with an N.F.L. game on the video board. Maddon wore a Joe Namath jersey in the clubhouse, though he made no guarantees for his team.
“We’re not there yet,” he said, smiling.
The Nationals held an afternoon workout, with no food or football in sight. Everyone took batting practice or fielded balls in the outfield, just as they would in the regular season. The Cubs’ offbeat vibe is not Baker’s style.
