Business|Warehouse Conversions Aren’t Just for Cities Anymore. Or Just for Warehouses.
Warehouse Conversions Aren’t Just for Cities Anymore. Or Just for Warehouses.
The notion that old commercial buildings could enjoy a second life as places to live and work was popularized by artists in Manhattan’s SoHo neighborhood in the 1960s, when dusty warehouses started to give way to studios and apartments.
And in the ensuing years, the trend seemed to play out mostly in dense urban areas, where tight quarters necessitated that residents be creative.
Now, however, in an era when homes and offices seem to embrace industrial décor, such “adaptive-reuse” projects are turning up in more suburban areas, in a slew of building types, like power plants, churches, schools, prisons, railroad stations, hospitals and factories.
Despite their growing popularity, the conversions can be complex, time-consuming and expensive, scaring off some developers. And projects can also risk a backlash: Plans for luxury housing in buildings that once employed entire neighborhoods may not sit well with every community.
But as the market for conversions expands, developers are becoming inventive, as with two current New York-area projects.
The former Arthur Kill Correctional Facility in a remote corner of Staten Island is being remade into a film and television production facility. And the Ponemah Mills complex in Norwich, Conn., largely deserted for decades, is adding apartments, stores, a gym and nature trails.
Tucked in the southeastern corner of Connecticut, in a region speckled with shuttered textile mills, Ponemah Mills, a collection of more than a dozen buildings on the Shetucket River, offers some striking sights.
Its red brick, mansard-roofed main building, which opened in 1871, stands five stories tall and is graced with two cupola-topped towers that recall the spires of a cathedral. Yet it has been largely quiet since the early 1970s, when most major mill operations ended.
Now, under an ambitious $98 million plan from a team led by Onekey, a New Jersey-based development firm, much of the complex is being reborn as the Lofts at Ponemah Mills.
As part of the first phase, which is budgeted at $38 million, half of that soaring main building is adding 116 one- to three-bedroom apartments with tall ceilings and 10-foot windows. Also in that building will be a small museum about the mill, which produced cotton fabric, typewriter ribbons and wings for early-20th-century airplanes.
In addition, Onekey has turned a separate structure into a gym with treadmills, a steam room and a sauna, alongside exposed-brick walls.
It won’t take a textile fortune to live at Ponemah, its developers said. Sixty percent of the units are being offered at below-market-rate rents, for those in certain income brackets, which works out to about $890 a month for one-bedrooms.
Market-rate one-bedrooms at the building, which opens this month, are about $1,000 a month, developers said.
In late September, interest in the property was strong, and not just from renters, said Richard Kingston, a vice president at the Simon Konover Company, which is handling leasing.
Curious residents were calling the rental office to find out what was happening to buildings that many considered a longtime eyesore, he said. So many people were calling, about 20 a day, that Mr. Kingston had to set up a call center just to field their queries, he said.
The building’s warm reception in some ways masks a difficult past. After the company bought the site for $4.5 million about a decade ago, Finbar O’Neill, Onekey’s director of operations, struggled to find financial backers. At the time, Mr. O’Neill wanted to build condos, a tough proposition in the middle of a severe housing downturn, he said.
After investing $8 million to clean up the mill and preserve it, Mr. O’Neill switched gears and reinvented the project as rentals, which helped qualify it for lucrative state and federal tax credits, especially because some of the units are considered affordable housing, he said.
Onekey, which has worked in other textile centers like Paterson, N.J., also decided to bring in partners, like the National Development Council, a nonprofit group that specializes in affordable-housing deals.
If Onekey is putting a new spin on an old structure, Broadway Stages, a production company that purchased the Arthur Kill Correctional Facility to use as the setting for prison scenes, is trying to keep things looking the same.
Other reminders of the complex’s past include rows of video monitors that flickered spookily in a guard tower and a solitary-confinement yard protected by a cage.
But it was not always clear where fact ended and fiction began. As it turned out, a sign warning about “contraband” had been affixed to a wall for a production shoot. Since 2016, the Arthur Kill complex has hosted “Orange Is the New Black,” the popular Netflix drama, as well as shows like “Blindspot,” “The Blacklist” and “The Sinner,” said Warren Cohn, a spokesman for Broadway Stages.
Though television shows could easily create a convincing prison using sets, they’re increasingly seeking out authenticity, said Gina Argento, the chief executive of Broadway Stages, which is headquartered in Brooklyn.
And cell-lined halls, Ms. Argento added, can enhance acting. “I imagine it helps the actor get into the mind-set that they’re in prison,” she said of the property, much of which was built in the early 1970s as a drug-treatment center.
Getting the complex up to speed was not easy. When Broadway Stages arrived in 2014 to use the facility temporarily before buying it, there was no power or running water, Mr. Cohn said. The property also needed to be secured for storing equipment, he said, adding that the company spent $3.5 million over two years on improvements.
Broadway Stages was under contract to buy the property, but the transaction was delayed because of a federal investigation into Mayor Bill de Blasio’s campaign fund-raising. Ms. Argento raised about $100,000 for the mayor in 2013. Investigators ultimately brought no charges against the mayor, and the Arthur Kill sale went ahead, changing hands this August for $7 million.
Under the terms of the deal, Broadway Stages must invest $20 million in the property in the next five years, or the state’s Empire State Development agency can take back the property.
The company is constructing a 12,000-square-foot soundstage in a gymnasium on the property; four other soundstages are planned. Broadway Stages has about 40 stages, in two locations in Brooklyn and Queens.
Plans include constructing editing facilities in an office once used by the Department of Motor Vehicles. Later, Broadway Stages may open the prison to the public for the kind of back-lot tours common in Hollywood, Ms. Argento said.
