BARCELONA, Spain — King Felipe VI of Spain stepped forcefully into the political crisis over Catalonia on Tuesday, accusing the region’s separatist leaders of “inadmissible disloyalty” and of creating “a situation of extreme gravity” that threatened the country’s constitution and unity.
The monarch’s televised address came at the close of a daylong general strike in Catalonia, as well as road blockades and a mass rally in downtown Barcelona, to protest Sunday’s police crackdown on voters as they took part in an independence referendum that had been declared illegal by Spain’s constitutional court.
Earlier in the day, protesters blocked dozens of roads across Catalonia. Farmers used their tractors to cut off highways, and demonstrators shut down some of the main roads in Barcelona. The strike, which was backed by the regional government of Catalonia, also brought the subway system and bus network to a standstill during most of the working day.
The protests took place amid high tensions and widespread uncertainty after the highly disputed referendum, which was carried out in defiance of the central government in Madrid and which touched off clashes between the Spanish police and citizens who were trying to cast ballots.
Many private sector companies remained opened for business, in part because Spain’s two main labor unions, which have argued that any such protest must be decided and coordinated nationwide, called on their Catalan members not to take part.
Almost 900 people were injured on Sunday, according to the Catalan authorities. The Spanish interior minister, Juan Ignacio Zoido, said on Monday that dozens of police officers also had suffered injuries.
The union representing officers of Spain’s Guardia Civil, or military police, issued a statement on Tuesday warning that the situation for the Spanish police in Catalonia was similar to that in the Basque region in 1981, at the height of the killings by the separatist group ETA.
Crowds of Catalans have surrounded hotels where Spanish police officers are staying, urging their immediate departure from the region, in line with a demand made on Monday by Carles Puigdemont, the separatist leader of Catalonia. Mr. Zoido, the Spanish minister, said on Tuesday that no Spanish police officer would abandon Catalonia.
The police union called on politicians in Madrid “not to give public opinion the feeling that there is no state.” The Spanish authorities, the union added, should either “protect or withdraw” the officers from Catalonia.
The standoff is also escalating tensions between the central and regional governments.
There was uncertainty about whether Mr. Puigdemont would unilaterally declare Catalonia’s independence, a move that would raise tensions even further.
Separatist leaders did not react immediately to the Felipe’s message on Tuesday evening, which carried an implicit warning that Madrid could take full control of Catalonia if separatists pushed their civil disobedience further. Felipe’s intervention, while unlikely to smooth relations between Madrid and Barcelona, could help rally Spain’s opposition parties around Mr. Rajoy, at a time when the Socialists have been ambivalent about how far the crackdown on Catalonia’s government should stretch.
The Catalan government announced that the independence referendum had been approved by 90 percent of almost 2.3 million voters, but it said that it would await complete returns before declaring the final result.
The preliminary figures could not be independently confirmed, and further doubt will be cast on the meaningfulness of the result because the referendum was held without an agreed census — making it unclear how many people were entitled to vote — and because most of Catalonia’s electorate did not take part. Madrid had asked potential voters to boycott the referendum.