Days after a series of sexual harassment allegations against the film producer Harvey Weinstein were reported by The New York Times, women continue to come forward to tell their stories.
At least 30 women have reportedly accused Mr. Weinstein of harassment, assault or worse, including, in recent days, Kate Beckinsale, Cara Delevingne and Claire Forlani.
Mr. Weinstein’s spokeswoman, Sallie Hofmeister, said in a statement on Tuesday that he denied engaging in nonconsensual sex and never punished women for rejecting him.
Mr. Weinstein was fired by the company he co-founded, the Weinstein Company, on Sunday.
Here are the stories of Mr. Weinstein’s accusers.
Just after she was chosen to star in an adaptation of the Jane Austen novel “Emma,” Gwyneth Paltrow said, she was invited to Mr. Weinstein’s hotel suite, where he suggested a massage in the bedroom. She said she refused.
Ms. Paltrow, 45, went on to star in movies including “Shakespeare in Love,” for which she won an Academy Award for Best Actress, “Iron Man” and “The Avengers,” and to found a lifestyle company, Goop. But at the time, she said, she was told to stay quiet.
“I was a kid, I was signed up, I was petrified,” she said.
In 1997, the actress Rose McGowan reached a settlement with Mr. Weinstein following a hotel room encounter with him during the Sundance Film Festival. She had recently played a memorable role in the slasher movie “Scream,” which came out in 1996.
The Times reported on the previously undisclosed $100,000 settlement last week. According to the document’s language, it “was not to be construed as an admission” by Mr. Weinstein.
Ms. McGowan, 44, took to social media to support the women coming forward with allegations against the producer — and to criticize the Hollywood personalities who remained silent.
In 1997, Ashley Judd, the actress known for movies including “Simon Birch” and “Divine Secrets of the Ya-Ya Sisterhood,” found herself in a hotel room with Mr. Weinstein in Beverly Hills, Calif., she said.
She had spent the day shooting the thriller “Kiss the Girls” and said that when she went to meet with Mr. Weinstein, he was wearing a bathrobe.
Ms. Judd, 49, told The Times that he asked if she would watch him shower and repeatedly suggested unwanted contact — a massage, a shoulder rub — in the face of repeated refusals.
“How do I get out of the room as fast as possible without alienating Harvey Weinstein?” she said she remembered thinking to herself.
In the early 1990s, the actress Rosanna Arquette, already known for her leading role in “Desperately Seeking Susan,” went to a hotel to get a script from Mr. Weinstein, she said, but was told to find him in his room. She said she encountered him in a bathrobe.
Ms. Arquette, 58, said he pulled her hand toward his crotch. She said he told her she was making a mistake when she resisted his advances. “I will never be that girl,” she recalled telling him on her way out of the room.
In Variety on Tuesday, Heather Graham said that Mr. Weinstein told her in a meeting in the early 2000s that he and his wife had an agreement that he could sleep with other women when he was out of town.
At a news conference on Tuesday, Louisette Geiss, a former actress and screenwriter, recounted a 2008 encounter with Mr. Weinstein that aligned with the accounts offered by other women. During what was intended to be a professional meeting, Mr. Weinstein pleaded with Ms. Geiss to watch him masturbate, suggesting it could help her career, she said.
Ambra Battilana Gutierrez, a model, told The New Yorker that Mr. Weinstein groped her breasts when he met with her in 2015, prompting her to alert the New York Police Department. In a sting operation the next day, she captured audio of Mr. Weinstein repeatedly telling her to go with him into his hotel room.
“Just sit with me. Don’t embarrass me in the hotel. I’m here all the time,” Mr. Weinstein can he heard saying in the recording, released on Tuesday by The New Yorker.
Tomi-Ann Roberts told The Times she was a college student and aspiring actress in 1984 when she met Mr. Weinstein while waiting tables in New York. After encouraging her to audition for one of his movies, Mr. Weinstein invited her to meet where he was staying. She said she arrived to find him naked in a bathtub and that he asked her to get naked, too.
She said she declined and left, feeling manipulated into believing he was genuinely interested in casting her.
Katherine Kendall, an actress known for roles on television and films including “Swingers,” and “A Gun for Jennifer,” said Mr. Weinstein once undressed and chased her around a living room.
The French actress Judith Godrèche was 24 when she met Mr. Weinstein at the Cannes Film Festival in 1996. He invited her to his hotel suite, she said to The Times, and then asked to give her a massage.
“The next thing I know, he’s pressing against me and pulling off my sweater,” she said to The Times, adding that managed to escape and leave the room.
Dawn Dunning said she was 24 when she met Mr. Weinstein in 2003. During a meeting in a hotel room, he offered her acting work if she would agree to have three-way sex with him, she said to The Times, adding that he grew angry after she laughed it off.
“You’ll never make it in this business,” she said he told her as she was leaving the room.
Lucia Evans told The New Yorker that Mr. Weinstein assaulted her at a Miramax office in 2004. There for a professional meeting, Ms. Evans said she soon found herself alone in an office with Mr. Weinstein when he forced her to perform oral sex on him, she said. “He’s a big guy. He overpowered me,” she said.
Asia Argento said to The New Yorker that Mr. Weinstein forced himself on her in 1997, kicking off what she acknowledged was a complicated relationship, involving subsequent sexual relations. She said she felt trapped by the power he had over her career. “After the rape, he won,” she said.
Mira Sorvino told The New Yorker that Mr. Weinstein pursued her in his hotel room and showed up at her apartment late one night. She had a professional relationship with Mr. Weinstein for years afterward, but the earlier incidents continued to affect her, she said. Ultimately, she suspected that her rejection of him had hurt her career.
In 2014, Mr. Weinstein told Emily Nestor that she could help her career by accepting his sexual advances, according to the accounts of colleagues to whom she described their private meeting. “She said he was very persistent and focused though she kept saying no for over an hour,” according to one Weinstein Company document cited by The Times.
Ms. de Caunes said Mr. Weinstein invited her to his Paris hotel room in 2010 under the pretense of showing her a book that would be adapted into a movie. Once there, she said, he undressed and told her to lie on the bed; she refused and fled.
“I know that everybody — I mean everybody — in Hollywood knows that it’s happening,” she said to The New Yorker.
The actress Jessica Barth told The New Yorker that she first met Mr. Weinstein in 1991. He invited her to his hotel room, she said, and asked for a naked massage while discussing casting her in a film.
Ms. Barth said that as she left, he promised her a meeting with a female executive. “He gave me her number, and I walked out and I started bawling,” she said.
The model and actress Cara Delevingne said in an Instagram post that Mr. Weinstein told her she would not make it as an actress if she dated women. 
Zoë Brock, a writer and model, wrote in a post on Medium that she was harassed by Mr. Weinstein in 1997, when she was 23. She said he insisted on massaging her until she ran into a bathroom and locked herself in.
“I wish I had spoken up sooner,” she wrote. “I wish I hadn’t thought this type of behavior was normal at the time. I wish I had thought there was something, anything, I could do to stop him from hurting women all these years.
Louise Godbold, a nonprofit director in Los Angeles, wrote in a blog post that she met with Mr. Weinstein in the early 1990s and decided to write about it after seeing other women come forward.
The artist and writer Liza Campbell wrote in The Times of London that she read about the allegations against Mr. Weinstein and “was struck by how amazingly familiar” the claims were. She said she met with the producer about potential work in 1995 in his hotel room, and he invited her to “jump in the bath” with him, prompting her to leave.
Florence Darel, a French actress, told People magazine that Mr. Weinstein propositioned her in the mid-1990’s while his wife was in an adjoining room. “What happened to me may not be illegal but it was inappropriate. Very inappropriate,” she said.
