A phenomenon seems to have taken hold of Dia: Chelsea on West 22nd Street in New York. A glowing green wormhole, drawn in space with lasers, appears to be tunneling through the gallery space, possibly to extend indefinitely.
“I want viewers to feel like this time-traveling device just happened here,” said the artist Rita McBride. She has created the installation, titled “Particulates,” by projecting 16 lasers across the 90-foot gallery in the form of a hyperbolic paraboloid, the mathematical shape physicists imagine such a theoretical passageway through the universe might take. Its green light beams illuminate particles of marble dust and water molecules colliding in the environment.
“It’s like looking at a part of the universe that you don’t normally see,” Ms. McBride said.
The piece was influenced in part by the history of Dia Art Foundation, founded in 1974 to support a small roster of all-male artists including Walter De Maria, Donald Judd and Dan Flavin in achieving ambitious and often site-specific projects.
In a visit last year to Dia: Beacon in New York State’s Hudson Valley, where the institution’s permanent collection is installed in a sprawling former Nabisco factory, Ms. McBride was directly inspired by Mr. Flavin’s gigantic sculpture of green fluorescent tubes forming a grid and stretching as a barrier wall to wall. It reminded her of how important such light and space work, hovering somewhere between objects and environments, had been in her decision to become an artist.
“I thought it would be a very interesting conversation to use lasers in the context of Dia,” said Ms. McBride, who bends the medium to explore her fascination with science fiction. Her interest in the genre stemmed from “always looking for alternative stories that we can somehow build on as women,” she said.
Since taking the helm at Dia in 2015, Ms. Morgan has been envisioning a different status quo for the institution, which had long skewed heavily male. When she arrived, there were only a handful of female artists, including Agnes Martin and Hanne Darboven, in the permanent collection.
Championing the presence of women on the staff and in exhibitions and acquisitions, Ms. Morgan in her short tenure has already made considerable strides toward the gender rebalancing of Dia. She has put together an entirely female curatorial team, including the new deputy director and chief curator, Courtney J. Martin, a 1960s specialist hired away from Brown University, and the associate curator Alexis Lowry, whose focus is on land art.
The British-born director, 49, has initiated exhibitions primarily of female artists like Charlotte Posenenske and Joëlle Tuerlinckx in addition to Ms. McBride. And Ms. Morgan has begun a strategic long-term plan to acquire large bodies of work by women made contemporaneously with that by men already well represented at Dia, including John Chamberlain, Fred Sandback, Michael Heizer and Bruce Nauman.
Immersive displays of works from the ’60s and ’70s by Joan Jonas, Jo Baer, Anne Truitt and Michelle Stuart have been on view at Beacon and are now part of the collection. New acquisitions by Dorothea Rockburne and Mary Corse will be installed in the early months of 2018.
Given the tight focus of the collection, now numbering just over 40 artists, the addition of even several women is noticeable. “Truitt was making these radical minimal forms with sculpture and painting combined in 1961, just at the same time as Judd and Flavin,” Ms. Morgan said.
These additions start to break down the monolithic reading of minimalism, said Donna De Salvo, deputy director for international initiatives and senior curator at the Whitney Museum of American Art. In the early 1980s, she was the curator at Dia when the institution had zero women in its collection — which, she pointed out, was not unusual for museums at the time.
