On his first visit to Senegal, Jake Michaels was inspired by the “curated” looks of many of his subjects. As he took portraits on streets, in cafes and at beachside nightclubs, he sought to make the people shine, while also spotlighting the action in the background.
In July, Jake Michaels spent a week in Senegal, documenting contemporary and traditional styles. He was traveling with his girlfriend, Juliette Ballay, and Francine Awa Pipien, who helped them get to know people and places around Dakar, the capital.
As a photographer based in Los Angeles, Mr. Michaels knows the intricacies of his own city well, but he gets excited by the novelty of a new place. “One of the best things in life is being surprised, and this was one big surprise after another,” he said.
He met Milcos, above, a designer and the founder of the brand Nio Far, on a rainy day in the Grand Yoff neighborhood of Dakar.
Khadija Aisha Ba is a fashion designer and shop owner in Dakar. For her label, L’Artisane, she takes inspiration from the past, channeling her grandfather’s style.
This photo was taken in St.-Louis, a port city on the Senegal River, north of Dakar. The city was once the French colonial capital. “You can see the skeleton of the colonization,” Mr. Michaels said.
This scene reminded him of a movie set, and he was attracted to the color palette. “The blue dress jumps off the page in comparison,” he said.
St.-Louis, which is on the border with Mauritania, is just south of the Sahara. “When you go north of there, it just becomes desert,” Mr. Michaels said.
Saliou, above, is a member of the Baye Fall, followers of the Sufi Muslim brotherhood called the Mouride. They prize spirituality over material goods, Ms. Pipien said. Traditionally they have been known to wear clothing made from other pieces of fabric, creating “a patchwork we call ‘njaxass’ in Wolof,” she said.
Yoro sells gold jewelry at a market where people buy clothing and accessories in the Plateau neighborhood of Dakar. “The soccer jersey seemed to be a really present style of dress with a lot of the younger males in Senegal,” Mr. Michaels said.
Yoro was more than happy to pose. “He’s like, ‘Go right away, take my picture,’” Mr. Michaels said.
As he and his group watched, three children started walking out to the ocean to wash two baby sheep. “What you can’t see in this image is the mother sheep trying to bite one guy the whole time,” he said.
Here, Olivia Nd, a founder of the Instagram account @dakarlives, took a break between shots. She was modeling contemporary Senegalese designs.
Mr. Michaels was drawn to her fingertips, which are adorned with henna. Few young women in Senegal wear henna these days, Ms. Pipien said. “It’s her way of paying homage to this old tradition she used to see her grandmothers doing,” she said.
This man, “a friend of a friend of a friend,” showed up while Mr. Michaels was on the campus of Cheikh Anta Diop University.
Toward the end of his trip, Mr. Michaels went to Sea Plaza, a mall in Dakar, after sunset. “These four skateboard kids came in and started skating,” he said.
The boys, who wore headphones, spoke English to one another. English, Mr. Michaels learned, is part of the skate culture in Dakar.
This young man worked at the mall and had taken a break to join his friends. “He was embarrassed because he’s not wearing skate shoes,” Mr. Michaels said.
Mr. Michaels photographed Nafissatou Diop, a screenwriter, at an open-air nightclub near the beach in Dakar. When he took this photo, it was only the beginning of the night. “The party starts at midnight and goes till the sunrise,” he said.
Paco, a painter, lives in St.-Louis. When Ms. Ballay asked Paco if they could take his photo, he took them to his home, where he showed them his work.
He considered Paco’s handmade wardrobe to be the most “relaxed” of all of the looks he saw in Senegal, sneakers included.
Fatou, a student, on Route de la Corniche, a seaside road in Dakar, was pleased when Mr. Michaels asked to photograph her.
Mr. Michaels and his group were in a quiet part of the Yoff neighborhood of Dakar when they spotted Racine Doye, a shaman, above. They ended up following him into his home, the concrete skeleton of an unfinished development.
Inside, it was “about 120 degrees,” Mr. Michaels recalled. Mr. Doye, who is part of the Lébou ethnic group, showed them a tarp covering some rocks that he’d used in a ceremony.
“He told me, ‘We just did an exorcism,’” Mr. Michaels said.
They didn’t spend a long time together, but Mr. Doye seemed happy to tell his stories. “I feel the energy from that place,” Mr. Michaels said.
Mr. Michaels noticed this woman early one morning. He didn’t take many street photographs in Dakar — most of the photos are portraits of people he spoke to — but he couldn’t resist capturing this scene.
“She’s listening to people’s conversations when she’s washing the window before the store, Salsa, opens,” he said.
To him, the image feels timeless. “I like the idea of having photographs that don’t have to be in a certain place,” he said.
This is another photo Mr. Michaels took from afar, in this case while he was eating lunch in a cafe.
