Elisabeth Moss and Claes Bang in Ruben Ostlund’s new movie, “The Square.” The film won the top prize at Cannes.Credit...Magnolia Pictures.
At a crucial, uncomfortable, revealing moment in “The Square” — though just about any scene in the nearly two and a half hours of this movie from Ruben Ostlund might fit that description — the hero apologizes. His name is Christian, he’s played by the lean and handsome actor Claes Bang, and he’s the chief curator at an important Stockholm museum. Christian has done something that seemed like a good idea at the time, but it made someone else unhappy enough to threaten vengeance, and now Christian is truly sorry. So he does what any decent person would, which is make a video mea culpa on his phone and send it to his victim.
Is there a saying about fish that live in glass barrels shooting themselves in the foot? Mr. Ostlund, whose film before this one was the squirmy, incisive “Force Majeure,” takes aim at some pretty fat satirical targets — art, taste, sex and money, for starters — and sprays buckshot at the audience as well as in his own face. The bad conscience of the cultural elite is hardly a new concern in European cinema (or American journalism, if we want to go there), and “The Square,” which won the Palme d’Or in May, uses some of the shock-the-bourgeoisie tactic refined, in recent years, by his fellow Cannes laureates Michael Haneke and Lars von Trier.
If Mr. Ostlund lacks Mr. Haneke’s rigor and Mr. von Trier’s sadism, he at least has a sense of humor. “The Square,” ragged and headlong, plays like a series of elaborately staged sketch-comedy routines. Or, closer to its own concerns, like an anthology of performance art pieces. Just about everything that happens to Christian has a conceptual dimension, an element of coy self-consciousness, that makes you wonder whether it’s just something that happened or a carefully planned and theorized happening.
Literally speaking, of course, the movie is a string of such events, though it manages to fool, or at least to tease, the characters as well as the viewers. The robbery that sets the main plot in motion seems at first like an art-world provocation, and before he quite understands what has happened, Christian experiences the kind of thrill that art is supposed to elicit. His one night stand with an American journalist (Elisabeth Moss) is not so thrilling, but its very awkwardness has an arch, knowing quality. Staff meetings at the museum have a similar feel. Is the baby whom one of Christian’s colleagues brings into the room really his child? Is its presence a commentary on the persistence of innocence in a fallen world? What about Christian’s own daughters? Can any human action or feeling be called natural or real?
“The Square” is also the name of a new installation, conceived by an Argentine artist and placed in the plaza in front of Christian’s museum, that declares itself a miniature utopia. Within its boundaries, this patch of sidewalk will be a place where mutual respect and individual responsibility are the rule. The slightly larger, rectangular dimensions of the screen are governed by the exceptions. But both versions of “The Square” practice an aesthetics of shaming, laying bare the hypocrisy, the selfishness and the wishful thinking embedded in the deep structures of 21st-century metropolitan existence.
That existence is a cornucopia of delights masquerading as miseries, or perhaps vice versa. Christian, magnetic and intelligent, strikes an appealing balance of smugness and sensitivity. He has a very cool job with some very cool perks, and he turns his entitlement into a virtue by ostentatiously caring about the world’s problems and supposing that his behavior is really the expression of that concern. Shots of homeless people, beggars and poor immigrants emphasize his bad faith, but they also replicate it and pass it along to the audience. The joke is on everyone.
But it’s not a very fresh joke, even though “The Square” is often quite funny and, once or twice — in particular during an aggressive performance at a black-tie gala dinner — genuinely provocative. The condition it depicts is one that will be familiar to just about anyone who buys a ticket, and its insights might have been generated by a Cultural Contradictions of Capitalism smartphone app. Christian and his tribe are obsessed with political correctness but can’t figure out how to behave decently. They think globally but don’t know how to talk to their neighbors.
You could say that Mr. Ostlund’s commitment to illuminate what it mocks from within is a mark of integrity. He doesn’t stoop to facile condemnations of art and its acolytes, and his view of Christian is affectionate as well as punitive. “The Square” is ultimately a long version of Christian’s rambling apology, ostentatiously smart, maybe too much so for its own good, but ultimately complacent, craven and clueless.