For the first time in its 64-year history, Playboy magazine will feature a transgender Playmate, a decision that Cooper Hefner, a top executive at the magazine, said on Thursday was in keeping with its founding mission of embracing changing attitudes about sex.
The French model Ines Rau, 26, will appear as the November centerfold in the first issue since the death of Hugh Hefner, Mr. Hefner’s father and the magazine’s founder.
When Ms. Rau — who has appeared in American Vogue, Italian Vogue and a Balmain campaign, among others — heard that she would be a Playmate, she cried from happiness, she said on Thursday.
But the announcement was not without resistance. A quick scroll through Playboy’s Facebook, Twitter or Instagram pages on Thursday revealed a mix of reactions. Many commenters expressed support and marveled at Ms. Rau’s beauty, but others said they were shocked or even appalled by the decision.
“My story is very heavy, and you’re going to always have people who don’t understand and are being very mean, and seeing that, it makes even more sense to fight for awareness and respect,” she said.
Mr. Hefner, who said he had not questioned his decision in the slightest, said he was more concerned about moving the conversation around equality and sexuality forward, and less concerned about alienating readers.
On Sept. 27, two days before the November/December issue went to press, Hugh Hefner, the embodiment of Playboy, died. Ms. Rau was originally supposed to appear on the cover, but it was changed to a 1965 picture of Hugh Hefner, photographed by Larry Gordon.
Some commenters on social media insisted that Hugh Hefner would never have allowed a transgender woman to appear in his magazine. But in addition to the fact that Ms. Rau was selected months before his death, her appearance is not the first time Playboy has featured a transgender woman in its pages — nor is it even Ms. Rau’s first appearance in the magazine.
The May 2014 issue came with a special section called Playboy A-Z that featured Ms. Rau fully nude for a spread titled Evolution.
And in 1981, Caroline (Tula) Cossey, a transgender English model, appeared in a Playboy pictorial for the James Bond film “For Your Eyes Only” alongside other Bond girls. She was outed shortly afterward by a British tabloid, but returned to the pages of Playboy in 1991 for a solo pictorial, a first for a transgender woman.
In March 1965, Playboy had another notable first when Jennifer Jackson, a black woman, was made Playboy Playmate of the Month. Mr. Hefner said the choice elicited letters that used similar language to what he saw on social media on Thursday. Playboy’s social media accounts posted snippets of archival letters from that time alongside new comments about Ms. Rau.
But similar to what populated Playboy’s feeds about Ms. Rau, others writing in 1965 applauded the magazine’s progressive stance. “In your leadership of the avant-garde in modern America, you have taken another giant step forward,” one letter read.
