SANTA MONICA, Calif. — In 2006, when Tom Hanks wanted to get a story published, he sent it to his friend and sometime director Nora Ephron.
Having had my own writing critiqued by her, I know just how daunting that could be.
“Oh, petrifying, horrifying, yes, yeah,” Mr. Hanks said, grimacing.
The piece was a sweet paean to his makeup man Danny Striepeke, then 75 years old and retiring, a 50-year Hollywood veteran who had started by giving Elvis Presley his tan in “Viva Las Vegas” and Laurence Olivier his Roman nose in “Spartacus” and ended by turning Mr. Hanks into a policeman, an astronaut, an Army Ranger, an F.B.I. agent, a Master of the Universe, a Slavic tourist stuck in an airport, Santa Claus and a Harvard professor of symbology.
“And she said, ‘Yes, it is a thing. Send it to The New York Times. I’ll make some calls for you. It shouldn’t be in the Sunday Styles section but maybe in the Thursday Styles section,”’ Mr. Hanks recalls. And after many rewrites and lots of no-mercy Nora editing, like “What does this mean?” and “This is not good” and “Voice, voice, voice” and “Tell people what you’re going to tell them, and then tell them, and then tell them what you just told them,” it was finally published in Thursday Styles.
I hesitate, wondering if now is the moment to break the news to Mr. Hanks: He has spent a decade honing his writing and, despite all the other acting and directing and producing he does, and despite being, as the historian Douglas Brinkley calls him, “American history’s highest-profile professor,” he has managed to squeeze in a book of fictional short stories called “Uncommon Type.” And yet he’s still going to be in Thursday Styles.
And not only that. I will have to ask him about The Times’s first bombshell report about Harvey Weinstein, just published, and Hollywood’s guilty silence on the incendiary subject. What does Mr. Nice have to say about Mr. Sleazy?
But the man is on a book tour, so first I needed to explore his fiction.
“Were you trying to be Chekhovian?” I ask.
“Boy, Chekhov just always goes right over my head,” he replies.
I confess that I don’t really know what that means, either, but a bookish friend had suggested I ask.
In profiles of Mr. Hanks, co-stars including Meg Ryan and Sally Field (Mama Gump) have made a point of saying that he is darker and more complicated and even more angry than you would imagine underneath that decent Everyman exterior, but he keeps it to himself.
And it is interesting, given that Mr. Hanks and Rita Wilson are celebrated as the king and queen of Hollywood, that there is a strain of melancholy that runs through many of the stories about small-town characters.
In one, “A Special Weekend,” a 9-year-old named Kenny is being raised by his moody father and brisk stepmother in a Northern California town — with a throng of siblings and stepsiblings — because his mother, a pretty waitress, broke up with his father when Kenny was little. He gets to spend a birthday weekend with his mother, who arrives in a cloud of perfume, with red lipstick that matches her red roadster.
He took Ms. Ephron’s advice to heart. His voice is recognizably Hanks, with lots of Norman Rockwell phrasing: lollygagging, yowza, thanked his lucky stars, titmouse, knothead, atta baby.
The title of the book is drawn from his love of vintage typewriters. There are 300 or so perched upstairs and downstairs in bookcases in the Santa Monica office of Playtone, his production company, which also boasts a turntable and enviable collection of LPs and 45s. We talk next to rows and rows of rare black and red and green typewriters that do not work but count as “objects of art” for Mr. Hanks.
There is also a glamour shot of Ben Bradlee, whom Hanks is portraying in “The Post,” the Steven Spielberg-directed movie about The Washington Post’s role in publishing the Pentagon Papers. “Ben knew he was the coolest guy in the room,” Mr. Hanks says.
In the adjacent room, bookcases are brimming with covered typewriters. Vintage posters of typewriters hang on the walls.
One of his characters in the book, an old-fashioned, tri-cities newspaper columnist, lovingly describes the chonk-chonkka of the keys with the ba-ding of the bell and the krannk of the carriage return and the shripp of the copy ripped from the machine.
He tried to write his fiction on a typewriter but concedes, “I only made it about five pages in.” That delete key on a laptop is too alluring.
All different brands of typewriters — Royals and Remingtons and Continentals — make cameos in the stories, with pictures. It’s “The quick brown fox jumped over the lazy dogs” version of Alfred Hitchcock giving himself a walk-on in his movies.
When I ask Mr. Hanks how he fell in love with typewriters, he tells the basic story in “These Are the Meditations of My Heart,” noting, “I changed the gender so they wouldn’t all be about confused young men.” It’s a yarn about a young woman who finds a cheap typewriter at a church-parking-lot sale, goes to a Polish repairman to get it fixed and ends by upgrading to a Swiss sea-foam-green Hermes 2000, the Mercedes of typewriters, with an Epoca typeface.
Did his stint on the early ’80s sitcom “Bosom Buddies,” in which he dressed in drag, “Some Like It Hot” style, to live in an apartment building restricted to women, help him write in a woman’s voice?
Mr. Hanks eats a sushi lunch, casual in Uniqlo jeans, a James Perse black T-shirt, Ralph Lauren boots, a Filson watch with Smokey Bear on it, a David Yurman silver bracelet and a custom-made class ring from the “School of Hard Knocks” with his children’s initials engraved (both pieces of jewelry gifts from his “fabulous wife”). He’s also wearing a dark Lululemon jacket.
Although he admits he’s not “impervious to perks” — going on private planes is “literally like crack cocaine” — he said he didn’t have any trouble writing about ordinary people beyond the Hollywood bubble.
I ask him if he’s going for a Pegot (Pulitzer, Emmy, Grammy, Oscar and Tony).
As he told The Times Book Review, he’s a big reader with stacks of books at home. Does that make him an oddball in Hollywood?
His favorite book when he was in high school was “In Cold Blood,” by Truman Capote, but now he prefers Cold War spy stories by Alan Furst and Philip Kerr. He says he’s not interested in murder or conspiracy stories. When he writes, he doesn’t try to get into the head of a psychopath, just a surfer, like himself.
I ask if, as the nation’s designated most likable actor — even his Halloween monster on “Saturday Night Live,” David S. Pumpkins, is cuddly — he felt pressure to make his fictional characters likable.
“‘Unleash the Charm Monster, damn it, that’s all we want from you,’” he intones in the collective Hollywood voice. But he gets a bit defensive on the issue.
Doesn’t he ever want to be like Larry David and start yelling at people on the street? It must be hard when everyone expects you to always be nice.
“I think I am! I’m sorry!” he says, laughing. “I think I give everybody a fair shake. But I will tell you this, and there’s plenty of people who can attest to it, don’t take advantage of my good nature, because the moment that you do, you’re gone, you’re history. I mean, look, I’m not a sap. I’m not naïve. At least I don’t think I am. I understand that part of it is my nature, part of it is my DNA, part of it is the sum total of everything I went through, and it came out O.K.   But don’t take advantage of my good nature because if you do, it will come back to haunt you and you will hear from me in no uncertain terms. I’ve yelled at people.” Even used vulgarities.
So now that we’re on the subject of screaming and vulgarities, I segue into the Harvey Weinstein scandal. Talk about a Bonfire of the Vanities, Sherman.
Why did Hollywood help shelter him, if everyone knew about the decades of abusive behavior?
I ask him why Hollywood and Silicon Valley are still such benighted places about women’s rights, with conspiracies of silence about raging sexism and marauding predators.
As long as we’re on the subject of Mr. Weinstein, a powerful, politically prominent man who got away with bad behavior toward women for an inexplicably long time, I bring up President Trump.
Mr. Hanks says he just listened to the NPR show in which a former producer of “The Apprentice” admitted that the show made the Trump Taj Mahal in Atlantic City, which was falling apart and, as Mr. Hanks says, “stank,” look glossy in an effort to sell the image of Trump, the successful businessman.
He says Mr. Trump squeaked through because people were tired of the “Bush-Clinton continuum” for 30 years and political “doublespeak.” He realized, even before the 2016 election, when Joe Wilson yelled “You lie!” at President Obama during an address to Congress, that comity was gone.
I ask Hollywood’s top history buff, the man who sent the White House press corps an espresso machine after Trump’s election because he knew they’d need it (he did this for journalists covering the Bush White House in 2004, too): Is this the calm before the storm?
I note that he savors the Philip Kerr character Bernie Gunther, a cynical Berlin detective who sees the Nazis for the beasts they are. Is he surprised the Nazis have crawled out of hell, marching in the open in Charlottesville?
“In Germany, in some of the smaller counties, they’ve got Nazis running for office,” Mr. Hanks says. “And jeez, we’ve got Nazis giving torchlight parades in Charlottesville. 
At a tribute to his career last November at the Museum of Modern Art, Mr. Hanks gave a soothing Sully Sullenberger-like speech about the election, with the theme “We are going to be all right.” I ask him if he is sure.
He replies that, except for some bone-headed amendments to the Constitution like prohibition — “that was so friggin’ stupid, completely contrary to human behavior” — America always course-corrects.
I ask where he stands on the removal of Confederate statues.
Mr. Hanks concludes about our rocky road to a more perfect union, “It’s going to be ugly periodically, but it’s also going to be beautiful periodically.” And he advises keeping a sense of humor.
