In a moment when being Jewish in America suddenly feels threatened in a way it hasn’t in decades, the idea of a distinctly Jewish novel — a concept that has persisted in literature since the turn of the 20th century — has become increasingly urgent. Three fiction writers and one cartoonist ruminate on Jewish identity and its relationship to Israel and the U.S. in 2017.
As fiction by Jewish novelists moved further away from the shtetl and into more secular — or perhaps just contemporary — ground, the idea of a Jewish author as some kind of outlier in the canon diminished, and yet the concept of the Jewish novel has persisted in American literature, a notion reinforced intermittently by critics, by readers and by many Jewish authors themselves. Now, three major voices in contemporary fiction — Joshua Cohen, Nathan Englander and Nicole Krauss — make an argument for the necessity of a Jewish novel at a time when white supremacists can be seen on TV chanting “Jews will not replace us.” All three writers were born between 1970 and 1980, and all have published books this year that grapple in some way with Jewish selfhood and, notably, its relation to Israel — territory where few living American authors besides Philip Roth have previously gone in their work. Cohen’s “Moving Kings” is about a New York-based moving company made up of former Israeli soldiers; Englander’s “Dinner at the Center of the Earth” is a political thriller partially set during the Second Intifada; and “Forest Dark,” by Krauss, focuses on an American philanthropist who travels to Tel Aviv, and is also a meditation on writing itself.
The larger question animating all of these books turns on the definition of home. It is perhaps no surprise that this particular generation of Jewish writers is looking to Israel, as both an ideal and a cautionary tale, at a time when America feels increasingly foreign, less and less like home. (Each author has spent significant time there.) Above all, though, their central concern is one of identity — of being Jewish, American and a writer, and how the order of those terms matters in 2017, if at all.
I never recovered from my first book tour. Not because of what happened on the ground — which was a joy. It’s what I saw, crisscrossing America, from the sky. The whole country, cut up into squares. We just can’t help marking boundaries, making categories and, mercy upon us, putting up walls. Those flights took place right when I was being minted as a writer, and, to my surprise, discovering I was a “Jewish-American” writer to boot. A hyphenate. Which is definitely not how I’d seen myself. And definitely not how I look at others when I read. I was aware of my subject matter, but very-young-me was resistant to the label. I felt I was being asked to consider myself a “type” of American, to see myself as other from inside my own mind. But I didn’t see a Jew when I looked in the mirror; what I saw were gentiles when I looked at everyone else. As for seeing Jews, I’d been living in Jerusalem for three years by then, excited to witness the peace process that I’d moved there for (and which was still in full swing in 1999). It was in Israel that I was tagged as American. I’d finally been fully assimilated into my native culture — only from 6,000 miles away.
Of course, Israel and Palestine clearly have their own organic attraction for Americans. Twain was covering the Palestine beat 150 years before me. And if we’re looking at the current wave of writing about Israel specifically, there are a million reasons to focus on the place, from the complicated politics, to the tragedy of the never-ending conflict, to the continued occupation that I believe it is imperative to explore. There is the turmoil of the region and a host of looming existential threats.
But if harking back to those early book-tour flights, to the delineation of boundaries, and the endless crisscrossing of those divisions from above, it’s partially the idea of shifting identity that drew me, all these years later, to a character who is American but Israeli, who is both patriot and traitor, who inhabits more than one self, by virtue of being a spy.
That’s what I latch onto when thinking about contemporary American Jewish novels engaging with Israel, the ideas revolving around fluidity, of borders drawn and redrawn, of changing landscapes and altered realities. As for my initial discomfort with being labeled, I don’t know if it’s age that has changed me as much as the current climate here, in America, my home.  One yarmulke isn’t even good enough for me, these days. I’m writing this with a half-dozen stacked, like pancakes, on top of my head.
The great Jewish American novel is ...
Israel first showed up in literature, in the book of Genesis, as an idea: God’s idea, to be precise, someplace Abraham hadn’t yet been, but where he needed to go to in order to become something. It proved a compelling one, with real pathos and propulsive narrative power (see: Exodus). But by the time those first works of Jewish literature were being composed, Israel was a reality — the opposite of an idea: in flux, raw, complex, messy — and it wasn’t long before that reality took over the narrative, adrenalizing it and complicating it morally. No one would mistake Abraham or Moses for flesh-and-blood men, or even literary characters in the modern sense, individuals with their own private meaning. But along with the reality of Israel came David — wily, charismatic, cunning, magnetic, brutal, a hero so flawed that he could only be real. A cutthroat warrior, a murderer, an ambitious politician hungry for power, willing to do whatever it took to become king, a man who manipulated the love of Saul, Jonathan, Michal, Bathsheba, of everyone who ever came close to him. A historical David almost certainly existed: In 1993, an inscription was found at Tel Dan in the north of Israel, which dates from the ninth century B.C., and refers to the “The House of David.” Who knows who and what that David really was? But in the hands of the genius who wrote the Book of Samuel, David’s live spark, and his real Israel, became the raw material for one of literature’s greatest and most iconic characters.
How many times has Israel swung from idea to reality and back again? It was an idea when Moses led the Jews toward it through the desert, and then it was real for a while until Nebuchadnezzar razed it in the sixth century B.C., after which it became an idea again during 50 years of exile, when Jews yearned for it, wrapped their souls around it and spilled verses of poetry about it while they prospered in Babylon. From the time that Cyrus allowed the Jews to return to Judea again, they were subject first to the Persians, then to a series of Hellenistic kingdoms and finally to the Romans, and during that time Israel was neither fully a reality — an independent political entity — nor solely an idea. Some might try to argue that after the destruction of the Temple in A.D. 70, Israel was returned again to the realm of Jewish idea, where it remained for nearly two millenniums, until in the early 20th century it shifted from an idea about origin, about the distant past, to an idea about being and about the near future. It shifted from pathos to pragmatism and through force of violent will was soon pressed back into existence again, restored to reality. Others might point out that as Jews continued to dwell on the land after the destruction of the Temple, and produce works of great importance like the Mishnah and the Palestinian Talmud, Israel continued to function as reality for the minority who remained behind in the Levant, while it became an idea for the majority in exile. What is indisputable is that for more than 2,500 years, ideas of Israel operated on the Jewish psyche as powerfully as the historical realities of the place, and more often than not were more primary and active than its reality.
The idea of modern Israel entered literature in 1902 in Theodor Herzl’s utopian novel, “Altneuland,” but at what point did the reality of modern Israel begin to take over the narrative of Jewish literature? Was it with the emergence of the novels by the first generation of writers who grew up in it and were shaped by its society, writers like Amos Oz and David Grossman, or was it when it proved irresistible as a subject to American Jewish writers like Philip Roth? Of his novels set in Israel, “The Counterlife” was published in 1986 and “Operation Shylock” in 1993. The reality of Israel was already decades old by then, old enough to be noisy with attributes and crisis, but still too young to achieve autonomy from the idea that engendered it, one that Israeli schoolchildren and soldiers are indoctrinated in: that the foundation of their state was an act of self-preservation after the Holocaust. For that autonomy to happen, Israeli society needed to surprise itself, to stumble into its own generative powers, which happened with the explosion of Tel Aviv culture, or rather counterculture, in the first years of the 21st century. As Israeli artists, inventors and youth claimed the city, the culture they began to pump out was the antithesis of the one at large that grew out of a diasporic, Ashkenazi, religious, post-Holocaust idea. Instead, it was a modern, secular, Middle Eastern reality without cultural precedent. For the first time in the country’s history, there was new Israeli music, food, art and humor that reflected the physical and emotional reality of a fraught and urgent Jewish existence whose context is Arabic rather than European. It’s no coincidence that Israeli society hijacked the narrative of itself around the time that modern Hebrew, also forcibly willed into fresh existence, fully caught up with the complex conditions of the lives of its native speakers: For language itself is generative, and to be able to describe is to be in the possession of creative power.
So it is that diaspora Jews find, for the first time in 2,000 years, that they can’t claim Israel as their idea, or its reality as an extension of their own. However related, it is something authentically other now, and the Jews of America and Europe, most of whom don’t speak Hebrew, have only narrow access to the inner conversation of Israeli being, and can only look upon it from the uneasy position of being neither inside, nor yet entirely outside, beyond the range of its consequences. Israel, which is making sense of itself, has confused our own sense of being, and the novel goes straight toward that confusion, just as it will always go toward heat, toward what is still undecided and so most alive.
Think about a conversation you’d only have with family. The doors are shut. The windows are down. You can get away with anything. You can goad and prick, you can accuse and insult, not just because a high fence separates you from the neighbors, but also because: Your family will forgive you. There’s food on your plate and drink in your glass; you’ll always have a seat at the table.
Now, think about a talk you might have with strangers. Out in the street. Among other strangers. In broad daylight. Suddenly, you’re worried. Suddenly, you have to explain yourself. You have nothing to rely on. No mutual history, or not much. No mutual culture, or not much. All you have in common is a language, whose words seem to mean different things to different people, who all speak them with different accents that seem to signify different experiences of class and education and ethnicity and race — though any judgments you wind up making, you’ll have to ignore, or else accept as manifestations of your own prejudice.
In America, now more than ever, I’m convinced that we Jews have to hold our family conversations out in the open; we have to say the private things that might publicly shame; the narrow things that might widely offend; and we have to do all this not just in our school and work existences, but also on social media — which isn’t quite a safe space, let alone a warm kitchen wafting with unconditional love.
  Converting shame into strength upholds the primacy of the self while vanquishing all haters.
Here is how it’s done: In my opinion, the great Jewish Question in America today is whether Jared Kushner should be excommunicated — and whether Ivanka Trump should be too. Of course, every family’s table since Eden has had its share of bad apples (Sheldon Adelson), and every family member has, or should have, a different idea of who’s the worst (Netanyahu). For example, I suspect that my parents, at this moment, are finding themselves far fonder of my brother and sister.
Jews in America are always being called upon to declare their loyalties — which of our identifiers do we put before the hyphen, and which do we put after: “Jewish” or “American”? This recurrent query — which Jews in America ask themselves with all the breeziness of an online test, and anti-Semites in America ask with all the gravity of an Ellis Island examination — is inevitable but pointless. Jews are more secure in contemporary America than they have been in any other country in Jewish history. This is because America is a country in which the citizens define the ideologies, not the other way around. This, ultimately, is what the fundamentalists hate: America’s constitutive capacity for change, which they regard as the evil face of self-determination. Nazis, Klansmen, ISIS — all fundamentalists resent the mutability of human life and the fact that, in a technologized world, no manner of racial or ethnic or religious or cultural purity can ever be guaranteed, as if an “inalienable” right.
The country I dream of is a place in which all humans are free to take their indoor voices out into the streets, both as proud members of families — however myriad, however defined — and as their own liberated individual selves. America has been this country only rarely; Israel has been this country almost never. The one country I’ve ever lived in that’s consistently fulfilled this dream has been the Novel.
