During high-pressure meetings to plan the expansion of prekindergarten during his first months in City Hall, Mayor Bill de Blasio would invoke the D-Day invasion of Normandy: There it is on the horizon, he would say, we are approaching the beach, we need a full-on assault. He spoke of it so often that a staff member gave him a picture of the landing, which he kept on the mantelpiece in his office.
Making free, full-day prekindergarten available to all 4-year-olds was the most visible and ambitious promise that Mr. de Blasio made when he campaigned for mayor, so making good on that pledge when he came into office in 2014 was crucial. And he delivered. Full-day prekindergarten enrollment grew to 53,000 in September 2014, from 19,000 a year earlier. It reached 68,000 the next year. Parents were generally pleased, and even his critics were impressed.
Now as Mr. de Blasio seeks a second term in an election on Nov. 7, the success of universal prekindergarten stands out as the most salient achievement of his mayoralty. It showed that Mr. de Blasio could meet an ambitious goal intended to address the inequality between rich and poor New Yorkers, but one that also helped the middle class. And it showed that a liberal mayor — the first Democrat to occupy City Hall in two decades — could get things done.
“It was the proving ground of the capacity to actually do big things,” the first deputy mayor, Anthony Shorris, said, citing other large-scale programs, like those for affordable housing, a city ID card and neighborhood policing.
But the prekindergarten push also pointed to some of the weaknesses and blind spots that would become constants during Mr. de Blasio’s four years in City Hall.
The dispute over how to pay for prekindergarten expansion was the start of his toxic feud with Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo. It called attention to the mayor’s occasional displays of self-righteousness mixed with political naïveté, especially when he saw himself as the protagonist of a lofty mission.
It presaged how the Republican-controlled State Senate would become an obstacle to the mayor’s agenda — a situation he made worse when he tried to swing the Senate to Democratic control. That effort, in turn, led to some of the state and federal investigations into fund-raising and pay-to-play that would later threaten to derail his administration.
The inquiries also focused on the Campaign for One New York, a nonprofit organization created by the mayor to support his prekindergarten push; the nonprofit was ultimately shut down amid ethics questions.
But to his allies, Mr. de Blasio’s ability to deliver on his promise has outweighed any complications.
Even before his first day at City Hall, Mr. de Blasio and his aides were setting in motion the planned expansion of prekindergarten. One of the biggest challenges was finding enough space for hundreds of new prekindergarten classrooms.
“We were totally wrong in our assumptions about space, and it was one of those real shocks to the system when we got in the door in the beginning of 2014 on a very, very tight time frame and had to stare down the barrel of that space reality,” Mr. de Blasio said at a news conference last month.
To find, refurbish and secure approvals for classroom space meant coordinating multiple city agencies, including, in various combinations, the Education Department; the Fire Department; the departments of health, buildings, design and construction, housing preservation and development, and citywide administrative services; and the School Construction Authority.
Laura Santucci, who was Mr. de Blasio’s chief of staff during the first year, said that the multipronged effort inspired the mayor’s frequent comparisons to D-Day, in which he likened the city’s effort to an invasion by land, sea and air. When Ms. Santucci gave Mr. de Blasio the printout of a D-Day photograph, he gave her a high five, she recalled.
But before he could begin to outfit classrooms, Mr. de Blasio needed money to pay for the initiative. His proposal, repeated often on the campaign trail, was to use a new dedicated tax on New Yorkers earning more than $500,000 — a maneuver that required Albany’s approval.
But Mr. Cuomo was running for re-election in 2014, and showed no enthusiasm for creating a new tax. Shortly after the mayor’s inauguration, the governor embraced his call for prekindergarten, but not the new tax; Mr. Cuomo promised to include money for it in the state budget.
Mr. de Blasio slapped the offer down.
In the midst of all that, Mr. de Blasio started a fight with the charter school movement, diverting a construction fund for charter schools to prekindergarten, and canceling an agreement to give space to three charter schools in public school buildings.
The charter schools staged protests against Mr. de Blasio and ran ads, and Mr. Cuomo and State Senate Republicans rushed to their defense. When the mayor went to Albany that March to press for his dedicated tax, the governor held a competing rally that same day just blocks away, on behalf of charter schools — beginning a pattern of one-upmanship that has continued.
Ultimately, the state made a five-year commitment to finance prekindergarten in New York City — without Mr. de Blasio’s tax — but it also passed legislation strengthening the hand of charter schools.
In an interview this week, Mr. Cuomo employed a phrase used by his father, Mario M. Cuomo, to characterize the mayor’s push for a tax on the rich as aspirational, rather than realistic.
Mr. Cuomo said that political reality extends to the present-day battle over how to finance transit system improvements, with the mayor again calling for a tax on high earners.
Mr. de Blasio is using the success of prekindergarten for all 4-year-olds as a model for the extension of free early childhood education to include 3-year-olds.
There were more hiccups at the start of the school year in September 2014. By Mr. de Blasio’s own telling, “It was by the skin of our teeth” that his team found enough space to open enough prekindergarten classes.
“It was absolutely a race to the finish line,” he said.
Other challenges included the last-minute cancellation or postponement of 45 programs that set off a scramble to relocate children signed up for those schools. But in general, the initiative won praise.
As he runs for re-election, Mr. de Blasio repeatedly points to the success of prekindergarten, and it is the model for one of the few new initiatives he has proposed for a second term — the extension of free early childhood education to include all 3-year-olds, which he calls 3-K.
As with the first prekindergarten project, Mr. de Blasio does not have the money to pay for this expansion and will need to appeal to the state and federal government for financing. But unlike the mad dash to carry out the prekindergarten plan, he intends to put the 3-K program in place gradually, hoping to avoid earlier mistakes. He has started city-financed pilot programs in several districts, chosen because classroom space was readily available.
But the prekindergarten experience, and much of what has followed, has shown that Albany can be the hot griddle that Mr. de Blasio must dance on. Over the last three years, the mayor has been tortured over his control of city schools and his push for more affordable housing.
When the mayor urged the state to create a $15 minimum wage for New York City, the governor said it was “a nonstarter”; months later, Mr. Cuomo released his own plan to back raising the minimum wage for the entire state.
Mr. Shorris, the first deputy mayor, pointed out that Mr. Cuomo eventually became a champion of prekindergarten, just as he later came to support the $15 minimum wage.
