
The French activist and author Henda Ayari filed a police complaint 10 days ago accusing the Swiss-born Islamic scholar, Tariq Ramadan, of sexually assaulting her in 2012.
Then on Thursday, a second woman filed a complaint in Paris against Mr. Ramadan, accusing him of rape and assault in a hotel room in Lyon, France, in 2009.
Mr. Ramadan’s lawyer has issued a categorical denial about the first accusation and said that Mr. Ramadan would sue his accuser for defamation.
The explosive accounts came in the aftermath of accusations that the powerful Hollywood film producer Harvey Weinstein had engaged in decades of sexual harassment and assaults against women like the actress Rose McGowan.
A New York Times investigation revealed that Mr. Weinstein had paid off at least eight women over the years.
Many women, and some men, around the world have added their voices to a wave of complaints on social media, including under the hashtag #BalanceTonPorc, or ExposeYourPig, in France.
Among the figures accused by Frenchwomen in recent days are Pierre Joxe, a former top Socialist leader and minister under François Mitterrand. Mr. Joxe, accused of groping a woman sitting next to him at an opera in Paris in 2010, told the French radio station Europe 1 that the accusation was completely unfounded.

Mr. Arend has denied the allegations.
Mr. Ramadan, 55, is a well-known Islamic scholar and the grandson of Hassan al-Banna, who founded the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt in the 1920s. The group has become one of the most influential transnational Sunni Muslim movements in the world.
Mr. Ramadan teaches contemporary Islamic studies at Oxford University and is the author of a dozen books in English on modern Islam and the Western world.
A familiar figure at conferences and in the news media, he is also a major presence on social media, with two million Facebook friends and more than 200,000 followers on Twitter.
Neither Mr. Ramadan nor his lawyer has responded to the accusations by the second woman. In a Periscope video posted on Twitter that he made several days ago after the first complaint, Mr. Ramadan said that he would not comment and that he would trust the courts to see that justice was done.
Asked about the latest allegations, his lawyer, Yassine Bouzrou, said he had not been informed, Le Monde reported.
Ms. Ayari, 40, said she had been corresponding with Mr. Ramadan on Facebook and had often asked him for advice on religion, until one day he proposed a meeting at the hotel where she said she was attacked.
The author had written about the assault in her book “I Chose to Be Free,” an account published in 2016 of how she been drawn to Salafism, a radical Islamist ideology, and then fought to break away from it. But she did not name the attacker, she said, because he had threatened her and her children.
But she said she had been moved by other women who were speaking out and decided to name her aggressor, even though she expected a storm of criticism.
Ms. Ayari first named Mr. Ramadan on social media on Oct. 20, the same day she filed a complaint with the French police accusing him of rape, willful violence, sexual harassment and intimidation in a Paris hotel room in 2012.
Ms. Ayari’s lawyers said they had yet to see any complaint of defamation filed by Mr. Ramadan.
One of her lawyers, Grégoire Leclerc, said Mr. Ramadan was using his numerous supporters to defend him.
Another of her lawyers, Jonas Haddad, said at a news briefing on Thursday that his client had already assisted at a hearing with the French criminal department and had submitted some proof. The case was transferred to Paris, where she said the attack took place.
Ms. Ayari has said that she expects Mr. Ramadan to be defended by his supporters.
