President Trump has nominated a former top Texas environmental regulator, who has argued that carbon dioxide is a harmless gas that should not be regulated, to be the White House senior adviser on environmental policy.
The former regulator, Kathleen Hartnett White, will lead the Council on Environmental Quality if confirmed by the Senate. Currently she serves as a senior fellow at the Texas Public Policy Foundation, a free-market think tank. She previously served as the chairwoman of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality under Rick Perry, who was governor at the time and is now the Energy Secretary.
“Kathleen is clearly highly qualified, adept and has a breadth of experience” said James L. Connaughton, who led the agency under George W. Bush.
The appointment is the latest in a series of disputed environmental nominations. This week, Mr. Trump nominated Barry Lee Myers, the chief executive of AccuWeather, a for-profit weather forecasting company, to lead the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Last week, the president nominated Andrew Wheeler, a coal lobbyist, to be deputy administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
Environmentalists say Mr. Trump is stacking agencies with those who either reject the scientific consensus that human-made emissions cause climate change or lack the scientific qualifications for their jobs.
Conservatives, including those who accept the established science of climate change, said they believe Mrs. White is a good choice for the job.
“I don’t think that she’s right on climate science,” said Eli Lehrer, president of the R Street Institute, a conservative think tank that has argued in favor of a carbon tax. But Mr. Lehrer also said he hoped that Mrs. White will support the Trump administration’s moves to reverse the Obama administration’s effort to regulate power plant emissions under the Clean Power Plan.
He said he is also optimistic that Mrs. White will help roll back other rules, including one that governs how the Environmental Protection Agency protects waterways.
“Her instincts on working to remove burdensome regulation, I expect, are largely right,” Mr. Lehrer said.
Democrats, meanwhile, have begun to question the choice of Mr. Myers to lead NOAA. The administration, which is the country’s chief agency on atmospheric science, falls under the Department of Commerce and is responsible for weather forecasting, climate modeling and ocean services.
