GENEVA — United Nations experts faulted the United States’ response to hurricane devastation in Puerto Rico in a report on Monday, calling it ineffective and lagging far behind the support provided for storm-struck states on the mainland.
Thousands left homeless by the storm had no relief in sight, few of the island’s hospitals were functioning, and there were reports that available water supplies were contaminated, the experts said in a statement. About 30 percent of the normal electric power is being generated on the island, officials in Puerto Rico say.
“We can’t fail to note the dissimilar urgency and priority given to the emergency response in Puerto Rico, compared to the U.S. states affected by hurricanes in recent months,” said Leilani Farha, the United Nations special rapporteur on housing.
The critical report comes as questions continue to swirl around a $300 million contract to help rebuild Puerto Rico’s power grid that was given to a small Montana company.
Gov. Ricardo A. Rosselló announced on Sunday that he had decided to cancel the disaster-recovery deal that Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority, the public power company known as Prepa, signed with Whitefish Energy Holdings.
He said the controversy had begun to detract from the work being done to restore power on the island.
Soon after the deal with Whitefish was announced, questions were raised as to how a two-man company from Montana managed to secure such a lucrative contract. The company has ties to the secretary of the interior, Ryan Zinke, but both sides say there was no wrongdoing.
A House committee is investigating, and the governor has asked the island’s comptroller and the inspector general of the Department of Homeland Security to also review the deal.
The Wall Street Journal, citing anonymous sources, reported on Monday that F.B.I. agents from the San Juan field office were investigating the contract, but such an investigation could not be confirmed.
The F.B.I. national office referred questions about the report to the Puerto Rico field office. A spokesman there, Carlos Osorio, said the agency could not confirm or deny the existence of an investigation.
A spokeswoman for the power authority said the agency had no information about an investigation, and therefore had no comment.
The governor’s office said it welcomed an inquiry.
In a phone interview, Ms. Farha, an independent expert reporting to the United Nations, said it was “very worrying” that she had not been able to obtain clarity on the number of people who were still homeless after the storm. She noted that estimates of the number of houses destroyed ranged from 30,000 to 90,000.
Thousands of engineers had been deployed in Texas and Florida to reconnect homes to the electricity grid after hurricanes hit those states, a number far in excess of the crews deployed to Puerto Rico.
Officials have said that deploying utility crews to an island posed far greater challenges than getting them to communities on the mainland.