WASHINGTON — President Trump’s campaign spent more than $1.1 million on legal fees over the last three months — a sharp increase that coincided with the escalation of investigations into Russian interference in the 2016 election.
The White House has retained lawyers to respond to the inquiries. And Mr. Trump and many current and former officials from his campaign and administration have retained personal lawyers to help them respond to questions. For instance, Reince Priebus, the former White House chief of staff, was interviewed on Friday by Mr. Mueller’s team.
The campaign has also been busy responding to requests from congressional investigators and Mr. Mueller’s team, reportedly turning over more than 20,000 pages of documents to the Senate Judiciary Committee in August, and beginning to hand over documents to the special counsel soon after.
The biggest share of the legal payments revealed on Sunday by Mr. Trump’s campaign and the joint committees it formed with the Republican Party — $830,000 — went to Jones Day, the law firm representing the campaign in connection with the investigations.
The campaign committee also paid nearly $238,000 in July and August to the offices of the New York lawyer Alan S. Futerfas, who is representing the president’s son Donald Trump Jr. in the investigations. The younger Mr. Trump was thrust into the center of the investigations when The Times revealed that he had arranged a meeting last year with a Russian lawyer who claimed to have damaging information about the Democratic presidential nominee, Hillary Clinton.
Mr. Futerfas did not respond to a request for comment, nor did representatives from the Trump campaign and Jones Day.
Jones Day also represents the campaign in matters related to election and campaign finance law, as well as litigation stemming from the campaign, and it is not clear what percentage of the legal payments relate to those matters, as opposed to the Russia investigations.
The campaign has also continued spending heavily on online fund-raising and other digital outreach, paying $1.1 million in the third quarter to firms run by the campaign’s digital director, Brad Parscale, who also has been interviewed by congressional investigators in Russia inquiries.
Mr. Trump’s campaign and its joint committees with the Republican Party have gotten off to a quick fund-raising start for his 2020 re-election effort, raising a combined $40 million this year. Mr. Trump has headlined big-ticket fund-raisers with major donors, while the campaign also has raised almost $7 million from small donors, partly through an email program with solicitations pegged to news events like Mr. Trump’s feud with National Football League players over their protests during the national anthem.
The Republican National Committee, which discloses its finances to the Federal Election Commission on a different schedule and did not file a report on Sunday, has also paid legal fees related to the Russia inquiries, including to Mr. Futerfas’s firm. It is legally permissible for campaigns and party committees to foot the bill for legal costs that stem from matters related to the campaign in question.
Not all the legal payments revealed on Sunday are related to the Russia investigations, though.
In addition to the standard legal costs stemming from running any large organization, the campaign has continued to pay fees related to lawsuits against it.
The campaign appears to have paid $10,000 to settle a copyright infringement lawsuit brought by a photographer named Julie Dermansky, who alleged that Mr. Trump’s company, the Trump Organization, used a photo she had taken of Trump supporters at a 2016 rally without her permission.
Ms. Dermansky declined to comment on the case, referring questions to her lawyer, who did not respond to requests for comment.