BAGHDAD — Iraqi forces have driven Islamic State fighters from the northern city of Hawija, the militants’ final urban stronghold in Iraq, three years after they seized control of nearly a third of the country, the Iraqi government said Thursday.
The United States-led coalition confirmed the fall of Hawija, calling it “a swift and decisive victory” by the Iraqi forces.
Although fighting continues in surrounding districts, the loss of Hawija adds to a series of crushing blows for the militants in Iraq, who are left in control of only a string of desert outposts in the Euphrates River valley and the city of Qaim, on the border with Syria.
The victory is also likely to bolster the confidence of Iraqi troops, who dropped their weapons and fled by the thousands when the militants swept across northern Iraq in the summer of 2014. Iraqi forces are now fighting the militants along the Euphrates in the northern part of Anbar Province, where they have already taken several towns, according to a United States military statement.
The Islamic State, also known as ISIS, still holds substantial territory across the border in Syria, mainly along the Euphrates, but its grip there has been badly undermined by American-trained forces in recent weeks. The coalition has taken most of the Syrian city of Raqqa, which had been the capital of the Islamic State’s self-proclaimed caliphate, and the Syrian government is attacking other positions closer to the Iraqi border.
Morale among militants in the Hawija area appears to be deteriorating rapidly. At least 600 men identified by Kurdish forces as Islamic State fighters have surrendered to the Kurds in Dibis, in Kirkuk Province. An additional 400 to 500 are being interrogated on suspicion of being militants. Together, they represent a substantial portion of the estimated 2,000 to 3,000 Islamic State fighters who were in the Hawija area before Iraq began military operations there on Sept. 21.
As in other battles over the past three years, Iraqi forces have been supported in Hawija by American military advisers, forward air controllers, special operations troops, airstrikes and artillery.
Col. Ryan Dillon, the spokesman for the United States-led coalition in Baghdad, said Thursday that the United States had conducted 16 airstrikes in the past week in support of the Hawija operation. The speed of what seems to have been a two-week Iraqi military sweep through Hawija suggests that the militants are no longer able to sustain effective military operations for long periods.
The battle to drive them from Mosul, Iraq’s second-largest city, lasted nine months before it was liberated in July. But the next city to fall from the Islamic State, Tal Afar in late August, took only 11 days.
Iraqi commanders said in telephone interviews from the front on Thursday that militants fleeing Hawija had moved north toward the Kurdish-held district of Dibis. They said the advance of Iraq troops had been slowed by roadside bombs planted by militants.
The route taken by the Islamic State fighters to Dibis would lead them to defensive lines held by Kurdish troops known as pesh merga. Militants who surrendered to pesh merga fighters since Sunday appeared to be trying to avoid capture by Shiite Muslim militiamen, who have been accused in previous battles of executing militants as well as civilians believed to be supporting them. The Iranian-backed Shiite militias have been fighting alongside the Iraqi regulars.
Kurdish intelligence officials in Dibis said they had heard repeated accounts from fleeing Islamic State fighters that the group’s leaders in Hawija had ordered their men to drop their weapons and head with their families to the safety of Kurdish lines.
About 7,000 family members have accompanied the 1,000 fighters identified since Sept. 21, they said. “I think in the coming days we’ll even see their emirs come over,” said Lt. Pishtiwan Salahi, an investigator with the Kurdish intelligence service, Asayish.
Capt. Ali Muhammad Syan, who is in charge of screening the arriving Islamic State fighters in Dibis, said he had been approached by senior militant leaders trying to negotiate deals for themselves.
“We tell them no way, no negotiations, turn yourselves in and we’ll turn you over to the court, which will decide,” he said.
American officials have worried that the recent vote in the Kurdish region of Iraq to pursue independence would undermine the military coalition. Pesh merga fighters have fought alongside Iraqi government units and the mostly Shiite militias known as Hashed al-Shaabi, or popular mobilization forces, in battles against the militants in the past three years.
The Kurdish independence vote has led to a bitter standoff between the Kurds and the Baghdad government, complete with Iraqi threats of military and economic reprisals. Turkey and Iran have also threatened retaliation, and both countries have conducted military maneuvers with Iraqi troops.
Mr. Abadi has made a point of saying that pesh merga forces were not involved in the Hawija operation beyond maintaining defensive blocking positions. In a televised speech on Tuesday, Mr. Abadi accused pesh merga commanders of being too slow to respond to queries or requests from Iraqi military commanders.
The objective of the Iraqi operation was to evict militants not just from Hawija, with a population of about 100,000, but from the entire surrounding district, home to about 150,000.
According to United Nations estimates, up to 78,000 civilians remain in Hawija. There have been reports that some have been killed by militants and others blocked from escaping the city. Many civilians may also be too terrified by gunfire, shelling and roadside bombs to try to flee their homes.
More than 7,000 civilians escaped the city during the first 10 days of the operation, the United Nations said. Several thousand more reached Kirkuk by Sunday. An official from the Iraqi Immigration Ministry said on Thursday that more than 9,000 civilians had been taken to camps run by humanitarian groups.
Iraqi commanders in Hawija said on Thursday that the militants had blown up several government buildings, shops and homes in the Hawija city center. They said Iraqi forces were trying to reopen roads and to clear roadside bombs and booby-trapped buildings.
The commanders added that Iraqi soldiers had taken control of a bridge in the city where, in September 2015, Islamic State fighters had shot and beheaded several captured pesh merga, Iraqi Army soldiers and Shiite militia fighters.