Stanley Druckenmiller, the hedge fund manager, wanted his charitable dollars to do more to reduce childhood poverty. He had been deeply involved with the Harlem Children’s Zone, which helps poor children and families in New York. But he said he wanted to do something to break the cycle of generational poverty, a goal seemingly beyond even a very wealthy person like himself.
Likewise, Connie Ballmer, a co-founder of the Ballmer Group and the wife of Steven A. Ballmer, the former chief executive of Microsoft, had been giving money to child welfare organizations around Washington State. The Ballmers, with a net worth of more than $34 billion, wanted to find a way to team up with others to have a greater impact on the issue nationwide.
Mr. Druckenmiller and his wife, Fiona, joined the Ballmers and other wealthy philanthropists, who have each committed $50 million to $250 million, to fund initiatives focused on reducing childhood poverty. They’re doing so through Blue Meridian Partners, a philanthropic fund created by the Edna McConnell Clark Foundation, which aims to invest $1 billion in other nonprofit organizations working on issues affecting poor children.
More than just pooling intellectual and financial resources to achieve change, groups like Blue Meridian are acting as “field catalysts,” according to a new academic paper in the Stanford Social Innovation Review. Such organizations, the paper’s author argues, can help solve intractable, societal problems that require resources beyond what even billionaires can marshal.
Taz Hussein, partner at the consultant Bridgespan Group and author of the report “Field Catalysts: The Unseen Agents That Galvanize Social Change,” said he and his colleagues had identified 15 social change efforts — like reducing malaria deaths, bringing about same-sex marriage, reducing obesity — and asked what big change would look like. They found that each effort had a core organization providing leadership and support to other groups tackling the same issue.
Mr. Hussein identified the Freedom to Marry campaign, led by Evan Wolfson, a visiting professor at Yale and Georgetown Law Schools, as one such field catalyst.
Mr. Wolfson said he had begun working on the movement for same-sex marriage in 1983, when he wrote his law school thesis. The goal was achieved in 2015 with the Supreme Court ruling allowing marriage nationwide. He attributed the group’s success to having clarity around its goals and maintaining it over three decades.
Mr. Hussein said most field catalysts received financial backing from philanthropists who bought into the idea of the group’s activist founder, who typically plays the role of intermediary. In the case of Freedom to Marry, Mr. Wolfson said, two of its biggest donors came from opposite ends of the political spectrum: Jon Stryker, heir to the Stryker medical device company, and Paul Singer, the founder of the hedge fund Elliott Management.
Mr. Druckenmiller said what made this approach work was the group’s belief in Ms. Roob and what her team was doing to vet organizations.
One such organization is Upstream USA, which aims to make birth control available to women as a means to expand economic opportunity for them. Mark Edwards, one of the founders of the nonprofit organization, said it was introduced to Blue Meridian early on in its development.
Before Blue Meridian offered any funding, he said, it helped Upstream flesh out that plan.
Other organizations come up with their own plans, which are often replicated.
Kevin Sheekey, global head of communications, government relations and marketing for Bloomberg L.P. and a senior adviser to Michael R. Bloomberg, describes Mr. Bloomberg, the billionaire former New York mayor, as someone who looks at the data and acts because it’s the rational choice. Mr. Bloomberg used this approach when he decided to ban smoking in restaurants and bars early in his first term and applied it later to his campaigns against trans fats and sugar.
In this way, the Bloomberg administration became a field catalyst for an issue that other cities quickly copied.
Wealthy individual donors are motivated to work together for the opportunity to take on a big problem where their insight and resources might make a difference.
Mr. Druckenmiller said he had become involved with Blue Meridian after his experience with the Harlem Children’s Zone. He saw the organization’s president, Geoffrey Canada, build on his initial idea and expand the number of children he helped. In doing so, Mr. Canada created a model that others have tried to emulate.
The appeal of Blue Meridian to Mr. Druckenmiller was the management group that brought the donors together and guided them.
“With my business, the way you make big money is, you find a great management team and a good concept and you stick to it and you add to it over time,” Mr. Druckenmiller said. “In philanthropy, there was more this idea that once an idea was formulated, you moved along.
There is also less risk dealing with an experienced field catalyst. Ms. Ballmer said she liked sharing opinions with the general partners at Blue Meridian.
Her hope, though, is that the group and others can show that these strategies work, so that larger organizations and government offices can adopt them.
There are risks for donors. One is making sure the group works in a cohesive way.
“There’s a limit not to the amount of capital we can bring in, but there is a limit to what makes an effective decision making body,” Ms. Roob said.
Another is getting the size of the grant right. Mr. Druckenmiller rejected the notion that too much money could be bad for smaller social service organizations.
The leaders of Upstream learned to dream big. Its first budget in 2015 was $1.5 million; it’s now $17 million, including the first $1 million from Blue Meridian. But it could receive as much as $60 million from the group over the next seven years.
But Mr. Edwards said the motivation for expansion was not the money as much as the strategy that Blue Meridian helped Upstream develop.
