TONY BENNETT at Radio City Music Hall (Oct. 6, 8 p.m.). No generation gap is wide enough to faze Tony Bennett. Three years ago, when he and Lady Gaga collaborated on the album “Cheek to Cheek,” it was his sense of classic midcentury cool that set the tone. Last fall, an all-star lineup toasted his 90th birthday at Radio City Music Hall; this week, Mr. Bennett, who recently celebrated his 91st, returns to the ornate room for another night of satin-smooth pop and jazz standards. Long may he croon.
GUNS N’ ROSES at Madison Square Garden (Oct. 11, 15-16, 7:30 p.m.). In the long years after Guns N’ Roses’ most famous lineup fractured in the mid-1990s, a détente between the band’s lead singer, Axl Rose, and its former guitarist, Slash, seemed laughably unlikely. But time and ticket receipts heal most wounds, and in April 2016 Mr. Rose, Slash and the bassist Duff McKagan reunited for the aptly named Not in this Lifetime tour, which will make its way to New York on Wednesday.
JAPANESE BREAKFAST at Music Hall of Williamsburg (Oct. 12, 9 p.m.). Few rock albums released this year are as endlessly re-listenable as Japanese Breakfast’s “Soft Sounds from Another Planet.” The LP’s richly varied textures are all the more impressive given that it’s more or less a solo work, recorded on the cheap by the Philadelphia-based singer-songwriter Michelle Zauner and her co-producer, Craig Hendrix. In concert, Ms. Zauner is joined by several touring musicians, who play up the riotous freedom in her music to great effect.
LOW CUT CONNIE at Irving Plaza (Oct. 6, 8 p.m.). Loud, wild and reverent of rock ‘n’ roll history, Low Cut Connie is an ideal band for youngish music fans who wish they were alive to see the Rolling Stones or the Replacements in their respective heydays. On its most recent album, “Dirty Pictures (Part 1),” the group shakes things up with a satisfyingly shaggy Prince cover and some timely political overtones. It’s a solid album, but Low Cut Connie’s word-of-mouth legend is built on live shows like this one.
MADEINTYO at Irving Plaza (Oct. 11, 7 p.m.). The rapper MadeinTYO — pronounced “Made in Tokyo,” a reference to his background as an American military kid in Japan — first gained national attention for his lightweight, catchy 2016 single “Uber Everywhere.” Early this year, he disavowed the beleaguered ride-sharing app; while he has yet to generate another hit of similar magnitude, languorously charming releases like his recent EP “True’s World” suggest that MadeinTYO is worth following all the same.
THE NATIONAL at Forest Hills Stadium (Oct. 6, 6:30 p.m.). Anyone who’s listened to one of the National’s albums in the past decade knows how good this band is at making finely crafted ballads. The thrill of its latest album, “Sleep Well Beast,” is in how well the National adds unexpected elements to its sound — a flash of paranoid anger on “Turtleneck,” a psychedelic twist of electronics and electric guitar on “The System Only Dreams in Total Darkness.” It’s a daring leap forward that’s even more exciting in concert.
JOAN SHELLEY at Union Pool (Oct. 9, 7 p.m.). The Kentucky singer Joan Shelley’s clear, high voice and beautifully understated songwriting have made her a rising star in the folk scene and beyond. Earlier this year, Ms. Shelley won her most enthusiastic reviews yet for her self-titled fifth album, produced by Wilco’s Jeff Tweedy; its songs have a warmth and intimacy that will suit this performance in the tiny back room of a popular bar in Williamsburg, Brooklyn.
PETER APFELBAUM’S SONG OF THE MYSTIC THREAD at Greenwich House Music School (Oct. 7, 8 p.m.). Mr. Apfelbaum, a virtuoso multi-instrumentalist, draws influences from around the globe, typically in service of a sound that’s big and sanguine and whorled — full of incisive funk and frothy improvising. He plays here with a new group, Song of the Mystic Thread, featuring two practitioners of the gyil, a Ghanaian xylophone — the master Alfred Kpebesaane and his protégé, Brittany Anjou — as well as Charlie Burnham on violin and vocals, Mali Obomsawin on bass, and April Centrone on drums and riqq, a Middle Eastern variant of the tambourine.
THE ART ENSEMBLE OF CHICAGO at the Lenfest Center for the Arts (Oct. 6, 7 p.m.). The Art Ensemble was a linchpin of the jazz avant-garde in the 1960s and ’70s, embodying a radical politics of performance and confrontation and imaginative inquiry. The group’s membership rotated often over a decades-long career, but its founding saxophonist, Roscoe Mitchell, was a constant. At this concert, which honors the ensemble’s 50th anniversary, he will lead a formation that includes the drummer Famoudou Don Moye, who joined the group in the 1970s;the bassists Jaribu Shahid and Junius Paul; the trumpeter Hugh Ragin; and the cellist Tomeka Reid. Joseph Jarman, a saxophonist who was long central to the group, will be on hand, but will not perform.
Sold out. Standby line available at venue.
KENNY BARRON at Jazz Standard (Oct. 11, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). One day after Thelonious Monk’s 100th birthday, Mr. Barron pays tribute with a set of music by the bebop legend. Mr. Barron’s own piano style has always been more tapered and refined, but Monk’s jagged melodic sense and idiosyncratic compositional style have always been a major influence on Mr. Barron, who was named a National Endowment for the Arts Jazz Master in 2010.
SARAH ELIZABETH CHARLES AND SCOPE at Joe’s Pub (Oct. 9, 7:30 p.m.). Ms. Charles just released “Free of Form,” an album of cutting social inquiry and lush ambience. Its beats, combining live drumming and electronics, often break apart into an open cloud, signaling invitation — and expectation. By turns introspective and anthemic, the album was co-produced by the trumpeter Christian Scott aTunde Adjuah, and features the keyboardist Jesse Elder, the bassist Burniss Earl Travis and the drummer John Davis. That group appears here in celebration of the record’s release.
CHICO FREEMAN QUARTET at the Community Church of New York (Oct. 6, 8 p.m.). The New York chapter of the Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians, a historic and still vital artists’ collective, launches its 2017 season of fall shows with a performance by Mr. Freeman, a tenor saxophonist of declarative elegance and compassionate tone. His music lies closer to traditional post-bop than most of the association’s members’, but brings the same urgency to the bandstand. Mr. Freeman is joined here by Jay Hoggard on vibraphone, Kenny Davis on bass and Reggie Nicholson on drums.
LISA MEZZACAPPA’S ‘GLORIOUS RAVAGE’ at Roulette (Oct. 12, 8 p.m.). Ms. Mezzacappa, a bassist, is releasing “Glorious Ravage,” an album of tenacious momentum and teetering squall. This invigorating music, often freely improvised, takes the form of a 10-part suite dedicated to female explorers and adventurers of the Victorian era. It’s written for large ensemble, and centers on Fay Victor’s frisky, implacable vocals, and the restless pianism of Myra Melford. Ms. Mezzacappa presents the work here with a 14-piece band, accompanied by projected video footage created by a team of four moving image artists.
RAZA Y RESISTENCIA at El Taller Latino Americano (Oct. 7-8, 7:30 p.m.; Oct. 9, 7 p.m.). Most jazz fans know Arts for Art for its annual Vision Festival, the banquet of avant-garde improvising that takes place downtown every spring. But the organization programs music year-round, always with an ear to the symbiosis between radical art and anti-authoritarian politics. This holiday weekend, Arts for Art teams up with El Taller, a Latin American cultural center in East Harlem, for a three-day festival it is calling an “UnColumbus Celebration.” Highlights include Francisco Mora Catlett’s AfroHORN, playing Saturday; TipRingSleeve, featuring Craig Taborn on piano, Tomeka Reid on cello and Ches Smith on percussion, on Sunday; and a Monday night appearance from William Parker’s Songs of Freedom ensemble.
