WASHINGTON — President Trump and his representatives on Monday dismissed the charges leveled against three former campaign advisers, saying none of them proved that he had colluded with Russia last year to influence the presidential election.
The White House said that the indictment of Paul J. Manafort, the president’s former campaign chairman, and Rick Gates, his deputy, as well as the guilty plea of George Papadopoulos, a former campaign adviser, had nothing to do with Mr. Trump or his election operation. Instead, it sought to refocus attention on Democrats and their actions during the campaign.
Jay Sekulow, a private attorney for Mr. Trump, said the president and his legal team were not worried about the indictments, which could be used by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, to seek testimony that could implicate other targets.
Several are under scrutiny by the F.B.I. and Congress.
On Twitter, Mr. Trump reacted only to the indictment of Mr. Manafort on tax fraud, money laundering and foreign lobbying violations, arguing that it was not relevant to the campaign since it dealt with prior private business.
He made no comment on the guilty plea by Mr. Papadopoulos, who admitted lying to the F.B.I. about his efforts to connect Mr. Trump’s campaign with Russian government officials.
Democrats jumped on the indictments, showing no hesitation to link the allegations against Trump campaign aides to Mr. Trump himself.
“These indictments and guilty plea demonstrate beyond any doubt that this is a consequential investigation, and it must be allowed to move forward without political interference,” he said in a statement.
Ms. Sanders said that Mr. Manafort and the president have not spoken in months. She said that Mr. Gates had been at the White House several times since the inauguration, but she declined to say for certain whether Mr. Trump had spoken to Mr. Gates.
Both Ms. Sanders and Mr. Sekulow disputed suggestions that Mr. Trump might seek to fire Mr. Mueller. “There’s no intention or plan to make any changes in regards to the special counsel,” Ms. Sanders said.
The two also played down the possibility that Mr. Trump might pardon Mr. Manafort or others caught in the special counsel’s investigation. “I haven’t had a conversation with the president about pardons or pardoning individuals,” said Mr. Sekulow. Ms. Sanders likewise said that she had not spoken with the president about the possibility of pardons.
The president’s team again pointed to the Democrats to argue that they were the ones who were collaborating with Russia because of a salacious dossier of allegations against Mr. Trump produced by a firm called Fusion GPS that was paid in part by the Democratic National Committee and Hillary Clinton’s campaign.
