TORONTO — More than 20 years ago, a precocious teenage girl made a surprising request of the novelist Margaret Atwood. She had just read Ms. Atwood’s “Alias Grace” and found herself entranced by the true story of Grace Marks, a 19th-century Irish immigrant and servant who became a celebrity “murderess” in Toronto. So she sent Ms. Atwood a letter seeking the movie rights.
Ms. Atwood’s correspondent was Sarah Polley, then best known as a Canadian child star from the Disney Channel’s “Road to Avonlea” and years away from becoming a screenwriter and director of independent films like “Away From Her” and “Take This Waltz.” Ms. Atwood declined. Obviously.
Now, at the age of 38, Ms. Polley is seeing her Hail Mary of a pitch come to fruition: She is the writer and a producer of the mini-series adaptation of the Booker Prize-shortlisted book, debuting on Netflix on Nov. 3.
“The Handmaid’s Tale,” now shooting its second season in Toronto, depicts a near-future dystopia where women are forced into surrogacy for a dictatorial elite. “Alias Grace,” meanwhile, is a six-part period piece based on the unsolvable mystery of a poor housemaid (Sarah Gadon) who either abetted the murders of her boss and his housekeeper/lover (Anna Paquin), or was sacrificed by Victorian moralists for being a little too free, a little too desirable.
Both feature Ms. Atwood’s unflinching eye on the constraints, social and literal, that have shackled women through history. As the stormy political climate continues to churn in the United States, the Canadian writer’s two decades-old novels have landed like contemporary critiques: In “Alias Grace,” 19th-century issues of anti-immigrant sentiment, abortion and class warfare seem suddenly hot-button.
Over breakfast in a restaurant near her home in Toronto last summer, Ms. Polley described how over the last two decades the character Grace never ceased burrowing in her imagination. Her 2012 autobiographical meta-documentary “Stories We Tell” opens with a quote from “Alias Grace,” read by Ms. Polley’s father. (“When you are in the middle of a story, it isn’t a story at all, but only a confusion,” it began.) That film, about Ms. Polley’s discovery of a family secret, confronted the unknowable, floating nature of family lore. Grace, in Ms. Atwood’s novel, is a shape-shifter, too, her guilt or innocence unfixed.
When the screen rights came up for grabs in 2012, Ms. Polley pounced. She took a six-hour meeting with Ms. Atwood. “She understood that the ambiguity mattered most, but ambiguity is tricky on film,” said Ms. Atwood. “Grace was convicted as an accessory because she didn’t tell. We never knew, and she never told. She acted as one of those blank screens onto which everybody commenting projected.” Ms. Atwood approved of the filmmaker’s ambiguity skills, and Ms. Polley paid out of pocket for the rights.
The CBC, Canada’s public broadcaster, came on board immediately, but a partner was needed to hit the $25 million (U.S.) budget. Netflix, the fast-growing streaming service that is increasingly looking at co-productions to fuel its insatiable appetite for original content, signed on quickly.
“They came in with a really clear vision and a lot of passion, and 500 pages written,” said Elizabeth Bradley, vice president of content at Netflix.
Last fall, “The Handmaid’s Tale” and “Alias Grace” were being shot simultaneously in and around the city. In November, at the industrial Toronto waterfront that’s cluttered with film studios, Ms. Gadon and Edward Holcroft, who plays the young doctor trying to unearth Grace’s memories, were seated in the drawing room of a Victorian manor, their “session” bordering on flirtation. Rain began to slam the studio roof, interfering with sound recording. “We’re also under flight paths,” Ms. Polley sighed, sitting near the monitor.
Ms. Polley’s first feature, “Away from Her,” was an adaptation of a short story by Alice Munro, perhaps the only Canadian author more famous than Ms. Atwood. But Ms. Polley never met the reclusive Ms. Munro. In contrast, Ms. Atwood weighed in on scripts and casting for “Alias Grace,” and spent hours touring the detailed sets with the production designer. She especially liked the “botulistic preserves” in Mason jars in the basement cellar where the bodies were found.
As “Alias Grace” was shot through the election of President Trump, certain of the show’s themes gained new resonance, particularly abortion (the reality of illegal procurement is bluntly depicted) and immigration (Ms. Polley wrote Grace’s harsh crossing from Ireland with recent migrant crises in mind). When I spoke to Ms. Atwood this month, the House of Representatives had just passed a bill banning late-term abortions, and the Trump administration had moved to expand the rights of employers to deny women insurance coverage for contraception.
Viewers in Canada, where “Alias Grace” began airing in late September, have responded. The ratings for the first episode were the strongest fall debut for a CBC drama in the past five years.
Ms. Polley, too, has felt the sting of backlash. She hasn’t directed in five years or appeared in a film since 2010, choosing to spend time with her children and work selectively. But with so few female directors in the marketplace, she’s conscious that some view her stepping back as an act of betrayal. At a party, Ms. Polley mentioned to a female critic that she was parenting, not directing, and the woman made a vomiting noise at her. “The choice I made freely is, I would like to be with my children as much as possible. I think it’s a victory of feminism not a failure,” she said.
The hunger for Ms. Polley’s return now, fair or not, may also stem from her engagement in the past with prickly social issues that remain unresolved. She’s spoken out about rampant sexism on film sets, and against child acting (“We’ve eliminated child labor everywhere in society except film. Kids shouldn’t be in any environment that’s for profit”). In the wake of the Harvey Weinstein sexual assault allegations, she wrote an op-ed in this paper. In it, Ms. Polley recollected that at age 19, as a young actress, Mr. Weinstein offered her what he described as a “very close relationship,” noting how such relationships had benefited other actresses. Ms. Polley walked away.
“I got off totally easy,” she said. “There wasn’t a moment before this one where anyone would have cared about what those women had to say, where those women wouldn’t have been ridiculed for coming forward, where they wouldn’t have been thought of as whiners or strident or angry.”.
