The Justice Department will limit its use of secrecy orders that prevent internet providers from telling people when the government has obtained a warrant to read their email during an investigation, according to a department memo issued last week.
Microsoft and other internet companies that supported its lawsuit had raised alarms that the government was using a gag order statute in the Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986 in a way that violated the principles of the First and Fourth Amendments. The First Amendment gives companies the right to speak to their customers, and the Fourth Amendment gives people the right to know if the government has searched or seized their property.
Technology companies worried that overuse of the statute could jeopardize the trust people had regarding the privacy of their online data, potentially undermining the growth of cloud computing services.
Microsoft’s chief complaint was that the government was using the gag orders on a routine basis and in some cases making them indefinite, in essence preventing Microsoft from ever telling its customers that their data had been retrieved. During one 18-month period, Microsoft found that 68 percent of the legal demands from the federal government that came with secrecy orders required the company to remain silent on them indefinitely.
In a memorandum on Oct. 19, Rod Rosenstein, the deputy attorney general, told department lawyers that the secrecy orders should “have an appropriate factual basis and each should extend only as long as necessary to satisfy the government’s interest.” Except under exceptional circumstances, the memorandum said federal prosecutors could seek a delay in notice of one year or less to a person whose communications had been obtained.
“This update further ensures that the department can protect the rights of citizens we serve, while allowing companies to maintain relationships with their customers by notifying those suspected of crimes, or believed to have information relevant to a crime, in a timely manner that information was obtained relating to their user accounts,” Lauren Ehrsam, a department spokeswoman, said by email.
