MANILA — Flanked by soldiers and officers, President Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines on Tuesday declared the southern city of Marawi “liberated from terrorist influence,” five months after Islamic militants stormed the town, killing scores and sending thousands fleeing.
The president’s visit to Marawi came one day after the authorities declared government forces had killed the insurgency’s leaders in a gunfight. But gunfire could still be heard in pockets of the city, where about 30 militants, some of them foreigners, continued a last stand. At least 20 civilians remain hostages, the authorities said.
Those remaining fighters, officials said, were led by Mahmud bin Ahmad, a Malaysian terrorist who has helped fund the fighting in the Philippines’ restive south. Mr. Ahmad was a close associate of Isnilon Hapilon, an F.B.I.-wanted terrorist who was killed in Monday’s fighting. Mr. Hapilon was the leader of Abu Sayyaf, a terrorist group linked to the Islamic State.
The area still controlled by Mr. Mahmud and his fighters is “very much contained and controlled,” said Maj. Gen. Restituto Padilla, a military spokesman.
General Padilla described Mr. Mahmud as an “academic,” who lacked the leadership skills of Mr. Hapilon and Omarkhayam Maute, another experienced guerrilla who was also killed on Monday.
“His ability to lead the fight is not there,” General Padilla said of Mr. Mahmud.
Mr. Mahmud, 39, trained at Al Qaeda camps in Afghanistan in the 1990s while studying at Islamabad Islamic University in Pakistan. He is a former lecturer of Islamic studies at the University of Malaya in Kuala Lumpur, one of Malaysia’s top universities.
Now that the bulk of the fighting has ended, the government must begin the difficult work of rebuilding the badly battered city.
More than 200,000 residents are crammed in filthy refugee camps, waiting for the military to declare the operation officially ended.
Mr. Duterte declared martial law in Mindanao Province in May when fighting broke out. Two months later, he extended the provision through the end of this year.
General Padilla said on Tuesday that martial law would remain in place despite the cessation in fighting.
Julkipli Wadi, a professor of Islamic studies at the University of the Philippines, said that although the fighting in Marawi may be close to ending, there has been a noticeable increase in violence elsewhere in the south.
The battle for Marawi showed Islamic State-affiliated fighters that a small group of militants can hold their own against the Philippine Army for months, Professor Wadi said.
