I don’t know how to break it to Idris Elba.
And, to be fair, Ms. Winslet did hoist Richard Branson’s mother down some stairs after a lightning bolt in a hurricane sparked a fire that engulfed the Branson holiday home on Necker Island, where she and her children were staying in 2011. That was when she met her husband, Mr. Branson’s nephew, a.k.a. Ned Rocknroll, when he rushed into the burning house with a headlamp.
“She was just like, ‘That guy’s for me,”’ Mr. Elba says.
The actor is starring with Ms. Winslet in the “The Mountain Between Us,” based on a novel about strangers who struggle, snuggle and eat roasted mountain lion in the frigid Utah wilderness after their small plane crashes.
Mr. Elba often plays opposite very strong women, and he says that’s fine with him.
His Ghana-born “Mum” is so into tough love, he says, that at his 45th birthday party recently, she turned her cheek away when he went to kiss her.
Mr. Elba also portrays the New York lawyer who defends Molly Bloom, the audacious poker madam to the stars played by a fiery Jessica Chastain in the Aaron Sorkin movie, “Molly’s Game,” out Nov. 22. And the actor created one of the most memorable romances in TV history in the popular BBC series “Luther,” when his London homicide detective in the big tweed overcoat, known by his deputies as “his satanic majesty,” gets in an erotic and psychopathic entanglement with a latter-day Lizzie Borden, played with film-noir panache by the flame-haired Ruth Wilson.
In a world where most movies disappoint and true stars are rare, Mr. Elba is magnetic. He is tall and muscular, and before he hit the big time as the drug lord Stringer Bell in “The Wire,” he was a bouncer (and pot dealer) at the comedy club Carolines on Broadway, sometimes living in his Chevy Astro van.
His daughter’s name, Isan, is also tattooed on his arm. (She is with him in New York, upstairs in his hotel suite.) And he has a line of a song inked: “This train carries no wrongdoers,” to indicate that he does not want the people in his life to let him down. He is wearing a snug gray polo shirt and black jeans from his own clothing collection, with a small “IE” emblazoned.
I remark to him that race seems beside the point in his romantic liaisons on screen.
He said it had not come up except during a Facebook Live video, when a woman asked if the movie was advocating greater trust between the races during a divisive time in this country.
Noting that he has starred in several dystopian movies, including the ill-starred “The Dark Tower,” I wonder if he thinks America is headed toward a racial dystopia under the stewardship of Donald Trump.
On the other hand, John Ridley, an African-American writer and producer who made “12 Years a Slave,” brought up, in The Hollywood Reporter, Norman Jewison’s “powerful stories about race and identity” in movies like “In the Heat of the Night.” Mr. Ridley worried that the “litmus test” could be flipped and prevent him from making a movie about Hispanics, for instance.
He calls Mr. Jackson “a god” who gets respect “as an actor, black, white, whatever,” but adds: “It felt like a very stupid thing to say, if I’m really honest and in a time where people are being marginalized, why marginalize us even further by going on about black Americans and English Americans? And to his credit, he read that and apologized. He called and said, ‘Hey, man. I agree. You’re right, black is black.’ I respect him for actually acknowledging what I said and sort of rethinking it.
I wonder why it’s harder for Americans to get a British accent right than vice versa.
He did worry about the East Coast accents for “The Wire” and “Molly’s Game,” however.
Just as he was nervous to make love on screen with Ms. Winslet, he says he was nervous to speak the high-velocity words of “the oracle,” as he calls Mr. Sorkin, especially since it was the writer’s first directing gig.
Mr. Sorkin also managed not to freak out with him when Mr. Elba engaged in a kickboxing competition in Thailand and England for a documentary days before he arrived, exhausted, in Toronto for shooting.
Mr. Cameron got throttled, but he is right that it’s easier for the suits who run Hollywood to accept a gorgeous young woman in a sexy costume than to make movies with middle-aged, non-cartoony heroines struggling with life, the kind Bette Davis and Joan Crawford used to do.
But the Brit, who comes from a country with much tighter gun-control laws, agonized over taking the part of the interplanetary vigilante, telling Esquire, “I had a clash of conscience with my character. In America, there’s a real awareness of gun culture.” Luther, the London lawman, is about reasoning, not shooting.
In our A.D.D. planet, it works. Mr. Elba does not look away at his phone, at the waitress when he asks for a knife, at his publicists trying to hustle him along or at his steak salad and steak and eggs. 
His vibe is cool but his career is frenetic. When he’s not starring in movies and “Luther,” he’s directing movies, designing clothes, D.J.-ing in London and Ibiza, and producing his own music, as well as making documentaries about his adventures kickboxing in Thailand and car racing in Ireland. Maybe that’s why his personal life is so turbulent; he has vowed never to marry again.
“Falling in love while falling in love,” he says, dreamily.
He also experienced that “You are not the father” moment that can either be the worst or best moment of a man’s life. In a therapeutic moment four years ago, he told a GQ reporter the “tragic, punch-in-the-face” story of how he discovered that the son he thought he had had with a woman he was involved with in Florida was not his.
“It is definitely without a doubt one of the worst things to happen to any person, and I include her,” he tells me about his ex. “Because whatever she went through and did, she was hoping that I would never find out, and I did. So for all three of us including the boy, it was. …” 
How did he find out? I ask.
I note that the lawyer has recently said in The Daily Mail that the marriage broke up because Mr. Elba’s handlers thought it would be better, given his sex-symbol status, if he were single.
He shakes his head ruefully and says that was absolutely not true and that many stories about his relationships are “completely wrong,” but that he doesn’t like to fight back in public.
“I think I’m the most misunderstood partner ever,” he says, looking distraught. “I’ve had many failed relationships but not because I’m an ass, just because there’s so many complexities to relationships and perhaps I’m very guarded, just like Luther’s guarded. And being guarded, people presume things and I often haven’t corrected them.
“I live a duality, do you know what I mean?” he says. “I got an O.B.E. It’s Officer of the British Empire, but I’ve always known it as a British sweetheart, treasured.
I reassure him that Mick Jagger has been knighted, so other naughty boys are in the Queen’s pack of aces. And I wonder if there’s any other challenge on the horizon, noting that he would make a remarkable Othello.
“Don’t like the story,” he says brusquely.
“Jealousy’s a real poison and I’m not into it,” he says.
Is that because you get jealous?
“George Clooney said that?” Mr. Elba asks with a skeptical grin.
