Business|Wall Street Firms Gambled on Puerto Rico. They’re Losing.
Wall Street Firms Gambled on Puerto Rico. They’re Losing.
A few days after Hurricane Maria leveled Puerto Rico, John A. Paulson, the billionaire hedge fund manager, boarded his company’s 23-seat Bombardier jet and flew to San Juan.
Mr. Paulson wanted to check personally on several resorts and a large office building that he and his firm own, two people familiar with the trip said. He traveled when commercial air traffic to the devastated island was limited and most private jets landing in San Juan were required to bring badly needed emergency supplies.
Mr. Paulson’s quick trip is an indication of just how much big investors have riding on the future of the Caribbean island.
Mr. Paulson and his firm, Paulson & Company, have invested hundreds of millions of dollars there as he, along with many of the best-known names on Wall Street, bet big on taking advantage of a long period of depressed prices for luxury properties and other real estate. Their wagers are looking increasingly unlucky, especially after the storm.
Mr. Paulson, who served as an economic adviser to Donald J. Trump during the presidential campaign, has been particularly outspoken in his support of the island as an investment opportunity. Other companies that went to Puerto Rico in search of bargains included the Blackstone Group, the Och-Ziff Capital Management Group, the D. E. Shaw Group, Fundamental Advisors, Goldman Sachs, Lone Star Funds and Monarch Alternative Capital. The main attractions have been hotels, condominiums, office buildings and distressed real estate loans.
Few tears will be shed for financial losses borne by wealthy investors who gambled on Puerto Rico, especially those like Mr. Paulson, who made billions off the 2008 collapse of the United States housing market.
“We’re going to lose a lot of money opening it now,” Mr. Kirschner said.
The Puerto Rico Tourism Company lists at least seven hotels closed with no clear reopening date. About two dozen expect to begin taking reservations before the end of October. Some resorts are said to have suffered little structural damage but severe damage to their beaches and grounds. Tourists might balk at returning to the island anytime soon.
On Tuesday, the bondholders, including big investment firms such as OppenheimerFunds, the Baupost Group and Tilden Park Capital Management, got a jolt when President Trump said some of Puerto Rico’s debt might have to be wiped out — a comment that sent the price of those already distressed bonds plunging. Prices stabilized after the White House clarified that the administration was not planning to interfere with the bankruptcy process.
One of Mr. Paulson’s properties in Puerto Rico, the St. Regis Bahía Beach Resort, in 2010. It is closed for storm repairs.
As for Mr. Paulson, two of his resorts — Condado Vanderbilt Hotel and La Concha Renaissance San Juan Resort — suffered minimal damage and are housing federal relief workers and hotel employees whose homes were damaged. Federal workers are being charged a negotiated rate, while employees are staying at no cost. A third resort, St. Regis Bahia Beach Resort, is currently closed.
Mr. Paulson’s firm, which once managed $36 billion, has shrunk to just under $10 billion after a series of bad trades in recent years. This year, several of his funds have suffered further losses. Mr. Paulson has trumpeted his wager on Puerto Rico as a crucial part of his long-term investment strategy.
Mr. Paulson, speaking at an investment conference last year, compared Puerto Rico to Miami in the 1980s, when Miami had many abandoned buildings and vacant lots.
