We’re nearing the season for ghost stories — or, in the case of William Alexander’s new middle-grade novel, “A Properly Unhaunted Place,” un-ghost stories, cautionary tales about what happens when we try too hard to put our history behind us. Eleanor Henderson’s “The Twelve-Mile Straight” and Josephine Rowe’s “A Loving, Faithful Animal” wrestle with the enduring trauma of violence over generations, and Alice McDermott’s “The Ninth Hour” draws narrative power from that perennial burden of Catholicism, shame. Two finalists for the National Book Awards appear on this week’s list: Frank Bidart’s collected poems, “Half-Light,” and Carmen Maria Machado’s debut collection of stories, “Her Body and Other Parties.” You have until the awards are announced on Nov. 15 to finish them. Go!
ADMISSIONS: Life as a Brain Surgeon, by Henry Marsh. (Thomas Dunne Books, $26.99.) Like “Do No Harm,” Marsh’s previous memoir, “Admissions” is “wandering and ruminative, an overland trek through the doctor’s anxieties and private shames,” our critic Jennifer Senior writes. Marsh once again recounts his miscalculations and surgical catastrophes; rails against the constraints of an increasingly depersonalized British health care system; and describes his operating theater in all of its Grand Guignol splendor.
THE NINTH HOUR, by Alice McDermott. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $26.) In McDermott’s novel, the cause of a young Irish widow and her daughter is taken up by the nuns of a Brooklyn convent. But as the years pass, this struggling pair can’t banish worldly temptation, with possibly dire consequences for their faith. Writing about nuns is a risky business, but McDermott situates their lives exactly where they belong: in the difficult, often conflicting world that embraces practical competence, a commitment to extreme generosity and a lived belief not only in goodness but in the fairness of God.
A FORCE SO SWIFT: Mao, Truman and the Birth of Modern China, 1949, by Kevin Peraino. (Crown, $28.) Peraino’s absorbing study of the pivotal year in Chinese-American relations — when Mao Zedong’s Chinese Communist Party came to power — shows how decisions made then have continued to affect relations between the two countries up to the present day. The year 1949 opened many fault lines, but unlike that midcentury world, so dramatically described by Peraino in his timely book, our globalized world renders separation not even thinkable.
A LOVING, FAITHFUL ANIMAL, by Josephine Rowe. (Catapult, paper, $16.95.) In Rowe’s gorgeous and harrowing debut novel, full of stark emotional moments, an emotionally scarred Vietnam veteran disappears from a small Australian town. Through six characters — three pairs of siblings — the author tackles the ever-interesting ideas of intergenerational trauma and the origins of violence.
HALF-LIGHT: Collected Poems, 1965-2016, by Frank Bidart. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $40.) With its stylized spacing and typography, Bidart’s work scores the speech inside his head. This career retrospective, a contender for a National Book Award this year, shows how Bidart shed the masks of his early poems to create a kind of self-mythology. His genius has been his ability to transform a poem into a vocalized performance of consciousness and moral interrogation, as intense as any Shakespearean monologue.
THE TWELVE-MILE STRAIGHT, by Eleanor Henderson. (Ecco/HarperCollins, $27.99.) A lynching and the legacy of Jim Crow haunt generations of a family in Henderson’s second novel, which is ever alert to the proximity of oppressed and oppressor. Empathy for its troubled cast is one of the novel’s great strengths, and at its most insightful and compassionate, the sentences sing.
THE WOLF, THE DUCK & THE MOUSE, by Mac Barnett. Illustrated by Jon Klassen. (Candlewick, $17.99; ages 4 to 8.) In this darkly witty collaboration, a mouse is gobbled up by a wolf. Inside, he meets a duck who has set up housekeeping. The book’s morbid sense of humor will hit the Halloween sweet spot.
