Opinion|Algae in Lake Erie: What Can Be Done?
Algae in Lake Erie: What Can Be Done?
In Congress, I represent Lake Erie’s southern coast and western basin, where algae blooms forced 500,000 citizens off water systems for three days in 2014.
You acknowledge that excess nutrients are the fuel that ignites yearly algae blooms. The State of Ohio and others estimate that 60 to 80 percent of those nutrients come from agricultural runoff. Land use changes to accommodate increasing human and livestock populations, along with shifting agricultural drainage patterns and weather conditions, all contribute.
The water-food-energy nexus leaves downstream ecosystems drastically out of balance. To meet the demands of 400 million Americans by 2050, we must recognize the incomparable value of fresh water and adapt to protect it.
Forthcoming infrastructure legislation, farm bill reauthorization and the Great Lakes Restoration Initiative can help undergird a federal strategy. Ultimately, a coordinated response that identifies sources, enforces standards and fosters innovation must save our Great Lakes, the largest body of fresh water on Earth.
The writer, a Democrat, is co-chairwoman of the Congressional Great Lakes Task Force.
This is the time of year when the three million of us who live along the southwest shore of Lake Erie begin to worry about the safety of our drinking water.
Algae, nourished by fertilizer runoff from croplands, bloom in the lake, affecting the taste of the water and, worse, produce microcystin-containing algae.
As a neurologist who studied the effects of liver disease on brain function, I am well aware of the threats to the liver and the nervous system posed by these toxins.
The Clean Water Act and associated Clean Water Rule are intended to allow the Environmental Protection Agency to fulfill its mission. This rule, like too many others, is under assault by the very agency whose work is to make this a healthier, safer world for us, our children and the most vulnerable members of our society.
A failure to support this rule is the equivalent of medical malpractice.
The writer, emeritus professor of neurology at the University at Buffalo, is a senior scientist at Physicians for Social Responsibility.