Apple is digging into the more than $1 billion it has set aside for original programming to create its first known television project: a revival of a Steven Spielberg series from the 1980s.
The tech giant struck a 10-episode deal to revive Mr. Spielberg’s NBC anthology series, “Amazing Stories,” NBCUniversal confirmed on Tuesday. Apple made the deal with Mr. Spielberg’s Amblin Television and NBCUniversal’s production arm.
Over the past two months, Jamie Erlicht and Zack Van Amburg, who left Sony Pictures Television in June to lead Apple’s new programming unit, have been staffing up and scouting projects. They are leading a big-budget effort to compete against Apple’s rival Silicon Valley titans Facebook and Google, which have followed Netflix and Amazon into the streaming business.
“We love being at the forefront of Apple’s investment in scripted programming,” Jennifer Salke, NBC’s entertainment president, said in a statement.
For “Amazing Stories,” Bryan Fuller, whose credits include “Hannibal,” “American Gods” and “Heroes,” will serve as executive producer. It was not clear if Mr. Spielberg would be actively involved in the series.
“Amazing Stories” aired on NBC from 1985 to 1987. The series won several Emmy Awards but received mixed reviews and was a ratings bust, unable to beat its main competition — the juggernaut that was “Murder, She Wrote” — in its first season. But in an era when Netflix’s science fiction anthology series “Black Mirror” has earned a lot of buzz and won two Emmys, there could be a market for it now.
Back in the mid-’80s, “Amazing Stories” had what was regarded as an enormous budget for a network series — around $800,000 to $1 million per half-hour episode — and the new iteration is expected to cost around $5 million an episode, according to a person familiar with the budget. That number is a little north of what many TV networks regularly pay for dramas but a far cry from the $15 million an episode HBO is expected to spend on “Game of Thrones” for its final season.
Apple has not said how it will distribute its programming, but a person familiar with the deal said the revived “Amazing Stories” would not air on NBC.
In addition to Mr. Spielberg, those who directed episodes of the original series included Clint Eastwood, Martin Scorsese and Robert Zemeckis. Guest stars included Kevin Costner, Gregory Hines, John Lithgow and Kyra Sedgwick.
The Wall Street Journal first reported the deal. A spokeswoman for Apple declined to comment.