WASHINGTON — The White House inflated the potential benefits to workers from a proposed corporate tax cut, according to a Harvard University economist whose work informed the estimate, highlighting a challenge Republicans face as they push a tax rewrite that President Trump has promised will benefit the middle class.
Mr. Trump’s Council of Economic Advisers said in a report released on Monday that reducing corporate taxes could raise average household incomes by as much as $9,000 a year. The top end of that estimate was based on work by a trio of researchers, and on Tuesday one of them, Mihir Desai of Harvard, said Mr. Trump’s team had misread the research. The actual income gain implied by his study, he estimated, would be $800.
Mr. Trump’s economic team disagreed — saying Mr. Desai had erred in interpreting his own paper.
The distinction could prove critical in the public reception to the Republican plan, which bets heavily on the notion that the best way to raise pay for American workers is to cut taxes on their employers.
The Republican proposal, which still lacks key details, thus far includes what analysts project will be only modest reductions in income taxes for many middle-class Americans. But it reduces the top corporate income tax rate to 20 percent from 35 percent, a move that Mr. Trump and Republican leaders say will spark faster economic growth and higher profits. Their theory is that companies will pass those winnings on to workers by raising their pay.
That claim has already run into opposition from many economists, particularly liberal-leaning ones. It could prove a difficult sell politically, at a time when corporate profits are near record highs and polling suggests Americans are skeptical that the Republican plan will help average workers.
As they prepare to release a full tax plan in the coming weeks, though, Republicans are pressing the argument.
The ability of Republicans to move forward with a tax bill got a boost on Tuesday, as Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, said he would support a budget resolution that will clear the path toward legislation. “I support the Senate budget resolution because it provides a path forward on tax reform,” Mr. McCain said in a statement.
The parliamentary language in the resolution would allow Republicans to pass tax cuts that cost as much as $1.5 trillion over the next decade with only 50 votes in the Senate, not the 60 needed to overcome a filibuster. Republican leaders have said that without a budget, there will be no tax cut.
In a speech at the Heritage Foundation in Washington on Tuesday evening, Mr. Trump called on Congress to quickly pass “incredible tax cuts” that he said will allow individuals, big corporations and small businesses to keep more of the money they earn.
Mr. Trump said his tax plan would expand the number of low-income people who pay no taxes, increase the child tax credit, lower rates on big corporations and small businesses, and pave the way for a return of trillions of corporate earnings parked overseas by American companies.
Many economists, including ones who served Democratic presidents, agree that lowering corporate taxes could lead to higher incomes for workers. A few, such as Lawrence B. Lindsey, the former director of President George W. Bush’s National Economic Council, have estimated the Republican plan for corporate cuts could lead to income gains of the magnitude that Mr. Trump’s economists are projecting.
But other economists have criticized the Trump team’s estimates as well above what research supports. That includes Mr. Desai, a professor at Harvard Business School and Harvard Law School, who co-authored a study on corporate taxation that Mr. Trump’s Council of Economic Advisers drew upon for its estimate. The report said that a corporate tax cut would increase average household income by $4,000 per year on the low end to as much as $9,000 at the high end.
Polling suggests middle-class Americans are not clamoring for corporate rate cuts, and that they do not expect the Republican plan to reduce their own taxes. Recent polls by ABC News and the Pew Research Center show a majority of Americans would prefer to raise, not cut, corporate taxes.
