In Alexis Rockman’s large mural “Spheres of Influence,” it’s hard to turn away from the dead waterfowl floating belly up, its head hanging underwater near a depiction of type E botulism, which has poisoned thousands of water birds.
The painting is one of five in his coming show, “Alexis Rockman: The Great Lakes Cycle,” starting at the Grand Rapids Art Museum in Michigan from Jan. 27 to April 29 and then traveling to Chicago, Cleveland and Minneapolis.
When Mr. Rockman began the series five years ago, “environmental issues were dire enough for the lakes,” he said. But now, President Trump has asked in his 2018 budget to defund the Great Lakes Restoration Initiative, which since 2010 has provided millions of dollars in federal funds to clean up and protect the lakes.
And earlier this month, a giant algae bloom covered more than 700 square miles of Lake Erie. Algae blooms, which have long been a problem for Lake Erie and can be toxic, are typically caused by fertilizer use on the region’s farmland.
So now his show is “in some ways a call to action,” said Dana Friis-Hansen, director of the Grand Rapids museum, who initiated the project with Mr. Rockman.
The Chicago Cultural Center, where Mr. Schulman oversees exhibitions, will host the show from June to September 2018.
Mr. Rockman, 55, whose mother is an archaeologist, perhaps sums up his work best, calling it “natural-history psychedelia.” He is known for bridging the worlds of art and science — his exhibition “A Natural History of Life in New York City,” which was shown at Salon 94 in New York last year, consisted of 75 field drawings of animals and plants from the five boroughs, ranging from the prehistoric era to the present.
And when the director Ang Lee was working on the movie “Life of Pi,” about a young man trapped at sea on a boat with a tiger, he asked Mr. Rockman to be the “inspirational artist” to define the look of the overall film. Among other things, Mr. Rockman did watercolor drawings of hundreds of pictures of ocean life based on natural history and his imagination.
His research included an expedition to Lake Michigan and Lake Superior, following an itinerary devised by the Grand Rapids museum. Over two weeks, he talked to experts, traveled to dunes, joined a charter-boat fisherman and visited the Great Lakes Shipwreck Museum and an abandoned copper mine. He also made visits to other Great Lakes.
One of those was Jill Leonard, a fish biologist at the university, who sat with Mr. Rockman at a Starbucks for three hours and hashed out the themes of the five paintings.
The paintings, Ms. Leonard said, will become a resource on her university’s website and will include short essays, videos and illustrations. Mr. Rockman also said he would be available to the museum, local schools and institutions for workshops and lectures.
His driving force was to capture the geographical, physical and ecological changes of the lakes over the centuries, but not in a linear way.
And there’s the unexpected. Underwater in the foreground of “Spheres of Influence” is a DC-4, the Northwest Orient plane that crashed into Lake Michigan in 1950, while on the horizon is the H.M.S. Queen Charlotte from the War of 1812.
Mr. Rockman’s paintings have “theatricality and overstatement, which is all backed up by how great a painter he is technically,” Mr. Schulman said. The paintings will be shown with keys so viewers can identify the various objects.
The exhibition will also include six 4-foot-by-6-foot watercolors and 30 field drawings. Mr. Rockman uses materials he picked up during his travels around the lakes to create the drawings, such as coal and sand from dunes.
Jill Snyder, executive director of the Museum of Contemporary Art Cleveland, which will show the paintings from October 2018 to January 2019, said the works “bring you into the past, present and future of a locale,” but also addressed compelling global issues.
