After 17 years, the author of the trilogy “His Dark Materials” carries on the story of one of literature’s most indelible heroines.
Lyra Silvertongue, Lyra Belacqua, but really just Lyra: one of those characters in literature — Pip, Emma, Lolita — who is on first-name terms with her public. Pullman has written 35 books, mostly for children and young adults, but Lyra stands foremost among his protagonists, a plucky scamp of mysterious origins who lives among Oxford academics and is accompanied through life, like almost everyone in the universe of “His Dark Materials,” by her dæmon, a shape-shifting animal self.
C.S. Lewis (“a paranoid bigot,” according to Pullman) provided anti-inspiration. Pullman could never bear the heavy Christian moralizing in “Narnia,” but he objected most of all to Lewis’s censorious judgment of his own characters, such as Susan, the second oldest of the Pevensie children, who is excluded from Narnia after indulging in “nylons and lipstick and invitations.” In Pullman’s world, the children are allowed to grow up. Lyra is the heroine, but she is also a child hitting puberty, falling in love for the first time, discovering her sexual self.
The books have been published in more than 40 languages, sold nearly 18 million copies and spawned a radio play, a two-part National Theater production, a Hollywood movie and a new BBC adaptation. In 2002, they achieved the presumed impossible and outsold Harry Potter in Britain. And now, after 17 years, Lyra is back. “La Belle Sauvage,” the first volume of Pullman’s next trilogy, “The Book of Dust,” will be published on Oct. 19.
The publication date of “La Belle Sauvage” is, by chance, Pullman’s 71st birthday. “I’ve felt 80 or 90 the last few years,” he said, sitting in his preferred love seat in his living room, surrounded by collapsing piles of books and his ukulele collection. “At the moment, I feel, oh, oh ... ” He paused. “I feel 68.” Pullman’s dry, understated tone makes the jokes almost undetectable, but that he’s able to joke at all is progress. Two years ago, when I first visited him in Oxford, he was suffering the effects of complications from a prostate operation. He was in near-constant pain and exhausted — at times only able to sleep in 15-minute bursts — and he wore the gray, spent expression of someone used to enduring something awful in silence. Earlier this year, another operation fixed the problem. Now he looked transformed.  If he had a beard, he would pass for Father Christmas.
There had been another recent transformation: A ponytail that used to lurk around the nape of Pullman’s neck was severed by Judith, his wife of 47 years, minutes after he wrote the last sentence of the second volume of “The Book of Dust.” “It was like Samson,” he said. “I had to not cut my hair while I was writing or else it would have all gone wrong. It was horrible.” He meant the ponytail. And then, eagerly, “Do you want to see it?” He jumped up from his chair and rummaged through stacks of papers on his dinner table. (Pullman’s home — an old farmhouse just outside Oxford — is wallpapered with literature and stuffed with ornaments and pictures, the kind of place where it’s not always easy to see the floor.) Then he pulled out a small plastic bag in which lay the hair, tied with a gold-edged purple ribbon. “It looks a bit like a shaving brush,” he said.
Pullman was born in 1946 to Audrey and Alfred, a pilot in the Royal Air Force. The family moved often. “You got used to being a bit of an outsider,” he said. “I am by nature a looker-on rather than a taker-part.” Alfred was killed in a plane crash in 1953, when Pullman was 7. He knows little about his lost father and discovered only after his mother’s death in 1990 that the couple had separated before he died.
The family returned to Britain by ship and moved deep into rural Wales. Pullman’s youngest half brother, Mark, recalled the walks the children would take across the Welsh hills, during which Pullman would offer entertainment. “He’d tell us stories of things he’d read,” Mark recalled. “He’d tell us myths. He was studying Anglo-Saxon languages, and he’d tell us stories about that. There were always stories.” But at home, he was an outlier. “My parents weren’t literary people,” Pullman said, “in the sense of being passionately interested in books.” They read, but not the way he did, as if it were all that mattered. In Wales, he developed a committed relationship with a mobile library and is still grateful enough to the woman in the village who let him borrow her books to pay her homage in “La Belle Sauvage.” Dr. Hannah Relf lends the trilogy’s new hero, Malcolm Polstead, a classic Pullman reading list: Stephen Hawking’s “A Brief History of Time,” Agatha Christie’s “The Body in the Library” and a history of the Silk Road.
The Greeks permeate his writing. Like Odysseus, his new hero, Malcolm, is on a self-appointed quest, fighting off enemies from his boat. (He’s also very unlike Odysseus, being 11 years old, ginger-haired and partial, like Pullman, to woodworking and meat pies.) “The Book of Dust” has other touchstones too: William Blake, the occult, ancient civilizations, East Asia and a eight-minute piece by Borodin called “In the Steppes of Central Asia.” Most of all, Edmund Spenser’s epic, 16th-century allegory, “The Faerie Queene.” Pullman copies the structure of “The Faerie Queene” — strange encounter after strange encounter — but thankfully not its style. When I admitted how I had struggled with the countless pages of archaic verse, Pullman shouted, gleeful, from his seat: “So did I! Couldn’t read it. Couldn’t read it at all until I was doing this.” His own novel is more readable, and earthier, locked into reality by character and geography, Malcolm and Oxford. In it, Lyra is 6 months old and being hunted by henchmen of the Magisterium. The action unfolds in Oxford, but an Oxford unrecognizable from its spire-crowded postcard form — the city is a damp and threatening place of inns and drunks and amiable nuns. For half the book they are all submerged in a catastrophic flood. Malcolm navigates the waters in his canoe and becomes Lyra’s chief protector. After a gentle start, the novel accelerates into an action thriller, with cameos from fairies and river gods. There are boat chases, hints at romance. It will be devoured.
“La Belle Sauvage” is dedicated to Judith and is, surely, the beginning of the end of Lyra’s world. When we met during the worst of Pullman’s illness, I wondered, guiltily, if he would ever finish it. He was midway through the second volume — Lyra was in the Levant, and she still had to get to Central Asia. “A long way to go,” said Pullman wearily at the time.
