There are 70 white mice in individual boxes set like tiles on the floor of a gallery on Manhattan’s Lower East Side. In clear plexiglass cages, designed to be stepped upon, they peer up underfoot in an exhibition exploring phobia.
To Natasha Millikan, a self-described mouse expert who squatted on the checkered floor on Sunday afternoon, her head pressed into her hands as around her mice shivered, chewed bits of wood or slept beneath her boots, it was an exploration of torture.
Mr. Grazi disagreed. The animals, so-called feeder mice, he said, had been destined to be eaten by reptiles. Here in the shallow tiles beneath gallery-goers feet, they were well-fed and happy.
The interaction was the result of a campaign that has emerged since animal activists took notice of the monthlong exhibit, “Prehysteria,” which opened on Oct. 19. And it has sent the four-year-old space, Castle Fitzjohns Gallery, into the same cross hairs of controversy recently trained on more venerable institutions: This fall, the Guggenheim pulled exhibits involving live animals, including lizards and insects, from an installation called “Theater of the World” by the Chinese conceptual artist Huang Yong Ping, where the penned animals vied for survival.
The gallery has been inundated with negative online comments, as well as haranguing phone calls from as far away as Europe. The owner, Vincent Harrison, said the public response had revealed the challenges of weighing criticism against artistic repression, not to mention the well-being of a bunch of rodents.
Mr. Grazi, 33, who lives in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, created the mouse-tiled floor installation, called “The Social Network,” as a commentary on the isolation endemic in social media. 
On Sunday afternoon, children jumped from square to square, playing hopscotch atop the mice, as the structure creaked.
In their little boxes, the mice did mice things, chewing wood or sitting stock-still in tightly knotted poufs. They scrabbled at the clear ceiling, gnawed at the air holes drilled in the top of each box, and tried to shove pink, whiskered noses through the ports.
The mice are all available for adoption, and three have been adopted. Those who are not claimed will be fed to Mr. Grazi’s pet ball python, Mr. Clip.
In September, the Guggenheim announced the live animals would not be shown, out of “concern for the safety of its staff, visitors and participating artists,” and said that it was “dismayed” at the attack on freedom of expression. Mr. Grazi said he would consider modifying the piece if he were concerned about animal welfare, but never shutting it down. This week, he will add little hideaways to the terrariums, so the mice have a place to duck into and hide from the shadows above, he said.
That did little to satisfy Nicole Hall, an animal activist who lives in Hell’s Kitchen and arrived at the gallery on Sunday to voice her distaste.
