New York|An Architect Designed a Calmer Restaurant. It Was Very Stressful.
An Architect Designed a Calmer Restaurant. It Was Very Stressful.
The room is a restaurant, not just any restaurant but the soaring Art Deco sanctuary of the celebrated Eleven Madison Park (three stars from Michelin, four from The New York Times). It closed in June — after serving an 11-course, $295 greatest-hits tasting menu for several weeks — so that the old interior could be demolished and Mr. Cloepfil’s built. It is to reopen on Sunday.
The new room is pleasantly muted, with whites and off-whites everywhere. It is more symmetrical than the room it replaced, which began as a brasserie, and wool-and-silk area rugs are now set into the terrazzo floors. He said he got the idea for the patterns on the rugs from looking at wet leaves on the sidewalk in Madison Square Park, across the street. “They’re abstractions of that,” he said.
Maybe the cups and saucers, also his, contributed to the pressure. He was not called on to design tableware for other big projects like Studio Bell, the new home of Canada’s National Music Centre in Calgary, Alberta, or for Uniqlo City, the headquarters of Fast Retailing in Tokyo. Nor were cups and saucers his responsibility for the new United States Embassy in Mozambique, on 10 acres overlooking the Indian Ocean in Maputo.
He said this outside, under the vaulted entrance. Eleven Madison Park is on the ground floor of a Jazz Age tower that was supposed to be 100 stories tall. It was scaled down after the stock market crash of 1929, making it look somewhat stubby. “Awkward little thing,” he said. For years the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, whose clock-tower headquarters loomed over it, used it as a warehouse. Met Life sold 11 Madison Avenue, and the restaurant opened in the former lobby in 1998.
Oh, them — the owners, Daniel Humm and Will Guidara. In 2011, they bought Eleven Madison Park from the restaurateur Danny Meyer, who had opened it. Mr. Humm had worked there since 2006, and said in 2012 that he had been determined to make it more special than it was.
Eleven Madison Park was pulling Mr. Cloepfil into its orbit long before he met Mr. Guidara in 2008. Consider the Contemporary Art Museum St. Louis, which he designed and that opened in 2003. “Danny Meyer’s mother is a supporter” of the museum, Mr. Cloepfil said. “He’s from there. When we had the press luncheon, it was up there.” He pointed toward a private dining room on the mezzanine at Eleven Madison Park.
The celebration dinner for his controversial redesign of 2 Columbus Circle, the white marble structure that became known as “the lollipop building” and now houses the Museum of Art and Design, was also held at Eleven Madison Park.
Then Mr. Humm and Mr. Guidara announced plans for a new restaurant in the skyscraper at 425 Park Avenue, at 56th Street. “I said, ‘I would have loved to do that with you,’” he recalled.
He did research in London and Paris. “I ate and drank a tremendous amount — duty called,” he joked.
He said that he wanted to make the room “a better version of itself,” and he had focused on the ceremony of dining: the walking in, the parade to the table, the people-watching.
And where the people sit. He said that Mr. Humm and Mr. Guidara wanted banquettes. “They both talked about comfort,” he said. “They wanted banquettes as a legacy,” a salute to a staple of fine restaurants of the past. He decided to add little lamps, built into the little spaces between the banquettes. Like the banquettes, they are something of a tribute: “I love those old restaurants where they had lamps on the tables,” he said.
He designed the chairs, and said, after sitting in one, that the backs needed to be plumped up. He said the chairs were made without mock-ups. There wasn’t time, he explained.
That prompted a question: Is this architecture?
But the architect of the space was pleased.
