 Fast Company said it’s the “timeliest podcast of 2017.” Why would you want to put yourself through this? Just because someone says something outrageously mean to you online doesn’t mean they’re sad and lonely. I wanted to go toward these messages rather than run away.
But surely you’re aware of the internet maxim “Don’t feed the trolls.” I’ve made the conscious choice to not even use the term “troll.” These are real people who have said things to me online that they wouldn’t necessarily say to me in person.
How do you decide whom to talk to? I chose people who had a nuanced take on why they hated me or my work. All my guests had initially reached out to me on Facebook.
Do you see your show as part of this trend in journalism toward reaching out to “real America” and trying to figure out what drives Trump voters? I really don’t like the mentality of “Identity politics aren’t the real issue” or “What we really need to care about is coal country.” It just feels like there are so many edicts every day of the right and wrong ways to care, but I think we can get to know the trials and tribulations of those in coal country while also acknowledging and exploring the marginalized identities of people who have been systematically oppressed for so long. There’s so much policing that goes on within the left. I came face to face with it last summer when I covered the Democratic and Republican National Conventions for Seriously.TV, a digital comedic news channel. Everyone loved Donald Trump at the R.N.C.; people rallied around him. At the D.N.C., there was so much talk about how awful Hillary Clinton was. It was so divided.
How do you psych yourself up for the actual phone call? The truth is the phone calls feel incredible: They make the world feel smaller and more manageable. It makes you feel like connection is possible with people with whom you’ve had a rocky beginning. The really emotionally draining part is delivering the episode to the world, trying to make sure that my guests and their views are accurately represented. I want to ensure that I’m actually engaging in conversation with them and identifying things that I disagree with, and that it’s not, like, the most masturbatory thing ever.
Has the podcast changed you? I used to be so firmly of the school of thought that we should humiliate people who are racists. But that actually shuts things down. I am not suited to be combative.
Then why are you drawn to talking to people you disagree with? I really love talking to people. When I was younger, I got a job at Whole Foods, which was an amazing job for me, because I had a different human in front of me every three to five minutes, and all I wanted to do was hear everything about them. It’s the same feeling I had with the people who bullied me in school. In a way, this podcast is sort of like calling them and seeing who they are, or what version of themselves they want to project into the world, and going from there.
Do you hate anyone? It’s very hard to hate someone when you’re face to face, or voice to voice, with them. Once you hear someone’s story, once you ask them that magic question that opens a lot of doors — “Why do you feel this way?” — the world opens up a little. There’s a McGuffin in every conversation — whether it’s the 18-year-old who told me that being gay is a sin, then revealed to me that he was bullied all throughout high school and that the things he said to me were similar to the things his bullies said to him, or the person who told me to kill myself, then revealed that he attempted suicide when he was a teenager. Everyone has a different surprise twist, but they all have it.