Roughly half a century ago, the country music industry consolidated its presence and power here, on 16th and 17th Avenues. Ms. Womack, a Texas-bred traditionalist and one of her generation’s most acclaimed vocalists, arrived on the scene in the late 1990s with the aim of following her gut. She quickly grasped that success would also require acclimating to the commercial forces of the radio-driven country world.
In the current phase of her career, Ms. Womack’s artful adaptation of establishment sensibilities has come into clearest focus. She has released seven albums on two major labels with Nashville in their names and one on the Nashville-based indie Sugar Hill Records. But on her new record, “The Lonely, the Lonesome & the Gone” — out Friday on the New York independent label ATO — she applies wisdom gleaned from her mainstream tenure while simultaneously casting off its restraints. It’s also something of a family affair: She once again worked with her husband, the producer Frank Liddell (who helped found Carnival), and the album features guitar playing by their daughter, Anna Lise Liddell, who graduated from high school in the spring.
At a young age, when many of her peers were taken with television’s chipper singing characters, Ms. Womack gravitated to the country records by Jones, Ray Price and Dolly Parton that her radio D.J. father brought home. “When I heard her sing, I might not have understood what she was singing about, but something, the quiver in her voice, the emotion in her voice, sucked me in,” she said of Ms. Parton.
Ms. Womack credited her former label Decca Nashville with allowing her the leeway to go against the format’s glossy grain, but also recognized her responsibility to “give them something they could work with.” Her 2000 blockbuster album contained the billowy inspirational ballad “I Hope You Dance” and the country rock of “Ashes by Now,” along with “Does My Ring Burn Your Finger,” a searing, Appalachian-sounding number by the future Americana luminaries Buddy and Julie Miller. “I Hope You Dance” became her biggest hit, a country chart topper that also crossed over to the pop Top 20, though its message-driven appeal was a departure.
“I told Frank one time, ‘I think they expect me to be Billy Graham now.’ And I wasn’t comfortable with that,” Ms. Womack said.
Ms. Womack has called the new album “country blues,” but that’s as much a tonal description as a stylistic one. She spends 14 tracks embodying the most delicate and desperate extremes of melancholy, inscribing countrypolitan and torchy pop arrangements with sighing silences, and launching into anguished, note-bending runs during the roiling, down-home numbers. The liberal use of reverb, particularly on the steel guitar and her voice, has a haunting effect.
“I’m not the one that goes, ‘Here’s the mic we need to use,’ or ‘Here’s where we need to put it,’ but I know who to hire that will understand what I’m going for,” Ms. Womack said.
“Glossin’ over things,” Ms. Womack completed the thought.
As a publisher, Mr. Liddell has signed some of Nashville’s country-tweaking songwriters, including his stepdaughter, Ms. Sellers. She spent half a decade fleshing out a sound she termed “garage country” before releasing her first album, “New City Blues,” which Mr. Liddell produced, last year. “I took all the things that I loved and tried to create my own identity,” she said, adding that she’s careful to separate her career from her mother’s.
Ms. Womack’s youngest, Ms. Liddell, currently splits her time between writing and assisting in an East Nashville recording studio. She envisions making her own albums, but only after she’s found a sonic stamp. “If I just put on a personality, I wouldn’t feel it and I’d be worried that other people weren’t feeling it,” she said.
After 20 years of releasing albums, Ms. Womack has her own unique position in the country landscape. She has the name recognition and endorsement juice of a fairly recent hit maker, along with the motivation to pursue musical priorities that predate her commercial peak. The business apparatus around her has grown more modest in scale, but her artistic aspirations are grander than ever. And she doesn’t feel the need to disavow her past accomplishments in order to own her present efforts.
