EUGENE, Ore. — On the first floor of a government building at Olive Street and West 10th Avenue here, Jed Shafer spends his days helping adolescents get their high school equivalency diplomas.
Outside the windows that line one wall are his once and future students, the “downtown kids” who gather in the bus plaza cater-corner from his classroom. He runs out to greet one from years past. Others he knows by name or back story, even if he has not yet lured them inside. Current students leave class early, only to hang out within view for hours. They return the next day or week, for the free lunch or mobile phone or toothbrush, and maybe stick around for another afternoon of tutoring.
To get himself here, looking out, reaching out, Mr. Shafer borrowed money to go to college and then some more to get his master of arts in teaching. And in 2007, he got early word of a new federal program for public servants that would forgive all of their student loan debt after 10 years of on-time payments. So he signed up, or so he thought.
This month is supposed to be the first one when nurses, social workers, soldiers and teachers like Mr. Shafer become eligible for loan forgiveness. But he will not be among them for reasons that are straight out of the theater of the absurd.
He’s unlikely to be the only one. About a quarter of the people who borrow money for higher education end up in jobs that could qualify for public service loan forgiveness.
All Mr. Shafer has been trying to do for more than 25 years is get ready for a career where he could make a difference while also earning enough to buy a home and help raise a family. The son of a fisherman and a mother who eventually became a teacher herself, Mr. Shafer, 46, does indeed own a cozy house on a street with gorgeous foliage. He and his wife live with their two sons, ages 10 and 4.
At work, Mr. Shafer offers job interview advice to one student while plotting financial aid application strategies with another. The classroom where he and his colleagues work has notices on the walls about housing and a free Thanksgiving dinner.
But at home over the last two years, he has spent many hours communicating with his current loan servicer, FedLoan, which is part of the nonprofit Pennsylvania Higher Education Assistance Agency. Eventually, he contacted elected officials and the Department of Education’s ombudsman department. The fact that he has had more than one servicer is a big part of what seems to have gone wrong.
As Mr. Shafer tells it, teacher circles were abuzz back in 2007 when the federal public service loan forgiveness program came into existence. Five years earlier, he had consolidated all of his student loans into a single one. At the time, his servicer verified his income and put him into a repayment plan where his payments would grow slowly over time, presumably as his income grew.
In 2007, Mr. Shafer said, he called his servicer at the time, ACS Education Services, and told the company that he wanted to enroll in the public service loan forgiveness program. No problem, he said he had been told, as long as he made his payments on time for 120 months. When ACS exited the federal loan servicing business, his loan moved to Mohela, short for the Missouri Higher Education Loan Authority, in 2012. Nothing, he said, that he heard or saw from Mohela gave him pause.
In 2013, he heard this from a fellow teacher: Once borrowers in the public service loan forgiveness program reached 120 payments, only one servicer, FedLoan, could forgive the remaining balance. So Mr. Shafer did what he needed to do to move his loans there.
It was at that point that things began to go off the rails. Remember that repayment program that Mr. Shafer ended up in back in 2002? It is what’s known as a graduated repayment plan, and if you’re in one, you’re not eligible for public service loan forgiveness. He was supposed to be in one of the income-based plans.
All along, Mr. Shafer said, people at the three servicers told him that his loan was in “good status” when he asked whether he was on track for forgiveness in 2017. The phone representatives at these servicers, however, may have been defining that term more narrowly — namely, that he was merely making on-time payments. It’s also possible that they simply didn’t understand the highly specific requirements of the loan forgiveness program.
In 2015, Mr. Shafer received an email from FedLoan that definitively alerted him to the fact that none of his eight years of payments had counted toward forgiveness. He panicked and spent the next year fighting back, flabbergasted that so much time had gone by without any of the three servicers telling him that anything was wrong when he had quite specifically and repeatedly inquired.
So why didn’t they? A spokesman for ACS’s current owner said it could not comment on the concerns of a past borrower, even though Mr. Shafer granted the company permission to do so. A Mohela spokesman said that while it didn’t have specific records of having told Mr. Shafer that his payments were not qualifying, its phone representative’s contact with him in January 2013 was probably what spurred him to move his loans to FedLoan to become eligible for the forgiveness program. Mr. Shafer said that was not so.
At FedLoan, a spokesman said it had told Mr. Shafer that he had a problem, more than once, by phone and through other communications. Indeed, in Mr. Shafer’s pile of documents, I did find a 2014 statement that said, on the back, that he had not made any qualifying payments. Mr. Shafer had missed that, and many others probably did, too, given that FedLoan didn’t bother to put this crucial piece of information on the front of the bill, let alone in 100-point neon “You are doing this wrong” type.
As for FedLoan’s specific assertion that it disclosed the problem to him by phone in 2013, Mr. Shafer responds with the following: Why on earth would he have not jumped on the problem instantly and aggressively if he had heard that in 2013?
There does not appear to be any happy ending in the offing for Mr. Shafer, and after a year of appeals, he did move himself into an eligible repayment plan. If nothing else happens to mess this all up again, he should finish paying off his loans when he is 55, about the time that his first child starts college. That will be 37 years after he took out his first loan as a teenager.
Worried that your story will end with similar bad news? There are four crucial requirements in the public service loan forgiveness program. You have to be in an eligible job, with an eligible loan, making the right kind of payments (which was what tripped Mr. Shafer up) and doing so in the right way. A column I wrote in April outlines the process, even if conquering it proves to be another matter.
Mr. Shafer remains baffled by it all. Perspiring at his dining room table this week after a meal of halibut that he had caught himself, he sipped a second adult beverage and tried to understand what had happened. In what other area of life, he wondered aloud, would you pay your bills on time only to be told that the payments hadn’t counted?
