Dance|The Rockettes Own Christmas. But Spring Is a Tough Nut to Crack.
The Rockettes Own Christmas. But Spring Is a Tough Nut to Crack.
The Radio City Rockettes have owned Christmastime for more than eight decades. But repeated attempts to create a second Rockettes franchise show for warm-weather months have not gone smoothly, and the latest effort — a big-budget, multiweek “spectacular” that had been postponed until 2018 — is no longer in the works, people involved with the production said this week.
The struggle to turn precision dance and kick lines into lucrative rites of spring and summer — akin to the Rockettes’ “Christmas Spectacular” — goes back years and at one point featured the now-disgraced movie mogul Harvey Weinstein in a pivotal role. Once a source of great excitement, such efforts have become an enduring challenge for the Madison Square Garden Company, which manages the Rockettes.
Executives there torpedoed a new Rockettes show in 2014 and then mounted expensive “spectaculars” in 2015 and 2016 that drew scorn from many critics. A 2017 “spectacular” was postponed in February for a year, and the company instead made money by renting Radio City Music Hall this year to big draws like Dave Chappelle.
Such lucrative rentals continue to hold strong appeal for James L. Dolan, the executive chairman of the Madison Square Garden Company, but he and other leaders still want another franchise for the Rockettes that rivals the popularity of the Christmas show, according to executives at the company and people close to the Rockettes. The current idea is for a Rockettes show that can be easily mounted, then packed up, then remounted — thereby providing flexibility so the company can make room for limited profit-making runs by the starry likes of Mr. Chappelle.
Devising a new annual entertainment tradition in an era when people have so many options, however, has bedeviled producers across fields like theater, circus, art, and concert festivals.
“The ‘Christmas Spectacular’ is spectacularly successful, but a strong part of its pull is nostalgia and tradition,” said Drew Hodges, the founder of SpotCo Advertising who worked on Rockettes projects in the past, and is now an independent consultant for producers of live entertainment. “It’s difficult to build a new tradition — it takes years — and even harder to create a family-friendly entertainment that fills 6,000 seats a night,” referring to the seating capacity at Radio City Music Hall.
Time would seem to have run out for this coming spring. None of the behind-the-scenes work needed to mount a major new production is taking place, and this month the Tony Awards said it would return to Radio City on June 10, all but precluding a late-spring show as well.
Rhonda Malkin, a dance coach who has trained dozens of Rockettes, noted that the company has tried and failed to create various shows for the group over the last 15 years. She admired the most recent iteration of the late-spring show, overseen by the choreographer Mia Michaels, and said that Rockettes were excited to perform it again.
“Radio City tends to build a big show and then at the last minute either do away with it or change it or not put it up,” Ms. Malkin said.
For years now, Madison Square Garden Company has faltered in its artistic choices for a new Rockettes franchise — a creative development process that started becoming bumpy in 2014 because of Mr. Weinstein, the film mogul who was fired as co-chairman of the Weinstein Company this month amid allegations of sexual harassment and assault.
That year, Mr. Weinstein played a key role in the decision to scrap a multimillion-dollar new springtime Rockettes show, “Heart and Lights.” He did not have an official role on the production, but attended a run-through with his friend Mr. Dolan, and was among those voicing doubts about the show’s book and songs. The show was canceled, and its creative team was soon gone, including Linda Haberman, the respected artistic director of the Rockettes since 2006.
Last winter there were indications that another overhaul was in the works. After a number of Rockettes expressed concerns about performing at the inauguration of President Trump, Marie Claire magazine published leaked remarks that Mr. Dolan made to a group of the dancers.
Several Rockettes had been eager to return to Ms. Michaels’s show, according to Ms. Malkin. The show was expected to include a mix of precision dancing and other choreography that was different from the Christmastime production.
