Music|Pink Quietly Became Pop Royalty. Here’s How She Made It Last.
Pink Quietly Became Pop Royalty. Here’s How She Made It Last.
LOS ANGELES — An invitation to visit Pink in Venice, a few blocks from the beach, for a home-cooked Monday night dinner could seem like a contrived play for authenticity. But it’s hard to remain skeptical when faced with a giggling baby.
Pink, who has spent nearly two decades selling her relative edge and honesty from within the pop machine, is not quite Martha Stewart. She wore tattoo-baring overalls and diamond earrings as she passed the baby (named for the whiskey) to his nanny, and began dressing a salad with the uncertainty of a 20-something playing dinner party. Slide sandals emblazoned with the words “Frigid Whore” sat nearby.
It’s not that she’s been ignored, or burrowed in a niche. Since her debut, “Can’t Take Me Home,” in 2000, Pink has sold more than 16 million albums and some 45 million digital songs in the United States, according to Nielsen Music; she’s had 23 songs in the Billboard Top 40 (including her current single, “What About Us”), with four No. 1 hits and 11 more that reached the Top 10. She headlines arenas around the world and will perform on “Saturday Night Live” on Oct. 14, the day after the release of “Beautiful Trauma,” her seventh solo album.
And yet here she is again — “What About Us” is currently No. 15 on the pop airplay chart — a beacon of longevity in an industry obsessed with the new and nubile. Generally more brash, more aggressive and more androgynous than her contemporaries, Pink has managed to become a populist stalwart known for her self-esteem anthems (“Raise Your Glass,” “______ Perfect,” “Just Like Fire”) and modern power ballads (“Just Give Me a Reason,” “Try”), not for the intra-pop feuds and other tabloid dramas that dominated her early years.
Instead, she has focused on honing her live performances — including the acrobatic aerial dancing that has become a trademark — using regular tours, soundtrack songs and guest appearances as lily pads between pop eras. Since 2000, she has released a single every year except one.
Tom Poleman, the chief programming officer for iHeartMedia, the largest operator of radio stations in the U.S., said that the singer’s longevity in pop’s upper tier is “an anomaly” owing to her consistency.
Born Alecia Beth Moore to working class parents in Doylestown, Penn., Pink was signed first as part of an R&B group to the urban-oriented, Atlanta-based LaFace Records. While her debut single, “There You Go,” recalled a Destiny’s Child leftover, it was the injection of some Lilith Fair into her sound — as well as the performed defiance at having subverted her label’s expectations — that made her a star.
On “Beautiful Trauma,” Pink is once again playing the part of the mainstream’s favorite nonconformist, singing of insecurities and imperfect relationships replete with drinking and fighting, but with an idealism that shines through and ensures maximum marketability. She’s always been a savvy collaborator; Pink recruited Linda Perry of 4 Non Blondes to write with her on “Missundaztood,” her defining and most popular album, released a year before Christina Aguilera put out the Perry-written “Beautiful.” Here she mixes work by established hitmakers like Max Martin and Greg Kurstin with the newcomers Julia Michaels, Jack Antonoff and Tobias Jesso Jr.
Still, the music is hardly a reinvention, with Pink’s manager, Roger Davies, calling it “just a continuation of the previous records” — that is, 13 well-crafted pop songs that can reload her concert set list and get her back on the road.
But as much as she’s remained steady, the business has changed. The rise of streaming — the biggest shift since Pink’s previous solo album in 2012 — presents a fresh challenge. “I don’t think 35-year-old moms are really streaming that much,” Pink said of her audience. But Mr. Davies pointed to a “pretty large core audience” that will still go to concerts. “We’re slowly getting there” on streaming, he added, noting bonus promotional content that will be exclusive to Apple Music.
“I’m a ticket-seller,” said Pink, crediting Mr. Davies, who has managed Tina Turner, Cher, Joe Cocker and Sade, with conceptualizing her live-centric strategy. Though she’d had hits and sold millions, Pink was still opening for Justin Timberlake well into her career; she pointed to an airborne, water-soaked 2010 Grammys performance of the non-single ballad “Glitter in the Air” as a turning point, when people woke up to her strong voice and showmanship.
Being the mother of two young children, however, complicates the constant touring. After Willow’s birth in 2011, Pink promptly made an album and returned to the road, daughter in tow, though the experience “definitely took like five years off my life,” she said.
In a trade not known for its sensitivity to women’s lives, Pink turns to humor to cope. She laughed heartily while telling a story about the miscarriage she had before getting pregnant again with Jameson.
Though she denied experiencing much overt music-business sexism firsthand — “People think I’m insane and aggressive and I’ll bite them,” she said, pleading ignorance about the sexual harassment allegations made against her former mentor, the executive L.A. Reid — Pink was less magnanimous about the super-producer Dr. Luke, with whom she last collaborated in 2006.
That wasn’t her first draft. Initially, Pink said, she wrote a speech responding to those online who said she didn’t deserve the lifetime achievement trophy, a throwback to a time when her “anger was everywhere” and “I couldn’t hold my tongue,” she said, with added expletives.
But getting older and gaining perspective has its advantages, even in a youth-oriented business. “I can choose my battles now,” she said. So after reading the original speech to her husband and being told it sounded bitter, she ripped it up and started again.