OCEANSIDE, Calif. — Gam Aung, a Burmese refugee, had never heard of sushi before arriving in the United States three years ago. Today, he makes six figures a year hawking creations like the Dazzling Dragon roll and the Mango Tango.
Over two years, Mr. Aung, who never finished high school and is still working on his English, went from running one grocery-store sushi counter to three. Along the way, he saved enough for a $700,000 house and trained 10 fellow Burmese to follow in his footsteps.
“I came true with my American dream,” said Mr. Aung, 38, standing behind his sushi display inside a supermarket in this Southern California town.
There is a long American tradition of immigrant communities dominating certain business sectors, recruiting their compatriots and building their way to the middle class. Many examples are familiar. Greek diners. Chinese laundries. Vietnamese nail salons.
You may not have heard of Burmese sushi counters.
But the workers assembling California rolls behind the counters in most grocery stores are almost certainly not Japanese. Many are refugees from Myanmar, the Southeast Asian country formerly known as Burma, where civil conflicts have over the years displaced hundreds of thousands of people of various ethnic minorities, like the Chin, the Kachin, the Karen and most recently the Rohingya.
Tens of thousands of Burmese, like Mr. Aung, who is Kachin, have in recent years been resettled in the United States. And sushi, which is about as endemic to Burmese cuisine as Texas chili, has become their livelihood.
“Sometimes one immigrant breaks through in a big way and creates opportunity for a lot of other people,” said David Dyssegaard Kallick, who studies immigrant entrepreneurship at the Fiscal Policy Institute in New York.
For the Burmese in the sushi business, Philip Maung may have been the one who broke through.
He arrived in the United States in 1989 as a 22-year-old with big ambitions but no money. After the early ’90s recession crippled his dreams of making it big in real estate, Mr. Maung joined Advanced Fresh Concepts, a Southern California company started by a Japanese immigrant who pioneered the supermarket-sushi concept. The formula: The store provides a display case, refrigerator and storage. The company supplies the ingredients and chefs to prepare the rolls on-site.
After a few years running Advanced Fresh stations, Mr. Maung struck out on his own, betting on untapped markets. In 1998, he started Hissho Sushi in Charlotte, N.C., a financial center where he figured he would get a loan.
But Hissho, which means “certain victory” in Japanese, was no easy win.
Banks shunned him. He borrowed $100,000 from friends and family, and maxed out his credit cards. To save money, he slept in his car when he traveled from retailer to retailer pitching the idea of fresh sushi inside their supermarkets, next to deli salads or cupcakes.
But he gradually won over some independent grocers, and by 2001 had sushi bars in 15 stores in Midwestern and Southern states ringing up $2.5 million in sales.
Hissho grew as the number of Burmese settling in the United States jumped more than tenfold, to about 1,300 in 2004 from just 113 two years earlier. They had fled bloody clashes that for decades pitted the national armed forces against ethnic groups in rural areas fighting for self-determination. In 2007, arrivals rocketed to 14,225 as refugees parked in Malaysia and Thailand were approved for resettlement in the United States.
Hissho swept up many of the newcomers as it expanded. It turned the counters over to the workers once they gained expertise, with the company and the supermarket receiving a cut of the sales.
“It was all by word of mouth,” Mr. Maung said of how he attracted workers from Myanmar.
Today, Hissho has counters in more than 1,100 locations in 41 states, including in national chains like Kroger, university food halls and medical plazas. Mr. Maung projects sales will surpass $140 million this year.
About 95 percent of Mr. Maung’s franchisees, like Mr. Aung in Southern California, are Burmese. They must commit $10,000 in start-up capital and complete a two-week course at the Hissho headquarters before taking over a sushi counter.
Among the 10 pupils planning to run franchises in Colorado, Maryland, Texas and other states, several, like Mr. Aung, had never encountered sushi, let alone Western-style rolls with names like Sriracha Party and Blazing California, before reaching the United States.
After leaving Myanmar, Mr. Aung eked out a living for five years peddling garments in Malaysia. He arrived in Kent, Wash., in February 2014, and within a week he was learning the sushi business from his cousin, Nang Moe, a Hissho franchisee, working his bamboo rolling mat until the motions were muscle memory.
A year later, the company invited Mr. Aung to work at its sushi counter in a Sprouts grocery store in Carlsbad, Calif., north of San Diego. He made $11 an hour. Then Hissho offered him a franchise inside the Sprouts in Oceanside, where sales quickly jumped 50 percent, said Pyie Thu, Hissho’s regional manager. Last year, Mr. Thu offered him two more Sprouts stores, the one in Carlsbad where Mr. Aung had worked and another in nearby San Marcos.
He lured fellow Burmese to California, training them to slice salmon and tuna at just the right angle and make perfectly round rolls stuffed with avocado, cucumber and other ingredients. Every one of Mr. Aung’s Burmese protégés has become a franchisee.
Many customers assume that the sushi they are buying is prepared by Japanese chefs, Mr. Aung said, adding that he always tells them the truth if they ask. High quality for value matters much more to them, he said.
From his three counters, Mr. Aung nets $17,000 a month.
A few months ago, his high school sweetheart arrived in the United States — and she promptly began working at his Carlsbad counter. They plan to marry soon and start a family.
