386 pp. Little, Brown & Company. $26.
THERE IS A MONUMENT in Ottawa’s Minto Park dedicated to the memory of women killed by men. As with most monuments in Canada’s capital, its inscription is bilingual, and meaning exists in a tense tangle between translations. In French, it says à la mémoire de toutes les femmes qui ont subi jusqu’à la mort la violence des hommes. In English, it reads to honor and to grieve all women abused and murdered by men. It’s difficult to say, at a glance, whether one is a translation of the other, or whether they are simply two statements, separate but related, written in stone, shedding different lights on the women they commemorate.
Alderman (who also created the popular apps “Zombies, Run!” and “The Walk,” and in 2013 was among Granta’s 20 best young British novelists) imagines our present moment — with our history, our wars, our gender politics — complicated by the sudden widespread manifestation of “electrostatic power” in women. Young girls wake up one morning with the ability to generate powerful electric shocks from their bodies, having developed specialized muscles — called “skeins” — at their collarbones, which they can flex to deliver anything from mild stings to lethal jolts of electricity. The power varies in its intensity but is almost uniform in its distribution to anyone with two X chromosomes, and women vary in their capacity to control and direct it, but the result is still a vast, systemic upheaval of gender dynamics across the globe.
Alderman explores this change through the eyes of Roxy, the daughter of a British drug baron; Margot, mayor of an unnamed city in the United States; Allie, a brown girl in an abusive foster home in Alabama; and Tunde, a young Nigerian journalist. Through Tunde, we get glimpses into what’s happening around the world; through Allie, we see the entrenchment of power around a new religion centering on women and lightning; through Margot, we see how politics proceed hand in hand with the military-industrial complex; through Roxy, we see how organized crime leverages social shifts into business opportunities. All their perspectives converge on the newly declared nation of Bessapara, previously Moldova, where the former sex-trafficking capital of the world becomes a staging ground for the new world order.
But as Tunde observes, “Transfers of power, of course, are rarely smooth” — and as the book counts down the years to a global catastrophe the future will name the Cataclysm, Alderman explores how power corrupts everyone: those new to it, and those resisting its loss.
I played those games too. I imagined that power in my chest and in the palms of my hands, and the specificity of Margot’s experience shook me. I imagined that power whenever I sat with teeth gritted through rape scenes in movies and books, and deflected the horror on screen into the fantasy of men stopped by the power I could summon. I felt so hungry, reading this book, for a ball of lightning in my hand instead of keys between my knuckles on a long walk home at night. I felt hungry for the victory of these women — two of whom are raped in their first scene — over those who would hurt them.
But that isn’t the story Alderman tells. It’s difficult to say what is, because “The Power” really tells two stories somewhat at odds, two inscriptions on a monument in different languages saying different shades of the same thing. They are related to each other; they shed light on and complicate each other. But something tense dances between them like electricity arcing from palm to palm.
One sees what Alderman is doing. The book Neil Adam Armon writes is called “The Power,” and it makes up the main text of the novel. That text is captivating, fierce and unsettling. But given the frame, it doesn’t quite make sense on a world-building level or cohere on a philosophical one.
For instance: Armon’s document includes occasional illustrations depicting archaeological remnants of pre-Cataclysm times, among them Apple products described as stamped with a mysterious “Bitten Fruit motif” and captioned with the speculation that iPads were used to serve food. Yet in his narrative about those days (which is to say, these days) people exchange emails, record video on their phones and use technology that’s very much of our moment despite the frame’s suggestion that “electromagnetic battles” during the Cataclysm wiped out data storage. It’s jarring that someone 5,000 years in our future would be able to extrapolate gmail addresses from archaeological artifacts but not recognize a tablet.
Jarring, too, are some of the ways in which American politics appear to function. This is a particularly dislocating time to imagine a campaign debate in which a woman squares off against a man and wins because she loses her temper; it’s even more dislocating to read about a governor demanding that some women be invasively tested for the electrostatic power because “it’s like walking around with a loaded gun” in a country where open-carry laws exist. I’m writing this on the same day that one man killed 58 people and injured over 500 at a concert in Las Vegas, in a year where there have been almost as many mass shootings as days.
World-building quibbles aside, it’s difficult to bear the conclusion that the horrors of our times are inevitable and inescapable: that there will always be abuses of power, that the arc of the universe doesn’t bend toward justice so much as inscribe a circle away from it, that if our world were destroyed and rebuilt with women in charge it would look exactly as it does with men in charge. The tension between thought experiment and gripping realism is tricky to navigate, and it left me wanting to argue, without quite knowing what the book’s position ultimately was. To show up the double standards between men and women? To enact what Sophia MacDougall wrote about in her essay “The Rape of James Bond” and show horrific instances of equal opportunity rape? These are both done to tremendous effect — but I found myself questioning the aim.
There’s a second half to the inscription on the monument in Minto Park. The English reads Envision a world without violence where women are respected & free. But the French is a bit more specific in its exhortation, a bit more committed to the active voice when it says Imaginons un monde où les femmes libérées de l’emprise de la violence s’épanouissent dans le respect et la liberté.
Let us, it says, imagine a world where women, freed from the grip of violence, flourish in respect and liberty. That, ultimately, is a thought experiment in which I’m more interested.