For the political journalists Mark Halperin and John Heilemann, work on the third installment of their popular “Game Change” book series — set to be an insiders’ account of the final two months of the 2016 presidential race — came to an abrupt halt last Wednesday at around 10 a.m.
That was when Mr. Heilemann received a call from a shaken Mr. Halperin, who informed his longtime partner in writing and reporting that CNN was about to publish a potentially damaging story. 
It was a short conversation. Before it was over, Mr. Halperin said he was sorry.
The two men were among the most successful and well-compensated teams in journalism. Their nine-year partnership generated an Emmy Award-winning HBO film, a pair of lucrative television franchises and best-selling books that defined a now-common kind of gossipy political reporting.
The partnership is now over.
Hours after CNN’s report about Mr. Halperin, Penguin Press killed the pair’s coming book, and HBO pulled out of a planned mini-series based on it. Showtime, which airs their political documentary series, “The Circus,” said Mr. Halperin would not return.
Mr. Halperin declined to comment for this article. The allegations against him, which have expanded in recent days as more women have come forward, place him in a group of media figures felled by claims of sexual misconduct in the wake of numerous allegations against the film mogul Harvey Weinstein.
They include the literary editor Leon Wieseltier, the New Republic publisher Hamilton Fish, the Vox editorial director Lockhart Steele and the head of Amazon Studios, Roy Price. Mr. Halperin’s alleged misconduct with younger subordinates has been described as predatory and a sign of endemic sexism in television news.
It remains unclear what will become of Mr. Halperin’s contributions to the scuttled third installment in the “Game Change” series. The pair had conducted roughly 300 interviews for the book in recent months, Mr. Heilemann said.
“We’ve done reporting that touches on important things both for history and for the current national dialogue,” he said.
For years, Mr. Halperin played the Washington insider to Mr. Heilemann’s freewheeling descendant of Hunter S. Thompson, whose likeness he uses for his Twitter profile.
The two achieved riches and prominence that most reporters only dream about. They moved through the crowds at rallies lit up by their own dedicated Showtime camera crew. Their employer, Bloomberg News, installed a huge promotional poster for their show featuring their images on the side of the Marriott in Des Moines, a popular hangout for campaign reporters.
Their style was derided in some quarters as superficial, and some pundits criticized Mr. Halperin’s interviews with President Trump during his candidacy as too cozy.
“Game Change,” a No. 1 best-seller, sold nearly half a million copies; its HBO film adaptation won Emmys and Golden Globes. They wrote a sequel, “Double Down: Game Change 2012,” and appeared frequently on cable news; Bloomberg was said to be paying Mr. Halperin and Mr. Heilemann salaries in the range of $1 million.
Mr. Heilemann, who made his reputation at Wired, The New Yorker and New York magazine, dreamed up the idea for “Game Change” — a Hollywood-style account of a presidential election — while vacationing in Aspen, Colo. He pitched the idea to Mr. Halperin, an acquaintance from the campaign trail, during a ride to a John McCain rally in 2008.
Showtime said that the network remained on good terms with Mr. Heilemann and that it was examining whether “The Circus” will go on without Mr. Halperin. NBC News, where Mr. Heilemann is a contributor, has severed ties with Mr. Halperin.
The men worked closely for nearly a decade, including a two-year stretch of near-daily contact for their Bloomberg TV show. What would Mr. Heilemann say to a skeptic who found it difficult to believe that he had been unaware of Mr. Halperin’s alleged misbehavior?
