At a Wednesday evening rehearsal for the musical “Into the Woods,” the actors playing two lovesick princes were practicing the choreography for their big Act I duet, “Agony.” The director, Lia Boyle, wanted them to rip their shirts open at the end of the number, and the costume designer asked how far down their bodies the tear should go.
“Just to the bottom of the xiphoid process,” Ms. Boyle said.
Mid-chest would have been just as suitable a descriptor, but dropping anatomical references in design discussions is standard practice for the Bard Hall Players, as every member in the troupe is studying to join the medical profession.
The student-run theater company at Columbia University’s College of Physicians and Surgeons was preparing for its production of this Stephen Sondheim/James Lapine riff on classic children’s fairy tales. The production, the final show of the company’s 50th anniversary season, will run Oct. 26 to 28.
Before rehearsal, Ms. Boyle, who is taking a research year between her third and fourth years of medical school, spent 10 hours working in a lab on pediatric genetics. Sam Bruce, a fourth-year medical student who is playing the Baker, began his clinical rotation in the hospital at that morning at 7. But at 7 p.m., they shed their white coats and headed to an auditorium nestled in the back of a Columbia University Medical Center building, adjacent to NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital. Intermittent sirens from the ambulances lined up outside the hospital punctuated the sounds of Sondheim emanating from the rehearsal piano.
Founded in 1967, the Bard Hall Players produces three shows a year: a classic play in the winter, a contemporary drama in the spring, and a musical in the fall. Every production is put together by the students — from the sets and costumes to the orchestra and lighting.
“It’s what sold me on Columbia — how could I go anywhere else?” said Kyle Lindsey McCormick, a second-year medical student and one of the group’s co-presidents.
Incorporating the arts into medical school curriculums is an increasingly popular trend. The arts and humanities initiative at Harvard Medical School includes a collaboration with American Repertory Theater. Yale School of Medicine requires a course in which students observe paintings. But an extracurricular student-run theater company that produces a regular season is an anomaly.
“It enhances empathy and understanding and emotional intelligence of our students, and it translates into enhanced understanding for patients from other backgrounds and cultures,” said Dr. Lisa Mellman, the senior associate dean of student affairs at the College of Physicians and Surgeons.
Auditions are open to anyone on the medical campus, including nursing, dental and doctoral students, and everyone who wants to be involved earns a role, onstage or off. Dr. Donald O. Quest, a neurosurgeon at NewYork-Presbyterian, has played trombone in the orchestra pit for several shows, and Dr. Mellman has made cameos in some productions.
Dr. Jay H. Lefkowitch joined the Bard Hall Players in 1972, performing minor roles in musicals like “Anything Goes” and focusing on set design, employing his undergraduate degree in art. Now a pathologist at NewYork-Presbyterian, he is the faculty adviser of the group and an impassioned supporter of the arts, speaking as knowledgeably about post-Sondheim musical theater as he does about intestinal cancers.
Bard Hall Players isn’t the only artistic group at the College of Physicians and Surgeons. The school has an a cappella group called The Ultrasounds. Each class has a band (The second year’s is called the Flu Fighters). There’s also a symphony, composed of students and staff.
Many students believe their artistic credentials helped them get into the school. Jenna Lanz, a second-year medical student and co-president of the Players, said Columbia was barely on her radar screen when she was applying to medical schools, because it was a stretch academically. But during her interview, she said, she talked about her theater experience and its connection to medicine.
“When you have the ability to see other people’s lives and put yourself into them, then it helps you serve them better and understand what they’re going through in a different way,” she said.
Bard Hall Players includes students have never acted before and those who have worked in the theater professionally. Ms. Boyle was an assistant stage manager at the Shakespeare Theater of New Jersey. Ms. McCormick, who plays Cinderella, studied music and opera at Columbia as an undergraduate. James Lasky, who plays Cinderella’s Prince, is a former ballet dancer and model. Cory Chang, one of the production’s music directors, earned a master’s degree in collaborative piano from Eastman School of Music.
And some have had full-fledged careers in the arts. Dr. Michael Parker Ayers, who graduated in 2014 and is now a cardiology fellow at the University of Pennsylvania, acted professionally before attending Columbia. A few weeks after starting medical school in 2010, he received a call from the casting director for “West Side Story” on Broadway, asking if he was available to be the new standby for Tony. He ended up turning down the offer and joining the Players instead.
Students often apply their medical training to their character development. When Ms. Boyle directed “Julius Caesar” her first year, she and the cast spoke often about how Caesar has epilepsy, “the falling sickness,” and how his confusion could be a result of a postictal state, the time following a seizure.
To prepare for “Into the Woods,” Kelseanne Breder, a PhD. nursing student specializing in psychology who plays the Witch decided that vertical trauma, the idea that suffering is carried across generations, is relevant to her character’s back story. The Witch’s mother left her when she was young and now she’s projecting by keeping her daughter Rapunzel in captivity.
The fourth-year medical student Nicole Curatola, who plays Jack’s Mother in “Into the Woods,” said theater has helped broaden her perspective on the medical profession.
Most of all, the students see the club as a way to relieve stress. At a recent evening rehearsal, the cast, dressed in a mix of street clothes and scrubs, stumbled through the choreography to the Act I finale, linking arms and skipping with abandon across the stage.
“Do you have an acronym for remembering these lyrics?” one of the performers asked, as if academic memorization methods could be applied to the musical.
In the end, it didn’t matter. People forgot the lyrics. People forgot the steps. But everyone was laughing. That’s the reason, according to Dr. Lefkowitch, the club has endured for 50 years. “It’s a source of sanity,” he said.