CINCINNATI — A concert hall that was simply too cavernous: hard to sell out and leaving audiences feeling distant from the music. Lobbies that have grown shabby over time. A fortresslike presence, somewhat isolated from the city just outside its doors.
These are all problems that Lincoln Center and the New York Philharmonic have been trying to fix for nearly two decades at the theater now known as David Geffen Hall — and still hope to, after their announcement earlier this month that they had scrapped a $500 million gut renovation in favor of a more modest approach.
But Cincinnati faced these issues, too — and went ahead and did something about them. Just as the latest Geffen Hall plans were being sent back to the drawing board, this city’s stately 1878 redbrick Music Hall was reopening to cheers after a $143 million, 16-month renovation that restored its High Victorian Gothic grandeur, uncovered bricked-over windows to open its facade to the surrounding neighborhood and shrank its giant auditorium by removing a thousand seats.
A visit to the renewed Music Hall suggested that it could be a road map of sorts for officials in New York.
In modern concert halls, as in modern baseball stadiums, smaller is generally considered better. Orchestra officials here said that while there had been more sellouts in recent seasons, especially of Cincinnati Pops concerts, they were the exception, not the rule. Just as ball teams no longer build stadiums for World Series crowds, most orchestras no longer build halls that only visiting superstars can hope to pack.
Audiences raised on high fidelity and high definition demand more intimate experiences.
The restrooms were upgraded, increasing capacity by about 60 percent. The hall also added more concession stands.
One reason New York scaled back its plans for a radical transformation of Geffen Hall was the growing fear that building the most recent, complicated design threatened to leave the Philharmonic homeless for more than two seasons. That was considered a real risk to the orchestra, which can ill afford to hasten the loss of its subscriber base.
Here in Cincinnati, the orchestra carefully planned for its single season away from home, taking over a theater in downtown Cincinnati and spending $3 million to bring it up to snuff. It scheduled more visiting stars than usual and offered free parking to subscribers to try to keep them in the fold. During its season in exile, an orchestra official said, its subscriptions only dipped by 4.6 percent.
Another fear in New York was the rising price tag — and questions about how much money the city could be expected to provide. Cincinnati scaled back some of its earlier ambitions, too, in order to bring costs down, but in the end accomplished its wish list with $143 million. Grants from the city of Cincinnati and the state of Ohio, along with state and federal tax credits, provided roughly half the budget.
A big difference between the renovation here and the one in New York is that Music Hall has long been celebrated for its acoustics, while Geffen Hall has been considered acoustically troubled.
For its reopening, Cincinnati’s hall got an acoustical workout, from the ebullience of John Adams’s “Short Ride in a Fast Machine” to the Classicism of Beethoven’s Piano Concerto No. 1 to the blaze of Scriabin. In Jonathan Bailey Holland’s atmospheric new piece “Stories of Home,” whispered murmurs of the woodwind and brass players, speaking in English and German, came through clearly. Janelle Gelfand, a veteran Cincinnati critic, judged the new acoustics “a work in progress” in a review in Classical Voice North America, praising some aspects but criticizing others.
Mr. Langrée, of course, is also the music director of the Mostly Mozart Festival Orchestra, which plays each summer in Geffen Hall. When he was asked if the Cincinnati renovation might show the way forward for his New York base, he laughed.
