Ms. Foeller is just one of several gallerists who have been forced or opted out of their physical spaces by the economics of an art market that favors large dealers who can afford costly art fairs — where many collectors find it more efficient to buy these days — and prime gallery real estate. But rather than giving up, dealers are redefining what it means to be a gallerist — in some cases joining forces to create cooperatives and in others becoming virtual with just an online presence.
Mr. Sheffer, a partner in the New York gallery Cheim & Read, noted how the galleries P.P.O.W. and Galerie Lelong last year joined forces in representing the artist Carolee Schneemann and how David Zwirner and the Maccarone gallery now share representation of the sculptor Carol Bove. “We are embracing the change as opposed to being afraid of it,” Mr. Sheffer said.
Similarly, the longtime dealer Andrea Rosen shocked the art world this year by announcing that she was closing her Chelsea space and would share representation of Felix Gonzalez-Torres with Zwirner.
To some extent, the art world is responding to the kind of consolidation that is occurring in other creative fields, like the music industry, and scrambling to adjust. Several Latin American galleries, for example, have come together to form Ruberta, a collaborative exhibition space in the Glendale section of Los Angeles:Galería Agustina Ferreyra (Mexico City and San Juan), Lodos (Mexico City), Proyectos Ultravioleta (Guatemala City), Carne (Bogota) and Bwsmx (Mexico City).
“What galleries need at this point is a more varied ecosystem for exhibiting internationally, connecting with curators and collectors,” said Brett W. Schultz, who helped organize Ruberta after closing his Mexico City space Yautepec (which he ran with Daniela Elbahara since 2008) and before opening Bwsmx.
Ruberta, which operates in a converted three-car garage owned by the adjacent gallery the Pit on Ruberta Avenue, will host one group exhibition that involves all of the participating galleries, followed by five two-month residencies, one for each gallery.
“There is something to be said for smaller galleries finding new ways to work together and hoping that can give us some kind of advantage in what’s becoming a difficult environment business-wise for us all,” Mr. Schultz said.
“The numbers make more sense to us,” he added.
Ceci Moss, a curator who started out at the New Museum of Contemporary Art in Manhattan, in September created the itinerant art space Gas in a converted truck in Los Angeles. “Starting a brick-and-mortar space did not really seem to make sense,” Ms. Moss said. So she cleaned out the truck in time to present her first group show, which opened in September and looks at the concept of hope in the Trump era, featuring work that was almost all produced since the election.
Ms. Moss said she planned to mount three shows a year, each of which would be on view for three months, with some of the artworks existing only online.
This summer marked the first Condo New York, a collaborative exhibition by 36 galleries across 16 New York spaces, organized by Nicole Russo of Chapter NY and Simone Subal of the Simone Subal Gallery.
The event was modeled after Condo London, started by Vanessa Carlos of the London gallery Carlos/Ishikawa in 2016 to offer international galleries a site for collaboration and exchange.
“The visitors hail from Shanghai, Detroit and Los Angeles and cities in Latin America and Europe,” wrote Roberta Smith in The New York Times, “a kind of art gallery Airbnb” or decentralized underground fair.
Adam Lindemann has turned over the programming of his Los Angeles space, Venus Over Los Angeles, to the Lower East Side gallery Ramiken Crucible, run by Blaize Lehane and Mike Egan.
To be sure, many of these collaborative enterprises are borne out of struggle — an attempt to stay in the game and continue to engage with art, even as the economics have made operating galleries prohibitive for smaller operators. But Mr. Sheffer said people in the art world were accustomed to the ups and downs of the art market and were innovative by nature.
“It’s not the first time they have seen some broken glass on the ground — they’ve seen the ebbs and flows over time and have a longtime perspective on the market,” he said.
Rather than bemoaning the state of the art business, Mr. Sheffer suggests that the art world needs to stay nimble and keep adapting; the Saturday gallery crawl that galleries used to be able to count on is a thing of the past.
