Kent, an Australian novelist whose first novel, “Burial Rites,” was based on the true events of a 19th-century murder in Iceland, has returned for her second novel to the 19th century and another inspiring true incident, this time an 1826 case of infanticide in Ireland: An elderly woman was put on trial when she drowned a child in an attempt to “put the fairy out of it.” Nora Leahy, a widow scratching a meager living from the soil in a Kerry valley, feels “suffocated by the constant neediness of her grandchild,” Micheal, a perplexingly feeble 4-year-old who can neither speak nor walk and whose mother, Johanna, has died. Nora journeys to Killarney to find a maid at the hiring fair, and returns to her village with 14-year-old Mary Clifford, drawn to her by her red hair, which reminds her of Johanna. “This girl had the same hair as her. The same as Micheal. A light copper — like a hare, or pine needles drying out on the ground.” Though Mary tends the sickly boy with care and patience, nothing improves his condition. After both the doctor and the priest have concluded Micheal is a hopeless idiot, his only chance seems to rest with the village’s elderly bean feasa (wise woman), Nance Roche, a “herb hag” who knows how to make potions and cures from herbs and plants. She also knows the rituals for protection from the fairies — the Good People, the Fair Folk, the Good Neighbors. Sometimes they will reward those who please them, but they can also be capricious and spiteful. “Sometimes ’tis all unreason and no knowing why things are as they are,” Nance says, “except to say ’tis the fairies behind it and they have their own intentions.”  Only a series of ritual immersions in the river can bring him back. Rural pre-famine Ireland in all its beauty and desolation is alive on every page of this exquisite novel, though the secondary characters rarely act beyond their defining identities (dismissive doctor, condemnatory priest, kindhearted hired girl). “The Good People” is a dramatic tale of desperation, set in a bleak time and place when no amount of protective ritual and belief — or goodness — can rescue people from their circumstances.
