Business|Where Do All the Disgraced C.E.O.s Go?
Where Do All the Disgraced C.E.O.s Go?
It’s become a ritual of corporate life: Trouble comes, and the chief executive walks the plank. These days, though, so many companies are embroiled in scandals that we need a wider plank.
These frequent dramas usually leave me with questions. Where do these people go after leaving the rarefied atmosphere of the gilded corporate flagships?
After all, they don’t actually drop into an ocean full of sharks. Most of them go on to live long and very well-compensated lives. Which makes me wonder: Is there a way to make money off them?
The first question has been bedeviling me as the list of departing chief executives lengthens. Just consider a few examples.
Richard F. Smith left Equifax in September after the company came under fire for a hack that compromised the personal information of millions of consumers.
Mike Cagney left Social Finance, the student loan company he co-founded, after reports of allegations of sexual harassment and the company’s “frat house” culture emerged.
And then there is the movie mogul, Harvey Weinstein, who was fired by his own company last week after years of allegations of sexual harassment and payoffs to accusers came to light in an investigation published by The New York Times and in a subsequent article in The New Yorker. He has admitted having “caused a lot of pain,” while denying many of the allegations. Mr. Weinstein also said growing up in the ’60s influenced his behavior, though he’s not that much older than I, and I’ve never done any of the things he’s talked about. And I went to college in Austin!
Calls for dismissals of chief executives are everywhere: In a recent hearing, Senator Elizabeth Warren told Timothy J. Sloan of Wells Fargo “you should be fired” over the company’s fake-accounts scandal and more. Harsh! He’s barely been in the job for a year. His predecessor, John G. Stumpf, resigned just last year. That job’s starting to sound as ill-fated as the role of the drummer in the fictional rock group Spinal Tap.
Captains of industry, however, do not spontaneously combust. In fact, they tend to lead long lives, especially since they have enough money for truly fabulous health care. And so, where do they go? And what do they do? None of the people I’ve mentioned would comment for this article, though a spokeswoman for Mr. Weinstein told a Times reporter that “he is taking the time to focus on his family, on getting counseling and rebuilding his life.” Anodyne answers like that don’t satisfy my curiosity. After all, how much time can they actually spend with their families?
Do they have a club, kind of an ex-bigwig version of the Bada Bing, where they can let their hair down and hang out with friends? That’s probably too downmarket for people with the money for mansions big enough to have their own ZIP codes.

They need their own island where they can down overpriced umbrella drinks without having to worry about the rabble asking, “Didn’t you used to be … ?” Islands tend to be hard to travel to, but the execs could drop in with their golden parachutes.
For advice, I called Eric Dezenhall, a crisis management consultant who has witnessed many corporate executions.
His work has led him to counsel some of the fallen, some of whom frantically seek ways to get back in the game and salvage their reputations, even when their reputations are beyond repair. You’ve got to feel for folks like that, with nothing but their millions to console them.
Yet Mr. Dezenhall said he didn’t know of any secret island where former top executives while away their days. And not just because it would be a secret island, duh. There doesn’t seem to be one.
That, my friends, is where I cash in on this ex-exec glut.
So here’s my brilliant idea: Let’s build that very exclusive island resort, sparing no expense, at least for our clients. There will be a glorious beach, fine food and wines in a setting that allows sullied chiefs to circulate among their peers and not skulk around. It would be family friendly! I would hire professional actors for the staff, people with such rigorous stage training that they won’t sneer. Not while they’re working.
Come on, Kickstarter it with me! We’ll become as rich as our besmirched clients. With the promise of thick, marbled steak, vintage port and plentiful Havana cigars — and, of course, golf, tennis and fast cars — they would flock to our fantasy island. We’ll give it a really great name, like Last Resort. It will be far, far away.
And then let’s leave them there.