Despite President Trump’s best efforts, the Obamacare market hasn’t imploded yet.
While Thursday’s decisions to cut off government funding and invite competition from flimsier, cheaper plans will jostle a vulnerable market, many of the major insurance companies say they will remain in the state marketplaces next year.
“It’s going to be business as usual,” said Michael F. Neidorff, chief executive of Centene, a major insurer that agreed to sell coverage in areas where competitors had bowed out. “We’ve stepped in and covered bare markets,” he said, adding that if any new bare spots emerged in coming weeks, the company would work with state regulators to try to fill them.
But for millions of consumers, and taxpayers, there will be a price to pay. Unless they shop around, consumers who don’t qualify for federal subsidies could face premiums that have been raised by 20 percent or more, just because of the loss of the federal funding.
And taxpayers will foot the bill for the higher subsidies required with higher prices. The Congressional Budget Office has estimated that eliminating the cost-sharing reductions could increase the federal deficit by $194 billion over a decade.
Mr. Trump has made his disdain for the Affordable Care Act clear in a variety of policies dating to his first week in office, and for months had threatened to stop paying insurers subsidies that help them provide lower deductibles and co-payments to low-income customers. Because of the uncertainty, most states had allowed insurers to set high enough prices for 2018 to account for the risk of cutoff subsidies. That means they are largely protected from the consequences of President Trump’s decision to eliminate the payments.
But not all. While many large carriers like Centene may be willing to stay, others are nervous, and their regulators were considering options Friday. New competition from plans exempt from the A.C.A. rules and much higher rates resulting from the loss of funding are making some insurers rethink their commitment to 2018. “They’re sharpening their pencils now to see if they are going to stay in or not,” said David M. Dillon, a fellow with the Society of Actuaries.
In addition to cutting off the subsidies, the president signed an executive order Thursday that may pave the way for competing plans that would be subject to fewer rules and could draw healthy customers out of the Obamacare markets. The administration has also cut back on its marketplace advertising budget by 90 percent, and slashed funding to groups that help customers understand their options and sign up for insurance.
Even as Mr. Trump created instability, his Department of Health and Human Services said Friday that it would take steps to help insurers stay in the market, despite the change. Caitlin Oakley, a spokeswoman, said the department would allow some plans to submit higher rates if their original prices had not taken account of the risk the subsidies would go away. The department “ is working on a case-by-case basis with those states where regulators explicitly required insurers to assume cost-sharing reduction payments would be made,” she said.
With or without the government payments to insurers, consumers who rely on subsidies for their premiums or their deductibles will be insulated from the changes, as long as carriers don’t flee. Insurers are still required to offer discounts to eligible customers, even if they don’t get reimbursed by the federal government. People who get their insurance through Medicaid will be unaffected.
But while the higher prices will keep most, if not all, insurers from exiting the markets, they will hurt customers who pay full price for their insurance. Around eight million Americans buy their own health plans and earn too much for government help. They will be footing the bill for double-digit increases linked to the increased policy uncertainty. Some may not be able to afford to keep their coverage.
Anthem, which offers for-profit Blue Cross plans and had sharply reduced its participation in the marketplaces next year, in large part because of the turmoil in the market, declined to comment.
Alex Feldvebel, the deputy insurance commissioner in New Hampshire, said his department permitted insurers there to assume that government subsidies would go unpaid in 2018 when submitting their rates this summer. The carriers haven’t made their final decisions about whether to stay or go, but Mr. Feldvebel said he was reassured by preliminary conversations Friday. “We’re feeling pretty O.K. here that this will not throw everything into a cocked hat,” he said.
In Washington State, where the insurance department had not allowed carriers to price for the risk but had asked them to file two sets of rates, the state insurance commissioner reversed course, telling insurers Friday they could switch to the higher rates to make up for the lost government funds. The New Jersey insurance regulator also said insurers could refile higher rate requests, as did Oregon’s regulator.
The regulators, anxious to avoid any last-minute departures, are working closely with the insurers to make sure they stay.
He said he was worried about a mass exodus of insurers. “If one bolts, you could see them all bolt,” Mr. Kreidler said.