Q. A friend chided me for saying Coney Island was in “South Brooklyn,” claiming that the term refers to the area around the Gowanus Canal. What gives?
A. The use of the term “South Brooklyn” is confusing, even to longtime residents.
The latter “South Brooklyn” is a relic of a bygone age, one that has managed to survive through the efforts of nostalgic Brooklynites. Its borders are nebulous, usually encompassing Boerum Hill, Cobble Hill, Gowanus and Red Hook, and, depending on whom you ask, occasionally parts of Park Slope and Sunset Park.
While Brooklyn today is geographically the same as Kings County, this was not always the case. At one point in the 1850s, Kings County was home to eight municipalities, including the City of Brooklyn and the short-lived City of Williamsburg.
Established in 1646 and considered one of the original “six towns” of Kings County, the Town of Brooklyn occupied the northwest part of the county. At the turn of the 19th century, Brooklyn was dotted with farms, many run by families who spoke only Dutch. The town had 2,390 residents in 1800, compared with more than 60,000 in the metropolis across the East River.
As the population rapidly grew, Brooklynites agitated for more self-governance. In 1816, the state legislature incorporated the Village of Brooklyn, which was concentrated around the ferry pier at the foot of Fulton Street. “South Brooklyn” was an easy way to refer to the undeveloped expanses that remained outside of the village.
Over the course of the 19th century, Brooklyn, which became a city in 1834, annexed the rest of Kings County’s municipalities. When Brooklyn absorbed the Towns of Flatbush, New Utrecht, and Gravesend in 1894 – four years before Brooklyn itself was consolidated into New York City – its extent reached the Atlantic Ocean, making the old “South Brooklyn” geographically inaccurate.
But the term persevered into the second half of the 20th century, when New York’s preservation drive led many areas to adopt names that reflected their historical value. “Cobble Hill,” a since-leveled ridge used by George Washington as a lookout during the Battle of Brooklyn, was first used to designate a neighborhood in 1959; the current connotation of “Boerum Hill” dates from around the same time.
Some experts concede that the idea of “South Brooklyn” as an area in the northern half of the borough is passé. “Today, South Brooklyn and southern Brooklyn are the same, the communities along the South Shore along the Atlantic Ocean,” Ron Schweiger, the Brooklyn borough historian, wrote in an email.
