It takes Craig Miller just 30 minutes to get out the door on a powder day.
His pass. That’s the key.
Mr. Miller, 63, buys one of Vail Resorts’ unlimited Epic Passes, priced this year at $859 for adults who purchased it before Labor Day. It entitles him to ski any day, on any of the resort company’s mountains, from Colorado to Australia. And ski he does — 25 days last season.
There is no senior discount. It doesn’t matter. The math means he pays about $34 a day, compared with regular single-day ticket prices that can reach $164.
Retirees are in a particularly sweet spot when it comes to unlimited passes, whether for yoga sessions, national park visits, or nearly anything else. Not only can the retired use passes more than those with jobs and other responsibilities, but they can use them better — hitting gyms, golf courses and the slopes at off-peak times when there is space to breathe — and plenty of steep trails begging for sexagenarians to lay fresh tracks.
There may not yet be a term for this practice — “off-peaking” perhaps? — but a lot of older adults have figured it out. It is less about getting a senior citizen discount, although those are always welcome, and more about creating ones’ own discount by having the time to wear grooves into an unlimited pass.
Ms. Modoono, her blond hair in a ponytail, her posture true in seated hero, ohmed as instructed.
Another holder of Mandala’s unlimited $160 monthly pass, Susan Retzky, retired from Bank of America a few years ago as a vice president of community development. Now over 70, she is a regular student of Mandala’s surf yoga classes.
Unlimited passes can be good for you.
When Joanna Mezzatesta, a retired newspaper copy editor living on Staten Island, was choosing Medicare plans, a top priority was one that included unlimited exercise classes for no extra charge. Now, three times a week, Ms. Mezzatesta, 67, drives seven minutes from her home in Stapleton Heights to the Broadway Y.M.C.A. in a workout shirt. A favorite one bears the image of Rosie the Riveter. “Never underestimate a nasty woman who was born in November,” it reads, along with the familiar image of a bandanna-wearing woman flexing her biceps.
Ms. Mezzatesta starts with one of the Silver Sneakers series of classes for seniors. After that, she takes a pool workout class.
Perhaps the ideal bargain is when a senior discount is paired with an unlimited pass.
In July, at Cuyahoga National Park in Ohio, an impressively long line of older people snaked its way through the visitor center. The reason, it turned out, is that the Parks Service had announced that the price of lifetime passes for seniors was rising to $80 from $10 at the end of August. As a result, sales of the passes — good at 2,000 federal recreation sites including national parks, wildlife refuges and other lands — tripled.
Sales rose to more than 2.6 million in fiscal year 2017 from about 870,000 in fiscal year 2016. This August alone, there were 593,121 online orders for the last of the $10 senior passes, compared with 33,373 online and mail orders for all of fiscal year 2016.
There are various moments in life that offer people the time to do what is good for them. Aransas Savas, a Weight Watchers group leader, said she often sees people join the program at transitional points in their lives. Perhaps they have just finished college, or given birth, or found themselves between jobs — or, they just retired. “At these points, people tend to begin paying attention to themselves and realize the opportunity they have to foster their own well-being and self-care,” Ms. Savas said.
Weight Watchers offers a monthly membership of around $40 that allows members to attend as many meetings as they like. Those with the time to come at least once a week show the best results, she said.
Sometimes the idea of what one might do with an unlimited pass can make retirement irresistible.
Bill Bernstein, 70, a home building contractor who works in Bergen County, N.J., says he hasn’t given up work just yet, but the various ski passes offered in Vermont make him yearn to spend more time at the house he just bought from a descendant of the famous von Trapp family in Waitsfield.
