‘BLACK SKIN, WHITE MASKS: CINEMA INSPIRED BY FRANTZ FANON’ at BAM Rose Cinemas (through Oct. 26). With a variety of styles and approaches, all the films in this program engage with the ideas of Frantz Fanon (1925–1961), the Martinique-born psychiatrist and author who became a forceful critic of colonialism and advocate for its overthrow. The program includes Gillo Pontecorvo’s 1966 classic, “The Battle of Algiers,” showing Saturday; Michael Haneke’s “Caché” (Saturday), in which France’s repressed colonial past resurfaces, indirectly, in mysterious videotapes; “No Fear, No Die” (Tuesday), a noir from Claire Denis that concerns two immigrants who become involved in an illicit cockfighting ring; and “Sambizanga” (Wednesday), about a woman searching for her husband, a liberation activist, in Portuguese-ruled Angola.
‘FROM THE FILES OF “POLICE SQUAD!”’ at Light Industry (Oct. 22 at 2 p.m.). Before Nordberg (O. J. Simpson), there was Norberg (Peter Lupus) — no D — and Frank Drebin (Leslie Nielsen) got his tips from Johnny (William Duell), a boundlessly informative provider of shoeshines. Although it ran for only six episodes, the ABC series “Police Squad!” became the rough draft for the much-loved “Naked Gun” movies and a testing ground for Jim Abrahams, David Zucker and Jerry Zucker’s inspired brand of absurdity. All six episodes will screen in this marathon-viewing program; in the free-associative tradition of the show, most episodes will be paired with another featurette, whether it’s a Looney Tunes short or an episode of the Lee Marvin series “M Squad,” a “Police Squad!” inspiration. This free event includes coffee and doughnuts.
NEWFEST at various locations (through Oct. 24). In its 29th year, NewFest, as ever, provides a showcase for portraits of gay life across the globe, but it still bills itself as “New York’s LGBT Film Festival.” This year’s edition includes “Out of the Archive: Queer New York” (Sunday), a program of shorts made in the city that spans 50 years of filmmaking. The festival’s centerpiece is Francis Lee’s acclaimed “God’s Own Country” (screening Saturday at NewFest before opening Wednesday), about the relationship between a Northern English farmer and a Romanian migrant worker. The closing-night film is “Becks” (Tuesday), starring the singer Lena Hall as a musician who returns home to Missouri after finding her girlfriend in bed with another woman and falls into a relationship with a housewife (Mena Suvari).
‘STRANGE ILLUSIONS: POVERTY ROW CLASSICS PRESERVED BY U.C.L.A.’ at the Museum of Modern Art (through Oct. 28). For those who enjoyed U.C.L.A.’s traveling show of preserved features last month, there’s more where that came from. This selection at MoMA focuses exclusively on Poverty Row movies, films made on the cheap in Los Angeles in the 1930s and ’40s. The program includes three features directed by Edgar G. Ulmer, perhaps the most famous Poverty Row director, including “Ruthless” (Saturday and Thursday), starring Zachary Scott as a Charles Foster Kane-like businessman with a lust for wealth and power. The lineup also offers moviegoers a chance to catch John H. Auer’s demented “The Crime of Doctor Crespi” (Oct. 28), featuring Erich von Stroheim as a jealous doctor who, with the help of a special drug, pretend-murders the colleague who married his old flame.
