WASHINGTON — Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke vowed Friday that there would be “no quarter” for employees who sexually harass or discriminate against colleagues. He said he would dismiss anyone found guilty of harassment and supervisors who sweep such charges under the rug.
The district was shut down after the Office of the Inspector General found what it called a 15-year-failure to address numerous reports of abuse and harassment, including male workers trying to take intimate photos of female colleagues, groping and physical assault, and withholding food on river trips after sexual advances were rejected.
One employee told investigators that women on the trips were forced to “walk the line” between “not being hated and not being desired” and that several had resigned because of the recurring stress of the situation.
Secretary Zinke cited the results of a new internal Park Service survey, which found that more than a quarter of the nearly 10,000 employees who responded had experienced or witnessed some form of harassment across the National Park Service. Roughly 75 percent of the employees said they did not report the harassment, and about a third said they were discouraged from reporting episodes of harassment.
In a phone call with reporters after the speech, Mr. Zinke, Mr. Reynolds and Christine Lehnertz, the Grand Canyon superintendent, confirmed that multiple employees — including nine people from the Grand Canyon park — have resigned, retired or been removed as a result of accusations of harassment, intimidation or discrimination.
The secretary said the department would be adding 14 positions to the employee relations and ethics staffs to respond to reports of abuse and discrimination and would require more training for employees on how to respond to harassment allegations.
He said that any employee who felt his or her concerns had not been addressed by a supervisor could bring their complaint directly to him.
Roughly half of Park Service’s nearly 19,000 employees responded to the survey, which spanned the first three months of the new administration and analyzed the previous year.
In September 2016, before Secretary Zinke took over the department, the superintendent of Yosemite National Park announced his retirement after a congressional oversight committee found that at least 18 employees at the park had complained of a toxic work environment that allowed for bullying, sexual harassment and discrimination.
“Dozens of people, the majority of whom are women, are being bullied, belittled, disenfranchised and marginalized from their roles as dedicated professionals,” Kelly Martin, then the chief of fire and aviation management at Yosemite, told the committee in 2016, outlining episodes of sexual harassment, stalking and hostile work environments across multiple sites under Park Service management.