An ocean separates Chupi Sweetman-Durney, who lives in Dublin, and Lea Giovanniello of Vienna, Va., and they have never met. Yet their workplace experiences and career paths — at a time when women still struggle with both — are a testament to what’s possible. Here are their stories.
Chupi Sweetman-Durney ran away from home when she was 6. She wisely took along the duvet cover from her bed, her doll and a book. She found a nesting spot under a tree, about a half-mile from her home in the Wicklow Mountains of Ireland. While her parents tracked her down in short order, it was her first overt action of independence.
But it was not her last.
After working as a women’s clothing designer for the British retailer Topshop for six years, Ms. Sweetman-Durney realized at 27 that she “just wasn’t in love with it anymore,” she said.
From health care and equal pay to reproductive rights and immigration, there is no shortage of issues facing women today. The Times wants to hear from you on how these issues affects you.
“Although I was brought up in a family where I did not have much experience with discrimination,” Ms. Sweetman-Durney said, “I had faced it after landing my contract with Topshop to design women’s dresses in 2005. I was refused a credit card with 500 euros of available credit, even though I had gone to the bank and shown them the contract.” At the same time, her boyfriend (now her husband, Brian) was a student and was accepted for a card with a credit line five times that amount.
Now 33, she runs her own successful Dublin-based jewelry business, Chupi, started four years ago.
This year, Chupi expects to sell 17,000 pieces of jewelry in 64 countries, has doubled sales annually for the last three years and has grown to a staff of 22.
An increasing number of women, like Ms. Sweetman-Durney, are starting businesses as a way to take control of their careers.
The frustrations of the traditional workplace are palpable for women. The study Route to the Top 2017, by the executive search firm Heidrick & Struggles, examined the number of female chief executives in the United States, Britain, France and Germany. Of those, the United States, the study found, had the largest share of female chiefs, with about 8 percent of the top spots held by women.
However, that number declined by 1 percentage point from 2015 to 2016, according to the study. The percentage rose in Britain, from 5 percent to 6 percent. France remained the same at 2 percent and Germany stayed at 1 percent.
“Women have made little notable progress toward the top job in any country we studied since the inception of this research in 2011,” the report’s authors said.
In the Global Gender Gap Report 2016, the World Economic Forum declared that “given the widening economic gender gap,” parity between sexes “will not be closed for another 170 years,” even though, in 95 countries, women attend universities in equal or higher numbers than men.
Time out of the work force to raise children continues to be a major barrier. A study from Visier, a work force analytics firm, found the gender wage gap at large United States employers widens at age 32 because that’s when many women leave work to have and care for children; it’s also around the age workers start to advance up the corporate ladder. While men and women hold about the same number of management positions throughout their 20s, once workers hit the age of 32, men hold a notably higher proportion of those positions. And managers earn, on average, double what nonmanagers do, according to the report.
But the challenge of returning to work is even greater for women who stay out of the work force for extended periods of time, or who take frequent breaks to raise children. That was the case for Lea Giovanniello, 59, the Virginia woman who found that resuming a full-time job in the technology sector two years ago required hitting the books for a new degree.
Ms. Giovanniello stepped away from a fast-track information technology job with Northrop Corporation. Over the course of more than two decades after she left, she taught math and science in public schools and worked in various I.T. positions at embassies and consulates where her husband was posted with the foreign service.
She earned a master of science degree in computer forensics from George Mason University in 2014. Then, through FlexProfessionals, a part-time job staffing firm, she was hired by Corsec Security, an I.T. security consulting company in Herndon, Va., as a part-time computer security engineer. Today, she’s on staff as a certifications analyst.
FlexProfessionals, based in the Washington, D.C.-metro area, was co-founded by Gwenn Rosener, a former $160,000-a-year Ernst & Young senior manager with an M.B.A. from Harvard who couldn’t land even a decent part-time job in 2010 when she decided to stop being a stay-at-home mother. So she and two other women, who had also stepped out of the work force, started a company to help people like themselves find work.
Entrepreneurship can also be the right move for many women, as it was for Debra Dixon, 52, of Washington, who left a government position at the Education Department to start her own consulting business.
In 2016, there were an estimated 11.3 million women-owned businesses in the United States — a 45 percent increase since 2007, according to the 2016 State of Women-Owned Businesses Report from American Express.
“Among European women in their 20s, women are actively searching for a path to what they want to achieve professionally and are looking to shape their own futures — and for these women, starting their own businesses is seen as a completely acceptable solution,” she said.
Further evidence of the power to change the workplace reality for women: Two-thirds of female entrepreneurs feel they have broken through the glass ceiling but feel their challenges to achieving success are more considerable than those of their male counterparts, according to a 2017 BNP Paribas Global Entrepreneur Report. The ability to pursue their passions through entrepreneurial activities is a core characteristic of the women entrepreneurs interviewed.
“Female entrepreneurs, particularly those over age 50, are igniting intergenerational entrepreneurship partnerships and collaborations among women of all ages,” said Elizabeth Isele, founder and chief executive of the Global Institute for Experienced Entrepreneurship. “Intergenerational partnerships between women dispel age-related stereotypes and build strong bonds across age, race and ethnicity in our increasingly diverse workplaces,” Ms. Isele said.
