The last time Charles Traub slept in a tent — on an army base in Louisiana a half-century ago — he swore he would never sleep in a tent again. But last weekend, there he was, with his grandson, his partner and her grandson, sleeping under the stars at Fort Tilden in Queens.
Except these were no ordinary tents. And this was not camping, but glamping — as lifestyle blogs refer to so-called glamour camping.
“I always wanted to go camping at the beach,” said his partner, Kathy Shorr, a photographer who sleeps most nights in a comfortable bed in her TriBeCa apartment.
“But I fought this pretty hard,” said Mr. Traub, also a photographer. Ms. Shorr convinced him it would be a great experience for their 5-year-old grandchildren.
The couple rented two tents: one a furnished safari tent with a queen-size Casper mattress, with solar-powered lights and a small porch with Adirondack chairs, and the other a pup tent with two cots. (Mr. Traub, naturally, got stuck with the pup tent.) Both were equipped with sleeping bags, pillows, platforms, ready-made s’mores packets and a movie-star trailer with three brand-new showers and toilets, complete with coconut-scented body wash, shampoo and conditioner.
No squatting in the woods. No sleeping on the ground. No pitching and disassembling tents.
All they needed were their overnight bags. And $325.
Camp Rockaway, a six-week pilot project running until early November, is the brain child of Kent Johnson, an architect and surfer who got the idea back in 2014 after seeing old postcards of tent colonies in the Rockaways.
“I love being out here at dawn and dusk and wanted to figure out how to stay overnight so I could enjoy both,” explained Mr. Johnson, who lives in Forest Hills. “Renting a room didn’t appeal to me, and renting a bungalow was out of reach.” So Mr. Johnson raised $50,000 through Kickstarter to get the project off the ground, then made a bid to the National Park Service for the space.
Camp Rockaway was the second of two glamping pilots this year. And though they were both temporary, Mr. Johnson is hoping to return next summer.
Mr. Johnson and his mother’s boyfriend, a gregarious Texan named Wade Mayer, run the camp night to night — overseeing seven tents, space for three self-pitched tents, a mess tent with coffee, tea, plates, metal cups and utensils and the use of a camp stove and long table. Meals are not served, though the Dropout restaurant and bar at Riis Park is just a walk down the beach, a local Thai place will deliver, and several guests have taken the short drive to Uma’s, a hip Uzbek spot. One guy brought a pizza with him and some have roasted hot dogs on the long forks the camp provides.
The camp, which sits at the edge of a rugby field, just past a goal-post, is a little off the beaten path. Some guests have taken the A train and then the bus to Fort Tilden; others arrive by the ferry from Manhattan and then a shuttle or a taxi. Most, though, have driven.
“Everyone wants to get out of the city for a little bit,” said Kristin Rogne, a surfer who also helps manage the Cowgirl bar in the West Village. “And this is much easier than setting up your own tent. You just bring a change of clothes and that’s about it.” Though the price is a bit high for camping, she said, Camp Rockaway is less expensive than many other glamping outfits, which can offer gourmet meals and nights in a luxury tent can cost more than $1,000.
Ms. Rogne and a friend from Uganda spent a night in one of the high-end safari tents. “There’s nothing like falling asleep and waking up to the sound of the ocean,” she said. But her favorite part of the night was sitting around the campfire with the other guests, talking. “You don’t have those experiences all the time in the city to connect with people,” she said.
The Camp Rockaway crowd has been diverse and the campfire conversation lively. There was the couple that met while working at the United Nations, camping with their two sons. The biotech researcher for HIV and cancer drugs from San Diego visiting with two New York City friends. The adjunct writing professor from Michigan and her friend, a graphic designer from Queens, who had met as students years ago at Bard College. There were visiting monarch butterflies, a few raccoons, rabbits and possums and a flock of Canada geese.
“I was curious about the glamping experience,” said Matt Werner, a Google technical writer and playwright, whose latest project is “Burning Man: The Musical.” Mr. Werner was Camp Rockaway’s first guest back in late September. “I also liked that they had a shared campfire. It had that summer camp vibe.” He said it reminded him of his Boy Scout days growing up in California.
Mr. Werner had the cheapest setup at Camp Rockaway, pitching his own tent — with use of the stove, campfire, hammocks and bathroom facilities — for $65. He rode his bike two hours from Manhattan, with his tent, sleeping bag and overnight bag, and stayed from Sunday to Monday morning.
Even Mr. Traub, the reluctant camper, admitted he enjoyed his stay. And although the cot was a bit narrow and his grandson woke up a few times in the night, Mr. Traub was no longer a glamping novice. “It really was quite wonderful,” he said.