Douglas Friedman’s kitchen in Marfa, Tex., looks more like a mysterious appliance or a piece of art furniture — perhaps imagined by Terry Gilliam for his dystopian satire, “Brazil” — than a room. It is, in fact, an object, rather than an assemblage of cabinetry, fixtures and hardware designed to be ordered by the foot and bolted to a wall.
The kitchen — made of powdered steel by Vipp, a 78-year-old Danish company that for most of the 20th century produced one product only, a sturdy, pedal-operated trash can that is in the permanent collection of the Museum of Modern Art — comes in one color, black, and is embedded not just with appliances and equipment but design-icon flourishes, like a brushed steel countertop that floats above the drawers below like the baseboard-free reveal in a modernist house.
Mr. Friedman, a portrait, interiors and fine arts photographer who also has homes in New York and Los Angeles, liked its toughness — that stainless countertop invites scratches and dents — which made sense in an environment in which you live hard, as Mr. Friedman put it. “The dust comes in, and the dust comes out,” he said.
Mr. Friedman is not alone in wanting his kitchen to look like something else.
For much of the first decade of the 21st century, the popular kitchen archetype was derived mostly from those in the post-menopausal romances of Nancy Meyers. Expressed in the glossy white English cabinetry and honey-hued Mediterranean kitchens that played pivotal roles in “Something’s Gotta Give” and “It’s Complicated,” these were sensual sets — cooking as foreplay — that telegraphed the success and sexual potency of their female commanders.
Then Pinterest made the look ubiquitous, and builders made it suburban, rolling out ever larger and ever blander imitations. White marble islands grew to impossible, comedic sizes, trapping families on either side of their vast expanses.
Ms. Meyer’s daughter, Hallie Meyers-Shyer, is a director with a new movie, “Home Again,” that is an awkward homage to her mother’s oeuvre. Its star, Reese Witherspoon, is shattered to be 40 and divorced. She moves back to her childhood home and takes in three 20-something men as boarders, and romantic entanglements ensue.
Like the movie’s plot, the kitchen on display — off-white bead board cabinets, Mediterranean tiles — feels dim, dated and, well, sort of suburban.
High-end brokers like to say breathlessly that the kitchen is the jewelry of a place; it may be more accurate to say that the kitchen has replaced the art wall and the living room as a locus for self-expression.
Kitchens are for your stuff, not your food, said Kim Gordon, a designer and builder in Venice Beach, Calif., who makes glassy/rustic houses with open living room kitchens for a clientele she described as “the beard and flannel set,” and which includes executives at Snapchat, Vice media and TOMS, the shoe company.
Recently, Ms. Gordon turned to marijuana growers when she designed an island fitted with a hydroponic garden. “I had to go to the pot guys to figure out a cute, little baby drip and lighting system,” she said.
Designers are conjuring all kinds of nonkitchen-y arenas, like the refectories of old boarding schools, a signature of Christopher Peacock, the English-born kitchen designer once known for his all-white offerings. The kitchens of Steven Gambrel, a New York City based designer, look like libraries, in dark woods with chunky, masculine hardware.
Thomas O’Brien laid in walnut library-style kitchens among the townhouses of the Greenwich Lane condominium development. Built on the old St. Vincent’s Hospital site in the West Village, it alludes to a mythical New York, from a past that never quite existed. In his kitchen-thinking, Mr. O’Brien remembered the fine joinery of the turned staircase in his first house, a tiny 1920s Dutch colonial fitted out like a wooden ship.
Plain English is a London design firm that makes kitchens painted in lush colors with impish titles like Milky Tea, Boiled Egg and Sprouts. Their designs recall, variously, the cabinetry in Georgian houses and Shaker furniture, among other influences. They evoke English Bohemia, and the novels of Penelope Fitzgerald.
For the last couple of years, March, a house wares store in San Francisco founded by two former Ralph Lauren designers, has been selling a kitchen island that is a rebuke to the white marble monolith. (You’ll find it in the Santa Monica test kitchen of Goop, Gwyneth Paltrow’s brand extension.) Made from white oak and steel by Matt Bear, a Berkeley designer, it is a fetish item for the device-weary, kitted out with leather pockets and knife sheaths made by a saddle maker from Marfa, Tex.; weathered, perforated zinc trays; hand-woven black ash baskets and honey-colored, finger-joined wooden boxes. Your Tupperware would be uncomfortable there.
Years ago, Sam Hamilton, March’s co-founder, was invited to a chef’s table dinner in the basement kitchen of a hotel in Avignon and that memory inspired its design.
Not everyone, however. Joan Behnke, a Los Angeles designer whose specialty is enormous habitats for billionaires and celebrities like Thomas Barrack, founder of Colony Capital, and Tom Brady and Gisele Bündchen, was thinking about an art gallery when she designed a “boutique kitchen,” as she called it, for a 25,000-square-foot house in the Hollywood Hills. In it, two kitchen islands are crafted to look like giant fractals or icebergs.
Do people just walk by, or can they belly up to those islands?
Sure, Ms. Behnke said. “Someone who wants to go and have a casual conversation with someone working in the kitchen or wants to look at the view,” she said, might venture in.
Like most of Ms. Behnke’s projects, the real working kitchen — a stainless steel restaurant-style theater presided over by a chef, his or her staff, and sometimes a supporting army of caterers — is on a lower floor.
Julie Carlson is the editor in chief and a founder of Remodelista, the design-forward remodeling blog that will be 10 years old in November. This anniversary means Ms. Carlson has overseen a decade of kitchen trends — open shelves; Ikea hacks; arch, vintage-style appliances; plywood cabinetry; deconstructed kitchens and kitchens that are every shade of blue. And black, yellow and bright green. Last year, she moved from Mill Valley, Calif., to Brooklyn Heights, and she has nearly finished a kitchen renovation in her brownstone parlor floor apartment there.
She took her inspiration from Anna Valentine, an English fashion designer, whose minimalist white kitchen was designed by DRDH, a London-based architectural firm, and was itself inspired by the work of Vilhelm Hammershoi, a Danish painter of quiet interiors marked by pale, wintry light. Composed of three elements — a white free-standing cupboard, a long pale wood table and chairs, and a counter height cabinet topped only with white marble — there’s not a shelf or a tile or a piece of equipment in sight.
