To revamp the most boring superhero in the Marvel pantheon, the company turned to an eccentric indie filmmaker from New Zealand. Will Americans like the view inside Taika Waititi’s head?
Waititi, 42, is just the latest in a long string of upstart directors — like Colin Trevorrow (“Jurassic World”), James Gunn (“Guardians of the Galaxy”) and Gareth Edwards (“Godzilla”) — handed the keys to some of the most expensive entertainment machines in the world. Studios hire these indie auteurs to deliver (at a reasonable price, and in a way they feel they can control) a little shot of cool to a staid or stagnant property. Sometimes, as with Patty Jenkins on “Wonder Woman,” the spark delivered by a new director can reinvigorate an entire cinematic universe and stave off franchise fatigue; other times, as with Josh Trank’s disastrous “Fantastic Four,” the move puts a small-movie director in a position to fail more hugely than anyone ever imagined possible.
In many ways, Waititi neatly fits the mold of a lively director plucked from indiedom and placed at the center of a franchise. He’s stylish, funny and confident. His handcrafted, quirky comedy-dramas “Boy” (2010) and “Hunt for the Wilderpeople” (2016) grossed a cumulative $5.5 million in the United States. Up to now, his most prominent American credit was a few episodes of the HBO comedy “Flight of the Conchords,” starring his college friends Jemaine Clement and Bret McKenzie. Much of his CGI experience came from a Sour Patch Kids commercial starring Method Man.
But in one very obvious way, Waititi doesn’t fit the mold. All those other directors are white; Waititi is Maori, from the Te Whanau-a-Apanui tribe, and so the bet Marvel was making by hiring Waititi was not only on an indie director but also on the first indigenous person ever to be handed the reins of a superhero megamovie. One reason they felt comfortable giving him those reins was that “Boy” and “Wilderpeople,” despite their minuscule American box office, were offbeat crowd-pleasers — indeed, in New Zealand they were blockbusters, the most popular Kiwi films ever made, in part because of the complex way Waititi treated his Maori heritage on-screen.
Marvel asked Waititi to meet in summer 2015. “I didn’t really think this was my cup of tea,” he said. “It’s always nice to be wanted, though.” Given the brief to pitch directing a “Thor” buddy comedy that he would help write, Waititi suggested “ ‘Withnail & I’ in space,” “just these two people who happen to be superheroes making their way across the universe.” (In this formula, the Hulk is the volatile Withnail figure, and Thor must “take care of this time bomb and keep him out of trouble” as they travel from planet to planet.) In their final meeting, Kevin Feige, the head of Marvel Studios, asked Waititi why he thought he could handle such a gargantuan project. “Because I’ve been doing it in my head my whole life,” Waititi replied. Feige loved that answer, because he feels that’s how he got his job, too.
Waititi grew up splitting time between Wellington, New Zealand’s capital, and the East Cape of the North Island, the setting of “Boy.” His father was a Maori painter, his mother a pakeha (white) schoolteacher. After an uninspired run at studying drama in college (one professor said that his only real memory of Waititi was that he didn’t expect him to succeed), he spent a decade performing sketch comedy, often with his Victoria University mates Clement and McKenzie.
He also had a national film commission that was eager to finance his directorial work. Waititi’s first feature, “Eagle vs. Shark,” was an aggressively quirky romance between two misfits, played by Clement and Loren Horsley. He followed it with an expansion of “Two Cars, One Night”: “Boy,” about a Michael Jackson-mad Maori kid called Boy growing up in the East Cape in the 1980s and his ne’er-do-well father, played by Waititi himself. With its wicked humor and unsentimental treatment of Maori life, it was an immediate sensation in New Zealand, becoming the highest-grossing locally produced film of all time. “Boy” featured Waititi-drawn animation and a “Thriller”-meets-Maori-war-dance number, but just as often, Waititi’s directorial flourishes served to deepen and sadden the film. 
After a mockumentary about vampire roommates, “What We Do in the Shadows” — directed with Clement — Waititi made “Hunt for the Wilderpeople.” A spirited comedy about a foster kid lost in the bush with his grumpy guardian, “Wilderpeople” grapples with grief and puts its heroes in real emotional and physical danger, transforming into a classic family-adventure story that just happens to center on a juvenile delinquent who names his dog Tupac. As with “Boy,” audiences embraced a story with predominantly Maori characters as archetypically Kiwi. “He welcomed everyone into Maori culture,” says the Maori actor Rachel House, who played a maniacal child-protection officer in “Wilderpeople” and is also in “Ragnarok.” The film surpassed the domestic box-office record set by “Boy” in a month and a half.
In hiring Waititi for “Thor,” Marvel found a director with an anarchic visual aesthetic whose storytelling interests were nonetheless deeply, satisfyingly conventional. “In a lot of my films,” Waititi said, “the biggest theme is family, making families out of those around you.” That theme drives Marvel Studios’ “Guardians of the Galaxy” series, an unexpected hit whose energy the third “Thor” movie seems designed to replicate.
On a set where every action shot was previsualized and every stunt was choreographed, it wasn’t always easy to direct instinctively, as Waititi was used to doing. “Sometimes,” he acknowledged, “it’s just too late to say, ‘Oh, man, wouldn’t it be cool if like a thousand robots came in and Thor fell off a cliff?’ ” But he still found ways to play. One day, while doing the motion-capture for Korg, Waititi rushed into a battle sequence wielding a big prop hammer, then flipped the hammer around and started pretending to shoot it like a gun. “O.K., CGI,” he declared, “I want you to turn that hammer into a gun hammer.” 
If Waititi, with his sense of frenetic rhythm, were to depict the long process of navigating security on Disney’s Hollywood lot and finding him in the “Thor: Ragnarok” postproduction suite, it would all zip past in a four-second montage of opening doors. The broad stone gate on Alameda Avenue, mouse ears embedded at the top of its arch, as the barricade swings into the air. The gentle fwoomp of the entrance to the Frank G. Wells building releasing the building’s air-conditioned atmosphere. A publicist’s waving her key card at the security console at a glass door in Marvel Studios headquarters, surveilled by a life-size Iron Man. The laminated sign Scotch-taped to an otherwise-anonymous wooden door as it opens: CREATURE REPORT.
“That’s our code name,” Waititi said in his office with a happy grin. He’s tall and slim, his hair that December day buzzed and gray at the temples, piled pell-mell in a dark Lyle Lovett pouf at the top of his head. It was now 330 days until release. “Hopefully by June, July, the film will actually look somewhat like it should look,” Waititi said. “At the moment it’s basically a blue screen with people in front of it. Its just blue, blue, blue, blue everywhere.” He gestured at an editing bay in the corner, its monitor featuring Goldblum posing before a blue tarp.
Waititi walked across the hall into a dark, soundproof editing suite, where the editor Joel Negron, a veteran of Michael Bay blow-’em-ups, waited at the Avid terminal. Frozen on a wide-screen TV was the face of Hemsworth’s Thor, his once-flowing blond hair cut spikily short. “Is that a spoiler?” Waititi asked the publicist, pointing to the screen.
“Not by the time the story comes out,” she replied.
“Cool,” Waititi said. “Cut it in half, then it’ll be amazing.” Over the next two hours, Waititi and Negron chipped away, deleting lines they didn’t find funny enough. They watched all 16 takes of Banner’s response, in which Ruffalo’s improvisations ranged from a deadpan “Oh, no” to screaming shock. Waititi by now was sunk deep into the couch. He came upon a tweet from Peyton Reed, director of “Ant-Man.” Looking at his picture, Waititi said, “All these Marvel directors look the same!” He laughed. “Scott Derrickson and James Gunn and Peyton all look like the same person.” He asked to watch the very beginning of the sequence again: “Do we have the other angle, from behind Banner?” Negron opened a folder full of neatly labeled shots, in each of which Ruffalo, enthusiastically pretending to transform from a monster into a human, fell out of frame. Waititi mentioned that he was hoping the camera might pan down with Banner as he shrank; he hadn’t shot it that way back in Australia, but in about two minutes Negron built a rough move inside the editing software, making it so.
Around the world, 18 effects houses had started creating the hundreds of shots that would fill in all those blue screens. “I don’t think there’ll be any bits of my particular style, which is, like, purposefully crap,” Waititi said. “I don’t think that’s what Marvel wants. They want purposefully amazing.” He stood and stretched, restless. “How long is it now?” he asked.
“About two,” Negron said.
“Couple more to go and we’re there,” Negron said.
“Darlings?” Negron asked.
He admitted that the final product doesn’t betray much of his D.I.Y. aesthetic. But his stamp is on the film in other ways: in the way he has framed a superhero movie as a misfit family adventure with gun hammers. In the way he Ragnaroked Valkyrie — white and blond in the comics, but played here by Thompson, an actor of black and Latino descent. In the way the native filmmakers who shadowed Waititi learned that it’s possible for an indigenous artist to dance his way through a $180 million movie.
And in the way he ricocheted around the big Marvel ship, putting on a two-year show, using all the tools they bought for him to make something he likes — “a Taika version of one of these movies,” he said with satisfaction. It’s worth noting that Marvel’s next directors and superheroes also look less like Marvel directors, less like the stereotype of Marvel heroes: Ryan Coogler’s “Black Panther” arrives in February, and Ryan Fleck and Anna Boden (the writer-director duo behind the 2006 Ryan-Gosling-on-cocaine drama “Half Nelson”) are in preproduction for a movie featuring the superheroine Captain Marvel for 2019. Waititi dressed up and played pretend, and with the help of Marvel’s omnipotence, he can now direct any movie he likes, big or small. As the Marvel ship plows on, churning up piles of money, its superheroes might soon come to resemble the predominantly human audience that watches them on Earth.