Mayor Bill de Blasio announced on Tuesday that his affordable housing plan would reach its goal of building or preserving 200,000 below-market-rate apartments by the end of 2022, two years ahead of schedule.
Because of the program’s success, the mayor said he was adjusting the housing plan, aiming to deliver an additional 100,000 affordable units by 2026. He said he expected the program to be so successful and popular that future mayors would want to continue it beyond 2021, when Mr. de Blasio’s second term, if he is re-elected as expected, would end.
Of the 200,000 units promised in the original plan, 80,000 are to be new construction. The remainder will be existing affordable units that will be kept from switching to market rate through subsidies or other arrangements between the city and landlords. Of the 100,000 units that will be delivered after 2022, Mr. de Blasio said that 40,000 would be new construction, and the rest preserved.
At a news conference in Brooklyn, the mayor said he had disproved critics who had suggested that the plan was not realistic.
“The plan actually worked, and we saw an opening to do even more,” said Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat.
The mayor said the reinstatement of a tax incentive for developers, known as 421-a, as well as zoning changes enacted by the City Council to promote affordable housing, had helped make it possible to expand the program.
The news conference was held at a newly built housing complex near Kings County Hospital. The complex was built by a nonprofit group called Camba. It consists of two buildings with a total of 293 apartments.
Of those units, 110 are for low-income tenants and the rest are supportive housing for formerly homeless people.
Mr. de Blasio said a one-bedroom apartment costs $900 a month, and a two bedroom costs $1,066.
About 60,000 people applied for the 110 units for low-income tenants, who were selected through a lottery.
Mr. de Blasio also said the city would invest in a fund to help nonprofit groups buy buildings with affordable apartments. He estimated that would lead to the preservation of 1,000 units a year.
Nicole Malliotakis, the Republican candidate who is running against Mr. de Blasio, said that if she was elected, she would order an inventory of city and state property that could be used to build housing for low-income people, seniors, veterans and the homeless.
“All these plans that take 10 years to be able to really provide results is problematic for the city, and there needs to be a better sense of urgency,” she said.