Quentin Tarantino, the Hollywood director most closely tied to Harvey Weinstein, has known for decades about the producer’s alleged misconduct toward women and now feels ashamed he did not take a stronger stand and stop working with him, he said in an interview.
Allegations of sexual harassment and assault by Mr. Weinstein were disclosed this month in The New York Times and The New Yorker, which prompted other women to share their accounts of his alleged abuse, set off criminal investigations, roiled the entertainment world and triggered a social media movement of women from other industries and backgrounds telling their stories.
But Mr. Tarantino said in the interview on Wednesday that he had heard about Mr. Weinstein’s behavior long before those articles. His own former girlfriend, Mira Sorvino, told him about unwelcome advances and unwanted touching by Mr. Weinstein. Another actress told him a similarly upsetting story years later. He also knew that the actress Rose McGowan had reached a settlement with the producer.
But Mr. Tarantino said he had failed to consider whether the women he knew were part of a larger pattern of abuse. Though he continued to hear alarming stories over the years, he proceeded to make film after film with Mr. Weinstein, his greatest champion — a decision he now regrets.
The producer and director have been symbiotic for decades: from 1992, when Mr. Weinstein distributed “Reservoir Dogs,” through “Pulp Fiction,” the “Kill Bill” films, “Inglourious Basterds” and “The Hateful Eight,” until a few weeks ago, when he threw Mr. Tarantino an engagement party.
When he and Ms. Sorvino started dating in 1995, she told him that not long before, Mr. Weinstein had massaged her without asking, chased her around a hotel room and even showed up at her apartment in the middle of the night, a story she recently shared with The New Yorker.
The problem was resolved, he said he felt at the time, because he and Ms. Sorvino were dating. “I’m with her, he knows that, he won’t mess with her, he knows that she’s my girlfriend,” Mr. Tarantino said, describing his attitude back then.
Mr. Tarantino also knew that Ms. McGowan had reached a settlement with Mr. Weinstein after an episode in a hotel room during the Sundance Film Festival. Recently, she tweeted that Mr. Weinstein had raped her.
Mr. Weinstein has denied all allegations of nonconsensual sex made by Ms. McGowan and others.
His own relationship with Mr. Weinstein, who has been fired from his own company and ousted from the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, spanned deals and shoots, publicity tours and film festivals. But when Mr. Tarantino tried to call Mr. Weinstein several times recently after the disclosures, he said, he got no reply. Mr. Weinstein needs to “face the music,” he said.
Despite their closeness, he said he could offer no insight into Mr. Weinstein’s alleged misdeeds. “I don’t have an answer for why he could do this and be stripped of his entire legacy,” he said.
