ALBANY — The mere sight of 83 landscapes by the Hudson River School artists, assembled at the Albany Institute of History & Art for the first time in over 50 years, was enough to reduce one visitor to tears.
“He was an older patron who was just really moved to see them finally together in one show,” said Tammis Groft, the Institute’s executive director.
These paintings will have that effect on people: The lush forests, majestic skies and mist-shrouded peaks of the first great American school of painters have fallen in and out of favor since they were first created in the mid-19th century. But their reputation now seems as rock solid as the Catskills Escarpment that inspired them.
The show, which opened in July and will remain until 2019, has attracted visitors from as far away as Germany.
Still, it can be seen as a sort of opening act for a much-anticipated exhibit at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, “Thomas Cole’s Journey: Atlantic Crossings,” opening in January 2018. (A third major exhibit, at the Thomas Cole National Historic Site in Catskill, N.Y., will be staged in May, featuring works of the school from Yale University’s collection).
Cole (1801 to 1848) is widely regarded as the patriarch of the school — which was really not a cohesive institution, but rather a loosely-related group of about 25 to 30 artists who worked over a 50-year period, often but not exclusively using the Catskills and Adirondacks as their muses.
Cole’s arrival to these shores in 1818 from his native Lancashire, England, seems as good a time as any to date the beginning of this movement, even though it would be another seven years before he would visit the wilderness of upstate New York that would transform him and, by extension, American art.
The exhibit at the Met features 38 of Cole’s paintings, including two of his most famous landscapes, “View from Mount Holyoke, Northampton, Massachusetts, after a Thunderstorm – The Oxbow” (1836) and “View on the Catskill, Early Autumn” (1836-37) both of which are in the museum’s collection.
Beyond a celebration of his work in the Northeast, however, the exhibit seeks to put Cole in a broader context. “We are presenting Cole as a global artist,” said Elizabeth Kornhauser, the Alice Pratt Brown curator of American painting and sculpture at the Met.
“He was a British-born citizen who experienced the upheaval of the Industrial Revolution, comes to the new world and has the ambition and the vision to want to be a landscape painter at a time when landscape painting was in its infancy,” Ms. Kornhauser said.
The scenes that would inspire him had only recently become accessible to most people, thanks to the building of the Erie Canal and improved passenger travel. On his first sketching trip to the area, Cole was dazzled by the views; so pristine compared to the glowering smokestacks and grim factories of his industrialized homeland.
Eventually working in a studio in the village of Catskill, he painted what he saw — or wanted to see: He sometimes gave that slightly sullied hand of nature a helping hand, by erasing signs of civilization in order to present the most naturalistic view possible.
Two artists most influenced by Cole would become prominent members of the Hudson River School: Asher B. Durand — a co-founder of the National Academy of Design; and Frederic Church, who was only 16 when he began studying with Cole in 1842 and whose fame would eventually eclipse his mentor.
Works by Cole, Durand and Church are included in the Institute’s exhibition.
At the Met show, which will travel to London’s National Gallery in June, paintings by some of the great English landscape artists Cole met during his formative trips back to the Continent — including John Constable and J.M.W. Turner — are also part of the exhibit.
Still, the power of the American artists’ work could not be denied. The 20th century brought a reappraisal and later, renewed appreciation.
