For decades, while making his name serving haute cuisine and baking crusty breads, the chef David Bouley has also been exploring — through travels and research — how the pleasure of good food made with the right ingredients can benefit health.
His latest project, Bouley at Home, provides a showcase for this approach to eating. There’s a dining room with open kitchens, a food lab, a cooking school and a bake shop under one roof, with a catering hall sharing the premises.
Bouley at Home, which opens Thursday in the Flatiron district, occupies about 1,600 square feet, with ovens and cabinets around the perimeter and three huge cooking stations combined with three dining counters in the center. There are just 24 seats for eight- to 10-course tasting menus for $225, not including beverages or tip.
The cooks, led by Chris D’Ambrosio, include Yoichi Akashi, who handles Japanese food; Etienne Le Bastard, the pastry chef; and Sarah Bouley, the chocolatier and Mr. Bouley’s niece. All the cooks double as servers, communicating with the guests as much as possible.
Adrien Falcon, who was the head sommelier at the elegant Bouley, which closed last summer, fills the same role here as well as manager. He has assembled a cellar that holds more bottles than the one at Bouley.
He won’t use online reservation services, saying they are too expensive and not responsive enough. Instead, he has set up his own ticketing system (like Tock, used by Eleven Madison Park) on his website for prepaid seats at eight time slots throughout the evening. Mr. Bouley said he will welcome walk-ins if there is room, but abhors the notion of people lined up outside waiting for tables, as they did for his Upstairs at Bouley restaurant in TriBeCa.
Lunch, which starts in a few weeks, will cost $75 for a tasting menu; there will be à la carte options. The restaurant will operate Tuesday to Saturday. Cooking classes will be held Sundays and Mondays.
His new space has five video monitors to demonstrate cooking techniques and to stream real-time commentary by cheese makers, vintners and others via Skype. “I want this to be as interactive as possible,” he said.
Bouley at Home is also a working expression of Mr. Bouley’s three-pronged approach to food: that it should be delicious, healthy and, for optimum benefit, enjoyed in a communal setting like the one he has now created.
Bring up those three points, and Mr. Bouley is ready with scientific studies, physicians’ testimonials and anecdotal evidence from across the globe. He delivers theories with zeal, along with a taste of something (French cultured butter, for example, or rosy Ibérico ham) to prove a point about beneficial fats, salt with good minerals, fermentation, or the scandal of the sugary starches that are used in much of what’s gluten-free.
“I’ve always wanted to share my passion for how food tastes and the feelings it brings, and now I can share the science of food, too,” he said.
He has little use for much of what passes as “wellness” these days. To him, the term is as meaningless as calling foods natural.
He is evangelical about what he calls the “living pantry,” the real, seasonal foods devoid of industrial processing that are part of his teaching.
His approach to food has been reinforced over the years by his work, especially in the Test Kitchen and in his travels. But closing Bouley and relocating Bouley Test Kitchen made it possible for him to put it in the spotlight. He still is an owner of Brushstroke, the Japanese restaurant on Hudson Street, and is sole owner of Bouley Botanical, an event space nearby. But he’s at least two years away from opening another Bouley, this time an intimate 25-seater on Harrison Street.
Soon, near the entrance of Bouley at Home, he will open a bakery selling fresh-baked breads. The space also contains the relocated Test Kitchen, which doubles as a place for private parties with its own kitchen.
Bouley at Home opens Thursday, 31 West 21st Street, no phone, davidbouley.com.
