The technology critic is typically a captive figure, beholden either to a sorrowful past, a panicked present or an arrogant future. In his proudest moments, he resembles something like a theorist of transformation, decline and creation. In his lowest, he is more like a speaking canary, prone to prophecy, a game with losing odds. His attempts at optimism are framed as counterintuitive, faring little better, in predictive terms, than his lapses into pessimism. He teeters hazardously between implicating his audience and merely giving their anxieties a name. He — and it is almost always a he — is the critical equivalent of an unreliable narrator, unable to write about technology without also writing about himself. Occasionally, he is right: about what is happening, about what should happen, and about what it means. And so he carries on, and his audience with him.
Franklin Foer, thankfully, recognizes these pitfalls even if he can’t always avoid them. Who can? The melodramatically titled “World Without Mind,” Foer’s compact attempt at a broad technological polemic — which identifies the stupendous successes of Amazon, Google and Facebook, among others, as an “existential threat” to the individual and to society — begins with a disclaimer. Foer’s tumultuous stint editing The New Republic under the ownership of the Facebook co-founder Chris Hughes ended with mass resignations and public acrimony. “There’s no doubt that this experience informs the argument of this book,” he writes. He is likewise entangled through his proximity to publishing: The author’s friends, colleagues and immediate family members — including his brother, the novelist Jonathan Safran Foer — depend to different degrees on the industry Amazon consumed first. The book is dedicated to his father, Bert, a crusading antitrust lawyer.
In this slightly crouched posture, and with a hint of healthy self-doubt, Foer proceeds quickly. We, the consuming public, have failed to properly understand the new tech superpowers, he suggests, leaving little hope for stodgy and reluctant American regulators. The scope of their influence is obscured by the sheer number of things they do and sell, or problems they purport to be solving, and by our outdated sense of what constitutes a monopoly. To that end, Foer promotes the concept of the “knowledge monopoly,” which he qualifies with a mischievous grin. “My hope is that we revive ‘monopoly’ as a core piece of political rhetoric that broadly denotes dominant firms with pernicious powers,” he says, rather than as a “technical” term referring to one company cornerning a market. (His new monopolists, after all, aren’t raising prices. They’re giving things away free).
For much of the book, readers are parachuted into various moments in the history of computing, the internet, media and philosophy. Character introductions arrive rapidly, with a casualness that can slip into absurdity: Descartes “enjoyed his sleep”; Mark Zuckerberg “is a good boy, but he wanted to be bad, or maybe just a little bit naughty”; Alan Turing was an “atheist and a loner,” while Ray Kurzweil, the prophet of an artificial-intelligence-driven singularity, is driven by his inability to escape “the biggest fear of them all.” (Death.) The effect is slightly delirious but genuinely enjoyable. Readers are flung through a highly selective history of the philosophy of mind, landing squarely on their feet in Google’s A.I. laboratories. The 17th-century philosopher Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz’s stubborn and total belief that knowledge could be reduced to mathematical computation leads surprisingly seamlessly into a perceptive assessment of Zuckerberg’s fraught and inconsistent public relationship with the concept of the algorithm, his mission to connect the world and the billions of meaningful decisions made by Facebook’s software every day.
His best assessment of what has happened to media in general in the last decade is tucked in an aside about what Facebook, Google and Amazon all offer, or threaten: They are the “primary bundlers” of commercial media, whether it’s books, articles or video. “They are the ones that create a usable, coherent product from its disparate parts. Their business model is infinitely better than the one it displaced.” More broadly, truly ambitious tech companies are in the business of creating markets, not competing in them; of wrapping themselves around industries, not merely disrupting them.
The New Republic, of which Foer was editor twice — Hughes invited him back in 2012 partly as a demonstration of good faith for a skeptical staff — appears intermittently in “World Without Mind.” Foer doesn’t share gossip or indulge much in the way of bitterness. He is generous in his only slightly condescending description of the magazine’s young tech-rich owner and in his minimally insulting account of working with the company’s data-obsessed C.E.O., whose arrival plainly portended Foer’s departure and the subsequent resignation of a majority of its masthead. What happened at The New Republic is more useful to Foer as an entry point for describing the news media’s state of utter upheaval at the time. Here, again, he becomes the knowingly unreliable narrator: His obvious loathing of the social-media-driven news coverage pursued in recent years by most media organizations does capture the fatalistic mood of the industry, but betrays a sense of nostalgia for a better era that can be hard to locate anywhere outside of Foer’s own memory. He also reveals a lack of interest in new modes of media production that were rising as his magazine fell.
Foer’s other concession to nostalgia, in the form of an inoffensive command to return to the “sustaining nourishment of the contemplative life and the deep commitment to text,” is overshadowed by a vigorous and novel call for regulatory intervention. He reminds us that the issue of monopoly dominated our politics for generations, even as the companies in the crosshairs changed in form and ambition. Though he makes no radical or provocative case to, say, nationalize Facebook, or to break up Google, he does suggest creating a Data Protection Authority, in the mold of Elizabeth Warren’s post-financial-crisis Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, and calling for government to protect privacy as it (in theory) protects the environment.
Is this idealistic, plain crazy, or just impotent? The armchair technology critic — roused by Foer’s sneakily persuasive manifesto — might ask in response, with a mixture of satisfaction and despair: What does it mean that it could be all three?