CONWAY, Ark. — It was 60 years to the day since Minnijean Brown Trickey and eight other African-American teenagers integrated Little Rock Central High School at bayonet-point, protected by the 101st Airborne Division from racist mobs and a defiant governor.
On Monday evening, after a day of commemorations, Ms. Brown Trickey sat in an auditorium at the University of Central Arkansas to hear how her life — and the more-than-timely story of the Little Rock Nine — was being transformed into a new opera.
She took her seat and listened to the first performance of excerpts from the new opera, being written by the composer Tania León.
So, well, why not?
The new opera by Ms. León and the librettist Thulani Davis, tentatively titled “The Little Rock Nine,” is very much in that tradition. And this week’s anniversary offered the rare opportunity for a composer to see her heroes in the flesh.
Ms. León spent Monday morning at Central High School, where former President Bill Clinton and a host of dignitaries honored the eight surviving members of the group, and listened as they shared memories of their harrowing year on the front lines of a civil rights flash point. They spoke with urgency of the work still to be done.
Ernest Green, the school’s first African-American graduate, described progress as having no finish line, and drew parallels between the civil rights era and the racial turbulence of today — from the nine African-American churchgoers who were slain in 2015 in Charleston, S.C., to the white supremacists who marched earlier this year in Charlottesville, Va.
Her new opera, which was commissioned by the university here, is a musical tapestry of jazz, gospel and snippets of ragtime, with a cast of characters that includes the nine students, the families who supported them, and historical figures, among them President Dwight D. Eisenhower and Louis Armstrong.
Recent American operas have not shied away from using history to explore current controversies. When their Civil War opera “Appomattox” was revived by the Washington National Opera in 2015, the composer Philip Glass and his librettist, the playwright Christopher Hampton, substantially revised it to make voting rights, which they saw as under assault, its central theme.
The integration of Central High School — a key test of the federal government’s ability to enforce the Supreme Court’s ruling in Brown v. Board of Education that public schools had to be desegregated — ends only the first act of the opera. The second act recounts the toll from that tumultuous, sometimes violent year on the students and their families — as the nine were tormented in school, and some of their parents were fired from their jobs in retaliation.
The idea for the opera came about after the university began screening the Metropolitan Opera’s Live in HD simulcasts, and Rollin Potter, who was then the dean of its College of Fine Arts and Communications, became intrigued by operas that grappled with recent history, including “Nixon in China” and Mr. Adams’s “Dr. Atomic,” about the making of the atomic bomb.
To compose it, the university turned to Ms. León, who was born and raised in Cuba and who has become an important figure in American music since moving to New York in 1967. She was a founding member of the Dance Theater of Harlem; an organizer of the Brooklyn Philharmonic’s pathbreaking community concerts with Julius Eastman; the music director of “The Wiz” on Broadway; and the composer of “Scourge of Hyacinths,” an opera based on a play by the Nigerian writer Wole Soyinka.
She originally asked her friend the scholar Henry Louis Gates Jr. to write the Little Rock Nine libretto; when his work as a filmmaker intruded, he put her in touch with Ms. Davis — who wrote the librettos of Anthony Davis’s operas “X (The Life and Times of Malcolm X)” and “Amistad.” Dr. Gates served as a historical consultant on the opera.
Ms. Davis recalled watching the Little Rock standoff unfold on television as a child growing up in Hampton, Va.
She agreed to do it, but the local school board ultimately decided to postpone integration.
At a twilight commemoration, Ms. León said that she hoped that using opera would help audiences see the real people behind the history.
