A friend of ours was less than impressed by the news this week that New York’s subwaymeisters plan to phase out the MetroCard in favor of a souped-up payment method that involves waving cellphones or bank cards at station turnstiles and bus fare boxes. The idea, at a cost put at $573 million, is to speed the human flow onto platforms just as other world cities like London already do. If nothing else, it would end the “please swipe again” purgatory to which MetroCard users are often condemned.
Hang on, our friend said: The Metropolitan Transportation Authority wants to spend more than half a billion dollars to move him swiftly through a turnstile so that he can then stand on the platform fuming about a train that seems never to come? Granted, his mood wasn’t the sunniest. He’d just been on a No. 6 train that crept along so slowly, it felt like waiting for Godot.
But he is no doubt not the only New Yorker wondering, with the subways mired in crisis, if a new payment procedure is the wisest use of all that money. Might it not be better spent on accelerating the installation of new tracks, tunnel signals, switches, drain pipes and the like — you know, the unsexy fundamentals that are essential to getting trains to run on time?
That riders are frustrated will come as no revelation. Statistics validate their annoyance. The city’s Independent Budget Office reported a few weeks ago that train delays had soared to 67,450 in May alone, from about 20,000 a month in 2012. Time is definitely money. Lost hours at work cost city residents $864,000 a day, the budget office said. The city comptroller calculated that subway delays during the morning rush cost the city’s economy from $170 million to $389 million a year in lost wages and productivity.
And breathes there the subway rider who isn’t exasperated with the persistent city-state deadlock over how to pay for emergency repairs that everyone agrees are essential? We have a governor and a mayor right now who seem incapable of agreeing on a lunch order. And the M.T.A. hasn’t even used all the money that’s been budgeted.
Despite all that, we would tell our skeptical friend that, yes, it’s worth spending money to bring the payment system into the 21st century. (We’re holding our breath, though, on that $573 million figure; price tags for New York public projects almost always balloon.) Amenities matter. They’re a way for subway passengers to know that improvements are indeed in the works. A streamlined procedure for entering the subway would have the added advantage of ending the maddening lines that form at card-dispensing machines.
A similar point may be made about the train-arrival countdown clocks that are gradually being installed at all stations. They’re not nearly as essential as ensuring that signals don’t fail and tracks don’t buckle. But they are an indispensable balm for riders, who would otherwise pace anxiously about when — or if — the next train will arrive. Unfraying passenger nerves is one of the M.T.A.’s obligations.
So the big challenge is how to do both: install the amenities while also rebuilding the guts of the system. It’s kind of equivalent to performing an organ transplant on a patient who’s in motion. What our friend really wants to know is whether the M.T.A. is capable of walking and chewing gum at the same time. He may find out soon enough.