My dream wedding was a bare-bones affair. After four years of dating, my fiancé, Mike, and I exchanged vows in a courtroom 14 floors above his office last April. His boss, a prominent judge, officiated. Only our immediate families and my two best friends were in attendance. I didn’t even carry a bouquet. When the 10-minute ceremony was over, we snapped a few photos before we dined at a farm-to-table restaurant across the street.
Unlike an elopement, which is organized by the bride and groom in secret, a microwedding retains some of the structure of a traditional wedding, except on a smaller scale. Alisa Tongg, a Life Cycle Celebrant — a sort of personalized ceremony planner — performs over 70 weddings a year in the New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania area, and said she defined a microwedding as a wedding ceremony with 15 witnesses or fewer.
According to The Knot, the average cost for a wedding in 2016 was $35,329, with higher averages in places like South Florida ($48,596), Chicago ($60,035) and New York City ($78,464). That’s a lot of canapés, cocktails and cake.
While average wedding costs have ballooned, however, guest lists have shrunk. The Knot’s 2016 Real Weddings Survey reports that the average number of wedding guests was down to 141 in 2016, compared with 149 in 2009.
While there are no firm numbers on how many tiny weddings occur in a given year, experts said more couples were choosing to streamline their nuptials, trim the fat and go micro.
“Microweddings afford a lot more flexibility and they’re easier on the budget,” Tatiana Brenizer, a Brooklyn-based wedding photographer, said. She and her husband, Ryan Brenizer, shoot about a dozen microweddings a year. They even celebrated their own microwedding in Prospect Park on June 9, 2015.
But the small size of microweddings doesn’t mean they’re headache-free. Here’s what you should know if you’re thinking about having one.
Not everyone might be thrilled you’re having an intimate wedding. Feelings might be hurt when you limit the guest list so severely, as it might go against expectations that friends and family members had that they would be invited to celebrate.
Approaching the subject with confidence is key.
“The more secure and confident a couple is when they drop this bomb on their family,” Ms. Tongg said, “the easier that they’ll take it.” She suggests sharing beautiful pictures of your wedding on social media to take the sting out of it for people who couldn’t attend. Once they see how private the ceremony was, she reasoned, people are more likely to understand why they weren’t invited.
Every couple’s must-haves are different, but for a smaller wedding with a teensy budget, you should narrow down the essentials. Because I have a sweet tooth, my only must-have for my wedding was a custom cake from my favorite bakery. Mike’s only requirement was having a nonreligious ceremony, as I’m Jewish and he’s Catholic and he didn’t want to give the appearance of favoring one family’s traditions over another.
For other couples, their must-have can be a particular location that holds sentimental value, like the couple’s first date or first kiss.
“Consider a place that’s meaningful,” Ms. Brenizer said. She suggests scouting the location at the time of day you’re planning on getting married to see what the crowds are like.
Ms. McTigue also recommended registering for enough gifts to allow those who attend to have a nice selection to choose from across a variety of price points.
Not everyone agrees that having a registry is a necessity, but for us, it came in quite handy. We were surprised when co-workers, long-distance friends and relatives who weren’t invited to the wedding still wanted to buy us gifts. By assembling a reasonable registry, we not only helped guide them, but we also received items we could actually use.
Maggie Winters Gaudaen, co-founder of Washington’s Pop! Wed Co. and author of “Fun Size Weddings: The Simple Guide to Planning a Tiny Wedding You’ll Love,” says that when it comes to microwedding attire, there are no rules.
In the same way attire and location are open to customization, receptions for microweddings can be tailored to reflect the interests and needs of the couple. Aside from being cheaper to facilitate, smaller receptions allow the wedded couple to spend quality time with each guest, something brides and grooms aren’t usually able to do when entertaining larger wedding parties.
As an elopement planner, Ms. Gaudaen helps organize a variety of small wedding receptions. She’s seen couples celebrate their union with a picnic in the park or renting out space at a bar or restaurant. One couple even had a group sleepover at a campground.
Even though I was unusually low key about my wedding, vendors still charged wedding prices. My beloved bakery charged us wedding prices even though our cake was for a smaller number of people than they would usually prepare an order for.
It was stressful fielding text messages and coordinating transportation while simultaneously applying mascara and squirming into my Spanx before the main event. If I had to do my wedding over again, I would appoint a coordinator — perhaps a relative or trusted friend — for the day of the wedding to be a contact for those last-minute details.
It can be especially tough when you’re bringing two families together and everyone’s sense of time and urgency is different. For that reason, “you need somebody to be the buffer,” she recommends.
Andy Mills and his wife, Geri Cole, had their microwedding on Sept. 14, 2014, on Fire Island with about a dozen of their immediate family in attendance.
“We decided to have a small wedding because we realized how expensive weddings are and it wasn’t an expense we thought we wanted to spend,” Ms. Cole said.
For their ceremony, Ms. Cole maintained some traditions and ditched others. She didn’t wear a white dress and didn’t get married in a church, but she still jumped the broom. “When you choose to detach yourself from all cultural customs of what a wedding is supposed to be, it’s actually really liberating,” Ms. Cole said.
