While warnings for travel to the United States aren’t new, they have picked up significantly in the last few weeks, following these events, said Ed Daly, who oversees the content for the Global Intelligence Division of iJET International, a travel intelligence firm based in Annapolis, Md. “After a lull, there was a rash of incidents which happened one after the other and led to these advisories,” he said.
On Oct. 16, for example, the Canadian government updated its travel advisory for the United States. In the safety and security section, the advisory says that travelers should be aware that, “The possession of firearms and the frequency of violent crime are generally more prevalent in the U.S. than in Canada.” In addition, it advised against nonessential travel to Sonoma, Napa and Lake Mendocino in the wake of recent wildfires in California and Nevada.
The shooting in Las Vegas that left 59 people dead may have prompted some of the recent warnings.
And Germany’s travel advisory, updated on Oct. 13, warns of more political demonstrations and the increased danger of politically motivated violence in the United States. According to the advisory, German nationals should therefore, “particularly in urban centers,” monitor the news and avoid demonstrations on a long-term basis.
The advisory said, too, that, in the wake of Hurricanes Maria and Irma, its citizens should carefully examine the necessity and possibility of travel to Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands and parts of Florida. According to the advisory, “There must still be flooding and landslides” in the affected areas.
Travel warnings to the United States peaked in the summer of 2016, according to Mr. Daly of iJET.
New Zealand, Germany, Canada and the United Kingdom were among the countries that issued warnings about the potential dangers of traveling to the United States; reasons included Zika in parts in Florida, the threat of terrorism and a shooting at a gay nightclub in Orlando, Fla., that left 49 people dead.
