The third and most disturbing case in this jam-packed narrative is as ugly as today’s headlines, the double murder of father-and-son pharmacists that opens up an investigation into a newfangled twist on the prescription drugs racket. (With “55,000 dead and counting,” Harry is told, this is “the growth industry of this country.”) It seems that international racketeers have an elaborate system for moving drugs, enslaving homeless addicts who need to feed their habit. Bosch does great work undercover as a strung-out oxycodone user, although he nearly gets himself killed in a spectacular way.
Connelly’s cop has always been a tough guy, but here he reveals a compassionate side. He’s haunted by that abandoned baby. He keeps replaying his first sight of the father-and-son pharmacists. And when he finds himself among the oxy addicts, he feels uncomfortably close to his fellow man.
Reacher is headed nowhere when he stops at the window of a pawnshop “on the sad side of a small town.” On impulse, he buys a handsome ring, obviously made for a woman, engraved with “West Point” and “2005.” “I know how hard she worked for this,” he tells the shop owner. “So now I’m wondering what kind of unlucky circumstance made her give it up.” Honor bound, Child’s road warrior marches into a dirty criminal enterprise that preys on wounded veterans, which saddens Reacher and makes him very, very angry.
Sure enough, on a visit to the Museum of Hounds and Hunting, Sister thinks she sees the ghostly figure of Wesley Carruthers stealing a valuable old hunting horn, and the evidence is right there on her friend’s cellphone. That’s just the kind of story that adds to the charm of Brown’s whimsical mysteries, with their thrilling hunts and intelligent animals.
Here Mankell’s narrator is Fredrik Welin, and he’s nothing like Wallander. A former surgeon, now 70 years old, Welin abandoned civilized society in shame many years earlier and lives by himself on a remote island. “I couldn’t for the life of me understand why I should stop communicating with old friends just because they were dead,” he says, explaining why he doesn’t exactly feel isolated.
When someone sets his house on fire, the police are as baffled as he is, eventually concluding that Welin set the blaze himself. To clear his name and salvage something of his old life, this reclusive man must return to the outside world — but not before Mankell scalds us with his searing thoughts about being old and living alone.