FRANKFURT — Signaling fresh confidence in the region, the European Central Bank began on Thursday to gingerly dismantle an arsenal of emergency measures that for a decade helped to keep the currency and economy from disintegrating in the face of financial turmoil.
But the central bank also left itself plenty of room to reverse course if necessary — tacit acknowledgment that it is voyaging across unmapped terrain in a still vulnerable economy.
The decision marks a new phase of the recovery, after four years of economic expansion and falling unemployment. Mario Draghi, the central bank’s president, heralded what he called “the unabated growth momentum” in the 19-country euro area.
Still, the central bank is being cautious, so thoroughly telegraphing the plan that it caused barely a stir in financial markets. The approach reflects the extraordinary level of stimulus that the central bank has been providing since before the global financial crisis even started.
Many of the tools, like printing vast sums of money to purchase bonds, had never been tried before in Europe. Therefore, there is no precedent for winding them down.
The European Central Bank’s move followed similar actions by the Federal Reserve and other central banks, as they gradually reduce their stimulus efforts. Next week, the Bank of England is expected to raise rates for the first time in 10 years. The Fed has said it plans to keep increasing rates.
But their strategies aren’t without risk, either, reflecting broader vulnerabilities in the global economy. Britain’s decision to leave the European Union has weighed on growth, while the Fed is dealing with weak inflation.
The European Central Bank, which held the benchmark interest rate steady at a historic low of zero percent, provided a timetable on Thursday for rolling back purchases of government and corporate debt, a program known as quantitative easing.
It had been buying 60 billion euros, or about $70 billion, of such bonds every month, and will scale that back to €30 billion a month for nine months, starting in January. The bank will also reinvest the proceeds when bonds mature, so that in practice the monthly purchases will be well above €30 billion. Over all, the measures were in line with expectations.
Some economists worry that the steady stimulus over the years has created real estate bubbles or pushed the prices of some assets beyond sustainable levels. When the central bank takes those funds away, it could expose weaknesses across the region, and perhaps even provoke a new bout of economic discord.
That is the difficulty the central bank faces. No one knows for sure what unpleasant surprises may lurk now that it is ready to begin the so-called tapering, stanching the flow of easy money that made it possible for banks to lend and governments to borrow.
The European Central Bank began departing from its standard playbook in 2007, offering cash-starved commercial banks unlimited short-term loans.
It stepped up its stimulus after revelations in 2010 that Greece had systematically understated the true size of its government debt, touching off a crisis that threatened to tear the eurozone apart.
To keep credit available, it let financial institutions borrow money at rock-bottom rates for longer periods than before. Where once commercial banks earned interest on money they deposited at the central bank, the Governing Council began charging them a penalty, a so-called negative interest rate. The aim was to force skittish banks to lend.
The measures culminated in early 2015, when the European Central Bank began using newly created money to buy bonds and other assets, a program that has cumulatively been worth more than €2 trillion, a sum roughly equal to the annual economic output of India.
As that tide of cash recedes, the hazards below the surface will come into view.
The list is long. For one, Italian banks are still laden with bad loans. Italy’s public debt is so high that the country spends 4 percent of its gross domestic product just paying interest.
Elsewhere, real estate prices in German cities like Frankfurt have risen so much that there is fear of a property bubble. Stock prices are at record-high levels and may be overdue for a correction. And Britain’s impending exit from the European Union will disrupt the economic order.
Consumers, businesses and politicians have also gotten accustomed to — or spoiled by — low interest rates. Investors are so desperate for safe places to put their money that corporations like Daimler, the German automotive giant, have been able to issue bonds that pay no interest.
Low rates have also weakened the euro against other currencies, a boon for exporters whose products are usually cheaper for foreign customers as a result. The euro will most likely rise as monetary policy returns to normal, making it harder for some businesses to compete.
For now, the eurozone economy is humming. But that may be no insurance against another crisis. Such events have occurred regularly since the world’s economic powers abandoned fixed exchange rates in 1973, a recent report by analysts at Deutsche Bank pointed out. They listed the withdrawal of central bank support as one factor that could trigger the next meltdown.
To avoid provoking renewed turmoil, the European Central Bank is moving slowly.
It stressed on Thursday that it “stands ready” to increase the asset purchases in response to worsening financial conditions or if inflation failed to rise.
Historically low interest rates will remain in place for the foreseeable future. The central bank has said it will not begin raising rates until it has stopped buying bonds, and only if the eurozone inflation rate is on track to hit the official target of 2 percent.
Still, some economists fear that the end of nearly free money will come as a shock for some.
