The Hollywood producer Harvey Weinstein faces a series of previously undisclosed allegations of sexual harassment and unwanted physical contact stretching back nearly three decades, according to a New York Times investigation published on Thursday afternoon.
During that time period, Mr. Weinstein has settled at least eight times with women, including actresses and assistants, according to two company officials who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
Soon after the article was published, the actress and writer Lena Dunham applauded the women who came forward.
Amber Tamblyn, who addressed her own experience with sexual harassment in an Op-Ed article in The Times last month, also praised the women, including the actress Ashley Judd, who shared their stories.
The actress Brooklyn Decker suggested that others in the industry had failed to adequately denounce Mr. Weinstein’s behavior, and implied that they were being hypocritical.
“We condemn ‘grab them by the pussy’ and we condone this,” she said, referring to comments made by President Trump years ago, which were widely criticized when they surfaced during the presidential campaign.
Rose McGowan, one of the actresses who settled with Mr. Weinstein, encouraged women to speak out and men to support them.

Megan Ellison, the founder of Annapurna Pictures, which has produced “Detroit,” “American Hustle,” and “Zero Dark Thirty,” noted that women who speak out about sexual assault often face “serious repercussions,” and said that she admired their courage.
The actress America Ferrera expressed a similar sentiment. “This abuse of power must be called out, however powerful the abuser, and we must publicly stand with those brave enough to come forward,” she said.
The director Judd Apatow took issue with Mr. Weinstein’s defense that he was influenced by the misogyny of a bygone era.
“You are blaming growing up in the 70’s? You haven’t picked up anything since then?” Mr. Apatow asked.
Gretchen Carlson, the former Fox News host whose sexual harassment suit helped topple Roger Ailes, the network’s founder and former chairman, said in a statement that such behavior exists in all industries and needs to stop.
Shortly after meeting with Mr. Weinstein in 2015, Ms. Battilana, an Italian model and aspiring actress, called the police in New York City, telling them that he had grabbed her breasts and put his hands up her skirt, according to a police report.
The Manhattan district attorney declined to bring charges, but Mr. Weinstein made a payment to Ms. Battilana.
Ms. Judd, an actress, said Mr. Weinstein invited her to his hotel for a breakfast meeting two decades ago. When she arrived, she was directed to his room, where he greeted her in a bathrobe and asked if he could give her a massage or have her watch him shower, she said.
In 1997, Mr. Weinstein and Ms. McGowan, then 23, reached a settlement after an episode at a hotel room during the Sundance Film Festival. The settlement was intended not as an admission of guilt, but rather to “avoid litigation and buy peace,” according to the agreement, which was reviewed by The Times.
At a 2014 breakfast meeting, Mr. Weinstein told Ms. Nestor, a temporary employee, that he would boost her career if she accepted his sexual advances, according to accounts she gave to colleagues.
In 1998, Ms. Perkins, then a 25-year-old assistant in London, confronted Mr. Weinstein over his alleged harassment and threatened to go public or take legal action if it continued, according to former colleagues. A lawyer for Mr. Weinstein was later dispatched to negotiate a settlement with her.