SCOTTSDALE, Ariz. — Laura Ingraham landed here in a private jet and climbed into a waiting S.U.V., accompanied by her personal assistant, a publicist, and a single piece of luggage.
The private plane was paid for by the publisher of her latest book, “Billionaire at the Barricades: The Populist Revolution From Reagan to Trump.” The publicist came courtesy of her new primary employer, Fox News.
“I love it out here,” Ms. Ingraham said, seated in the back seat as a string of desert resorts glided by last week.
She was on her way to speak at a fund-raiser for Kelli Ward, the insurgent Republican primary challenger to Senator Jeff Flake. Stephen K. Bannon — the executive chairman of Breitbart News, former White House chief strategist for President Trump and one of Ms. Ingraham’s pals — was also on the program.
Next week, Ms. Ingraham, 53, will take over one of the most coveted slots on cable television: 10 p.m. on Fox News. At the event for Ms. Ward, she served up some of her high-dudgeon populism to a Hilton hotel ballroom filled with several hundred fans, denouncing the “Democrat-media complex” before launching into an acidic attack on Mr. Flake, a critic of President Trump.
“Since we are in the south, I can say bless his heart, but it’s time to melt the snowflake,” she said as the room vibrated with boos. A chant of “Build that wall!” broke out.
An acolyte of Ronald Reagan, Robert Bork and Pat Buchanan, Ms. Ingraham was among the first commentators to endorse Mr. Trump in the presidential campaign. Many pundits on Fox News took longer to follow her lead, especially as Mr. Trump feuded with the network’s star anchor, Megyn Kelly.
Before Election Day, Fox News executives were talking up a new focus on straight news coverage. Post-Trump, the channel’s prime-time lineup has moved to the right, installing the combative Tucker Carlson in the 8 p.m. slot and Sean Hannity at 9.
Ms. Ingraham is well-suited to deliver it. In Scottsdale, she was greeted as a hero by the Trump-supporting crowd.
When Ms. Ward took the microphone, she held up a copy of Ms. Ingraham’s new book, which praises the rise of Mr. Trump and economic nationalism.
As an early supporter of Mr. Trump, Ms. Ingraham landed a prime speaking slot at the Republican National Convention. She said she now speaks with the president a few times a month. “Sometimes, I call him, and occasionally, I’ll get a call,” she said nonchalantly.
Shawna Noyes, who waited in line for a half-hour for Ms. Ingraham to sign a book, said that Mr. Hannity was sometimes too soft on the president. “I think she’s going to be tough,” said Ms. Noyes, who runs a steel company in Phoenix.
The president, an avid Fox viewer, has not been not shy about registering his displeasure with critical coverage. What will he think of Ms. Ingraham?
“No, Walt, that’s the way you say it is!” her father would reply.
Ms. Ingraham honed her craft in college at The Dartmouth Review, the undergraduate right-wing journal that earned national recognition (and some revulsion) for stunts that, in hindsight, presaged the antics of Breitbart reporters.
“All the way back to Dartmouth, I was part of the insurgency,” she said.
In an era before mainstream acceptance of homosexuality, Ms. Ingraham assigned a reporter to attend a meeting of the campus gay students’ alliance and published a transcript of the proceedings, naming names. Years later, she apologized, citing in part the experience of her gay brother and his partner, who had AIDS.
In law school at the University of Virginia, she drove a Honda hatchback with the license plate “FARRGHT.” In Washington, as a young conservative on the rise, Ms. Ingraham worked in the Reagan White House, clerked for Justice Clarence Thomas, and founded a right-wing retreat cheekily dubbed “The Dark Ages.” (Arianna Huffington was on the steering committee.) A New York Times Magazine article described her joy-riding in Washington in her green Land Rover, blasting zydeco music at midnight.
She was among the first crop of commentators at the dawn of the cable-news era, hosting a show on MSNBC and, along with Kellyanne Conway and Ann Coulter, earning the nickname “the pundettes.” By the early 2000s, her radio talk show was carried by more than 200 stations and her books — “The Hillary Trap,” “Of Thee I Zing,” “Power to the People” — sold by the millions.
Still, her move into Mr. Bannon’s Breitbart circle — considered a fringe of the right-wing until Mr. Trump’s victory — was not inevitable. Her embrace of Mr. Trump strained her relationship with some of her fellow conservatives.
Ms. Ingraham joined Mr. Bannon in 2014 to endorse David Brat, an outsider Republican who would go on to win a surprise victory over Eric Cantor, then the Republican majority leader in the House. She had been encouraged to back Mr. Brat by a producer, Julia Hahn, who went on to write for Breitbart and now works in the White House.
So is a makeover à la Ms. Kelly — who has softened her on-air persona for her new morning show on NBC — in the cards?
