Two men run across the stage in sweeping circles until one stops the other by pressing a palm into his chest. They lock eyes. Then the second melts backward into the arms of the first.
Lauren Lovette created this lush pas de deux for Taylor Stanley and Preston Chamblee in her sweeping, romantic ballet “Not Our Fate,” and the effect was startling and wonderful. A pas de deux — a dance for two — is usually about love and usually between a man and a woman. But here were two men, not incidentally men of color, in a tender, athletic display of desire.
Ballet is slower to change than most art forms, but in the span of just two weeks, New York City Ballet, one of the world’s premier companies, will have shown two ballets featuring significant same-sex duets.
“Not Our Fate” had its premiere before a donor-filled crowd at New York City Ballet’s fall gala, on Sept. 28. And on Thursday, Justin Peck, the company’s resident choreographer and a soloist, makes his own statement with a casting change in his “The Times Are Racing” that City Ballet says is unprecedented at the company: In the central pas de deux, Mr. Stanley will perform the role originally created for a woman.
Same-sex partnering on its own is not new, especially in contemporary ballets and in modern dance. And even at City Ballet, there have been instances of same-sex partnering in several ballets, including those by Ms. Lovette, Pontus Lidberg and Mr. Peck. What feels unusual in these two dances is their fresh approach: Full of abandon and brimming with romantic desire, they seem utterly natural.
City Ballet, co-founded by the choreographer George Balanchine, has a tradition of breaking boundaries. This year is the 60th anniversary of “Agon,” Balanchine’s ballet that showcased a trailblazing pas de deux for a white ballerina, Diana Adams, and a black male dancer, Arthur Mitchell.
“Agon” is a masterwork, and in 1957 Balanchine was making a purposeful statement about race and the civil rights movement. And today, in their casting and subject matter, Ms. Lovette, 25, and Mr. Peck, 30, are also responding to the contemporary world and putting it on the ballet stage.
That response feels long overdue. And it challenges certain fundamental traditions in ballet, sparking a debate about what is appropriate for the genre and how it can move into the future.
His post was accompanied by what appeared to be a Photoshopped image of a ballerina holding a man in the air.
A few days earlier Mr. Peck had announced his casting change on Instagram, writing that “The Times Are Racing,” which had its debut in January, would be continuing its “exploration of gender-neutrality.” (His post included the hashtags: #loveislove #genderneutral #equality #diversity #beauty #pride #proud.) Last spring, he recast the dance’s tap duet, giving the dancer Ashly Isaacs one of the parts originated by a man. She was all thrilling, silky power, slyly displaying how distinctly a woman can do a man’s job.
“The Times Are Racing,” created during the presidential election, is something of a protest ballet — the dancers’ costumes are adorned with words like unite,” “react” and “fight.” And it’s danced in sneakers, which means no pointe shoes.
Gender norms in ballet have developed through the use of the pointe shoe, worn by women to create the illusion of lightness and of floating, and the rules of partnering: Lifts require upper-body strength that men access more easily than women.
For the dancers, the roles feel like opportunities to express themselves in more nuanced ways. “I think for gay ballet dancers, you rarely get to be yourself,” Mr. Stanley said. Mr. Chamblee, his partner in “Not Our Fate,” and Daniel Applebaum, his partner in “Times Are Racing,” are also gay. Mr. Peck and Ms. Lovette are straight.
