Nearly a month has passed since Stephen Paddock opened fire on a country music festival at the Mandalay Bay Resort and Casino in Las Vegas, killing 58 people and wounding hundreds more — yet the shooting continues to confound the public and investigators alike. Little is known about Mr. Paddock’s motives. And investigators have revised parts of the timeline of the shooting on three occasions, raising further questions about what exactly happened.
During continuing investigations into major events, traditional reporting often relies in part on official statements from law enforcement officers. But in this case, faced with shifting reports, The New York Times wanted to try to establish a timeline independent of that offered by the Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department.
The approach makes use of every available piece of data in a given set of video files: the videos themselves and every pixel we see in the images, but also the audio tracks and the metadata — timestamps, geolocation information — embedded in the files. The files can come from social media uploads or submissions from witnesses themselves (most cellphone videos log the hour, minute and second they were recorded in file data).
The process can be as simple as comparing a video with Google Street View to identify camera location or extracting file data with a smartphone app — or as difficult as analyzing each frame of a video and the amplitude and frequency of every second of audio.
For our video investigation on the Mandalay Bay shooting, published over the weekend, I gathered and annotated dozens of videos and audio clips recorded at various locations — inside the festival, at the hotel itself and on Las Vegas Boulevard and Giles Street, where the police responded and concertgoers fled. And I searched social platforms and downloaded clips that were verified by wire services, ending up with well over an hour of footage and two hours of police scanner and fire scanner audio.
The bursts of gunfire, 12 in all, served as scaffolding for the timeline. And by analyzing and lining up the audio waveforms of 30 videos filmed by concertgoers, the Las Vegas police and bystanders, my colleague Barbara Marcolini and I reconstructed as closely as possible the complete 10 minutes of the assault.
Traditional reporting and information-rich visuals and graphics provided additional clarity and precision. The journalists C. J. Chivers, Thomas Gibbons-Neff and David Botti — all former Marines — vetted audio of the gunfire. Mr. Botti and Jon Huang, a journalist in The Times’s graphics unit, helped me count the number of bullets. Video and graphics editors Drew Jordan, Chris Cirillo and Nicole Fineman layered visuals over raw material to explain the evidence. And throughout the investigation, Times reporters in Las Vegas — Jennifer Medina, Julie Turkewitz, Adam Goldman, Mitch Smith and others — relayed information from on the ground.
Our investigation uncovered several key pieces of information. Perhaps most crucially, we were able to approximate the very second the first bullet was fired.
By using data of such variety and quantity, we were able to tell a different kind of story. The Times plans to pursue more like it — so stay tuned.