Procter & Gamble is counting on a variation of America’s electoral arithmetic as its best hope for keeping Nelson Peltz off the board of directors. There’s no particularly good reason for shareholders to deny a seat at the table to the pushy investor, whose hedge fund, Trian Partners, owns 1.5 percent of the $235 billion diapers-to-shampoo conglomerate. Yet as at the ballot box, a combination of voter apathy and arcane rules is likely to leave three investors holding all the cards at Tuesday’s annual meeting.
It is an irony of the way American public equity markets have developed that the most important deciders in the P. & G. saga — as in many other proxy battles involving the world’s most valuable companies — are so-called passive index-fund managers led by Vanguard, BlackRock and State Street. To further the imperfect political analogy, they play roles similar to the ones Ohio, Wisconsin and Pennsylvania did in helping put Donald J. Trump into the Oval Office even though Hillary Clinton won more of the popular vote in November.
There are differences, of course. P. & G. shareholders are not being offered a choice between one chief executive and another. The question of whether to give a seat to Mr. Peltz, who comes armed with ideas about how P. & G. can improve its performance and with more experience in the sector than most if not all of the company’s sitting directors, is far from existential. He would be one of about a dozen people helping set strategy, compensation and the like. Handing him a board seat is pretty much a no-lose option on bettering the maker of Tide and Pampers.
The insular, Cincinnati-based company thinks different. P. & G.’s notorious allegiance to internal candidates for nearly every high-level position makes it vulnerable to criticism that it does not like outsiders telling it what to do. That’s a central theme to Mr. Peltz’s charges of P. & G.’s underperformance. The company, led by David Taylor, counters that it’s already on track to create a “profoundly different, much stronger and more profitable company” than just a few years ago.
As in previous engagements, Mr. Peltz is apt to have won over most of those P. & G. investors who spend their days thinking about whether to keep the investment in their portfolio. These so-called active managers, a group that in P. & G.’s case includes hedge funds, mutual funds and some pension funds, tend to agree that corporate boards benefit from having a voice from the investor community in their midst. Since P. & G.’s board had no such representative before Mr. Peltz jolted it into action, they consider his pitch favorably.
It’s here where the electoral math starts to matter. P. & G. has about 2.6 billion shares outstanding. Proxy advisers working either side of the tussle roughly estimate that investors like Calstrs, Fidelity and the Capital Group own 41 percent of those shares. Assume 90 percent of the active managers live up to their billing and vote. If 80 percent of them tilt in favor of Mr. Peltz, that would give Trian about 770 million votes.
Retail investors own about the same amount of P. & G., however. They tend to go along with what management has told them to do in the proxy cards that arrive in the mail, as Trian learned the hard way when it failed to garner enough support to win seats on the board of DuPont two years ago. Like the American electorate, this group doesn’t tend to vote the way Fidelity and other institutions do. P. & G. may have an extra edge, though, in that many of its former workers still hold the stock, or received it as part of their retirement.
Yet there may also be folks who own the stock because, say, they love Dawn dishwashing liquid or live in the Cincinnati area and worry that Mr. Peltz would move its headquarters to the Bronx. So for arithmetic purposes, assume a slightly higher 60 percent of retail shareholders vote, and 80 percent of them cast their ballot against Mr. Peltz. That would give P. & G. 515 million votes.
That’s obviously not enough, and explains the significance of Vanguard, BlackRock and State Street. They have been the biggest beneficiaries of a trend toward investing in funds that simply track benchmark indexes like the Standard & Poor’s 500 — and charge lower fees for doing so — at the expense of higher-cost managers. Together, the three control more than 17 percent of P. & G., according to Institutional Shareholder Services, a proxy advisory firm that favors Mr. Peltz’s proposal.
To beat back Mr. Peltz, P. & G. needs to make up the difference between the active and retail investors, of some 255 million shares. P. & G. can make that happen only by bringing all three to its side. Vanguard, with 181 million shares, is the largest. State Street owns 115 million and BlackRock 156 million, according to ISS. To put it another way, Mr. Peltz has to win just one of the three.
Though that sounds like a tall order for P. & G., past voting records give it a chance. In votes for directors proposed by shareholders, BlackRock cast its ballot against management’s wishes only 17 percent of the time at American companies in the year to June 30. Nearly half the time, Vanguard sided with board-related proposals put forward by shareholders at companies in the United States. State Street says it cast its ballot in favor of any shareholder proposal, in defiance of management, only about 7 percent of the time in the first half of this year on a global basis.
These are not perfectly comparable statistics. They nevertheless suggest that P. & G. has a chance, just as Mr. Trump clearly did, if it can woo the investment world’s version of Pennsylvania, Ohio and Wisconsin. That also means that a weekend trip for Mr. Peltz to Malvern in the Keystone State — which Vanguard calls home — is advisable.