Fifty years ago, the news spread rapidly around the world: Che Guevara was dead, again, and this time, it seemed likely to be true.
That caution was warranted, such was the legend of Guevara, whose symbolism was growing only more powerful. As his image evolved from an emblem of leftist movements to a more general badge of defiance, it was harnessed as a marketing tool. Later, many marveled at how, in death, the communist revolutionary had been put to work for capitalism.
Before all that, though, there was the man, an Argentine-born doctor who first arrived on the world stage during the Cuban revolution, when he became a trusted comrade of Fidel and Raúl Castro.
In January 1959, as the revolution ended and President Fulgencio Batista fled, the rebels entered Havana led by Guevara, who was recovering from a broken arm and could not lead the final assault himself, The Times reported.
As the rebels consolidated control, a reporter asked Guevara what he planned to do now. “We are waiting for Fidel,” he said.
In the months and years that followed, Guevara oversaw executions at La Cabaña prison before becoming a top-level economic minister and diplomat, traveling the world to promote Cuba’s ideals.
Those nations included Congo, where a six-month revolutionary effort failed, and then Bolivia, where he found himself on the run from the country’s army, which was aided by the C.I.A.
After Guevara was captured and summarily killed, it took several days for something close to the truth to emerge. The Bolivian Army initially announced that he had died in a clash and that he had “admitted that he failed in the seven-month guerrilla campaign he organized in Bolivia,” an article on The Times’s front page said.
The next day, the nature of his death became clearer: “A medical report indicated today that Ernesto Che Guevara was slain at least 24 hours after his capture in the southeastern jungle on Sunday,” The Times reported.
It was not until nearly 30 years later that Jon Lee Anderson, who was writing a biography of Guevara, learned of the location, and the revolutionary was given a second burial with full honors in Cuba.
On that occasion, in October 1997, Fidel Castro described him as “the paradigm of the revolutionary” who is “everywhere there is a just cause to defend,” The Times reported.
Raúl Barroso González, a retiree, spoke for many who admired Guevara. “As far as we are concerned, he is still alive,” he said.