CENTRAL VALLEY, N.Y. — On a beautiful autumn day here recently, a woman wearing a hijab sat on a park bench with smartphone buds in her ears as she tapped at her screen. Two women casually strolled by, dressed almost identically in dark skirts that reached midcalf and loose sweaters. Wrapped on their heads were hair-covering scarves often worn by religious Jewish women. Slung over one of the women’s arms was a shopping bag from Tory Burch.
This was a scene at Woodbury Common Premium Outlets, an outdoor luxury-brand megamall in this otherwise quiet town about 50 miles from Midtown Manhattan. At Woodbury Commons, or the Commons as it’s also known, shoppers can find more than 200 brand-name stores, ranging from Prada to Nike.
Shopping, it turns out, is the great connector of disparate cultures of locals and tourists within America and abroad.
Along with taking boat trips around New York Harbor to see the Statue of Liberty and snapping selfies in Times Square, a trip to the Commons has become a not-to-be-missed to-do for a large portion of international visitors to New York City, many of whom avail themselves of the promise of deep discounts.
Woodbury Commons shoppers also come from nearby cities and towns, particularly on weekends and holidays. But on a daily basis, large numbers of visitors come from Europe, South America and Asia looking for bargains and distinctly American items.
So much so, in fact, that some of the shop clerks, many of whom are local, are encouraged to learn at least some words in other languages.
For seven years, I lived about 20 minutes from the mall, yet I assiduously avoided it, with the packed parking lots and heavy traffic. During that time, I commuted to the city for work through the Port Authority Bus Terminal — a dank depot, where pigeons sometimes fly about inside. It’s scary in a Hitchcockian way. This is also where the shopping tourists get the bus to the Commons.
I have long been baffled by visitors to New York waiting in long lines to board the crowded buses. Why would they willingly leave the city to shop at a generic mall?
Since moving to New York City, where locals and tourists have their own bewildering shopping rituals, I began to think about the Commons less from an annoyed neighbor’s point of view and more as an armchair psychologist. In an age of e-commerce when malls can be mostly avoided, what makes people so motivated to shop at them?
For insight, I asked an expert. Peter Noel Murray, a consumer psychologist, owns a firm called EmotionInc that helps companies better understand the feelings that drive consumers’ behavior.
Then there is the status that shoppers can feel from their new stuff.
“People are not after the Gucci bag; they are after the identity that they think owning the Gucci bag gives them,” Dr. Murray said.
A man from Argentina, whom I spoke to briefly when I traveled out to the place I had so pointedly avoided, put it more succinctly.
“Must,” he said, haltingly, in English, when I asked why he would devote a full day of his first New York City vacation to shopping in a far-off town.
It was early in the day, and the Commons was still relatively quiet. The man stood outside an Armani store looking weary as he leaned on a hard-shell suitcase, the likes of which are a fixture at this mall.
The suitcase is the new shopping cart. And that’s good news for entrepreneurs like Loui DiBarro, who runs a “Luggage Outlet” kiosk at the Commons. He sells roller suitcases, some of them bearing tags that read “NOW $60” next to crossed-out prices of $120.
Mr. DiBarro’s buyers are mostly international tourists, who come for the promise of bargains only to learn the reality of not being able to carry their purchases back to the city, much less all the way home.
Amit Paul could have used a suitcase as he walked around the Commons with seven shopping bags hanging over his forearms. He was visiting from Mumbai, India.
While many of the shops at Woodbury Commons can be found in India, he said, the American outlets often carry different styles. “It’s quite cool to wear things at home that you’ve bought in New York,” said Mr. Paul, a well-known singer in India.
Just before I headed back to the city, I met a group of four women who were popping in and out of stores with massive suitcases rolling behind them. They didn’t want to share their names, although they said they had moved to New Jersey from China. They enjoyed taking the bus to the Commons and spending the day looking for bargains.
I was struck by what she said, but more so by the obvious friendship among the women. It dawned on me then that shopping can also be about camaraderie and community.
Historically, a town center was more than a place for commerce: It was also a place for togetherness. Perhaps Woodbury Commons — with its Orthodox Jews and Muslims, its Chinese and European tourists and its New York State shop clerks — is at least in part a place for the world to unite in pursuit of a universal pleasure: getting a bargain.