The past year has been a whirlwind for Rhiannon Giddens, the Grammy-winning musician who became the first woman and first nonwhite person to win a major prize for excellence on the banjo and then celebrated the release of her latest album, “Freedom Highway,” with a performance at the Sing Sing Correctional Facility.
But none of it prepared her for what initially seemed like an innocuous call last month from an unfamiliar number in Chicago.
The fellowship, which honors “exceptionally creative people,” comes with a no-strings-attached grant of $625,000, to be awarded over five years. It is known colloquially as the “genius” award, to the sometime annoyance of the foundation.
Cecilia A. Conrad, a managing director of the foundation and the leader of the fellows program, said the goal was to find “people on the precipice,” where the award will make a difference, but also to inspire creativity more broadly.
The foundation also honored relatively well-known figures in the arts, like the playwright Annie Baker, 36, who won the 2014 Pulitzer Prize for “The Flick”; the theater artist Taylor Mac, 44, the creator of the 24-hour piece “A 24-Decade History of Popular Music”; and the writers Jesmyn Ward, 40, and Viet Thanh Nguyen, 46.
Even some fellows who have already achieved substantial recognition described the honor as bringing palpable relief.
Few honors are as wrapped in mystery and speculation as the MacArthur. Potential fellows cannot apply but are suggested by a network of hundreds of nominators from across the country, in a range of fields, and winnowed down by an anonymous committee of about a dozen.
Some fellows described taking winding paths to their current occupation. Gabriel Victora, 40, a Brazilian-born immunologist at Rockefeller University who studies the mechanisms by which antibodies become more effective over time at countering pathogens, came to the United States at 17 to pursue a career as a concert pianist before pivoting to science.
Jason De Léon, 40, an anthropologist at the University of Michigan, trained as an archaeologist studying ancient sites in Mexico, before shifting focus to clandestine migration across the United States-Mexico border, which he studies using a combination of oral history, archaeological research and forensic science.
Other fellows include Yuval Sharon, 37, a Los Angeles-based opera director who has staged works in a train station and a fleet of moving cars; and Trevor Paglen, 43, a conceptual artist and geographer whose work explores invisible aspects of military and corporate power.
While only individuals are eligible for fellowships, some winners spoke of the intensely collaborative nature of their work and of the ways they might use the money and prestige to benefit collaborators, including nonprofessionals.
Mr. Nguyen, who won the 2016 Pulitzer Prize for his novel “The Sympathizer,” said he wanted to use some of the money to hire an editor to oversee the blog he created for the Diasporic Vietnamese Artists Network, as recognition to the broader tradition that made his own success possible.
Mr. Nguyen, a professor of English and American studies and ethnicity at the University of Southern California who has toggled between fiction and scholarship, added that the honor came with something paradoxical: a new opportunity to fail.
