When Lincoln Center first planned the Psalms Experience, an ambitious series of concerts that includes musical settings of all 150 biblical psalms, it was thought of as an antidote to what felt like a terrible year: 2016.
But there were gaps. So the project also involved commissioning nine new psalm settings. Here are audio excerpts from each, with comments from the composers.
This Dutch composer, known for complex multidisciplinary operas, wrote in a relatively straightforward harmonic language for his psalm setting, “Shelter.” The title comes from what Mr. van der Aa said was the most poignant passage, which says that people should shelter all who take refuge.
At its heart, Mr. Fairouz said, this psalm is about “believing in something bigger than yourself,” even while living in divisive times.
He found himself drawn to the psalm’s message about eternal life — something that “can be achieved through remembrance,” he said — and the concept of divine right. He thought of world leaders using religion to justify their actions, but pointed to the second half of the text, which depicts a wrathful God who has more power than any king.
Reading this psalm for the first time was difficult for Mr. Moultaka, a composer from Lebanon now based in Paris. “There is a lot of violence in it,” he said, pointing to moments in the text where, for example, God tramples down enemies.
His setting, “Marrow,” takes its title from the line “My soul shall be satisfied, even as it were with marrow and fatness.” Anchoring the piece is a musical texture in three-quarter time — “a kind of wet aquatic idée fixe,” as Mr. Muhly called it.
Ms. Zebeljan, a Serbian composer, translated her psalm into Portuguese because “there is a very special melody in this language,” she said. The words fit naturally into the tone of her piece, which she described as a slow dance.
This psalm opens with one of the most memorable lines in Brahms’s “A German Requiem”: “How beloved is your dwelling place.” Ms. Shaw, who wrote the beginning of her setting like an Anglican chant, made sure to preserve that line while treating the rest of the text more liberally.
