The sheriff of a Louisiana parish is under fire for lamenting the scheduled release of prisoners in terms that critics said underscored the exploitation of inmates and, at times, evoked slavery.
The remarks, by Sheriff Steve Prator of Caddo Parish, came near the end of a lengthy news briefing on Oct. 5, in which he objected to a set of laws that will allow for the release of a number of nonviolent prisoners on Nov. 1.
His remarks attracted harsh attention online on Thursday after they were amplified by the reporter and activist Shaun King. Critics said that they demonstrated a prevailing attitude in the Louisiana justice system toward prisoners.
“My immediate reaction is what he’s talking about is the economic exploitation of human beings,” she said.
Ms. Harris said that the racial context informing the sheriff’s remarks was unmistakable. She pointed out that blacks made up more than 60 percent of the state’s incarcerated population and only about 30 percent of its general population, and that a confederate monument stands outside the courthouse in Shreveport, the parish seat.
Cindy Chadwick, a spokeswoman for Sheriff Prator, said that his comments were being taken out of context and that he did not once refer to race.
According to the Louisiana Department of Public Safety and Corrections, 1,400 prisoners will be released from state custody on Nov. 1. Sheriff Prator said at the news conference that more than 60 of them would be released from the Caddo Correctional Center.
Louisiana has long had the highest rate of incarcerated people per capita of any state in the country. Gov. John Bel Edwards, a Democrat who was elected in 2015, campaigned on prison reform, saying multiple times that he wanted the state to at least drop to second place on the list.
Sheriff Prator’s comments came as part of an extended set of grievances about 10 bills signed by Governor Edwards in June, known as justice reinvestment reforms.
Seven of the bills, which were supported by conservative organizations in the state, were sponsored by Republicans, two by Democrats and one by an Independent. All of them passed with strong bipartisan majorities.
The package was endorsed by the Louisiana District Attorneys Association, but the state’s sheriffs’ association cautioned that the legislation would lead to the release of violent offenders.
Sheriff Prator voiced that concern at the news conference, and said that the laws had been passed to save money and the state’s reputation.
In an interview Thursday, Secretary James Le Blanc of the Louisiana Department of Public Safety and Corrections clarified that all the people being released on Nov. 1 were neither violent nor sex offenders.
He said that he had “all the respect in the world for Sheriff Prator,” but that he believed the sheriff was misinformed.
“He just doesn’t really — I don’t think in my opinion — understand the information at hand,” Mr. Le Blanc said.
Furthermore, he said, the fact that there were offenders who had been arrested dozens of times with few convictions suggested that there was a problem on the front end, and that arrest records were not in themselves damning.
Caddo Parish has a long history of racial discrimination in its criminal justice system and beyond. More people have been sentenced to death per capita there than in any other county in the United States; close to 80 percent of those executed have been black. Shreveport was once a confederate capital, and a 2015 study found that the parish was a hotbed of lynchings between 1877 and 1950.
Jim Craig is the New Orleans co-director of the MacArthur Justice Center, which has filed a lawsuit against the Caddo district attorney for its practice of striking blacks from juries without explanation. Mr. Craig pointed out that between 1988 and 2008, the Caddo district attorney had sought death as punishment in 84 percent of black-on-white homicides and only 24 percent of other homicides.
“Our observation is this: Those statistics are not accidental,” Mr. Craig said.
Ms. Harris said that Sheriff Prator’s remarks, while shocking to hear, were not aberrant in the attitude they represented, arguing that they highlighted a mode of thinking that was rampant throughout the United States.
