The actor has built a career, and a passionate fan base, playing supporting roles; now, at 60, she has become an unconventional star.
At 7 p.m. in Paris late last year, Frances McDormand was marching from the Right Bank to the Left at an extraordinary pace. “I’m practicing my route,” she said, speeding off in the wrong direction before stopping short.
“Which way is the river?” she asked, scanning the narrow boulevards snaking in every direction.
I pointed left, and she took off so swiftly that I had to run to catch up. When I did, she was cursing under her breath at her faulty inner compass. She has lived most of her life in Manhattan. She likes grids.
She would be walking home alone after shows, and she doesn’t use Google Maps. Her cellphone still has buttons and a hinge.
“Do you want me to look this up?” I asked, reaching for my smartphone, and she responded as if I’d reached for the grenade pin. “NO! DON’T!”  “Then we’ll never learn.” She caught a glimpse of the Seine and was gone again.
Frances McDormand, or Fran, as she is called in regular life, cuts a handsome figure on the street.  She eschews makeup unless she is working, doesn’t dye her hair and despises the nips, tucks and lifts that have become routine for women of her profession. Her clothes are well made — she loves clothes — but utilitarian and comfortable. On this day she was wearing loose-legged cropped pants, black-and-peach sneakers, a navy sweater and a thin headband shoved in and out of uncombed hair as the mood struck.
She doesn’t do press junkets, and for most of the 20 years since she won a Best Actress Academy Award for playing Marge Gunderson, the tremendously pregnant, improbably cheerful police detective in “Fargo,” she has refused interviews. Her publicist explained to me that his job is to politely tell people to go away.
Just then, a young Frenchwoman walked up to us and said, “ ‘Fargo’? ‘Fargo’! Oh, j’adore ‘Fargo’!” It all transpired as McDormand had described: She refused the picture and the autograph but asked the woman what her name was, made extended eye contact and allowed herself to be hugged. The woman was elated.
Her first film role was Abby in the Coen brothers’ noirish debut, “Blood Simple.” (This was kismet; the Coen brothers, then unknown, went on to create some of McDormand’s best roles, and she and Joel Coen married.) Abby is a proper ingénue, a young Texan woman with wide eyes and fluffy curls and a habit of softly telling men she loves them when she is afraid they might hurt her. In “Blood Simple,” McDormand is in her mid-20s, dewy and golden blond, and she seems to occupy brighter, warmer light than anyone else in her scenes. She is addictive to watch, which obscures the fact that, as she pointed out to me, Abby is fairly two-dimensional. “The one thing that I’ve always been able to offer them is a complexity that fills out an idea they have of something,” she said of the Coen brothers in an interview for the Criterion Collection’s release of “Blood Simple” in 2016.
McDormand explained to me that had she stayed in the theater, she would have played all the canonical leading women, but in Hollywood her looks disqualified her. “I was too old, too young, too fat, too thin, too tall, too short, too blond, too dark — but at some point they’re going to need the other,” she told me. “So I’d get really good at being the other.” Years of hearing this type of thing from casting directors have provoked in her a defiant renunciation of vanity and a deep, though intermittent, self-consciousness. She’ll state her weight in a public interview but avoids looking at the monitor when filming.  She wants the work that is given to stars, but she hates to have her photo taken. She doesn’t own a full-length mirror.
In the last 10 years, something shifted for McDormand: Right as she hit the age when most actresses begin disappearing for lack of roles or moving to the edges of story lines, she moved to first billing. For decades, she excelled at the work of embroidering the lives of women who aren’t deemed appealing enough to watch for two hours straight, and rather than aging into a different acting type, she has taken it upon herself to put peripheral women at the center.
“Olive Kitteridge” is a four-hour peregrination inside one woman’s life — a postmenopausal woman who’s not the Queen of England or an aging rock star or a mother suffering picturesquely from dementia, but a starchy middle-school math teacher living in Down East Maine. Olive is furious and uncompromising, agitated by her husband, who is “oppressively nice” (McDormand’s words), puzzled and disappointed by her son, ill at ease with emotion and bewildered by social niceties. She burps uncontrollably and spares no one the truth. She’s moral, she cares, but still she’s unable to be what the people closest to her need: warm, compromising, wifely, motherly.
The project was the first work McDormand ever produced for herself, after a long career in which her only power, as she describes the actor’s lot, was the power to say no. It was also her first concentrated effort to create a female story that felt as complex as real women’s lives. “I became interested in educating people in the variety of ways in which women can express their emotion. Which is much easier to do in a large role than in a supporting role to a male protagonist. In general, the women in a supporting role to a male protagonist — cry a lot.” McDormand insisted on Olive’s right not to cry and battled the director, Lisa Cholodenko, over whether Olive should break down at several key moments in the series. The women were already comfortable working together. Cholodenko, who directed McDormand in “Laurel Canyon” (2002), prevailed, pleading that the audience needed an opportunity to feel affection for the character. (McDormand privately made a list for me of which moments of crying were authentically Olive, and which were her doing what she was told.) The balance they struck worked: “Olive Kitteridge” won eight Emmys in 2015, including the Outstanding Lead Actress in a Limited Series or Movie award for McDormand.
This fall, she will be the star of a film featuring another caustic antiheroine, who was written just for her: Mildred in Martin McDonagh’s “Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri.” McDormand plays a mother whose daughter has been raped and murdered, and who has made it her mission to terrorize the local Police Department until they give the case the attention it deserves.
McDonagh thought of Mildred more as a Marlon Brando character. “We both liked her,” he told me, “we both loved her, but didn’t want to do anything to make her more likable or lovable. For once, we don’t have to show the female side or the light side or the nurturing, mothering side. We both said, ‘[expletive] that, we’re doing something different this time.’ ” Whether or not you buy the notion that rage and violence are incompatible with “a female side,” whether you like the notion that the actor’s way into Mildred was to “play it like a man,” there’s something surprising about seeing a female protagonist like Mildred. Nothing is done to make her grief soft or even to imply that she was a very good mother in the first place. She isn’t made for viewing pleasure or to teach a lesson; she’s just there, hurling Molotov cocktails at the world.
One evening after rehearsal with the Wooster Group, McDormand walked to a cafe across from the Centre Pompidou for a drink with Kate Valk, who was directing the production, and the Wooster Group’s founder and director, Elizabeth LeCompte. McDormand intends to die onstage with these women, or so she said over drinks. In 1999, after seeing one of the group’s productions, she approached LeCompte to ask if she could join them. She didn’t want to accept film jobs that would take her away from her young son. People kept stopping her in the grocery store asking her to do the “Fargo” accent, and the Wooster Group, a pioneer of avant-garde theater, was appealingly removed from the machine of Hollywood celebrity. “I need to work, and I need a home,” McDormand said. LeCompte agreed.
In rehearsal, as in life, her body is kinetic and restless. The company was brushing up the performance after a long break, and whenever someone made an error, McDormand’s mouth twisted or her eyes betrayed intense perception and restrained irritation. Throughout rehearsal, she was rapt but funny, keeping one ear tuned toward Valk’s mood at all times while finding moments to touch or joke with the cast and crew. She was the goody-two-shoes and the class clown wrapped up in one.
“And we love the music,” Valk added.
McDormand made a face. “No. No. They never —” She stopped. “I’m not a cover-type person.” Before anyone could protest, she changed the subject: She thought perhaps a bird had pooped in her wine.
She signaled the waiter and caught my eye. “Do you think you can tell him that a bird pooped in my wine and I’d like a little extra?” The waiter arrived.
“Monsieur, un oiseau a ...” I hesitated, forgetting the French verb and realizing too late that the bird had also targeted my phone, which was sitting near her wine.
“MERDE,” McDormand interjected loudly, pointing at her glass. The waiter’s eyes widened and he bowed lightly, excising it from between bowls of olives and salted nuts.
Shortly after returning from Paris, I received an email from her with the subject line “My head shot.” It contained a photograph of her floating naked in a lake. She doesn’t like having her picture taken, she wrote, but this might suit the magazine’s purposes. Two months after that, she sent me a picture of herself at the dinner table with a head of cauliflower perched atop her like a crown.
 You would never want to be a girl again for any reason at all, you have discovered that being invisible is the biggest secret on earth, the most wondrous gift anyone could ever have given you.
McDormand was the last and, she thinks, ninth child to be taken in by Noreen and Vernon McDormand. Vernon was a pastor with the Disciples of Christ who had a talent for starting new outposts of the church. He and Noreen moved between working-class communities in the South and the Midwest every few years, and because Noreen was never able to carry a pregnancy to term, the couple fostered children wherever they went. They adopted two, a son and a daughter, through the foster system. In the late ’50s, they adopted their third, a 1-year-old named Cynthia, who, as far as anyone knows, was born to a young woman in Vernon’s parish. They changed her name to Frances.
In her late teens, McDormand was offered the chance to meet her birth mother, and she refused. The anger she felt at being unwanted had become too important a part of her psychology, she thought. Still, she sounds proud when she calls herself “white trash” like her birth mother, and she has spent much of her career playing women who, in one way or another, resemble that description.
She describes her upbringing with the McDormands as “kind of Norman Rockwell-y”: hymn singing, spaghetti dinners, summer Bible camps run by her father. Though Noreen often worked full time as a receptionist and had lots of kids to take care of, she strived to make a homemade dessert every night, often elaborate cakes, like a three-tiered Lady Baltimore. McDormand’s favorite was more déclassé: angel food cake with orange-juice icing. The family moved mostly between small agricultural communities like Hillsboro, Ky., Statesboro, Ga., and Chattanooga, Tenn., where they lived in a neighborhood that was built over the town dump. McDormand, then in second grade, found that this provided excellent treasure hunting.
It was at Monessen High School that she acted for the first time, as Lady Macbeth. She was 14, and an English teacher had the students put on scenes from Shakespeare after school. “I spent a lot of time alone reading books, and this was the first time that literature took me into a public place where I could share it with other people,” she told me. She started acting in school plays, never as the lead but as the colorful characters, the ones who came out screaming or fainting. She went to Bethany College in West Virginia, because it was affiliated with the Disciples of Christ and she could get a scholarship. There, she became the only theater major in her class, drove vans across the border into Pennsylvania so her classmates could buy birth control and steadily worked her way through her post-hometown to-do list: sex, drugs, profanity.
The McCoens, as McDormand sometimes refers to her marriage unit, now maintain two residences: an apartment on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, where they’ve lived for decades, and a 1,300-square-foot house in what McDormand would prefer me to call An Unnamed Town in the Pacific Northwest. This is where McDormand spends most of her time, and she forbade me to specify even a state, not so much because she worries people will track her down but because she feels protective of her Unnamed Town. She is involved in local efforts to protect affordable housing, and with the local radio station. The cheesemonger runs around the counter to give her a hug when she comes in.
So we hiked. McDormand had instructed me to meet her in the parking lot of a nearby cafe, and when I arrived she was sitting straight as a soldier, dressed in her “hiking skirt” (ankle length, denim). We hopped into her car and drove to a nearby freshwater spring to fill our water bottles, which she stuck in a backpack packed with cheese and apples for our lunch. As we carved our path up the mountain, she told me about her next project with Jane Anderson, based on a trilogy of Conrad Richter novels published between 1940 and 1950 called “The Awakening Land,” which they’re adapting into another mini-series. She’ll play the oldest iteration of the main character, Saird, a pioneer woman who gives birth to a stillborn baby and, while still covered in blood, throws herself on top of a wild turkey and wrings its neck so her other children won’t starve. McDormand clapped with glee. “Isn’t that great? What actor wouldn’t want to play that?” We sat on some rocks in the forest, and she began unloading plastic bags of cheese and crackers from her knapsack.
I told her I thought I knew the answer to the question I was about to ask, but: Why these roles? Why these women?
She eventually agreed to be photographed but asked that the session be as unlike a typical shoot as possible: no hair person, no makeup artist, no wardrobe. Initially, when asked to talk about the “concept,” she had suggested a “no-concept concept.” Later, she allowed that she might wear some plants in her hair. It would be interesting to appear like the spirit of a Shaker woman floating around Lower Manhattan.
McDormand-as-herself was dressed in wide-leg bluejeans, a tank top with no bra, a long-sleeve T-shirt, Birkenstock sandals and a giant denim jacket. Out of her backpack she produced two other options: a bandanna and a long white nightgown. “I wore it last night, but I ironed it,” she said.
Even with as few people on set as possible and without all the accouterments of a cover shoot, McDormand seemed to be gritting her teeth. She shifted under the lights in her tank top and bare feet like a child. Someone turned on the music she’d requested (“Smooth,” by Santana), and she swayed a little, uncertainly. She caught my eye across the room and made a small motion, asking me to dance too, where I was standing, so she wouldn’t be all alone up there. We bopped awkwardly to Santana while she tried to ignore the camera.
There is a stunning un-self-consciousness that overtakes her characters when they are alone. In these moments on film, you can see the face fall open and reveal a whole person, whoever she is when she’s turned inward, unwatched. Her ability to go to this place in front of a camera is one of her singular talents. I had been curious whether that might happen this morning, a sort of reverse-engineered revelation as Fran performed Fran. But if that moment came, it was distinguishable only to the camera, and perhaps to the photographer. As the hours passed, McDormand kept the room in a state of mild panic. She stood there at one point in her nightgown with a sweater on her head. She sent the wreath stylist to cut pieces of boxwood she had noticed on the building’s roof terrace, and then winked at me as he went. She turned around so the back of her head faced the camera and announced that she wanted to try a few like this. “This is my angle,” she said.
“Then why are you doing it?” someone finally asked.
At the end of the day, the group went outside for some exterior shots in the alley behind the studio, and McDormand spotted three teenage boys hanging out on the sidewalk.
She called to them: Would they come sit and chat while she was photographed? “It’s for a magazine,” she explained. At first, the boys were hesitant. “Don’t want to get famous too soon,” one of them said with a little smile.
“Please,” she said, and she reached out her hand. “I have to have my photo taken. Just come and sit with me so I don’t have to be in the picture alone.” They relented and perched next to her for a few minutes while she asked them about their clothes, their school, what their names were, what they liked to do. It had begun to rain lightly, but McDormand was happy, scooched in, well lit but mostly obscured by the three lanky bodies. She chatted keenly with her co-stars, a member of the company, as if none of the rest of us were there.