After hundreds of children had finished their dance, piano and voice lessons one recent afternoon, the halls of the Harlem School of the Arts were quiet. Construction workers had also departed, leaving their tools behind.
Eric Pryor, the president and chief executive of the nonprofit, walked around the 40,000-square-foot brick structure on St. Nicholas Avenue like a foreman, pointing out where walls would come down for a recording studio.
Passing a room, where two drummers — who are also instructors — were having an impromptu jam session, Mr. Pryor noted the quiet flow of cool air from a new heating and cooling system. And he pointed to an almost-finished elevator that would help the school comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act.
Just seven years ago, the school, founded in 1964, was $2 million in debt and temporarily closed. Today, the school has not only recovered, but is pivoting from a place that primarily provided arts education for children to a full-fledged performing arts center.
“We will always be rooted in providing arts training to children. That will never waver,” Mr. Pryor said during a tour of the school, which teaches 4,000 children a year on a $5 million budget.
The leaders of the school whisper phrases like “Harlem’s Lincoln Center” and “cultural hub” and aspire to be a place for artistic and cultural enrichment for a broad audience.
The dancer and choreographer Twyla Tharp developed her most recent show in the school’s black box theater. When the musician and producer Michael Bivins, a founder of the R&B group New Edition, spoke about his career, the gallery was packed. On a recent muggy night, the gallery was filled again, this time with younger people, for the first solo art exhibition of Tarah Douglas.
Charles J. Hamilton Jr. remembered what the school was like in 2010 when Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg asked him to head its board of directors.
Now, the school’s main gallery is open and airy. In the courtyard, thick shrubs and ivy were pulled away from the rock waterfall, which will soon be lighted so that more events can be held outside. Rental income from a private gallery space will fund scholarships, while drawing new people to the school.
Ms. Tharp said being at Harlem School of the Arts increased access to her work. “The audience came eager and on their own terms,” Ms. Tharp said of the four live shows she did at the school last summer. Chairs were shoehorned into the space.
Events like Ms. Tharp’s dance performances helped to solidify the school’s reputation as a cultural hub, said Alfred Preisser, artistic director for the school. “In addition to having a strong local presence, we feature some people that have strong national and international reputations, and they bring a wider audience here,” he said.
Other professional artists are in talks to produce works at the school. The actress and producer Tamara Tunie, known for her roles on “Law & Order: Special Victims Unit” and “As the World Turns,” asked about producing a musical called “Jazzland” using students.
“As the organization looks forward, it’s important to think about ways to grow and expand,” Ms. Tunie said.
Mr. Pryor and Mr. Preisser also want to groom the next great performance company or up-and-coming artist. That is where groups such as Legacy Arts Ensemble, a company focused on West African storytelling through dance and song, and artists such as Ms. Douglas fit in.
Tracy Johnson, 35, a former student whose children attend the school, was a co-founder of Legacy Arts Ensemble. She heads the school’s college preparatory program.
“I want world-renowned artists in the building, but I also want Ms. Louise from across the street in the same room experiencing the same piece of theater or dance and music. I want the people that talk back to the stage,” Ms. Johnson said.
Ms. Douglas’ artwork, on display in the gallery, explores the “essence of femininity” through textiles and photography.
“A lot of my work is providing voices for those who don’t really have voices, and I see Harlem School of the Arts doing the same thing,” Ms. Douglas said.
That vision for the school is what the musician and philanthropist Herb Alpert said he had in mind when the foundation he started with his wife, the singer and author Lani Hall, donated $7 million to the school over the past few years.
Mr. Hamilton still speaks wistfully of the 2012 call telling him that Mr. Alpert was committing $5 million.
“Can you imagine what that felt like?” Mr. Hamilton asked.
The money from the Herb Alpert Foundation has wiped out the school’s debt and allowed for the re-establishment of its endowment and the creation of a scholarship fund.
Future plans include partnering with a charter school and a private school being built nearby. And negotiations are underway to partner with the London Academy of Music and Arts in 2018.
Sitting in the former office of the school’s founder, the international opera singer Dorothy Maynor, Mr. Pryor said the job required him to think like a businessman.
