When the sale of Starrett City, the largest federally subsidized housing complex in the country, was announced last month, it looked like a done deal.
The buyers of the massive complex, with its 5,581 apartments, schools, shopping center, power plant and even its own ZIP code, pledged to maintain its affordable rents, a key in getting the government approvals the sale will require. They agreed to pay $905 million to its shareholders, who include President Trump.
But in recent weeks, a dissident group has emerged to block the sale, putting the Brooklyn development at the center of a bruising grudge match, and leaving its 15,000 residents uncertain about the future of their home, a working-class oasis of 46 towers spread across 145 well-manicured acres on Jamaica Bay.
It is a tale worthy of a soap opera, with the widow of the irascible real estate tycoon who built the project locked in a bitter fight with her four estranged stepchildren over the sale.
Even in a business known for its hard-nosed tactics, Mr. Deane stood out. He kept a stuffed timber wolf in his office as “a reminder that you should always keep your organization lean and hungry,” and he could be an emotionally remote father, who, according to the author Vicky Ward in her book “The Liar’s Ball,” “sporadically beat” his children with his belt.
Mr. Deane did, however, establish sizable trusts for each of his children, which contained shares in Starrett City.
Patrick Gerschel, another limited partner in Starrett City, is also part of the dissident group. He declined to comment, but he had a longstanding feud with Mr. Deane dating to the 1970s when they were both partners at Lazard. They publicly fought over the fate of another affordable housing complex, Phipps Plaza West, in 2002.
In the current battle, the dissidents contend that Ms. Deane is enriching herself while failing to maximize profits for the shareholders. They say she signed a deal with a single bidder — the Brooksville Company and Rockpoint Group — for less than what the Starrett complex, whose name was officially changed several years ago to Spring Creek Towers, is worth, rather than conducting a proper auction.
They also make claims of “secret” payments to Ms. Deane and conflicts of interest.
LIHC and Belveron, who jointly accumulated a 12 percent stake in Starrett City in recent years, offered $930 million for Starrett City, after Brooksville and Rockpoint had already signed a purchase agreement for the property.
They will have a showdown on Wednesday at a hearing in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
In June, Ms. Deane notified the limited partners that she was exploring a possible sale because of the complex’s need for major capital repairs, a maturing mortgage and for tax reasons. She hired Douglas Harmon of Cushman & Wakefield to market the property.
According to court papers, Ms. Deane wanted to avoid the kind of fiasco that occurred in 2007 when she and her husband tried to sell the property to the highest bidder for $1.3 billion. Tenants, state and city officials, as well as Senator Chuck Schumer, a New York Democrat, angrily opposed the deal, fearing that anyone who paid such a high price would either slash services or oust longtime tenants or both.
The federal Department of Housing and Urban Development, which had to approve any sale, rejected the deal, describing the buyer as unfit.
The partnership subsequently remortgaged the property, enabling the partners to reap about $200 million.
This time around, Mr. Harmon recommended that the owners skip an auction and instead target prospective buyers who had both the wherewithal to buy the complex and a likelihood of obtaining governmental approval. Ms. Deane was also intent on getting a deal that would preserve Starrett City as an affordable home for low- and moderate-income families.
She also wanted to avoid the noisy media coverage that would accompany the sale of a property in which Mr. Trump is a limited partner, fearing it would could scare off prospective buyers. Mr. Trump inherited his 4 percent stake in the development.
Mr. Harmon, the broker, met with a limited group of possible buyers.
Belveron had also expressed interest in the property, but Ms. Deane said she was wary, knowing that Belveron’s “playbook was to file lawsuits in an effort to wrest control of large properties from management,” according to her affidavit.
Ms. Deane, in her affidavit, said she found Brooksville and Rockpoint’s offer “very attractive.” As the managing partner, she then sought approval in September from the 76 limited partners in Starrett City, who would share in the residual proceeds.
Ms. Deane notified them that the managing partner was entitled to 20 percent of the residual proceeds, or at least $80 million under the current deal.
The dissidents have described this as a “secret” provision, but it was an amendment approved by the limited partners in 2003.
Immediately after the deal was announced, Belveron offered to buy the property for $25 million more than Brooksville and Rockpoint offered. It also says it wants to preserve Starrett City as affordable housing, though LIHC has clashed with tenants at some Manhattan developments.
The pending sale has sent a current of anxiety through Starrett City, where residents worry about the possible effect on the quality of life and long-term affordability of the complex. Representative Hakeem Jeffries, a Brooklyn Democrat, and other elected officials have assured tenants that their concerns will be addressed.
Mr. Jeffries said that Brooksville had done a good job so far in communicating with residents. But, he said, any argument that a buyer had not paid enough money would raise suspicions about gentrification and luxury development at some time in the future.
“That’s obviously of great concern,” he said.