Electronic cigarettes, the popular vapor substitute to traditional tobacco cigarettes, will soon be banned from public indoor spaces in New York State — just like the real thing.
Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo on Monday signed a bill to ban vaping anywhere cigarettes are already prohibited, like workplaces, restaurants and bars. The ban goes into effect in 30 days.
E-cigs, as the products that vaporize a variety of oils into an inhalant are generally known, were added to the state’s Clean Indoor Air Act this summer by the State Assembly, and the measure was approved by the Senate. The original act has been around since 2003, when smoking tobacco products in public indoor areas was first banned in the state, one of the country’s first such measures.
New York has come down fiercely on e-cigs, even as their popularity grows: they now represent a $2.5-billion industry, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which says that while the health consequences of the product are little understood, there are still reasons for concern, including nicotine addiction.
In New York, around 70 percent of the state’s municipalities already have bans in effect, according to the American Lung Association. New York City’s ban has been in place since 2013, when then-Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg included it in the city’s Smoke Free Air Act.
But manufacturers have not gone quietly in the city. They have mounted several legal challenges, arguing that e-cigs do not qualify because technically they do not emit smoke. The most recent challenge to New York City’s ban was rejected this year in the New York State Court of Appeals, which found that the inclusion of e-cigs in the law was valid.
But proponents of devices like e-cigs and vaporizers — larger, cellphone-size gadgets — say they are a safer alternative to cigarettes and may help with smoking cessation. Studies so far have been limited and short term, and are not conclusive on either front.
Mr. Singh acknowledged that the product he sells may be a health risk, but he says it is a lesser evil; most customers use it as way to quit traditional cigarettes, he said.
