Cornelia Bailey, a vivid storyteller who fought to protect a vanishing slice of African-American culture on Sapelo Island, off the coast of Georgia, died on Oct. 15 in Brunswick, Ga. She was 72.
Inez Grovner, president of the Sapelo Island Cultural and Revitalization Society, which Ms. Bailey helped found and where she was vice president, confirmed the death. The cause was not announced.
Ms. Bailey was among a shrinking number of people to have been born and educated on the island, where descendants of slaves have lived for generations, the isolation of island life allowing them to retain elements of West African traditions, language and religion that have become known as Gullah-Geechee culture.
That culture has been threatened over the decades by dispersion and, most recently, development pressures and high taxes. Ms. Bailey, as the unofficial historian of Sapelo, was among the leaders of efforts to preserve and pass along the island’s heritage, ends that she furthered through advocacy, entrepreneurialism and activities that included a fall cultural festival.
Ms. Bailey’s main preservation achievement may have simply been telling the stories of her ancestors and her own life, something she did eloquently in the memoir “God, Dr. Buzzard, and the Bolito Man: A Saltwater Geechee Talks About Life on Sapelo Island, Georgia” (2001, with Christena Bledsoe).
After the Civil War, descendants of slaves established settlements on Sapelo Island, reachable only by boat.
Cornelia Walker Bailey was born on June 12, 1945. Her father, Hicks Walker, often worked for R. J. Reynolds Jr., the tobacco heir, at the mansion he owned on the island. The house had been the centerpiece of a plantation where, in the early 1800s, Thomas Spalding used slave labor to grow cotton, rice and sugar cane.
Ms. Bailey’s mother, Hettie Bryant, was, like many in the community, a believer in spirits; when the eyeglasses that she was sure she had left on a particular table would disappear, she would suspect a long-dead uncle of having moved them.
Sapelo, which is about 11 miles long and part of a chain of barrier islands, is accessible only by boat or air. Today, almost all of it is owned by the state, but in the decades after the Civil War former slaves and their descendants bought land there and established several settlements. Ms. Bailey grew up in one of these, Belle Marsh, and wrote of a childhood that was both idyllic and rugged.
After that, she said, everyone thought she had a some sort of special gift, an expectation that she could find burdensome.
Ms. Bailey traced her family to a man named Bilali Muhammad, an important slave on the Spalding plantation who is thought to have come from West Africa by way of the Caribbean and, like many other slaves, was a Muslim, a heritage evident in the distinctive Gullah-Geechee adaptations to the Christianity of their slave masters. When she was young, Ms. Bailey noted, children were taught to pray facing east; Sapelo women covered their hair in church.
Growing up, Ms. Bailey absorbed Gullah-Geechee culture even as she watched it shrink. It disappeared entirely from other barrier islands, and on Sapelo it was consolidated into one community, Hog Hammock, where she and her husband, Julius, acquired several pieces of property. They operated a guesthouse, the Wallow, and gave history-filled tours to visitors.
Ms. Bailey’s preservation battle was a difficult one, as young people left the island in search of higher education and jobs. In 1910 the island had a black population of 539; by 1970 it was estimated at 175, and when a reporter for The New York Times wrote about the island in 2012, it was around 50.
The island’s school closed in the 1970s. More recently, Sapelo’s limited amount of private land caught the eye of well-off people looking for vacation properties. Ms. Bailey did not want to see it go the way of nearby islands like Hilton Head, S.C., with its yachts and golf courses, and was blunt about her preferences.
In 2012, Hog Hammock residents were hit with a substantial property tax increase that some felt was an effort to drive out the remaining Geechee residents. “I call it cultural genocide,” Ms. Bailey said in a video interview in 2013. Some tax relief was negotiated, though the issue remains a concern.
In 2004, Ms. Bailey received a Governor’s Award in the Humanities for her preservation work.
Survivors include her husband as well as several children and grandchildren.
Although Gullah and Geechee — terms whose origins have been much debated and may trace to specific African tribes or words — are often used interchangeably these days, Ms. Bailey always stressed that she was Geechee. And, specifically, Saltwater Geechee (as opposed to the Freshwater Geechee, who lived 30 miles inland).
Ms. Grovner said Ms. Bailey had been instrumental in a continuing effort by the Sapelo Island cultural society to establish a Geechee historical village on 25 acres on the island, where visitors could see how people cooked, planted and lived in times past.
“Hopefully we can get it up and going on her behalf,” Ms. Grovner said.