Of the many film adaptations of “The Sea-Wolf,” one of Jack London’s most popular novels, published in 1904, none surpasses the atmospheric, action-packed and anti-fascist Warner Bros. version, first released in 1941.
Restored to its original 100-minute running time on a new Warner Archive disc, “The Sea Wolf” is a triumph of studio filmmaking. The movie marshaled the talents of an expert director, Michael Curtiz; a politically engaged writer, Robert Rossen; and a high-energy cast headed by Edward G. Robinson, Ida Lupino and John Garfield; with help from a distinguished composer, Erich Wolfgang Korngold, and a newly acquired fog machine seemingly operating at full throttle. The mise-en-scène is moody. The movie may have been shot in a studio tank but the schooner on which it mainly takes place is lit to suggest the stippled patterns of a film noir nightclub.
Robinson, who became a star portraying gangsters, is as hard a hard guy as he’s ever been; the vessel he commands is less a pirate ship than a floating concentration camp. When Humphrey van Weyden (Alexander Knox), a sensitive writer and London’s stand-in, comes aboard after being rescued from a shipwreck, he finds the first mate in his death throes being studiously ignored by Larsen’s crew.
Van Weyden is the novel’s hero but Rossen also built up parts for two working-class characters who eventually fall for each other. An embittered drifter, George Leach (Garfield), and a hard-boiled prostitute, Ruth Brewster (Lupino), separately elude the police to wind up on the Ghost. Lupino is mercurial and assertive, her volatility matched by Garfield’s. Indeed, the anger that they and Robinson bring to their roles bespeaks a larger issue: the war going on in Europe.
The political element of “The Sea Wolf” had a personal resonance. Robinson was, like Curtiz, a foreign-born Jew; Rossen, a Communist, and Garfield, a progressive fellow traveler, were Jewish slum kids from New York City. Ida Lupino, also foreign-born and of Jewish descent, would characterize “The Sea Wolf” as a movie that “could pass as current history.” She had also prompted Rossen to write additional scenes illuminating Ruth and George as déclassé victims of a capitalist society.
A hit in 1941, “The Sea Wolf” was rereleased six years later, cut by 14 minutes, mostly it would seem, bits of scenes in which van Weyden argued philosophy with Larsen, and Ruth and George discussed their marginality. In any case the revised version appeared in a different political climate. In the years that followed Robinson, Garfield and Rossen would all be hounded by the House Un-American Activities Committee and two other cast members, Knox and Howard da Silva were blacklisted.
A maritime political allegory from another perspective is “Titanic,” made in Nazi Germany in the midst of World War II. (It’s newly out, with its postwar cuts restored, on Blu-ray from Kino Classics.) An ambitious and expensive production, “Titanic” was intended as an attack on British arrogance and greed. The ship goes down as a result of a stock market scheme run amok.
In the film, Bruce Ismay (E. F. Fürbringer), the British magnate whose company owned the Titanic, ignores the advice of his fictional German first officer (Hans Nielsen). Striving to maximize his profits, Ismay, in effect, sinks his ship, filled with British and American plutocrats who are served by a heroic crew.
“Titanic,” which was filmed in German-occupied Gdynia in Poland, as systematic gassing was beginning in Auschwitz and the Soviets were launching a counteroffensive against the Nazis at Stalingrad, not only evokes a catastrophe but was one. Heard complaining about the government, the initial director, Herbert Selpin, was arrested midway through the production, and was found hanging in his prison cell. Then the scenes of mass panic seemed to hit too close to home for a German population coming under Allied siege. The movie was extensively cut and was banned in Germany in 1944, although it does seem to have been released in occupied France and was shown in West Germany after the war.
The liner Cap Arcona, on which much of “Titanic” was shot, subsequently became an actual floating concentration camp and was docked in the Baltic as a target. Several days before the war ended, it was bombed by the Royal Air Force. Many more people died in this tragedy than those who lost their lives when the real Titanic went down.
