MELBOURNE, Australia — The Australian government presented its annual cybersecurity report on Tuesday, revealing that one of its national security contractors had suffered a breach in which it lost a “significant amount of data” last year.
Though the report outlined the breach as a case study, Dan Tehan, a minister tasked with advising the prime minister on cybersecurity, did not divulge specifics to the local news media about who was affected or what data might have been compromised. “We don’t know and we cannot confirm exactly who the actor was,” he said Tuesday on ABC Radio.
The revelation of the security contractor’s breach, and the lack of detail surrounding it, comes at a time of increased concern over the government’s ability to protect citizens’ personal information — especially when accounting for third parties that have access to sensitive data.
Last week, Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull introduced a far-reaching plan to collect Australians’ driver’s license photos and distribute them across security agencies, leaving open the possibility of sharing them with private companies. Privacy advocates criticized the plan as risky, with some pointing to a hacking attack on Australian census data last year, and the revelation this year that Australians’ Medicare card details were being sold on the web for less than 30 Australian dollars, or around $23.
Experts say that private industry has been one of the most glaring vulnerabilities in Australia’s cybersecurity. Tuesday’s report, the Australian Cyber Security Center Threat Report, noted that 734 private-sector systems of “national interest” were affected by cyberattacks last year.
Ms. Maurushat said that Australia as a whole was not far behind the rest of the developed world’s level of cybersecurity, but emphasized concerns about its private sector.
A cybersecurity report released this year by Telstra, the country’s dominant telecommunications company, said that 59 percent of surveyed companies in Australia had detected a security breach on at least a monthly basis. A similar number reported experiencing at least one ransomware attack. Over half of Australian organizations that came under such an attack paid the ransom, the report said.
Ms. Maurushat said that, in part, Australia’s private-sector cybersecurity was lacking because of an acute shortage of skilled workers.
The government report also noted “extensive” state-sponsored activity against Australia’s government, saying that its defense contractors continued to be targeted by foreign nations’ cyberespionage efforts.
Last year, the Australian government blamed foreign actors for an attack on its online census portal.
In a settlement over the census problems, I.B.M. paid the government about 30 million Australian dollars, or about $23 million.
Not unlike vaccines and herd immunity, Ms. Maurushat said, a government’s cybersecurity is only as strong as those it chooses to share its data with.
When asked whether Australia’s lagging digital infrastructure and poor internet speeds might have a detrimental effect on its security, Ms. Maurushat said that a beleaguered attempt to speed up Australia’s internet, the National Broadband Network initiative, may prove to be a silver lining.
