She launched her campaign for governor at a Mexican restaurant. Her running mate is a Cuban immigrant. And it was not too long ago that she supported a pathway to citizenship for undocumented immigrants.
But in the waning days of the race to become New Jersey’s next governor, Lt. Gov. Kim Guadagno, a Republican, has taken a sharp turn to the right as polls show that she is well behind her Democratic opponent, Philip D. Murphy, a former Wall Street banker.
Ms. Guadagno’s comments regarding immigration came after a recent advertisement by her campaign that alludes to a crime in Newark 10 years ago — the execution-style killings of three young people in a schoolyard — and highlights one of the accused as being an “illegal alien and child rapist.’’ The televised ad insinuates that those are the types of crimes that could happen if Mr. Murphy were elected because of his support for shielding some undocumented immigrants from federal immigration officers.
Democrats condemned the ad and compared it to the Willie Horton ad that Republicans used against Michael Dukakis in the 1988 presidential campaign. That ad attacked Mr. Dukakis on a prison furlough program that granted Mr. Horton a weekend pass on which he committed a murder.
Ms. Guadagno’s more conservative approach places her at odds with more moderate Republicans in New Jersey, but her willingness to embrace the kind of divisive politics she has avoided for much of her career appears to be an 11th-hour appeal to her party’s base in the hopes that it will drive up turnout in what has been a very low-interest race.
It is a tall order in New Jersey, where registered Democrats outnumber Republicans by more than 800,000. For Republicans to win a statewide campaign, they usually need to win over many unaffiliated voters whose views tend not to skew too far to the left or the right.
But, if nothing else, the ad did get Ms. Guadagno noticed in an election that has gotten little attention. The ad captured headlines across the country and it was shown on newscasts even before the Guadagno campaign had spent money to show it on television.
The ad has appeared almost exclusively on cable channels, according to Advertising Analytics, a company that tracks advertising. Ads on most cable channels are often less expensive and reach a smaller, more targeted audience.
After her ad was unveiled by her campaign, Ms. Guadagno was a guest on “Fox and Friends,” the conservative morning talk show that is watched by President Trump. On the show, she continued to discuss crimes committed by undocumented immigrants.
When asked for comment about the decision to target immigration, a spokesman for Ms. Guadagno instead focused on Mr. Murphy.
“It’s Phil Murphy who is out of the mainstream by running on a platform to raise taxes and make New Jersey a sanctuary state,” said Ricky Diaz, the communication director for the Guadagno campaign.
For most of her campaign, Ms. Guadagno has been focused on the state’s property taxes, which are the highest in the country. During her victory speech on the night of the Republican primary in June, Ms. Guadagno made a bold pledge not to run for re-election if she failed to lower property taxes during her first term. She pinned her promise to the top of her Twitter page for months.
But during her interview on Fox, Ms. Guadagno never even mentioned the word tax. Instead, she focused on immigration, and her immigration ad is pinned to the top of her Twitter feed.
While her tough stance on undocumented immigrants may be a move designed to reach conservative Republican voters, it could also be risky.
“It may not even be the card to play with the base,” said Ashley Koning, the director of the Eagleton Center for Public Interest Polling at Rutgers. Ms. Koning cited a poll taken in 2015 during the presidential primary showing that 51 percent of Republicans in New Jersey supported a pathway to citizenship, and only 28 percent said undocumented immigrants should be forced to leave the country.
Ms. Guadagno has not always sought out the party’s conservative wing.
She denounced President Trump last year after tapes were released in which Mr. Trump, then a candidate, bragged about forcing himself on women. Ms. Guadagno said “no apology’’ could excuse his comments.
In August, she offered a curt response when asked if there was a chance she would visit the president when he was on vacation in New Jersey.
“None,” she told reporters at the time.
And she holds positions that members of the more conservative wing of the Republican Party would find anathema. From climate change (she supports renewable energy investment) to abortion (she has been a supporter of abortion rights her entire career), Ms. Guadagno has not shown a rigid adherence to the party’s platform or conservative ethos.
Now, any language that makes a positive reference to Democrats has vanished, which is not surprising at the end of her campaign. But what is notable is how Ms. Guadagno is giving top billing to immigration after spending so much time on a bread-and-butter issue like property taxes.
Mr. Murphy said he has been taken aback by the ad and Ms. Guadagno’s shift toward immigration.
