It’s not a done deal — yet.
The City University of New York, bowing to pressure from prominent African-American leaders from Harlem, on Monday postponed the anticipated appointment of the next president of City College, its flagship school.
The university had been expected to elevate Vincent G. Boudreau, the college’s interim president for the last year, as the permanent president at its board of trustees meeting. But over the weekend, a letter emailed to The New York Times bearing the names of 20 community leaders, including former Gov. David A. Paterson, former Representative Charles B. Rangel and former Assemblyman Keith L.T. Wright, expressed “disappointment” with Dr. Boudreau, saying that their “input, insight and influence” had not been included in the search process.
On Monday morning, some of those leaders plus at least one who was not a signatory, Representative Adriano Espaillat, attended a breakfast meeting at Sylvia’s restaurant in Harlem with Dr. Boudreau; James B. Milliken, CUNY’s chancellor; and William C. Thompson Jr., chairman of CUNY’s Board of Trustees. Afterward, according to those who attended, the university pledged to arrange meetings with Dr. Boudreau over the next two weeks.
A CUNY spokesman declined to comment.
Dr. Boudreau, a political scientist, is a 26-year veteran of the college who previously served as the dean of the Colin Powell School for Civic and Global Leadership. He has been credited with helping to stabilize the college and provide more transparency following the unexpected resignation last October of Lisa S. Coico, whose finances have been under investigation by the United States attorney for the Eastern District since at least last June. He is also said to have the strong support of Colin L. Powell, the former secretary of state, who is one of the most influential alumni at the college.
The protest letter claimed that Dr. Boudreau was initially deemed “unworthy of this post” by the search committee, which took more than a year to do its work.
In a statement, Mr. Paterson praised CUNY for delaying the vote, saying that “all parties involved would agree that it is far more important to students, families and the community that we take as much time as possible to make sure we get the right person."