WASHINGTON — Under pressure from Republicans and Democrats, the Trump administration on Thursday turned over to Congress a list of Russia-connected entities it will use to determine new sanctions meant to rebuke Russia for actions in Eastern Europe, Syria and the 2016 United States presidential election.
Administration officials made clear to lawmakers that they intended to impose sanctions on individuals in the United States and elsewhere who did “significant” business with the Russian entities, sending an early warning that such deals must soon end.
The list appeared to be an attempt to mollify critics — including Senators John McCain, Republican of Arizona, and Benjamin L. Cardin, Democrat of Maryland — who said that the administration had not moved quickly enough to punish a key American adversary, using legislation passed by Congress in July and signed by President Trump in August. That legislation required that the administration produce the list of entities by Oct. 1.
Under the law, persons who “knowingly engage in a significant transaction” with these entities could be subjected to sanctions as soon as Jan. 29. Officials said they intended to work with individuals and the United States’ allies to help them avoid sanctionable activity.
The Trump administration on Thursday sent a list of Russian-connected entities that it is considering for further sanctions as a rebuke to Russia's activities in Eastern Europe and its meddling in the 2016 presidential election.
The list reads like a who’s who of the Russian defense and intelligence sectors. It includes the United Aircraft Corporation, which makes Sukhoi jets and Tupolev passenger airliners; Kalashnikov Concern, which makes the famed assault weapon used around the world; and Rosoboronexport, which is the chief state-owned arms exporter in the country.
Democrats and several powerful Senate Republicans, led by Mr. McCain and Mr. Cardin, had grown frustrated in recent days over the delay. Mr. McCain, a fierce critic of Russia, threatened to use his position as the chairman of the Armed Services Committee to try to force the Trump administration to comply.
The administration answered those criticisms with assurances that it was working to draw up a list of targets, but that with minimal staff in place in the State Department and given the complexity of the legislation, it was taking longer than the law allowed for.
A State Department spokeswoman, Heather Nauert, said on Thursday that the department was notifying American companies and foreign allies before it would officially release the list.
“It’s complex, it’s complicated and industry needs to know what will happen if they engage in certain activities,” she said.
The Russia measures were part of a larger sanctions package approved with near unanimous support by the House and Senate and signed by Mr. Trump in early August. The legislation also included sanctions on Iran and North Korea, but it was the Russia sanctions, as well as a provision limiting Mr. Trump’s authority to lift them, that most irked the president.
The sanctions were seen as a rebuke by lawmakers of both parties of Mr. Trump’s friendly posture toward President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia and an effort to punish Russia for its annexation of Crimea, its military intervention in Ukraine and its meddling in the 2016 presidential election.
Critics of the president have accused Mr. Trump of failing to be aggressive enough toward one of the United States’ biggest adversaries even as people connected to his administration are being investigated for collusion with Russians during last year’s race.
The United States’ spy agencies have concluded that the Russian interference began as an effort to hurt Hillary Clinton’s candidacy, but later tried to explicitly help Mr. Trump. Three congressional committees and a Justice Department special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, continue to investigate how the campaign was carried out and whether Mr. Trump’s associates were involved.