Stock prices for firearm companies rose this week after a gunman killed dozens of people in Las Vegas, an apparent continuation of a morbid trend linked to mass shootings.
But investors were more muted than they had been in recent years, a sign of Wall Street’s increasing skepticism about how much influence mass shootings can exert on gun control legislation, especially in a Trump administration.
Although the 2016 presidential election eased concerns among gun advocates about tighter rules, gun companies have struggled since the vote, with falling sales and excess inventory.
The shooting on Sunday was the deadliest in modern American history, with at least 59 people dead and more than 520 injured. The tragedy drew calls for gun control, as such massacres have in the past.
The prospect of tighter gun rules often leads consumers to stockpile firearms. Wall Street, sensing a sales upswing, piles into gun manufacturer and retailer stocks.
This time, however, its reaction seemed more tepid than it was after previous major shootings.
On Monday, shares in Sturm, Ruger & Company, the Southport, Conn., maker of Ruger handguns and rifles, rose 3.5 percent, then an additional 2.1 percent on Tuesday. Last year, the day after a gunman killed 49 people and wounded 53 at the packed Pulse nightclub in Orlando, Fla., on June 12, 2016, the gun maker’s stock price swung up 8.5 percent. And it eventually rose 10 percent in the days after two attackers killed 14 people and wounded 17 in San Bernardino, Calif., on Dec. 2, 2015.
Stock movements at American Outdoor Brands, the Springfield, Mass., company that owns Smith & Wesson, were similar. The price was up 3.2 percent on Monday and 2.4 percent on Tuesday, compared with increases of 6.8 percent after the Orlando shooting and 11.5 percent in the days after the San Bernardino attack.
In previous years, stock prices for firearms companies sometimes fell after mass shootings, such as the December 2012 killings in Newtown, Conn.
President Trump’s perceived ambivalence toward gun control could be tamping down firearms sales, analysts said. Mr. Trump’s candidacy was endorsed by the National Rifle Association, and he has declared himself a “true friend and champion” of gun owners.
On Tuesday, he said, “We will be talking about gun laws as time goes by,” but offered no specifics.
A year ago, gun company stocks were gaining. Investors, looking at the polls, figured that Hillary Clinton — an advocate of tougher rules against firearms — would win the White House. They projected a postelection surge of gun purchases.
Gun stocks sank as much as 26 percent in the days after Mr. Trump’s victory.
In eight of the 10 full months since then, the F.B.I. conducted fewer background checks for firearms — a rough proxy for gun sales — than in the same months a year earlier. The agency’s National Instant Criminal Background Check System processed nearly two million checks in September, compared with the record high of 3.3 million in December 2015.
In September, American Outdoor Brands reported that its quarterly sales had fallen 37.7 percent from a year earlier. In August, Ruger said its sales had slumped 22 percent.
Ruger blamed reduced purchasing by retailers trying to scale back their inventories and “aggressive price discounting and lucrative consumer rebates” offered by competitors.
But some analysts see the so-called Trump slump in gun sales as a temporary state.
"We see an industry that, while beleaguered with excess inventory, elevated promotions and questionable manufacturer strategy, is showing no signs of going away,” Wedbush analysts wrote in their report.