WASHINGTON — When Scott Pruitt, the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, signed a blueprint Tuesday to eliminate a major Obama-era climate change regulation, the text said the agency would at some point consider a new rule to ratchet down greenhouse gas emissions.
Industry leaders and environmental activists predict that when the Trump administration formalizes its plan to repeal the Clean Power Plan, nothing will take its place for possibly years to come. The E.P.A. said it would seek public comment on how to fashion a more modest measure to address pollution from power plants, although the agency has not said when it would do so.
Mr. Pruitt previewed his plan on Monday at a coal equipment supply company in Hazard, Ky., where he declared, “The war on coal is over.” There and in the repeal proposal, Mr. Pruitt accused the Obama administration of favoring renewable energy over coal and violating the Clean Air Act when it established state-by-state targets for carbon emission reductions.
“The last administration just simply made it up,” Mr. Pruitt said. “When you think about the Clean Power Plan, it was not about regulating to make things regular. It was about regulating to pick winners and losers.” He said the Obama administration overstepped its authority in order to favor renewable energy over fossil fuels.
Under the proposed repeal, the bureaucratic process of unraveling the Clean Power Plan could take months, and that is before any court challenges. Separately, the E.P.A. said it would ask the public for ideas about how to write a different, more tapered regulation. It gave no indication, however, of when it would do so or even whether it actually intended to create such a new rule. Moreover, soliciting public comment — in federal jargon, an “advance notice of proposed rule making” — is usually used by an agency to test ideas far in advance of even putting forward a proposed new regulation.
“I think they’re just dragging their feet,” said Vicki Arroyo, executive director of the Georgetown Climate Center at Georgetown Law School.
Business leaders from the Chamber of Commerce and leading utility companies have urged the E.P.A. in recent months to design a replacement for the Clean Power Plan. The groups, all opponents of the Obama-era plan, have argued that some type of regulation must exist to protect the E.P.A. from lawsuits. Even if the Trump administration succeeds in killing the Clean Power Plan, a 2009 agency determination known as the endangerment finding still compels the agency to regulate carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases.
“When they finalize the repeal, there will certainly be a lawsuit. And separate and apart from that, if they don’t move forward with a replacement rule they will also have a lawsuit,” said Jeff Holmstead, a lawyer with Bracewell LLP, a firm representing energy companies that sued to overturn the Clean Power Plan.
“We are concerned legally that not having a replacement regulation in place opens them up to liability,” said Ross Eisenberg, vice president of energy policy at the National Association of Manufacturers, which applauded Tuesday’s repeal. Mr. Eisenberg said he was not concerned that the agency appears to want some time to consider a replacement. But, he said, companies are eager to see that effort move forward.
Industry isn’t all on the same page. Mr. Murray said he didn’t believe a replacement was necessary. “Right now, there’s no urgency to do anything in my opinion,” he said.
Supporters and opponents alike point out that the E.P.A. may not have enough senior officials in place to design a new rule. President Trump only last week nominated a deputy administrator to the agency, and other key appointees are awaiting senate confirmation. Another factor is Mr. Pruitt himself, a vocal denier of the scientific consensus that human-caused greenhouse gas emissions are the main cause of climate change. Policy analysts said they did not believe Mr. Pruitt wanted his name attached to any greenhouse gas regulation, even a weak one.
But where some see cynical strategy, Mr. Pruitt’s supporters see considered reasoning. David T. Stevenson, policy director at the Center for Energy Competitiveness at the Caesar Rodney Institute in Delaware and a member of Mr. Trump’s E.P.A. transition team, said smart policy takes time. Designing and moving forward a replacement for the Clean Power Plan could take as long as two years, he said.
