The light bulbs are yolk-yellow, painted with black-dot eyes and Edvard Munch-like mouths, alternately anguished, dopey, malevolent and cackling. They look like tethered yellow ghosts, sitting on a shelf behind the counter at Benyam, an Ethiopian restaurant that opened in July in Harlem.
The siblings — Helina Girma, the chef; Marta Malavazi, who helps in the kitchen; Miku Girma, the curator and a street artist himself; and Beniam Asfaw, a graphic designer and the soft-spoken, unobtrusive host — commute from Midtown, Queens and New Jersey to converge here in upper Harlem. This is their first joint effort, and already a standout: While the menu is almost identical to those found at other Ethiopian restaurants, the flavors are brighter and the textures more distinct.
Vegetables come fresh from the Grassroots Farmers Market, a few blocks away. The meats yield. A welcome heat announces itself in almost every dish, like a sly nudge in the ribs.
Most noteworthy is Ms. Girma’s injera, the dusky, crepe-thin, faintly sour bread that sets the stage for the Ethiopian meal, as both platter and utensils: Dishes are spooned directly over it and strips are torn off to scoop them up. It’s made with teff — an ancient grain indigenous to North Africa, so tiny that its name is often attributed to the Amharic word for “lost” — originally fermented for four days and constantly replenished, like a sourdough starter.
The fermented teff at Benyam is loosened with water and cut with a touch of wheat (a concession to the difference in climate between Ethiopia and the United States). Then the batter is poured onto the hot face of a mitad, which in Ethiopia might be a flat clay plate warmed over coals, but here is a nonstick griddle plugged into the wall. The bread darkens in rings as tiny sinkholes multiply, the opening of a thousand eyes.
The finished bread is sheer and papery at the circumference, curling up like parchment. The rest is sponge, with more loft and spring than I’ve found elsewhere in town, while still nicely pliant. At the end of the meal — arguably the best part, when all that’s left is injera soaked with the runoff of sauces — the bread still has structure and holds together.
All dishes are arranged as ensembles, on a broad white plate nearly eclipsed by a full moon of injera. None exist in isolation; the flavors are meant to be interposed. Key sir, with sweet beets halfway between firm and tender, might neighbor gomen (relaxed, minerally collard greens), while deffen misir alicha, lentils collapsed into near-soup, might appear alongside fasolia, string beans guarding their crunch.
Nubs of beef might be simmered with turmeric, ginger and garlic, to deliver a gentle, lulling warmth, or patted down with awaze, a paste of berbere swirled with tej (Ethiopian honey wine) and tossed swiftly in a pan, barely long enough to soften the edge of heat. For doro wat, drumsticks are left to loll in a stew of smoky-sweet berbere until they turn incarnadine, then are paired at the last minute with hard-boiled eggs, creamy and meaty at once.
Dessert isn’t historically part of Ethiopian culture, but Benyam offers two from local bakeries: baklava, flaky and not too sweet, and cheesecake with a sour-cream top, as old school and velvety as you could wish.
Like most immigrant chefs, Ms. Girma has had to adapt. She can’t always get the right shiro (chickpea stew) mix from Ethiopia, so she’ll roast yellow split peas instead. Unable to reliably find the African bird’s eye chiles that go into the spice blend mitmita, she settles for jalapeños; if their heat is less nuanced, she makes up for it by recalibrating other seasonings to bring depth.
