There couldn’t be a much prettier place for an art fair: the Grand Palais and the Petit Palais, two Beaux-Arts palace-museums built for the 1900 Universal Exposition, royally nodding to each other across the grandeur of Avenue Winston Churchill (formerly Avenue Nicolas II), at the foot of Pont Alexandre III. FIAC — the Foire Internationale d’Art Contemporain — brings a huge array of contemporary and modern art to this corner every fall, yet the event keeps expanding around the city.
The organizers like branching out “as much as possible without making everybody giddy,” said Jennifer Flay, director of the fair. It’s a way to focus on the many great cultural institutions of Paris, Ms. Flay said in a telephone interview.
And that’s not the only branching out that’s going on. FIAC remains quintessentially French and essentially European, so when officials mention that a good 20 percent of the galleries this year are from North America, it could be taken as a boast or a lament. And it’s only the beginning. The 193 galleries participating in the 44th fair (Oct. 19 to 22) come from 29 countries.
Collectors may not think of Kosovo as a hotbed of artistic innovation, but this gallery, the first from that country to participate in the fair, may change some minds. LambdaLambdaLambda is in the capital, Pristina, which just happens to have one of the youngest populations of any city in Europe. This FIAC debut reflects that in a big way: Both featured artists, Tatjana Danneberg and Dardan Zhegrova, are in their mid-20s.
Ms. Danneberg, an Austrian, works with a mix of gouache, inkjet printing, paint primer and solvent, vinyl, canvas and glue to create texturally unique tableaus. A quick look at the work of Mr. Zhegrova, a Pristina-born journalism-school dropout, might reveal floppy fabric sculptures lying in a corner as if they were too exhausted to go on, cartoony rabbit masks or thrillingly stylized videos that he calls visual poems. The gallery was founded three years ago by Isabella Ritter and Katharina Schendl.
Lelong & Co.
If this gallery is good enough for Yoko Ono, then it may even be good enough for Etel Adnan. Ms. Adnan, a 92-year-old Lebanese poet and essayist (she writes in Arabic, French and English), is also a visual artist extraordinaire. Roberta Smith, the New York Times art critic, has described her paintings as “stubbornly radiant abstractions.” Ms. Adnan herself likes to refer to her passion for “the immediate beauty of color.” The very recent works being shown at FIAC seem to imbue ordinary shapes with a remarkable energy. Lelong is also showing work by more than a dozen other artists, including David Hockney and Jean Dubuffet.
O.K., its name may sound like an eye care clinic, but this three-year-old Colombian gallery, inside a modest pistachio green building in San Felipe — a formerly industrial Bogotá neighborhood now packed with chic galleries — is abuzz with ambition and experimentation. Take Felipe Arturo, a native Colombian whose work will be at the fair. Sometimes he works in concrete, sometimes with glass jars. For his installation “La Disolución de la Geometría” (2014), he made do with ground coffee, raw sugar and powdered milk.
A Frenchman and two Americans are representing this gallery, which has locations in Mexico City and Los Angeles (a second-floor space on the edge of MacArthur Park). The hanging painted wool poncho is by Marc Camille Caimowicz, a Parisian known for performance and installation work.
“America 2017,” an acrylic that appears to depict a scalping, is from the North Dakota-born Antek Walczak, who made his name as a video artist. “Comrades, Not Colleagues” (colored pencil on paper, 2016) by Sam Pulitzer, a New York artist from New Hampshire, may remind some collectors of scary office politics.
Another thing the 2017 fair can brag about is the number of highly respected galleries with highly unusual names — like Truth and Consequences (Geneva) and Scai the Bathhouse (Tokyo). And there’s the Brussels gallery Sorry We’re Closed, which is presenting three artists: Eric Croes, a native Belgian, makes small ceramic, bronze and wood sculptures that can be simultaneously frightening, adorable and primitive. (Ever seen totem poles with Cyclops and snowman heads?) Yann Gerstberger, a Frenchman now living in Mexico City, creates intense tapestry-collages using lots of cotton and linoleum. Josh Sperling, a third-generation American artist, does both sculptures and sculptural paintings; with their squiggles and candy colors, they could be mistaken for oversize desserts.
Óscar Muñoz, the innovative, unconventional Colombian artist represented by this Paris gallery, never met a transient medium (water, dust, fire, even human breath) he didn’t like — or, apparently, want to make part of his work. Each is a way of looking at life’s transitory nature, memory and existence itself, but Mr. Muñoz didn’t need any of those for one of his works at this booth. “Domestico” (2013) is a marble shelf topped with an elegant arrangement of white marble picture frames. Every one of them is empty. The gallery is also presenting Lawrence Abu Hamdan, Alexander Apóstol and Voluspa Jarpa.
If you didn’t happen to get to Oregon or South Carolina to see the total solar eclipse in August, looking directly (without special glasses) at Lita Albuquerque’s “Eclipse” series may be the next best thing. Ms. Albuquerque, a native Southern Californian who also lived in Tunisia and France as a child, has a thing for the cosmos. Maybe it started with her “Stellar Axis” project in Antarctica. Her work, however, is highly accessible to the Earthbound; you don’t even have to know what the Fibonacci Sequence is to appreciate her “Fibonacci Lunar Activation” (2017). Kohn, her Los Angeles gallery, is also showing artists including Wallace Berman, Bruce Conner and Ed Ruscha at FIAC.