WASHINGTON — President Trump’s top economist said on Monday that a corporate tax cut being pushed by Republicans would increase a typical household’s income by $3,000 to $7,000 a year, highlighting a primary argument the administration will make in drafting and selling its tax plan.
A report by the White House Council of Economic Advisers is the first official calculation of the tax framework’s impact and its focus on cutting corporate rates underscores how central that effort is to the administration’s overall plan. Mr. Trump and Republican lawmakers have been selling their framework as a middle-class tax cut, saying the plan will put money back in workers’ pockets, including by lowering the corporate rate to 20 percent from 35 percent.
The Council of Economic Advisers report argues that high corporate taxes hurt workers in the form of smaller paychecks and that worker incomes rise sharply when corporate rates fall. It points to “the deteriorating relationship between wages of American workers and U.S. corporate profits” and says, essentially, that high corporate taxes have encouraged companies to shift capital abroad rather than flow profits to workers through pay increases.
Its conclusions drew swift condemnation from many Democrats and liberal economists, who accused the administration of “cherry-picking” economic evidence to sweeten Mr. Trump’s pitch to American workers.
Other research has cast doubt on the theory that businesses would pass tax savings on to their workers in the form of higher wages. A 2012 Treasury Department study, which Treasury recently removed from its website, found that less than a fifth of the corporate tax falls on workers. A Congressional Research Service report last month concluded that the effects of corporate taxes fell largely on high-income Americans, not average workers.
The council is led by Kevin Hassett, an economist whose previous academic work has argued that high corporate tax rates hurt workers.
The report does not attempt to analyze the full Republican proposal, which still lacks many key details, including the individual income ranges for tax brackets, the rules to qualify for certain lower business tax rates and possible methods to prevent multinational corporations from avoiding taxes by channeling profits to ultra-low-tax countries.
Instead, it focuses on one detail that Mr. Trump has insisted is not negotiable: the reduction in the top corporate income tax rate.
The report draws heavily on several economic studies that find results similar to Mr. Hassett’s, including that the so-called incidence of corporate taxation falls mainly on workers, meaning they have much to gain if such rates are cut. One of the studies it cites uses international data to estimate the magnitude of wage growth countries could initiate by cutting corporate rates; another performs a similar estimate using state-level data.
The council’s report concludes that if the corporate rate were cut to 20 percent, the median American household would earn $3,000 to $7,000 more than it otherwise would have. The median household earns just under $60,000 a year.
Another report issued on Monday from three economists at Boston University used an economic model to predict similarly large income gains from the Republican tax framework, though it warned that the plan would likely widen income inequality. That model assumes that the burden of corporate taxes falls almost entirely on workers.
A prominent conservative economist, Douglas Holtz-Eakin, the president of the American Action Forum in Washington and a former director of the Congressional Budget Office, said on Monday that the council’s projections represented “a reasonable, back-of-the envelope calculation,” drawn from empirical research.
He said gains to workers from a corporate rate cut would have a far greater impact on their living standards than the framework’s proposed changes to the individual income tax code, such as doubling the size of the standard deduction.
Liberal researchers accused the Trump administration on Monday of ignoring studies that showed few benefits from corporate tax cuts for average workers and relying on research that supported a politically desirable result. Seth Hanlon, a senior fellow at the Center for American Progress think tank and a former economic adviser to President Barack Obama, said Mr. Hassett had “cherry-picked” studies on the effects of corporate taxation on wages.
Jason Furman, a professor at the Harvard Kennedy School and a former Council of Economic Advisers chairman in the Obama administration, called Mr. Hassett’s findings “implausible” and noted they were rooted in studies that had not been published in major academic journals.
“This lies outside the mainstream of economists,” he said.