You asked; he answered.
Choire Sicha, who was hired in September as the new editor of The New York Times Styles section, sat down this week to address a long list of questions submitted by you, our readers.
What belongs, and doesn’t belong, in Styles? What’s on offer for older adults and younger children? And what’s the plan to fill the void left by Bill Cunningham?
The Styles section seems to have a very wide purview — fashion and designers of course, but also love, sex, drugs. In your mind, what are the boundaries of the Styles section? What, if anything, is decidedly not a Styles story?
Styles has two pillars: fashion news and society news (i.e., Weddings) — both of which, historically, are about big-ticket transactions. And then there’s the whole wide world between them.
Styles is the document of the conflicts between rich and poor, which is why our section makes absolutely everyone unhappy eventually.
I have a hard time imagining anything beyond the purview of Styles.
As a follow-up: We heard from readers that a recent profile of Susan Fowler, who helped bring down Uber’s C.E.O., wasn’t appropriate for Styles — that its inclusion there hinted at sexism. What’s your take?
I find it overtly sexist when people think Styles is lesser than Business, Sports, and whatever all these other sections are called.
How about some tips and advice about being stylish after the age of 65? Many of my friends love fashion and could use a few tips on “kicking it” at 70!
— Dorize, in Shawnee, Kan.
Among our 25 most-read stories since September were: this story about how we treat the facts of aging for women; this dreamy time that Maureen Dowd spent with Judi Dench; this conversation with Maye Musk, the 69-year-old model represented by IMG; and this conversation between Hillary Clinton (also 69) and America Ferrera.
So thank you. Looking into this has been helpful because I realize we should double down on the not-young.
It’s a little over a year since Bill Cunningham died. What (more) can be done to reinstate the raw creativity of people on the street (and otherwise off the radar of Times editors) into The Times? Rephrased more broadly, how can Styles become more about what is actually happening right now in the world as opposed to what editors and others there notice and find interesting about the world, often quite a bit after the fact?
We talk about this each day, and I’m really happy folks outside are thinking about this, too. For 2018 we’re working toward what we think is next in photography, in streetstyle, in the era of self-documentation — and in society.
One lesser-discussed aspect of Mr. Cunningham’s work was his devotion to noticing and praising philanthropy. He documented people in society because, and when, they gave. So, please hold! But know that these questions are among the biggest to us.
With global warming encroaching, what do I do with all this cashmere? I’m not kidding.
— Randall, in Atlanta, Ga.
I keep dressing for the calendar instead of what is clearly happening outside, and I’m so uncomfortable all the time. Fashion is about the lies we tell ourselves about who we are!
I’d like to see more visuals (photos and videos) when the topic is of a visual nature.
— Jules, in San Diego, Calif.
One hundred percent, yes. We are growing our visual team here, and they have only just begun to rock. A lot of our most exciting reporting work this week is about photographers and writers working together.
There seems to be a queer sensibility to most of the stories published in Styles — which, for the record, I love. Is this the kind of sensibility that you would like to cultivate more in the future, and how? Also, are you planning to expand the desk’s coverage on L.G.B.T.Q. lives?
Well, we try to save some of that gay stuff for Sports. But, joshing aside ...
Yes, we will cover queer lives and queer change, and we’re willing to take the heat from anyone as we report where others might fear to tread.
And this seems like a good time to say something. The outsize majority of writing, creating, assigning and decision-making done in Styles is by women. These women may or may not be L. or G. or B. or Q. or T. or (some other cool stuff as well), but I think it’s important to the sensibility and to the actuality of what we publish.
Is it awkward at all to work with people you probably gossiped about at Gawker?
— RW, in Hollywood, Fla.
Eh, everyone’s friend is everyone’s fool.
Please, please move women’s health and women’s political issues out of Style. The state of being a woman is not a style choice.
— Jonquil, Belmont, Calif.
I totally hear you that the name “Styles” can sometimes seem like a purple spotlight on a green bowl of fruit, or like a goofy headline on a serious story. We will aggressively cover politics, gender, sexuality, health, crime, shoes and contouring. These things make change in the world. You think Sports is going to cover all this?
What’s the point of the Styles section? To be navel gazing? To market trends from 24 months ago so as to sell advert space? To weigh down the paper with bad writing? Will the Styles section do anything to counter the fake news the Times publishes daily about “Russian meddling,” Wall Street, Syria, Ukraine and the state of the U.S. economy? What about the Metro reporting?
— JC, in New York, N.Y.
Well, for starters I don’t actually believe you’re reading us in print, but I will have a word with Metro when I’m done dealing with Sports.
This is my 20th year teaching high school in the small suburb upstate. I am a longtime subscriber to (and huge fan of) The New York Times, but most of my students find the paper out of touch with them and their lives. These students care passionately about many issues, and they would love relatable stories about styles. Why not study, research, and cover teen styles and trends — beyond just the head-turning, flashy styles of wealthy students?
— Mary Heveron-Smith, in Webster, N.Y.
The great recent transition in journalism has been from people reporting about “others” to a more diverse set of people reporting on a vaster array of communities and topics.
We are just beginning now to figure out how to write about, and for, young people. One early experiment here at Styles has been putting out calls on social media for young people to tell us what they think for themselves.
We have also been talking quite a bit about how people in college and in high school are manifesting different values than older generations. (As is supposed to happen!) We want to investigate and play with that in ways that aren’t dumb or insulting.
How are you going to make fashion accessible? 
— Lauren, in Brooklyn, N.Y.
As for us, we care about fashion as an enormous and significant industry. We care about fashion as one of the fabulous creative art endeavors of human society. We care about fashion as a reflection of wealth and social status. We care about how to help people look most like themselves. We care about sustainability and industrial practices. We care about retail stores, retail leases and marketing. We care about how young people and old people alike express themselves with fabrics, cuts, reuses and remixes. We care all the way from Target to Dior.
So most of all, I think the answer to your question is that the delivery of news is in the middle of a funky transition. The future of news personalization and delivery is going to solve almost every question I’m getting here, but particularly yours.
Want to see only photographs of new fashions for women at a certain price point, plus only makeup-related service journalism for people with darker skin and straight hair, and no stories about sports at all? (Same!) Do you want your politics by email and your fashion by Instagram? Do you want to set your “surprise me” setting at 5 percent, or 55 percent?
The future is going to be great — but, like Missy Elliott, it’s just always a little under construction.
I would like to see more articles about makeup and hair care for women of color. I don’t see much of that.
— Joal H. Broun, in Carrboro, N.C.
We’d like to double-down on ensuring that the “useful” stuff we publish is actually useful. We mean it to be! It’s important that we communicate expressly about who we’re addressing. And yes, we can and will do this.
How do you say your name? If we are going to have a relationship with you, we must know!
— Janet Traylor, in Phoenix, Ariz.
It’s too boring to talk about.
In conclusion: Thank you to all my friends in Sports for letting me make fun of them every day! You’re all great ... sports.