Jennifer Lopez may soon be bidding farewell to her Manhattan neighbors, who include Chelsea Clinton and the Nascar driver Jeff Gordon.
Ms. Lopez, the New York-born singer and actress, has decided to sell the duplex penthouse that she bought nearly three years ago at the Whitman, a condominium conversion with just four units, at 21 East 26th Street, between Madison and Fifth Avenues.
The asking price for this sprawling apartment atop the boutique building, overlooking Madison Square Park, will be $26.95 million, according to Adam D. Modlin, the founder of the Modlin Group, which is listing the property. The monthly carrying costs are $20,580, he said.
Ms. Lopez, who stars in the television crime drama “Shades of Blue” and just completed a Spanish-language album, had bought the unit directly from the sponsor in late 2014 for $20.16 million. She used a limited liability company in the transaction.
Mr. Modlin said he could not comment on whether his client, Ms. Lopez, planned to buy elsewhere in New York. Last year, Ms. Lopez, 48, reportedly paid $28 million for an eight-acre compound in the Bel Air neighborhood of Los Angeles with a large main house, guest cottages and an outdoor amphitheater.
Her Manhattan home is a bit more modest by comparison, though striking in its own right. It has four bedrooms, six full baths and two powder rooms over 6,540 square feet on the building’s fifth and sixth floors. There are also four terraces totaling 3,106 square feet.
The building has a 24-hour doorman, and this apartment has a private, keyed elevator and vestibule. The main entry on the lower level opens to a 45-by-29-foot great room with a domed geometric skylight. The space includes a formal dining area and living room, as well as several spots for lounging. Three sets of French doors, with arched transoms, lead to a south-facing terrace overlooking the park. There are additional views of the MetLife clock tower and the Flatiron Building.
“This is the crown jewel of the Whitman,” Mr. Modlin said of the apartment.
At the center of the loft-like home is an open kitchen, with another spacious dining area and built-in seating. The kitchen has marble countertops and a long breakfast bar with stools, as well as built-in pantries, stainless-steel Miele appliances, a wine cooler and white custom cabinets.
Beyond the kitchen, at the apartment’s north end, are three en-suite bedrooms, a laundry room and an en-suite staff room that could also be used as an office.
The apartment is decorated in an eclectic mix of contemporary and antique furniture and artwork. (The furnishings are not included in the sale.) Photographs of Ms. Lopez and her twin son and daughter, and at least one with her and the retired Yankee third baseman Alex Rodriguez, whom she has been dating, are in the main-level hallway.
Throughout the unit are oversize windows, wide-plank oak floors and beamed ceilings extending around 12.5 feet. The apartment also has a Crestron smart home system.
On the upper level, which is reached by two separate staircases, there is a spacious master suite and a media room with a powder room that could be converted into another master bedroom. The master suite has a seating area; two marble baths, one of which has a separate soaking tub; and a windowed dressing room filled with Ms. Lopez’s outfits and accessories.
There are three sizable terraces on this level — with outdoor furnishings, various plantings and even a small putting green. One terrace is off the master suite and looks out onto 27th Street, one faces the park off the media room and another is adorned with outdoor lights in between the media room and master suite.
The Georgian-style, limestone-and-brick Whitman, bordering the NoMad and Flatiron neighborhoods, was built in 1924 and was a showroom and headquarters for Clarence B. Whitman and Sons, a textile company. It was converted by the developer Mitchell Holdings into condos in 2013. “It’s a perfect blend of historical elements and architecture blended with modern amenities,” Mr. Modlin said.
Ms. Lopez’s penthouse unit was the last to sell in the building. The apartments purchased by Ms. Clinton, Mr. Gordon and John Silvetz, a hedge fund manager — at prices that were at or just below $10 million — all closed in 2013.