Exploring nearly 30 years of genre-bending, improvisational work.
Ideally this article would start with a single-word sentence. A single short word. A short word like “quiet” or, in musical terminology, “piano.” That word, “piano,” would be repeated. It would be repeated several times. As it was repeated, we would become conscious that it had changed, that in the process of being repeated it had changed, quietly, had expanded from quiet to quietly, imperceptibly. And as this imperceptible change became perceptible, so we would notice that another deeper aspect of its meaning — also simple — was making itself felt: a basic figure of speech, a bass figure. Alongside piano and bass something else would emerge, a rustle so faint it could be nothing, a nothing stirring into something that sounds breeze-scattered: a rattle, dimly perceived, moving so slowly it will have to develop significantly before it can be recognized — measured — by the form of time known, since the dawn of time, as rhythm and, later, as percussion. At some point — though the key point is that we will not be able to say with certainty when, where or how this point was achieved — piano, bass and drums will have moved either into a deep propulsive groove or into a maelstrom of relentless intensity. And then, after an extended stretch of time, the music will subside — or plunge — back to the silence from which it emerged faintly, quietly. So this article, ideally, would unfold in a single, long paragraph as a way of approximating the experience of listening to a typical performance by the Necks, the Australian trio who, for the last dozen years, have obsessed me to the point of mania.
On the other hand, their 2017 album, “Unfold,” comprises four separate tracks, each occupying one side of a double LP, so it would make topical sense to split this piece into four quarters, though that still leaves the problem of how to write about the band at all. Which is why, when I turned up to speak with them at their Airbnb in San Francisco on the day after the opening gig of their American tour this year, I began by asking how to express in words what they’d been up to for the last 30 years? How to describe what they’d played last night? The question was addressed to all three of them lined up on the sofa: Lloyd Swanton (born 1960, bass), Chris Abrahams (1961, piano) and Tony Buck (1962, drums), but it was Lloyd who stepped up — while remaining seated. Part of the attraction of music, he said, was precisely that it was nonverbal. Later, after the last gig of the American tour, at the Blue Whale in Los Angeles, I picked up on something else that had been said during our earlier conversation, about how each tour took on a distinctive character of its own. So how would Lloyd characterize the music of this particular tour? “That’s very difficult to verbalize,” he said, bringing us back, not untypically, to where we began, to the problem of where to begin.
In San Francisco, Chris mentioned how, from the start, they were interested in a kind of “textural stasis” — which seems as good a way as any of verbalizing what’s going on in the hourlong album. The stasis is accompanied by constant small changes that, in context, acquire disproportionately dramatic effects. At 10:07 into the track, Chris lays down a slow vamp that makes it seem they’re about to start really swinging. They never do, but the easygoing trance is subtly deepened; thereafter we are in a state of heightened attentiveness as to what might happen. Or, to put it more appropriately, we are conscious of the power of that which is dormant in what is already happening, let alone what might happen next.
What happens next is both more of the same — their next album, “Next,” opens with a few seconds of “Sex” — and somewhat anomalous in the sense that the record is quite conventional. There are six tracks, one of which, “The World at War,” even features a horn section. I’m guessing that the standout track, “Pele,” is named in homage to the mesmeric skills of the great Brazilian footballer. In his high-altitude glide through the 1970 World Cup finals in Mexico, Pele seemed to exist in a realm with more time — more time on the ball, more time to make up his mind — than his opponents. (Someone should put together a compilation of highlights of Pele in action and cut it to this track and post it on YouTube.) There is a similar flow and ease to music that blossoms into lavish rhythmic expansiveness. The track is 28 minutes long, building continuously before moving into headlong rapture, which was, of course, implicit in everything that had gone before. And because of that, conversely, even this gorgeous climax seems touched — even enhanced? — by restraint.
“Pele” is one of the most lyrically expressive pieces in the whole of the Necks’ output, though a subsequent album, “Aquatic” (1994), and their first live release, “Piano, Bass, Drums” (1998), each share its hypnotic rhythmic propulsion. The Necks had by now developed a cult following, and while they had not become a household name nationally, let alone internationally, it would be pretty safe to characterize their work to this point as jazz. What, after all, could be more essentially jazzy than a piano, bass and drums combo? Perhaps a trio so committed to the ideal of improvisation that none of their music is composed.
When they arrived at the Basement club in Sydney on Sept. 25, 1996, for a gig that was recorded and released as “Piano, Bass, Drums,” they knew exactly what they were going to do. They were going to take the stage — as they still do — with no idea of what was going to happen or what they would play, not even who would hit the first note. Free jazz! Collective improvisation! Spontaneous composition!
Now the claim made frequently on behalf of free playing is that everyone solos all the time. The Necks turn this inside out: no one solos — all the time. If Louis Armstrong established and defined jazz as a soloist’s art, then even at the start, at their jazziest, the Necks weren’t playing jazz. Hence the exclamation of my friend — the friend who introduced me to jazz in the 1980s — when we saw them play at Pizza Express in Soho, London, in 2003: “They’ve completely reinvented the idea of the jazz trio!” Since then we have both reconsidered this admiring appraisal. It sold them short, was not nearly admiring enough and did not take into account what is often a marked split between how they perform live and what they record in the studio. Live they are always just piano, bass and drums, starting quietly, simply, slowly. But the first thing of theirs I ever heard, on the radio in 1999, kicked off at breakneck speed, and the sound — with Hammond, Rhodes, keyboards, samples, electric bass and overdubbing — was unavoidably reminiscent of electric Miles Davis from the early 1970s: the shimmer of “In a Silent Way” at the pace of “Turnaround” or “Right Off.” I was curious enough to buy the album “Hanging Gardens,” but even after multiple listens I remained fascinated rather than devoted. The full conversion occurred in two stages: the gig at Pizza Express (after which I sought out the older albums) and the release in 2003 of “Drive By.” As the title suggests, “Drive By” is a journey through an audible landscape that is almost entirely flat but never featureless. There’s a sci-fi quality to the electronic keyboards and programming at the beginning, as if the drive might take us to the outskirts of Roswell or some other desert town, possibly abandoned, where something may have happened, or may yet happen. As the pulse of expectation builds, we seem poised to move into full-on dance music. And then. ...
From the many great experiences I’ve had listening — and driving — to “Drive By,” I’ll mention two as vicarious descriptions of the music itself. One afternoon at Burning Man in 2005, I played “Drive By” on a friend’s tremendous sound system. After the electronic and keyboard buildup, at 7:38, an immense bass pattern surged across the playa, apprehended visually as the heat rippling through the white desert. And then Chris laid over all this a piano melody of such gorgeous clarity it was as if a mirage had come to life — and would continue to live for a further 52 minutes.
Ten years later I was driving with friends from Austin to Enchanted Rock in Texas, which is like a modest version of Uluru or Ayers Rock in Australia. We were 30 minutes into “Drive By,” lost. The car was full of the music when we wound down the window to speak to a biker on a snarling hog, his face entirely hidden by full helmet and dark visor. It seemed highly likely that the visor, when lifted, would reveal a skull or no head at all, just the void into which the music was leading. He turned off the engine and lifted the visor to reveal a rugged Texan face and white beard. He then proceeded to give us directions, which would take us “the prettiest way,” on a road fringed by fields blooming with wildflowers.
The Necks are not careerists. “Hanging Gardens” was followed by “Aether,” a whole album consisting entirely of variations on four shimmering chords. “Drive By,” with its potential to become a crossover hit, was followed shortly by a difficult double CD (“Mosquito/See Through”). By now I knew how foolish it was to try to guess what they might do next, but “Chemist” broke the molds of expectation in several ways. There were three tracks, each clocking in at a mere 20 minutes, on at least two of which the drummer (Tony) overdubbed surf guitar. The last of these tracks, “Abillera,” didn’t just swing; it rocked. The influence of Krautrock, of Neu! in particular, was unmistakable, but as often happens when the critic spots an unmistakable influence, it turns out that Tony hadn’t ever listened to Neu! The Necks had moved far from the minimalist grooves of the earlier records, from post-jazz to a kind of post-rock, but they were in the midst of a deeply creative groove, releasing masterpiece after masterpiece. The live album “Townsville” had none of the narrative trajectory that made “Drive By” and “Chemist” so enthralling — and that, I realized eventually, was its beauty. To experience “Townsville” properly is to give way entirely to the oceanic sense.
“Silverwater” (2009) followed, an epic reminder that they both were and were not the band that recorded “Sex.” Featuring further evidence of the drummer’s guitar prowess, “Silverwater” succeeded in being both fragmented and cohesive. After about 50 minutes, you could be forgiven for thinking that the record was coming to an end. Everything subsides to a series of low electronic beeps, like a faint message from a stricken space station, picked up randomly, so long after transmission as to serve as evidence of its doom. Except records by the Necks change radically according to the system on which you’re hearing them. On about the 10th listen, through headphones, I detected, so far back in the mix it seemed to have leaked through the inadequate sound proofing of a neighboring sound system, the faint bleed of funk. Scientists are still poring over this discovery, trying to establish if, in the last phases of its existence, a section of the space station was given over to a party.
We scored great seats, three rows from the front, and I was able to make sure, without anyone noticing (even though everyone noticed), that I got the best seat of all, with the clearest view — of the resting instruments — of any of us. Ever since I went to my first rock concert, Family in Oxford in about 1972, the thrill of what was about to happen was symbolized by the dormant power of the vacant drum kit, the way it sat there like a throne to its imminent rhythmic might. That sense of the instruments lying in wait is even more pronounced with a gig by the Necks as we wait for music to come into existence for the first time.
The gigs the band played immediately before this tour were in large venues, opening for Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds, in Australia. This brought the Necks to the attention of a new audience, but it’s in places like the Lab that they really come into their own: 150 people, ready to focus on every moment, every note. Typically, bands “tour” an album, showcasing its contents, advertising it. The Necks do not do this, of course, but one track from the new album, “Blue Mountain,” bears a sufficiently close resemblance to some of the performances from the recent tour to permit me to conflate the transient experience of a live performance with repeated exposures to the documentary evidence of the record.
They take the stage at the Lab, Lloyd looking like a tall backwoodsman with balding head and full beard; Chris, bald, bespectacled, austerely professorial; Tony, white-haired and dressed, by comparison, quite fashionably in a polka-dot shirt. Chris sits with his back to the other two as if cutting himself off, but it’s a setup that enables them to hear one another better — and responsiveness to one another is at the heart of the performance. Tennis players, by the time they come on court, are already halfway into the realm of intense concentration required by the coming sets. Preparation for the Necks involves shutting their eyes for five seconds, waiting to see who will serve. Chris touches the piano keys.
Instead of the band gradually stretching out and easing into a groove, there is a steady creation and increase of internal pressure. From Tony there tends, at the outset, to be a lot of shaking, rattling, scraping and shuffling. It’s easy to hear this as aimless — a sonic bush through which it will be necessary to beat a path rhythmically. Gradually the impediments to rhythm emerge as its formative parts. Insistently repeated press rolls on the snare generate the need to break out — rhythmically — while simultaneously incarcerating this need. The same thing is happening with the tidal moan of Lloyd’s bowed bass, a sublimated pulse that manifests itself as a refusal to fully express itself. At some point the yearning is answered, at first chthonically, by the bass drum, later by the insistent jump of the high-hat. But the forward momentum remains contained.
So there is a piling up of forces, like the roiling storm clouds of a weather system, already in our midst but continuing to approach. The pressure continues to mount, to bear down and, partly through the immense shimmer of cymbals, to expand. The piano suggests what might remain of the lyrical after all else — including much of what constitutes lyricism — has been corroded. Think of all that aural starlight in jazz (“Stella by Starlight”!). The glimmer, here, is of ruined starlight. Contained in the piano is a scattered residue of jazz, traces of a lost blues. You focus on what Chris is doing, and then your attention is drawn to the drums, then over to the bass and back to Chris, who has jabbed the piano into an off-the-cuff Reichian lockdown. There are no solos, but the ball is being passed back and forth constantly. At some point it becomes impossible to tell who is doing what.
And not only that. There appear, through some weird alchemy of harmonics, phantom instruments. A cello? A human voice? A violin? Hearing such things, wanting to have the source of these auditory hallucinations verified, you look to see what is happening, but there are just these three middle-aged blokes, playing piano, bass and drums, conjuring things that do not exist. There are also moments that make you aware that your attention has wandered. Is this just about refocusing as a listener, or has the band, having drifted into a comparatively slack interlude, done something deliberately to pull you back into the trance? The Necks, these days, do not swing, but there is a constant swelling, an abundance of lateral movement that is manifest also as its opposite: a tightening of the screw, locking you inside the music, becoming part of its rise, its eventual fall and final fade.
At the end of the first set, Lloyd introduces the band and mentions that CDs are for sale. With their minimalist packaging and discreet information (the recent ones don’t explain who’s playing what), the CDs and the new double LP are consummately cool, eminently desirable, but the economic aftermath and interlude are relatively modest given the profundity of the experience that has preceded it. While the merchandise is being shifted, the band is more than ready to mingle, all the while displaying a distinct lack of any wish to be revered. At the Blue Whale in 2016, Lloyd came up to say hello. I was talking to a guy sitting in the row in front who had seen the band the last time they played in Los Angeles. He wasn’t sure when that was.
“But too long,” he said.
“Right,” Lloyd agreed.
“He was actually referring to the length of the set,” I said.
“Yeah?” he said. “I thought he meant your last book. Pretty surprising, since it was only about 150 pages.” In my book, so to speak, this represents the ideal behavior of the artist: You create this very serious work, and then you shoot the breeze as though the whole world is a pub in the Outback where no one cares what you do as long as you get your round in. Until it’s time for the second set.
The Necks are not improvising from existing tunes but creating from scratch, every night. Except now, in their 30th year, they are able to draw on their own history the way jazz musicians have relied on the history of the form, on what has been done — sometimes composed — by others. The idea in this classic jazz situation is not to copy or emulate but to distinguish yourself, to establish your individual identity by reference to what has gone before. The Necks could be said to do versions of — to improvise on — their past (entirely improvised) performances. In other words, they improvise on their own history. Each night is a slightly more familiar exploration or mapping of the unknown. Their career is therefore expressed in miniature in each piece, and each piece is a condensation of their career. The foundations have to be endlessly re-established, otherwise they collapse (into chaos) or cement themselves into cliché or convention.
“It depends what you mean by a bad night,” Tony said.
“Like a heart attack?” Chris said.
“You could get a perfect storm of negative elements,” Lloyd said, before it occurred to me that there was a corollary to my line of questioning. If they are all on good form, it still does not necessarily mean that it will be a great gig by the Necks. And needless to say, what they do is not to everyone’s taste. I reminded them of a gig in Brighton, England, in 2002 — the second time I saw them, before my conversion — when, the moment the first set ended, a member of the audience leapt to his feet and started hurling abuse, telling them and us what a bunch of crap it had been. (The guys took it with surprisingly good grace, seemed entirely unperturbed.) For the record, and to prove that I am not a mindless devotee, their discography contains a few duds: “Silent Night,” “Photosynthetic” and “Vertigo” do nothing for me. And a member of my little group at the Lab, having prepared for our evening out with a noseful of cocaine, was less than enthusiastic. “He does everything with those drums except play them,” he remarked of Tony, rather wittily. I was unsure, when he went on to say that seeing the Necks was just like seeing the Grateful Dead, whether he was joking, trying to make a serious point or testing the limits of my tolerance. Either way, coke is a wretchedly inappropriate drug for experiencing the Necks.
Impatience prevents you from seeing — hearing — that what you are waiting for is already happening (not a bad test-definition of the avant-garde). But there is scope for anxiety on behalf of the participating listener, because the gathering intensity is underwritten by the potential for dissipation. And any given performance makes you wonder how any part of it could be different. This is the possibility that the performance has to raise on the way to becoming that which it was. So the answer is always, Yes, it could have been very different, at almost every stage. Could it have been better? In retrospect maybe, but there are long interludes — sometimes lasting the entire length of the set — when you are left to reflect instead on how much was latent in that first note or chord or rattle of percussion. To what extent did that note — by Chris, say — determine what they all went on to do? The sense, in this genealogy of the moment, is of unanticipated inevitability.
They have to feel uninhibited, to be free of the judgments that we listeners often feel bound to make. Was the first set on Saturday in San Francisco better than the second? (My little group of six was split straight down the middle, three and three.) Was Sunday better than Saturday? This is not a problem for the band; they have trouble remembering what they did on a given night.
In the course of thinking about — which means listening to — the Necks and their recent concerts, I’ve often remembered that idea of John Berger’s in “The Moment of Cubism”: “The moment at which a piece of music begins provides a clue to the nature of all art.” But it’s the moment after each piece of music, each set from the Necks, that I think of now. As the music faded into silence, instead of a rush to applaud, the audience waited, respectfully acknowledging that the altered silence was itself still a part of the performance. The silence meant that, on behalf of the performers, the audience wrapped the gift of the music they had received. Only then could the applause begin. That’s when we stood up and applauded.