When President Trump announced his long list of immigration demands on Tuesday, it threw another wrench into the fraught negotiations over fixing the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program, an Obama-era policy that until last month protected some young, undocumented immigrants from deportation.
But if the Washington deal-making drags on too long, it could be disrupted by a different force: a federal judge in Brooklyn who has sternly warned that should policy makers prove unable to repair the program, commonly known as DACA, he might have to do it.
Judge Garaufis has even professed confusion over Mr. Trump’s tweets about DACA, saying that the president’s apparent desire to save the program does not square with his government’s continued efforts to rescind it. But perhaps most forebodingly, the judge has stated several times that while he would prefer “the political branches” to resolve the issue, if that becomes impossible, he may have to impose his own solution.
A Democrat appointed by President Clinton, Judge Garaufis has found himself in a position to guide DACA’s fate because two linked lawsuits have landed in his courtroom. The suits, filed separately last month by a coalition of immigration lawyers and by more than a dozen state attorneys general, have challenged Mr. Trump’s repeal of DACA by arguing that it is an “arbitrary” exercise of power and betrays an “animus” toward Latinos. Similar suits have also been filed in California.
Judge Garaufis has acknowledged that he is unlikely to decide on the merits of the lawsuits until early next year. And he may find that the United States Appeals Court for the Second Circuit does not take kindly to his rhetoric or eventual decision.
But even though the case has only started moving forward, he and Magistrate Judge James Orenstein, a junior judge who is assisting him, have already hinted that they support the plaintiffs. The two jurists, who are working together to complete the case before March 5, when deportations could begin, have repeatedly taken to task — and even berated — the lawyers from the Justice Department who are arguing on the government’s behalf.
The DACA case has now entered its discovery phase. And on Wednesday, against the wishes of the government, Judge Orenstein ruled at another hearing that the plaintiffs could take depositions from two administration officials: Donald Neufeld, an associate director in the United States Citizenship and Immigrations Services, and Gene Hamilton, the deputy chief of staff for policy at the Department of Homeland Security.
In making his ruling, Judge Orenstein, like Judge Garaufis, had harsh words for the government lawyers, chiding them for writing poor briefs and for showing up in court unprepared.
On Wednesday, his target was Stephen M. Pezzi, a Justice Department trial lawyer, who has on occasion been unable to answer direct questions from the bench, saying that he first had to consult with officials in Washington. In a remarkably firm move, Judge Orenstein raised concerns that Mr. Pezzi and his colleagues might, through their delays, be engaging in a “calculated filibuster to avoid judicial review.” Clearly annoyed, he warned them not to do so.
