543 pp. Ecco/HarperCollins Publishers. $27.99.
Every couple of decades the nation revisits, publicly and painfully, its oldest violence. The wounds of race — still open, still weeping over the course of 400 years — preoccupy our literature for a time. This is a good thing, given that the wages of silence are most certainly death. At its best, historical fiction isn’t a stump speech or a school lesson, but it sure does illuminate the past, give soul and body to our history so we can sojourn with it a while, in privacy and contemplation. As a useful byproduct, it gives us a fighting chance at recognizing the past’s reverberations in our present. And reverberate it does.
We suspect that Genus is innocent, and indeed, he is. We hope his luridly described murder by lynching proves more than a mere point of departure for Henderson’s sprawling Southern Gothic family drama. Genus was a field hand on the farm that Elma Jesup sharecrops alongside her father, Juke, and a mute black girl, 14-year-old Nan Smith. The girls live like sisters and, at least when they are home on the farm, the racial lines that divide them are blurred by affection and proximity.
Elma, hoping to trade the sharecropping life for something finer, reluctantly succumbs to the advances of the vile Freddie Wilson, grandson to the town big shot. At the same time, Nan falls in love with Genus. The girls become pregnant and give birth three days apart. At Juke’s insistence, for disturbing reasons that become clear as the novel unfolds, Elma claims motherhood to both Nan’s biracial son and her own white daughter. The Cotton County folks, with only an exception or two, fall for the story and the “twins” become a local phenomenon: Freddie is father to one child and the “rapist” Genus is father to the other. From there, the lively plot hurtles forward until all of the gruesome secrets of the Jesup household are revealed.
Cotton County is full of the sort of folks we might expect from a novel set in the rural South. Freddie’s wealthy grandfather George Wilson is a (barely) gentler version of Calvin Candie, the brown-toothed, debauched plantation owner from “Django Unchained.” He gives Juke free run of his farm because the real profits come from Juke’s famous bootlegged gin, made from a still in Wilson’s woods. There’s the corrupt Sheriff Cleave, whom Wilson bribes with hooch. And a town drunk named Wolfie who periodically ends up in jail to dry out and play cards with the sheriff and deputy.
But Henderson’s empathy isn’t always adequate to the job of parsing her characters’ experience. As we learn, Nan’s mother, Ketty, cut out her child’s tongue with a scalpel when Nan was a baby. Before Nan’s birth, Ketty is involved in two extramarital relationships with white men, neither of which is entirely consensual. When she becomes pregnant, Ketty spirals into depression. Years later she is afflicted with the tongue cancer that runs in the family, the illness from which, we are told early in the novel, she hoped to save Nan by cutting out her tongue. Yet Nan’s mutilation and Ketty’s violent despair never quite ring true. In the end I had to wonder why the only living black woman in this novel is rendered doubly powerless by being unable to speak.
What’s at issue here isn’t just the fact of Genus’s death, which is tragic enough, but rather the fact that he is lynched, too potent a symbol of racial terrorism in the South to evoke without the proper gravitas. I don’t mean to imply that the subject is untouchable, but it is the case that we have become so accustomed to black death that it is often used too casually.
Part of the problem here may be the novel’s desire to correct the past, in a sense. After Freddie Wilson lynches Genus, he goes on the run for fear of punishment. One doubts that in 1930s rural Georgia the white grandson of the most powerful man in town would be so terrified of serious legal repercussion that he’d go on the lam for six months. Well intentioned though it may be, that sort of corrective gesture makes our long and difficult racial past a lot easier for contemporary readers to digest. It shouldn’t be; white people are still murdering black folks and nobody seems to be running from their crimes.
Beyond these larger social implications, there is the simpler matter of compromised plausibility and the danger of narrative convenience. Freddie’s flight from Cotton County and subsequent return is just such a convenience. In another example, Nan, her son and her father (returned after years of self-imposed exile) settle on the farm they sharecropped — given to them in deed by George Wilson in a bout of self-recrimination. In yet another example, Oliver, the class-conscious town doctor’s son, writes love letters to Elma after having seen her only once: “It occurred to Elma that the letters might be just that. That he was asking her what their life together might look like.” The letters, and the bequeathing of the farm, are lovely happenings. They make us feel better, but I don’t quite believe them.
“The Twelve-Mile Straight” is well worth reading. It’s a page turner, a novel to settle into. But good intentions can’t replace its responsibility to the complexities of its subject matter. Heart-wrenching though it may be, diving into certain waters requires reckoning with the creatures in those depths.