Was anyone ever so wrong?
 But she has never stopped speaking to us.
There have been the posthumously published poems, journals and juvenilia. And she’s been famously spoken for — villainized and valorized in a plethora (Plathora?) of biographies and critical studies, a film, an opera. She’s been made to stand in for the plight of the female writer, the plight of the wronged woman, the plight of mental illness and — in “The Silent Woman,” Janet Malcolm’s survey of this hive of activity — the very problem of biography itself.
Plath’s letters have been collected for the first time, edited by Peter K. Steinberg, an archivist specializing in Plath, and Karen V. Kukil, the editor of Plath’s journals and curator of the Plath collection at Smith College. The first volume — attractive, immense and done up in trendy millennial pink — is just out.
But it does set the stage for the strangeness of these letters, first glimpsed when Plath’s mother, Aurelia, published a selection of them in “Letters Home” (1975). Her intention was to humanize Plath, to reveal her as a healthy all-American girl. Alas, it went very much the other way — the “psychic osmosis” between mother and daughter, of which Aurelia was so proud, was perceived to be pathological, and perhaps even the root cause of Plath’s depression.
Whatever the diagnosis, to speak of Plath’s letters is to speak of her relationship with Aurelia, to whom she wrote twice a day at times — long letters that swarmed to fill every inch of space on the page and trailed onto the envelopes.
The journals, published unabridged in 2000, were, of course, a darker place. There her violent imagination could bloom. Her pet insult was “smiler” — for the false and appeasing; her own inclination as well, we learn in the letters. She would admit, in passing, to her loneliness in college before screwing on a smile: “My room is lovely.” “The campus is utterly lovely.” “The freshmen are dears.” “Lisa is very sweet.” Even a suicide attempt is glossed over. “My escapade,” she called it in a letter to a friend.
It’s not Plath’s death necessarily, or even the dissolution of her marriage, but her doubleness that’s been the abiding mystery. In his foreword to her journals, Hughes wrote: “I never saw her show her real self to anybody — except, perhaps, in the last three months of her life.” It’s a line picked up by critics from Elizabeth Hardwick to Janet Malcolm, this belief in the authentic Plath, the aggressive genius lurking behind the polite banalities, that finally flowered in the final poems — the “blood jet,” she called them.
The achievement of this avalanche of letters — 1,300 pages and counting — is that it disabuses everyone of the notion that Plath wasn’t aware of her contradictions or in (some) control of them. She referenced her two selves every time she went from blonde to brunette (“I’m rather sure that my brown-haired personality will win out this year,” she wrote to a boyfriend. “Gone is the frivolous giddy gilded creature who careened around corners at the wheel of a yellow convertible.”) Her honors thesis was, in part, on Dostoevsky’s “The Double,” after all, in which a self splits, and one kills the other.
