Legislators in three Midwestern states are taking steps to protect consumers who buy cheap and often rundown homes from investors through seller-financed deals or rent-to-own leases.
The legislative initiatives in Ohio, Illinois and Michigan come as the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau continues to investigate the activities of some of the larger firms in the seller-financing home business.
Sales of rundown homes on long-term installment contracts — sometimes called contracts for deeds or land contracts — to people who could not qualify for a traditional mortgage are surging in several states, especially in the Midwest.
Seller-financed deals can provide a path to homeownership because the monthly payments can be less than the prevailing monthly rents in some neighborhoods.
But such transactions have had a long history of abuse: Buyers can be easily evicted for missing just a single payment, and the homes are often sold in a state of disrepair.
Nonetheless, the deals have made a comeback over the past decade because the housing crisis created a ready supply of foreclosed homes for speculators and investment firms to buy and then resell.
In Ohio, Michele Lepore-Hagan, a Democratic state representative from Youngstown, introduced a bill on Tuesday that would require property owners to solve any housing code violations and pay outstanding fines before selling the homes to buyers in contract-for-deed transactions or in similarly structured rent-to-own leases.
Illinois this year enacted a law, which will go into effect in January, that strengthens disclosure requirements with seller-financed deals. The measure, which had bipartisan support, gives buyers more time to come up with the money for a missed payment to prevent sellers from quickly evicting them.
And in Michigan, a group of state legislators led by Steve Bieda, a Democratic senator from suburban Detroit, has been working on a bill that would address similar abuses with contracts for deeds.
In Detroit, for example, cheap homes sold on contracts for deeds have consistently outpaced the number of homes sold in the city with traditional mortgages.
The flurry of legislative activity follows a series of articles by The New York Times that shed light on the resurgence of the contract-for-deed market. The Times found that a number of national firms were selling homes in seller-financed deals without fully disclosing that some properties had housing code violations or thousands of dollars in unpaid taxes and other fees. Some homes that were sold were even condemned and slated for potential demolition.
The series prompted officials in Wisconsin and Cincinnati to file civil lawsuits against several firms. Housing lawyers in Atlanta and Indianapolis also have filed lawsuits that contend firms operating in those cities have taken advantage of lower-income buyers.