Business school case studies involve a wide range of situations in which critical decisions have been or must be made. The best cases provide all the essential background and detail that the decision-maker had at his or her disposal, with enough narrative momentum to make it engaging — but without implying a judgment or suggesting a preferred path.
In the classroom, cases can yield surprising and profound insights from the student conversation managed by the instructor. Some cases include “teaching notes,” which are a kind of answer key for educators provided by the case authors. In contrast to the uniformity of the format and quality of the cases themselves, these notes are extremely diverse in their approaches and usefulness.
Part of this unevenness simply reflects that a well-written case can be used for a wide variety of purposes — some never envisioned by the writer — making a comprehensive teaching note difficult. But it also reflects that writing a great case and effectively analyzing one involve fundamentally different skill sets.
That is laid bare in “Forged in Crisis: The Power of Courageous Leadership in Turbulent Times,” by Professor Nancy Koehn, a historian at Harvard Business School.
But the three new profiles selected by Professor Koehn — on author and conservationist Rachel Carson, Dietrich Bonhoeffer, a German theologian; and the abolitionist Frederick Douglass — are so far-flung that it is never completely clear what precisely is meant by “leadership” for the purposes of the book.
It is an expansive enough definition to encompass both the courage of Carson in completing her environmentalist masterwork, “Silent Spring,” in the face of debilitating and ultimately terminal illness and the daring of Shackleton in successfully guiding his surviving crew across the Antarctic to safety. But it is hardly a unifying concept around which to develop specific strategies for becoming a leader.
Each of the five stand-alone case studies are well-written and interesting. What significance they have in common, however, and why these in particular were chosen remains a mystery. The handful of summary pages that begin and end each profile, and the regular interruptions asserting that the protagonist’s example provides a “key lesson for today’s leaders,” do not really add much.
The issue isn’t that these aphorisms are inherently objectionable. It is that they distract from the otherwise interesting stories, which often are not the most compelling demonstrations of the adages in question.
Some of what are identified as shared leadership qualities appear to flow more from the particular set of people whom Professor Koehn decided to examine closely rather than speak to some intrinsic nature of leadership.
There is also something circular in the suggestion that “the power of writing and writing well” is an important inherent leadership lesson — “Leaders today need to consider the kind of writing these five people did” — rather than the unsurprising result of the fact she chose to profile five individuals who happened to be adept writers.
This general description of how human beings develop seems reasonable enough. But the argument that each of those profiled had succeeded in cultivating some specific shared set of transcendental qualities called “effective leadership” is not convincing.
In the case of Shackleton, Professor Koehn is strangely silent, beyond a passing reference to ongoing financial problems, about his string of spectacularly disastrous business ventures outside of the expeditions that are her focus.
The point isn’t that these detract from the extraordinary accomplishment of saving his crew. Rather it is that there is something misguided in the notion that a single type of leadership — however defined or developed — would be equally effective in accomplishing every kind of task and objective.
Several years ago, Professor Koehn apparently came close to releasing these profiles with a different publisher and a more modest subtitle: “The Making of Five Legendary Leaders.” There is much to enjoy in the current version, but I have a feeling I would have preferred the earlier effort.
While there are certainly shared qualities worth exploring among exceptional individuals, as with the best Harvard Business School cases, the greatest benefit usually comes from letting these extraordinary stories speak for themselves.