I spent my early childhood in a mountainous region in the southern Dominican Republic, living in a house made of wooden planks with a tin roof. My parents had emigrated to New York, so my grandmother was charged with taking care of me.
One day, she was boiling root vegetables over a fire under a star fruit tree when I came running toward her and fell into the flames before she could catch me. At the hospital, doctors removed the blistered skin on my chest and left arm and prescribed a cream to help me heal. My grandmother accelerated the process by applying cod liver oil to the wound and covering it with warmed plantain leaves to minimize scarring. But the incident scared my parents, and soon after, they hustled to bring me to live with them in New York. I was 3 years old.
Or at least that’s the story I’ve been told. I do not remember the plane ride, much less the star fruit and coconut trees in my grandmother’s yard. And because I was undocumented — a so-called Dreamer — I would not return to the Dominican Republic again for almost 15 years.
Once I arrived in the United States — my parents rented a small room for the three of us in a basement in Queens — my undocumented status was like a net. It was always there, but I only really noticed it when I was caught in its mesh.
For most of my childhood, my parents worked on becoming legal residents. My mother ended up moving back to the Dominican Republic, but when I was 13, my dad became a citizen. Soon after, he petitioned for me.
At 17, after a process that included a paternity test and hundreds of dollars in application fees, I was finally given an appointment at the United States consulate in Santo Domingo. My father was very nervous about my visit to the Dominican Republic: He worried that once there, I would not be able to return. But I was approved for permanent residency and after a little more than the requisite five-year wait, I became a citizen last year, just in time to vote in my first presidential election.
Since getting my green card at 18, I’ve watched the Dreamers’ plight from the sidelines. I rarely expressed support on social media. I never became politically involved. And I didn’t write about it publicly until Donald Trump was elected on an anti-immigrant platform.
I have felt a keen sense of survivor’s guilt for escaping from the shadows just in time for it to matter. I was underage the entire time I was undocumented, so the government did not consider me responsible for my actions. I obtained legal residency in January of my senior year of high school, in time to apply for federal financial aid and receive ample support to attend college. And most important, I entered the job market unhindered by my legal status.
And yet, despite these privileges, I always shied away from calling the United States “our” or “my” country, as so many Dreamers have done since the Dream Act was proposed in the early 2000s. Before I had my naturalization certificate, how could I be sure that I truly belonged? How could the Dreamers know it so resolutely?
In his book “The Ethics of Immigration,” the political scientist Joseph Carens argues that once immigrants settle in a new country, they acquire, by virtue of their integration, a “social membership.” This status, he says, should grant them the right to legalization. He compares immigration enforcement to the laws that govern any other crime. “There is a parallel here between statutes of limitations for criminal offenses and a policy of not deporting long settled irregular migrants. Most states recognize that the passage of time matters morally,” he writes.
Of the approximately 11 million undocumented immigrants in the United States, 66 percent have been here for at least a decade, with a median stay of 13.6 years. Young Dreamers have an even stronger claim: According to Tim K. Wong, a professor at the University of California, San Diego, of the 800,000 participants in the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program for young immigrants, 33.7 percent have lived here for more than two decades, with an average length of stay of 18.8 years.
What will happen to these Dreamers under the Trump administration is still unclear. Last week, President Trump gave Congress a list of demands — conditions for his approval of any legislation to continue to protect Dreamers. They include the construction of his promised border wall, limits on family reunification and the denial of federal grants to “sanctuary cities,” which have vowed to protect Dreamers and other immigrants.
I am no longer at risk of getting trapped in the net. And I feel guilty that I can no longer fully relate to my fellow Dreamers. But disengagement now doesn’t feel like an option.
In my naturalization ceremony, surrounded by emblems of American patriotism, I realized I’d felt suspended in the air my entire life. When I was handed the naturalization certificate, I finally felt grounded. I pledged my allegiance to this country and promised to support and defend our Constitution “against all enemies, foreign and domestic.” I didn’t know then what that defense would look like. I have a clearer idea now.