EDGEWATER, N.J. — The developers snatched up possibly the last large building site here on New Jersey’s red-hot gold coast, a weed-covered, waterfront parcel offering spectacular views of Manhattan.
They devised a plan they thought local officials could not refuse: They would create two parks, a waterfront esplanade, space for retail, a ferry terminal, an elementary school, and 1,863 apartments in five high-rise buildings, including 375 units for low- and moderate-income tenants. The project would pay an estimated $12 million a year in taxes.
Instead of embracing the plan, Michael McPartland, the mayor of Edgewater, and the town council moved last month to seize the 19-acre parcel under eminent domain to construct a new Department of Public Works building and a public park. The developers’ proposal was too big, the mayor said, and would increase the population of an already congested Edgewater by 30 percent or more.
The developer is vowing to fight.
The battle in Edgewater is just the latest skirmish in a war over affordable housing and overdevelopment that has broken out from Brooklyn to San Francisco. Major cities, and towns as small as Edgewater — a 3.5-mile long, two-block wide community wedged between the Hudson River and the Palisades cliffs — are dealing with an unprecedented wave of luxury development that is transforming the social fabric, as housing prices soar beyond the reach of many families.
But the developers say the mayor has refused to meet with them, although they have met with the city’s planning office several times since 2014, when they signed a contract to buy the land — a former oil tank farm — from Hess Corporation for $25 million; Edgewater proposes to pay that same amount to take the property under eminent domain.
As Hess cleared the site of toxic materials, the developers put together their plan, based in part on variances the town gave to other developers of former industrial sites. Although the land was zoned for industrial or commercial use, they designed a project that would generate the highest returns: residential buildings up to 25 stories tall, which would be the tallest in town. They included affordable housing, said Edward K. Elanjian, one of the developers, based on the borough’s master plan and the zoning variances granted to other projects.
Mr. Elanjian’s company, EnviroFinance Group of Denver, bought the site, known as 615 River Road, in partnership with Maxal Group, a real estate company in Manhattan.
The developers have found an ally in the Fair Share Housing Center, a nonprofit that has sued towns to enforce the New Jersey’s Mount Laurel doctrine, which requires towns to establish zoning that allows for affordable housing and to build a certain number of units based on the overall new housing constructed.
Fair Share contends that Edgewater has failed to build enough state-mandated affordable housing or to ensure that agreed-upon units actually got built.
Like much of the Hudson riverfront between the George Washington Bridge and Jersey City, Edgewater was a beehive of warehouses and factories until the 1970s and 1980s. Then, Edgewater’s Ford assembly plant, the Alcoa rolling mill and the Unilever factory closed, leaving the town with a faded waterfront and a shrinking tax base.
But by the late 1990s, a transformation that started earlier in Hoboken finally took off in Edgewater. Professionals, many priced out of Manhattan, moved into newly built townhouses, condominiums and apartment towers on both sides of River Road, the main artery along the waterfront.
The population has more than doubled to nearly 13,000 today, from 5,000 in 1990. And the newcomers are far more well-heeled than Mr. McPartland’s neighbors when he was growing up in town.
Mr. McPartland, a former commodities trader, is a third-generation resident of Edgewater. His father was a police detective; his mother the borough clerk. His grandmother, he said, had pensions from Alcoa, Hills Brothers Coffee and Jack Frost Sugar, all now closed.
Mr. McPartland was appointed mayor in 2015, after the previous mayor abruptly resigned.
At the time, Edgewater had been rocked by a controversy over the construction of Veterans Field, a waterfront park being built at the north end of town. A construction company owned by a longtime Edgewater developer, Fred Daibes, had dumped contaminated crushed concrete from the former Alcoa plant onto the site.
Who is financially responsible for the illegal dumping is still being litigated in federal court. But Mr. McPartland gave a visitor a golf-cart tour of the park and its lush green fields, which opened this summer after he made it his top priority.
As he drove around town, the mayor pointed to an affordable-housing project for older adults. “I think Edgewater has been good at building low- and moderate-income housing,” he said.
Fair Share disagrees and it has been wrestling in court with Edgewater over what it says are the town’s affordable-housing obligations, which it puts at 1,226 affordable units for the period between 1999 and 2025; the town puts the number at about a quarter of that. Fair Share has entered the current battle on the side of Mr. Elanjian and his partners.
Fair Share says that even when the town has required developers to build affordable housing, it has not pushed them to complete it. A development called iPark was supposed to include 75 apartments for low- and moderate-income tenants, built at the same time as the 495-unit luxury complex. But the market-rate building is almost complete, while work on the affordable housing has not started.
The developer in that case was Mr. Daibes, and after Fair Share sued, he obtained a permit to begin the work.
Mr. Daibes, who boasts that he has either built or been a partner in every project in Edgewater over the past two decades, is also opposed. He has no part in 615 River Road.
He conceded that the 615 River Road developers are asking for a similar variance and rezoning to what he got when he built the Alexander, a residential complex on a former industrial site. As part of his affordable housing obligation, he built 27 units next door.
The board of adjustment has scheduled an Oct. 18 public meeting to review the developer’s request.
And a Superior Court judge hearing the lawsuit brought by Fair Share has set a November deadline for Edgewater to submit a draft affordable-housing plan for review.
