Maria Elena Yanes and her son Ezequiel escaped Honduras after members of the MS-13 gang burst into their home with weapons to force him to join. He was 10 years old.
They arrived in the Long Island town of Brentwood in September 2016, only to learn that MS-13, known in Spanish as Mara Salvatrucha, was killing teenagers nearby.
So this fall, they fled again — out of Brentwood, to a town farther east on Long Island not yet touched by MS-13’s violence.
After a year in the national spotlight, as Suffolk County leaders publicly pleaded for money for services and enforcement help, officials at the local, state and national levels are trying to figure out how best to combat the gang’s presence and to keep it from recruiting new members. It has been a fitful process, troubled by bureaucracy and political maneuvering in a county where a majority voted for President Trump.
For the Trump administration, which responded to the gang’s murder of four Latino young men in April with visits by Attorney General Jeff Sessions and Mr. Trump himself, the answer is a crackdown on allowing young people fleeing violence in Central America into the country.
Since October 2013 through June of this year, Suffolk County has absorbed 4,728 minors who came by themselves from Central America, according to the federal Office of Refugee Resettlement. That put a strain on already-thin school resources, from Spanish-speaking teachers to guidance counselors. Even as the gang violence ramped up in the county, 1,019 unaccompanied minors were released to family members or others from October 2016 through this June.
In his latest proposed immigration legislation, the president would restrict that flow; his argument is that unaccompanied minors have given rise to MS-13, with gang members slipping into the country under the program, and some young people joining the gang once they are here.
For his part, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo held a news conference on Sept. 13 to announce he was sending one state trooper each to 10 high schools in the most gang-vulnerable areas in the county as a deterrent to gang members. Unbeknown to Mr. Cuomo, he had picked the one-year anniversary of the murders of two teenage girls in Brentwood for the announcement.
But the schools were blindsided, because the details had not been worked out in advance. And they took it personally.
Discussions of how best to integrate a uniformed state trooper in the schools, balancing deterrence and education, are underway, the governor’s office said.
Last September, right after the death of the two girls, county executives promised $500,000 to a Long Island nonprofit organization, Strong Youth, to expand its gang prevention program in Brentwood. But the program had been stalled by contract disputes, and no staff has been hired.
“The idea was we would have been a welcoming arm to these kids at the start of the school year,” said Rahsmia Zatar, the executive director of Strong Youth (the first word is an acronym for “Struggling to Reunite Our New Generation”). The program is now not likely to start in Brentwood until January 2018.
At the same time, the Suffolk County executive, Steve Bellone, and the county police commissioner, Timothy Sini, have been collaborating with more than a dozen social service and immigrant rights organizations to establish their own program — and service center — for gang prevention. A pilot program has been operating with the county’s probation department since 2015 in two middle schools.
Jon Kaiman, a deputy county executive, said that creating new programs to assist vulnerable residents, including newer immigrants, had to be done deliberately because current immigration policies have raised fears of deportation.
While none of the murders took place on school property, it is often in school where young people come into contact with gang members or become targets for recruitment.
Kayla Cuevas, one of the girls who was murdered, and an MS-13 gang member first encountered each other at Brentwood High School, her mother, Evelyn Rodriguez, said. The gang member was bullying Kayla, and the school did not respond to her concerns, Ms. Rodriguez said. She still has an open lawsuit against the school, and has been frustrated with the slow pace of the installation of new surveillance cameras.
The Suffolk County Police Department places 19 “school resource officers” in each school district.
Mr. Sini, the police commissioner, said that school resource officers “almost exclusively do educational programs,” including domestic violence, drug and gang prevention training.
Immigrant advocates claim that Suffolk County is becoming a police state, with an influx of immigration agents from the Department of Homeland Security. A lawsuit filed this summer by the American Civil Liberties Union claims that immigration agents have been arresting students without enough evidence they are gang members.
The Suffolk County police have solved both the murders of the two teenage girls and the quadruple homicide of four young Latino men — three of whom were immigrants. In addition, the police arrested nearly 200 MS-13 gang members. In the cases where the police know of active MS-13 gang members who are undocumented immigrants, and they cannot be charged federally, they do collaborate with immigrant enforcement, Mr. Sini said.
“The only time we are going to be working with ICE to target an MS-13 gang member who is here illegally is when we have confirmed that they are, in fact, an MS-13 gang member,” Mr. Sini said.
He represented Long Island while testifying in Washington in May, and asked the federal government for more funding. Last week, Mr. Sessions awarded a $500,000 grant to the Suffolk County Police Department, primarily to help pay for increased enforcement. A small component will go to prevention programs for school-age children.
The point, he added, was not to make residents fearful to go out in their suburban neighborhoods.
As of last September, the police estimated there were 400 MS-13 gang members in Suffolk County. In the last year, the police and immigration agents said they had combined to arrest more than 320 of them.
