Kevin Spacey evaded questions about his sexuality for years, insisting that it was a private matter even as Hollywood gossip surrounded him. On Sunday, the celebrated actor confirmed what had long been whispered: “I choose now to live as a gay man,” he wrote.
But some of those who might have supported him were instead incensed by the implication that his sexuality was relevant to an accusation, reported by BuzzFeed News, that he had made a sexual advance toward a 14-year-old boy 31 years ago. They saw his coming out story as an intentional distraction from the accusation and a damaging conflation of homosexuality and pedophilia.
The sentiment expressed by Mr. Eichner, an actor, was shared across Hollywood and the gay community, as people criticized the timing and tactics of Mr. Spacey’s response. Some also directed ire at news organizations that appeared to focus more on Mr. Spacey’s coming out than the sexual misconduct accusations.
On Sunday, BuzzFeed News reported that Anthony Rapp, an actor, said Mr. Spacey had made a sexual advance toward him in 1986, when Mr. Rapp was 14. He said that Mr. Spacey, who was then 26, had picked him up, placed him on a bed and climbed on top of him.
Mr. Spacey did not offer a comment to BuzzFeed. But shortly after the story was published, he released a statement in which he said he did not recall the encounter. “But if I did behave then as he describes, I owe him the sincerest apology for what would have been deeply inappropriate drunken behavior,” he said in the statement.
While coming out is often met with support by peers, fans and gay rights activists, the response was far different for Mr. Spacey.
George Takei, who has used his large social media following to advocate social-justice causes, said in an emailed statement that Mr. Rapp’s accusations were about power, not sexuality.
“I am sorry that Kevin only saw fit to acknowledge his truth when he thought it would serve him — just as his denial served him for so many years,” he said.
A representative for Mr. Spacey did not immediately respond to an email seeking comment.
While Mr. Spacey made reference to rumors regarding his sexuality when he hosted the 2017 Tony Awards, he had never publicly confirmed them and fiercely guarded his privacy.
In 2010, Kevin Sessums, a journalist, pressed Mr. Spacey on his sexuality in an interview for The Daily Beast.
Mr. Sessums continued the line of questioning, but Mr. Spacey pivoted to a discussion of bullying without addressing his own sexuality.
