Thirteen thousand feet deep, on the cold, dark desert of the Pacific Ocean seafloor, scientists have discovered new sponges living on rock nodules targeted for deep-sea mining.
“When I examined Plenaster for the first time, I was amazed by its unusual, simple skeleton,” said Swee-Cheng Lim, a sponge taxonomist from National University of Singapore and lead author of a paper on the discovery, published in the journal Systematics and Biodiversity.
The sponges were collected on two expeditions, in 2013 and 2015, led by Craig Smith, an oceanographer at the University of Hawaii, to the Clarion-Clipperton Zone (C.C.Z.), a chunk of the Pacific Ocean between Hawaii and Mexico that is the size of the continental United States. Dr. Lim, in collaboration with another research team led by Adrian Glover at the Natural History Museum in the United Kingdom, characterized and classified the sponges based on both their appearance and genetics.
Stace Beaulieu, a deep-sea biological oceanographer at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, who was not involved in the study, said: “This is exciting because it is not only a new species but a new genus.” That is akin to discovering not just dogs, but a larger group that includes wolves, coyotes and jackals.
The International Seabed Authority governs the seafloor outside of sovereign waters and has allocated 15 areas for exploration in the C.C.Z. to several companies affiliated with nations that include China, Japan, Singapore, Tonga and those in the European Union. A few dozen exploration licenses have been granted, but none for actual mining yet.
Plenaster craigi grow on the nodules and are vulnerable if mining for nodules commences. “We have collected a few hundreds of this sponge species and they were only found attached to the nodules,” Dr. Lim said.
“The C.C.Z. is a soft sediment habitat so the hard surfaces are limited,” Dr. Beaulieu said. While almost nothing is known of Plenaster craigi – what they eat, how they reproduce, where they are distributed – most sponge species, like corals, have to find hard surfaces to settle down on and grow while they are young, she said.
But the C.C.Z. is so vast, Dr. Glover believes that it is more likely large areas would be left undisturbed. The International Seabed Authority has already reserved wide swaths of seafloor for protection and commissioned large-scale exploration studies to establish life on the seafloor. “To get to the point where you can make informed decisions, you need to know what animals live there,” Dr. Glover said.
More pressing are the huge sediment plumes that mining activities will generate, says Ann Vanreusel, a marine biologist at Ghent University in Belgium. That’s where Plenaster craigi could prove to be useful as an indicator species because of its abundance, she says. “Every animal you collect from the seafloor seems to be a different species,” Dr. Vanreusel said. An organism that will clearly be disturbed from the plumes and abundant enough to count such as Plenaster craigi could help researchers figure out the effects of deep-sea mining and perhaps even the possibilities for recovery, she said.
“They can almost act like a canary,” Dr. Amon said.
Dr. Glover’s team first noticed Plenaster craigi while on the 2013 expedition to the exploration area allocated to the United Kingdom. “For three years we were calling them sponge species A,” Dr. Glover said. Then in 2015, Dr. Lim participated in the second expedition to the area allocated to Singapore and began working with Dr. Glover to identify and classify the sponges. Now, Dr. Lim has begun work on a second sponge species growing on the nodules, while Dr. Glover is preparing an extensive study on deep sea mollusks.
