LONDON — With less than 18 months to go before Britain is scheduled to leave the European Union, and with British businesses growing increasingly concerned about the future, this was the moment Prime Minister Theresa May hoped for a breakthrough in the paralyzed negotiations on the process known as Brexit.
After phone calls to Berlin and Paris, and the first of two visits to Brussels in three days, the most Mrs. May accomplished on Tuesday was a promise to keep talking. However, this dialogue does not yet include the subjects Mrs. May wants to discuss: a transition deal to prevent an economically damaging “cliff edge” Brexit and future trade relations.
Both at home and abroad, Britain’s prime minister is hamstrung by her political fragility. She is constantly forced to mediate between warring factions in her cabinet, some of whom want a quick, clean break with the bloc, while others fret about protecting the economy. She must also fend off doubts on the Continent about her ability to deliver a deal, even if one is agreed to.
To avoid that, the European officials say, they need to offer at least glimmers of hope to Mrs. May, if only to make progress on a transition agreement and trade negotiations.
Continental Europeans have an interest in an agreement, too, as a failure to reach a deal would hit their exporters hard. Mrs. May thought she had broken the deadlock in September with a speech in Florence, Italy, in which she took some risks with her party by promising to pay around 20 billion euros, or about $23.5 billon, in 2019 and 2020.
The British have a point when they say that some of the issues that the 27 other members of the bloc want resolved before moving to trade talks — such as the border between Ireland and Northern Ireland — are probably insoluble without a broader agreement on future trade relations.
Yet with the clock ticking to the planned departure, in March 2019, and British businesses threatening to cut off domestic investment and to begin shifting jobs to the Continent, the European Union has all the leverage.
With luck, the 27 will agree on Friday to prepare for a next phase of talks in December, but only providing that the British first offer more concessions.
Continental Europeans see this as a problem created by Britain, and not many are in a charitable mood. That would include Jean-Claude Juncker, president of the European Commission, the bloc’s executive arm, who, before dining with Mrs. May on Monday night in Brussels, promised journalists an “autopsy” afterward.
Until recently, British officials assumed that the European Commission was taking a harder line than were the largest countries in the bloc, but Germany has proved tougher still in recent weeks.
It wants more concrete detail on the offer Mrs. May made in Florence. Berlin has other priorities, including complex coalition negotiations, but it also worries that, as the biggest net contributor to the European Union, it may end up filling any shortfall in the bloc’s finances left by the British. That prospect has been made more difficult by recent electoral gains by a right-wing, populist and euroskeptic party, Alternative for Germany.
Though Mr. Hammond later apologized on Twitter, his slip was all the more striking because he is one of the most pragmatic members of the cabinet, and the leading exponent of a “softer” exit to protect the economy.
On Tuesday, David Davis, the British minister responsible for negotiating the terms of leaving the European Union, dismissed economic “scaremongering” about withdrawal. But the economy has already slowed, and Britain’s inflation rate hit its highest point in more than five years in September, driven in part by a drop in the value of the pound after the Brexit referendum in June 2016.
On Tuesday, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development said that reversing the process would be a lift for the British economy, which is growing at the slowest rate of any Group of 7 country.
Analysts expect a bumpy few months, and Mr. Grant, for one, argues that it is essential for Mrs. May to call the bluff of Brexit hard-liners and reassert her authority.
Until she does, it seems likely that her weakness will be exploited by opponents on both sides of the English Channel.
“Sometimes it’s very difficult to see and understand what Britain really wants from these negotiations,” Samuli Virtanen, a deputy minister of Finland, said at a meeting in Luxembourg on Tuesday. There is more unity among the governments of 27 European Union countries, he added, than there is in one British cabinet.