On Nov. 2, 1967, a dozen or so of America’s most respected foreign policy mandarins assembled at the White House to meet with President Johnson and his top Vietnam advisers. While the president maintained a sternly optimistic public face on the war, the conflict was threatening to consume his Presidency, and so he sought the wisdom of these advisers, a virtual Mount Rushmore of America’s postwar foreign policy establishment.
October had been a most unkind month to the president. Polls revealed that public support for the war, and for Johnson, was eroding, and the punishing bombing campaign against North Vietnam was an increasing point of dissent. The demands of his military commanders for more troops seemed insatiable. Johnson had recently, and reluctantly, authorized one final increase, to 525,000 by the end of 1967 (there had been 23,000 American military personnel in Vietnam in December 1964). And the president knew that any additional increment in manpower would require mobilizing the reserves, further exposing the mounting costs of the war.
And the antiwar movement, once dismissed as a sideshow, was gathering mainstream credibility, and numbers. On Oct. 21, tens of thousands gathered outside the Pentagon in protest, resulting in hundreds of arrests. And it was not just radicals who were turning against the war. Senator Robert Kennedy was now raising his own doubts in public, and one October poll showed him trouncing Johnson in a head-to-head primary race, 52 percent to 32 percent.
The president needed reassurance. He had called upon the “Wise Men” previously, in the summer of 1965, when final plans were nearing completion to go all-in with ground troops. They urged him then to take decisive action. Faced with another crossroads, Johnson called on the Wise Men once again.
These Wise Men, or Wise Old Men, as some White House staff members took to calling them, included former Secretary of State Dean Acheson, one of the principal architects of the post-World War II international order; Douglas Dillon, a former investment banker, ambassador and secretary of the Treasury; Clark Clifford, Harry Truman’s White House counsel; and Henry Cabot Lodge, a former senator from Massachusetts, fresh from a two-year stint as ambassador to South Vietnam.
The group met at the State Department on Nov. 1, where they were treated to high-level (and upbeat) military and intelligence briefings, which emphasized the progress that had been made since 1965. Assembling the next morning in the Cabinet Room, they were further fortified by an ebullient telegram from the American Embassy in Saigon. Acheson reported to the president that “this is a matter we can and will win” and “we certainly should not get out of Vietnam.” McGeorge Bundy, Johnson’s former national security adviser, quickly seconded Acheson’s comments, adding that pulling out was both “impossible” and “undesirable.” One by one the seasoned diplomats and storied military titans gathered around the table expressed variations of their general agreement with these sentiments.
With unanimity on the imperative of the war, the discussion focused on three of the questions posed by Johnson in his opening comments — the merits of negotiations and bombing, and the problem of national unity. On each issue there was broad consensus: Negotiations would be pointless, halting the bombing would be seen as a sign of weakness, and the main problem was not with the war but with widespread public and political misperception about how it was going. Things took a slightly surreal turn when, near the end of the four-hour session, Johnson’s infant grandson was brought into the room and rested in the president’s arms for the balance of the meeting.
But neither Ball nor Harriman expressed opposition to the war at the meeting, and a few weeks later Johnson solved his lingering problem with McNamara (whose most recent, deeply pessimistic memo anticipated that nothing the United States could do would “break the will” of the enemy) by dispatching him to the World Bank and replacing him with the steadfast hawk Clark Clifford. As far as the White House and the Wise Men were concerned, the problem was principally one of public relations. Several of the participants urged that the ambassador to South Vietnam, Ellsworth Bunker, and Gen. William Westmoreland be brought home to allay the public’s misconceptions.
Clifford urged the president to reconvene the Wise Men, who on March 25 received new briefings and then talked late into the night. They met with Johnson the following afternoon, assembling for what Clifford would later describe as “an unhappy occasion,” for “there could be no pleasure” in admitting “that their previous advice had been wrong.” McGeorge Bundy, the group’s youngest member, drew the short straw. “Mr. President, there has been a very significant shift in most of our positions since we last met,” he reported. A majority now held the view that “we must begin to take steps to disengage.” Five days later, Johnson stunned the nation with his announcement that he would not seek re-election.