It started with a series of meetings at the Carlyle Hotel in New York, and grew to become one of the world’s most ambitious and well-connected private equity firms. Its Rolodex was unrivaled, and its advisers included the first President George Bush and John Major, the former British prime minister.
All along the way, David M. Rubenstein has been the face of the Carlyle Group, which he co-founded 30 years ago. He has raised billions of dollars for investments, struck deals with brands including Dunkin’ Donuts and Beats Electronics, and lobbied Congress to protect a tax arrangement that made the private equity business so tremendously lucrative.
Mr. Rubenstein also emerged as the rare Wall Street titan who enjoys the public spotlight, becoming ubiquitous on the boards of nonprofit organizations and in the media.
Now, Mr. Rubenstein is volunteering to do less. On Wednesday, he and the other two co-founders of the firm — William E. Conway Jr. and Daniel A. D’Aniello — announced they were handing over daily management of the firm to their chosen successors.
The changing of the guard at Carlyle is part of a generational turnover at private equity firms, as the billionaires who pioneered the industry recognize that they must prepare their businesses for life after they have retired. Just three months ago, Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, another private equity giant, outlined its own succession plan.
Carlyle will be led by three familiar faces. Kewsong Lee, who joined Carlyle in 2013, and Glenn A. Youngkin, currently the firm’s president and chief operating officer, will become co-chief executives. Peter J. Clare was named the firm’s co-chief investment officer. All three men will join the board and begin their new roles on Jan. 1.
Mr. Rubenstein will not be hard to find. An affable White House aide under President Jimmy Carter who became a self-made billionaire, he is a major philanthropist with a passion for American history, and is on the boards of organizations including the Brookings Institution, Lincoln Center, the University of Chicago and the Council on Foreign Relations.
Mr. Rubenstein even has his own talk show on Bloomberg Television, where his guests have included Oprah Winfrey and Yo-Yo Ma.
The Carlyle Group, which has headquarters in Washington, manages about $170 billion in assets around the world, spread across private equity, real estate and other investment funds.
Though it was once best known for deals with defense businesses, it has since become a major investor in a wide range of sectors. Among private equity firms, it was one of the first to go beyond traditional corporate buyouts and develop extensive practices in real estate, infrastructure and credit.
Investments include holdings in Getty Images and the health supplements maker Nature’s Bounty.
Mr. Rubenstein, however, said he regretted passing on opportunities to invest in Amazon and Netscape, deals that would have made the firm billions. “I always remember the ones that got away,” he said.
Privately held until 2012, Carlyle joined other private equity firms in offering shares to the public in the years after the financial crisis. But since the initial public offering, Carlyle’s stock price has barely budged. On Wednesday, the stock was down 3 percent on news of the succession planning.
“Publicly traded private equity firms are undervalued by the market,” Mr. Rubenstein said.
Carlyle may not have been a great investment for public markets investors, but it has been lucrative for the co-founders. Thanks to the traditional private equity business model — in which firms charge investors a lucrative management fee, regardless of performance, and also take a large share of profits — companies like Carlyle are practically guaranteed to make money.
And thanks to the so-called carried interest loophole, which Mr. Rubenstein has lobbied to protect, much of those profits are lightly taxed. Mr. Rubenstein, Mr. Conway and Mr. D’Aniello are each worth $2.8 billion, according to Forbes. Since 2011 alone, the three co-founders have collected compensation worth some $3.2 billion combined, according to Equilar.
Mr. Rubenstein said that he was troubled by the widening gap between rich and poor.
But Mr. Rubenstein said there was little he could do about it.
Mr. Rubenstein and Mr. Conway, who serve as co-chief executives, will become co-executive chairmen of the company. Mr. D’Aniello, Carlyle’s chairman, will become chairman emeritus.
The changes will give Mr. Rubenstein more time to focus on his extracurricular activities, which he says have allowed him to engage in networking that has benefited Carlyle. A fan of American history, he has donated millions of dollars to help restore the Washington Monument and renovate museum galleries around Washington.
David Skorton, the secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, said that Mr. Rubenstein, who serves on the Smithsonian’s board of regents, was uncommonly involved in his nonprofit work.
In 2007, Mr. Rubenstein paid $21.3 million for a copy of Magna Carta, which is on display at the National Archives. More recently, he donated $10 million to the National Museum of African American History & Culture.
Carlyle and Kohlberg Kravis Roberts are only the latest private equity firms to undergo a generational transfer of power. At the Blackstone Group, Jonathan D. Gray has long been the heir apparent to take over for Stephen A. Schwarzman. TPG Capital and Warburg Pincus have also either picked their next chiefs, or transitioned to a new set of leaders.
Still, Mr. Rubenstein said he and his co-founders would try to stay involved in the firm without micromanaging their successors.
