• The federal government just released thousands of documents related to the assassination of President John F. Kennedy in 1963.
• The papers were posted online by the National Archives in compliance with a 1992 law requiring their release after 25 years.
• After a chaotic last-minute review in which intelligence agencies lobbied against full disclosure, the White House said it would take more time to process and release thousands more documents that were also supposed to be made public. It set a deadline of late April for the release of those documents.
Citing security concerns, Trump held back some of the documents.
The papers were being posted online by the National Archives and Records Administration in compliance with a 1992 law requiring their release after 25 years. But President Trump agreed to postpone the release of thousands more files that were supposed to be made public, pending a review that should end on April 26.
The American public expects — and deserves — its Government to provide as much access as possible to the President John F. Kennedy Assassination Records (records) so that the people may finally be fully informed about all aspects of this pivotal event. Therefore, I am ordering today that the veil finally be lifted. At the same time, executive departments and agencies (agencies) have proposed to me that certain information should continue to be redacted because of national security, law enforcement, and foreign affairs concerns. I have no choice — today — but to accept those redactions rather than allow potentially irreversible harm to our Nation’s security. To further address these concerns, I am also ordering agencies to re-review each and every one of those redactions over the next 180 days. At the end of that period, I will order the public disclosure of any information that the agencies cannot demonstrate meets the statutory standard for continued postponement of disclosure under section 5(g) (2)(D) of the President John F. Kennedy Assassination Records Collection Act of 1992 (44 U.S.C. 2107 note) (the “Act”).
The decision to postpone the release of some documents will invariably lead to suspicions that the government is still protecting secrets about the case. Administration officials said there was no cover-up, just an effort to avoid compromising national security, law enforcement or intelligence gathering methods.
As expected, these incomplete raw files are, often, a mess. Handwritten notes from the C.I.A. and others are often illegible. It will take an enormous amount of work and lots of time to put this together. Think of this as an unassembled million-piece puzzle.
• Mexico was a cooperative partner with the United States in many ways — from helping to wiretap the Soviet and Cuban Embassies well prior to the assassination, to thorough attempts to investigate Lee Harvey Oswald’s ties in the country after Kennedy’s murder. Sources told the C.I.A. that Oswald had deposited $5,000 in a Mexican bank. In a document dated March 9, 1964, Mexico was reported to have traced all deposits in Mexican banks, looking for the money. They found no such Oswald transaction.
• The F.B.I. closely monitored the activities of attorney and conspiracy advocate Mark Lane, who was representing Marguerite Oswald, mother of Lee. According to an F.B.I. source, a bizarre meeting Mr. Lane had with a Polish journalist in January 1964 saw wild conspiracy theories tossed around, including a ridiculous claim in a far-right Italian newspaper that J.D. Tippit, the Dallas policeman killed by Oswald shortly after Oswald shot Kennedy, was the real presidential assassin — and that Jack Ruby had killed Mr. Tippit.
• A C.I.A. document alleges that Oswald may have been accompanied on his mysterious September 1963 trip to Mexico City by “El Mexicano.” According to another document, “El Mexicano” is believed to have been Francisco Rodriguez Tamayo, the captain of Cuban Rebel Army 57 until he defected to the United States in June of 1959. A third file also identifies Rodriguez Tamayo as the head of the anti-Castro Training Camp at Pontchartrain, La.
No doubt there are thousands of tantalizing tidbits. But are they true? How do they augment our current knowledge, if at all? Do they somehow help us to answer the larger questions about the assassination? These are questions we should ask as we examine this treasure trove.
Dr. Sabato is the author or editor of two dozen books on American politics. Dr. Sabato was the editor and lead author of the recent book “Trumped,” which explores the 2016 election.
A memo from J. Edgar Hoover captures the drama of the days after Kennedy’s death.
Some of the long-withheld documents convey some of the drama and chaos of the days immediately after the murder of the president. Among them is a memo apparently dictated by J. Edgar Hoover, the F.B.I. director, on Nov. 24, 1963, shortly after Jack Ruby fatally shot Lee Harvey Oswald as Oswald was moved from one jail to another.
“There is nothing further on the Oswald case except that he is dead,” the memo begins laconically before reciting the day’s events.
While he was F.B.I director, J. Edgar Hoover dictated a memo shortly after Jack Ruby fatally shot Lee Harvey Oswald.
Referring to Nicholas Katzenbach, then the deputy attorney general, Mr. Hoover expresses anxiety that the killing of the suspected assassin may spur undesirable doubts among Americans.
The files contain a variety of material.
Paging through the documents on Thursday night was a little like exploring a box of random documents found in an attic. There are fuzzy images of C.I.A. surveillance photos from the early 1960s; a log from December 1963 of visitors, including a C.I.A. officer, to President Lyndon B. Johnson’s ranch in Texas; and a White House memo from 1965 discussing how the F.B.I. and the Secret Service should collaborate on presidential protection.
An April 1964 F.B.I. cable recounts Oswald’s bus trip to Mexico in October 1963, including the names of the people sitting around him and his clothing: “a short-sleeved light colored sport shirt and no coat.” From the 1970s, there are reports on interviews conducted by the House Select Committee on Assassinations with retired F.B.I. agents. The agents had interviewed mobsters with C.I.A. ties and Cuban exiles in Florida who might have encountered Oswald.
A memo from Hoover pointed to Kremlin suspicions that Johnson was behind the assassination.
Mr. Hoover sent a memo to the White House more than three years after the assassination summarizing information in the F.B.I.’s files about how the Soviet government responded to Kennedy’s death.
Our source added that “now” the K.G.B. was in possession of data purporting to indicate President Johnson was responsible for the assassination of the late President John F. Kennedy.
While he was F.B.I. director, J. Edgar Hoover sent the following memo in 1966 to the White House, detailing Russian reaction to the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.
The memo, which Mr. Hoover notes was not “furnished to the Acting Attorney General,” Ramsey Clark, opens by saying that the news was met with “shock and consternation” and that church bells tolled in the president’s memory.
The intelligence, some of which was gathered by a source who was inside Russia when Kennedy was assassinated, details how Communist Party leaders believed the killing was part of an “ultraright” conspiracy to “effect a ‘coup.’” Soviet officials also claimed not to have a connection with Oswald.
What are you finding?
Meet some of the key figures in the assassination.
As a new trove of documents about the killing of President John F. Kennedy is released, The Times's Peter Baker walks us through who’s who in this American tragedy.
As a new trove of documents about the killing is released, Peter Baker of The New York Times walks us through who’s who in this American tragedy.
An infamous mystery meets a president who dabbles in conspiracy theories.
Few seem as excited about the release of the final batch of secret documents as the current occupant of the Oval Office.
Surely, then, it was just a coincidence that Mr. Trump posted that message while on Air Force One heading to, of all places, Dallas. Or was it? Fifty-three years and 11 months after the event that gave rise to a thousand conspiracy theories, the president even landed at Dallas Love Field Airport, where Kennedy’s body was brought for the final flight home, and his motorcade came within a few miles of Dealey Plaza, where the fateful shots rang out.
The assassination has fueled decades of speculation and investigations.
The granddaddy of all conspiracy theories has re-emerged in the American psyche with the release of the National Archives’s final trove of records about the assassination.
Kennedy’s death and the numerous investigations that followed were simultaneously some of the most secretive and public events in modern history.
The New York Times chief film critic A.O. Scott analyzes how movies such as Oliver Stone’s “J.F.K.” helped fuel America’s interest in conspiracies.CreditCredit...Warner Bros.
‘Grassy knoll,’ ‘Zapruder film,’ ‘Umbrella Man’ ... See a glossary of some of the key terms associated with the assassination.
As the longtime government explanation goes: Kennedy was assassinated on Nov. 22, 1963, by a lone gunman, Oswald. Oswald fired three bullets from a nearby building, striking Kennedy and Gov. John Connally of Texas.
But much of the public has never fully bought that explanation. The trove of files released on Thursday, which the federal government had long fought to keep from public view, may address some of the conspiracy theories that have lingered for decades.
Read The Times’s coverage from 1963.
Dallas, Nov. 22 — President John Fitzgerald Kennedy was shot and killed by an assassin today.
