After practicing C.P.S. at home for a few months, with help from a therapist, Jessica gradually saw Matt get calmer and more in control. But at school, where teachers refused to use the strategies, Matt was often sent to in-school suspension. One day he was escorted to a tiny, windowless room with “calming down tools,” where Jessica says a teacher’s aide blocked the door. “It freaked him out, so he threw a yoga ball. Then another aide came to help block the door.” Terrified, Matt became even more aggressive. After that incident, Jessica found another school that uses C.P.S.
C.P.S. was developed in the late 1990s by Dr. Ross Greene, now the director of a nonprofit called Lives in the Balance, and later expanded upon by Stuart Ablon, a psychologist who runs the Think:Kids program at Massachusetts General Hospital. (The two organizations now use separate but similar models.) An adult and child collaborate to understand why the child is struggling and what to do about it, using a strategy called “Plan B.” Plan B starts with the child stating a concern. Next the adult does the same. They then brainstorm realistic solutions that address both parties’ concerns. That method diverges from more typical responses, like when an adult tries to exert her will by applying consequences (“Plan A”) or lets go of the expectation for a specific behavior (“Plan C”).
I watched a teacher do Plan B with a student around 6 years old, whom I’ll call Jayden. He fidgeted and ran around during morning meeting — behavior that would get him sent to the principal’s office in many schools. But through C.P.S., Jayden was able to explain that sitting still caused him intense discomfort (a symptom consistent with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder). The teacher shared her concern that he was distracting others. They came up with a plan for Jayden to sit in a chair behind his classmates, where he could move around as long as he paid attention. Jayden’s whole demeanor changed: He calmed down, looked his teacher in the eye for the first time, and willingly returned to class.
In classrooms around the nation, one can find discipline strategies that rely on rewards and punishments, like color-coded charts, where each child’s behavior is marked in a green, yellow or red — trouble — zone. With a child like Jayden, it makes little difference how often his marker ends up on red. He’s not going to change his behavior until he learns how.
Similarly, many kids flounder when schools use the popular “token economy” approach, which gives checkmarks or tokens for good behavior that students cash in for rewards. These systems are straightforward and seem effective in the short term, but can cause long-term problems, psychologists say, including shame and anxiety. “Rewards and consequences work for some things like teaching very basic lessons about right and wrong — but they weren’t intended to build complex skills,” explains Ablon. And for kids who struggle with behavior, they can backfire.
Christine McGuire, who is a teacher, learned that lesson when her own son, Quinn, started acting aggressively. “I tried everything I had been trained to do — sticker charts, token systems, timeout — but none of it helped,” she said. When Quinn would make “one little slip up, like missing one star,” his guilt and anxiety became so acute that he would get depressed and even suicidal.
The school recommended a special education classroom that used physical restraints and a plywood closet with padded walls for students to “work out” their anger. But that kind of isolation triggers loneliness, which further weakens self-regulation, says Adele Diamond, a neuropsychologist at the University of British Columbia.
Christine eventually learned about C.P.S., and she and Quinn began making “Plan B” a daily routine. As they identified triggers for his anger and anxiety, both mother and son learned to manage them better.
Christine ultimately got the school district to pay for Quinn to attend a private school that uses C.P.S., but it took an expensive lawsuit for which she had to borrow money from friends and hold public fund-raisers she found embarrassing. Still, she feels lucky, and worries about children whose families have fewer resources or don’t know how to advocate for them. Quinn still struggles with anxiety, but his coping skills have improved so much that Christine went from being afraid to leave him alone for 10 minutes to letting him attend sleep-away camp this past summer.
