Many years ago, before I owned a proper stereo, I listened to records on an all-in-one phonograph I salvaged from a preschool. The phonograph had a thick plastic stylus — audiophiles are now destroying this magazine in a rage — and four speeds; my favorite was 16 r.p.m.
Listening to my favorite LPs slowed down to 16 r.p.m. was revelatory and ominous. Familiar melodies were stretched into alien ragas. Pop stars sounded sludgy and mournful, even while singing in major keys. Cracking snares turned swampy. Best of all, guitar chords unfurled as deep, dark blooms. At 16 r.p.m., my old records were newly saturated with a loamy melancholy. Even Kajagoogoo sounded profound, as if it should be performing inside a cathedral.
The Arkansas quartet Pallbearer comes closer to capturing the uncanny allure of pop music at 16 r.p.m. than any band I’ve heard. Ostensibly a doom-metal group, Pallbearer has spent nine years testing that genre’s code of conduct. Its album “Heartless,” released in March, continues to expand the horizons visible from beneath doom’s bleary, black umbrella.
If it’s hard to imagine, say, Joel Osteen enjoying Coffinworm’s “High on the Reek of Your Burning Remains” or Ophis’s “Necrotic Reflection,” it might be because there’s a sense of inevitability and inescapability to a good doom song. Lurking in the shadows of our culture’s towering prosperity gospels, doom offers a suffocating, dead-end corrective to saccharine rushes. The longer you listen, the deeper you go, the more you hear your options being eliminated. No soaring melody is coming to airlift you to safety, no witty couplet will lighten the mood. To press play is to submit. Don’t get up from your sofa. The sun’s going down. The future is hopeless. We’re on the brink of collapse. The country doctor is on the loose. You are doomed.
Or maybe not. In the midst of this sonic dismay, Pallbearer works like contractors hired by Black Sabbath and HGTV to renovate doom’s underground bunker, by installing major-scale emergency exits and unexpected, lovely chord changes that function as skylights. (Who says you can’t be heavy while standing in the sun?) While some doom purists may resent the gentrification, Pallbearer’s facility with melody, song structure and heart-on-your-sleeve singing has kept it inching toward the edge of crossover success, which is a strange place for a doom band to be.
The guitarists Devin Holt and Brett Campbell play in drop-A tuning, which means fifths and octaves ringing in low registers. Their fastest songs still feel burdened. Though the classic pop chords at the end of “An Offering of Grief” are uplifting, the fact that C, G, F and the gang are slowly crashing down at 64 b.p.m. means you’ll probably never hear them in a Toyota commercial, unless Toyota starts selling cement mixers. Like all those records I played at the wrong speed, Pallbearer’s leave space to soak in each chord, even if you can’t see to the bottom.
At its best, Pallbearer’s infusion of fresh harmonic blood into doom’s turgid circulatory system is exhilarating. The emotional power of a pivot to a B-flat major chord during “Lie of Survival” kept surprising me, until I realized it reminded me of one of my favorite moments in sacred music: the climactic hallelujahs in Edward Bairstow’s 1925 setting of “Let All Mortal Flesh Keep Silence.” Indeed, when I saw Pallbearer perform in the spring, I was struck by the sight of headbangers with eyes closed and arms upraised, swaying like megachurch attendees coming down with the holy spirit. And as the band pounded through the wordless opening of “A Plea for Understanding,” a chord progression of punishing melancholy that seems sweetly protective of its A-major home, I realized I was on the verge of tears.
Granted, it had been an exhausting few months. I had already fallen into the unhealthful habits of mistaking my dread for integrity and of confusing skimming the news all day with civic engagement. At that concert, Pallbearer’s despairing optimism and go-for-broke sincerity felt like a moral rebuke to the doom I’d grown too comfortable with. As the crowd threw its fists in the air, as the band continued pummeling away at one of the most resonant emotional campaigns in American rock music, as our horizons expanded, I was happy to be recruited — to believe, finally, in the audacity of doom.