Cats, long the enemy of pristine furniture, may have a new ally in Denver.
A City Council member there has proposed a bill that would ban declawing the animals, saying the procedure is painful and unnecessary. The bill will be presented for the first time at a public hearing on Wednesday, and if it passes on Nov. 13, Denver would become the first city outside California to ban declawing.
Supporters of the bill say declawing is like amputation because it removes part of the bones in the cat’s paw, rather than just extracting the scythelike claws.
“It is cruel,” said Aubrey J. Lavizzo, a veterinarian and a director of the Paw Project, a nonprofit group in Colorado. He is set to speak on Wednesday in support of the bill, which was sponsored by Councilwoman Kendra Black.
The Colorado Veterinary Medical Association said surgical removal of the claws should remain an option, such as when an animal’s scratching behavior prompts the owner to consider whether it can be kept as a pet.
Gina Nations, a worker at a veterinary center in New York, said her practice had a client in her 80s whose cat often playfully scratched her. Although the woman did not support declawing, she ultimately asked for the procedure on the cat’s front paws.
“Every time she came here, she had scratches all over her arms,” Ms. Nations said.
The declawing of cats has been increasingly targeted by local and state lawmakers.
In 2003, West Hollywood, Calif., passed the nation’s first legislation banning the procedure. At the time, the proposed ordinance was described as being consistent with another measure passed in the city the previous year declaring that people with pets were “guardians,” not owners, with commensurate moral obligations.
In 2009, seven California cities (Los Angeles, San Francisco, Santa Monica, Beverly Hills, Berkeley, Culver City and Burbank) enacted similar bans, according to the Paw Project.
Similar bills are being proposed in state legislatures this year, including in New Jersey and New York, where veterinarians have opposed a measure by saying the decision should be left to pet owners and medical professionals.
But the issue reaches far beyond whether a pet owner can avoid shredded upholstery or a cuddle marred by claws.
With the number of American households with cats increasing in recent decades — to about 47 million in 2016 — government oversight of the declawing issue has extended to federal policymaking, particularly in the housing and health sectors.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention released a study a year ago of the public health effects of so-called cat scratch disease, a bacterial infection carried by fleas that is transmitted through scratches or sometimes bites, mostly to children. The agency recommended flea control and hand washing, rather than claw removal, as prevention.
Some arguments against a general ban on declawing say the procedure should be a personal decision by pet owners, particularly if there are people in the home with medical problems that could be affected by a cat scratch.
Councilwoman Black, in an interview with Fox 31 in Denver on Monday, said she would consider a medical exemption in the bill.
The procedure of declawing, called onychectomy, calls for amputation of a piece of bone, in which the claw is embedded, from the cat’s toe. In addition to being painful, the surgery often results in complications. Remnants of the bone can stay in the paw, and since most of a cat’s weight is borne on its front paws, cut tendons, nerves and blood vessels mean the paws cannot be used in a normal way.
Last month, the American Association of Feline Practitioners, an advocacy group of veterinary cat care professionals, said in an annual position statement that it strongly opposed the procedure. The group drafted a list of alternative options that it said veterinarians should provide to cat owners, like scratching posts, trimming claws, synthetic nail caps or pheromone sprays to help relieve feline anxiety.