SAN FRANCISCO — Pavel Cherkashin, a Russian investor based in this city, thought he had the perfect name for a Catholic church that he is spending $11.5 million converting into a tech palace. It would be called Hack Temple.
With news of the hacking and influence campaigns escalating all year, the Russian immigrant community of Silicon Valley, which numbers in the tens of thousands, is in a strange new position. Some Russian venture capitalists said start-ups were more wary about taking their funding, while several Russian-born engineers said they were being treated differently socially and in their companies. Lawyers also said some tech firms were installing tighter security measures restricting what data foreign-born coders can see.
The tension is new. Russian immigrants helped build the last generation of Silicon Valley behemoths: The Google co-founder Sergey Brin and the early Facebook investor Yuri Milner are both Russian-born.
Now when Mr. Cherkashin, a partner at GVA Capital, which is investing $120 million in start-ups, pitches companies on why they should take investments from him, he gets skeptical questions as soon as they hear his accent, he said.

Prospective partners and start-ups invariably ask the same question, Mr. Cherkashin said: Is his money clean?
Mr. Zegelman said he had noticed that some cybersecurity firms, big tech companies, government customers and large venture capital firms were the most wary about working with new Russian immigrants. Yet some start-ups and small investment firms are more interested in Russian talent now.
Leonard Grayver, a lawyer specializing in start-ups who is on the board of the American Business Association of Russian-Speaking Professionals, said the hacking had put Russian tech talent at “the forefront.” His firm brokers technology deals between Russia and Silicon Valley, handling tech licensing and talent acquisitions, and he said the average size of a deal had risen to $4 million this year, from $1 million to $2 million last year.
And as companies staff up with Russian talent, he is getting a new question that he finds bizarre: “Are we letting the wolf in the henhouse? ” Some companies have asked him to help arrange for heightened internal security, he added.
When young Russian technologists first arrive in San Francisco, the person they often text is the investor Nicholas Davidov. Mr. Davidov, 30, said he was part of what he called the New Wave, which is a group of Russian founders and engineers who came over to Silicon Valley in the last few years. They gather at a Russian immigrant-owned bar in San Francisco, Rum & Sugar, and every Wednesday at a smoke shop in Redwood City, Calif., where they share stories.
Most of the comments that Mr. Davidov and his friends now get are couched as jokes, he said.
Mr. Davidov is an investor in Wallarm, a cybersecurity firm based in San Francisco. He attributes Wallarm’s double-digit growth this year directly to the peculiar reputation that has come from the election-influence campaign and the fact that the company’s founders are Russian.
Some Russian-born entrepreneurs said they had noticed no change in how they were treated. Stanislav Shalunov, a co-founder of Open Garden, which develops peer-to-peer mesh networking software, said he hadn’t experienced anything different.
Back at what may only briefly be known as the Hack Temple (investors want a new name before it officially opens), two young Russian entrepreneurs made breakfast sandwiches in the rectory kitchen one morning last week. The building has eight bedrooms, some with bunks to fit up to four; a living room full of Midcentury Modern sofas; and a patio covered in artificial turf and often used for beer pong. Before Mr. Cherkashin bought the building in January 2016, it was Nuestra Señora de Guadalupe Church.
On the wall along one of the aisles, Evgeniy Lapchenko, the Ukrainian artist, has remade Hieronymus Bosch’s “Garden of Earthly Delights.” Among the twisted human figures are tech luminaries: the Apple co-founder Steve Jobs taking a selfie, revelers at Burning Man and Mr. Brin of Google in a self-driving car.
As for rebranding Hack Temple, Mr. Cherkashin hasn’t found a new name he likes.
