A new law enacted in June gave New York City police officers the discretion to issue a civil summons, rather than a criminal one, for offenses such as public urination and public drinking.
It appears that many officers have opted to do neither.
Criminal summonses for certain quality-of-life offenses covered by the law have declined: Officers issued 4,370 criminal summonses from June 13, when the law went into effect, through Oct. 1, according to data from the city released on Friday. Over that same period in 2016, they handed out more than 55,000.
The more than 50,000 missing criminal summonses did not simply transition to civil offenses; officers handed out about 26,000 new civil summonses for those offenses, suggesting that many may be deciding to not punish the offenses at all.
Proponents of the effort, including the City Council speaker, Melissa Mark-Viverito, sought to reduce unnecessary interactions with the criminal justice system, especially for minorities. Critics feared that it would herald a new era of lawlessness.
But Mayor Bill de Blasio eventually embraced the approach when the Council and the Police Department reached a compromise that would allow officers to retain the option of issuing criminal summonses — and therefore, their arrest power in those encounters.
Even before the new law, officers had been writing fewer criminal summonses of all types: In 2016, they wrote nearly 270,000, half as many as a decade earlier. When the new law went into effect, the Police Department directed its officers to issue civil tickets rather than criminal summonses. The data released on Friday indicated that, in a city where legislative police reform is uncommon and quality-of-life policing has been a mantra for more than two decades, officers got the message.
The changes covered offenses that are governed by the city, rather than by state law, and included having an open container of alcohol, littering, making unreasonable noise, public urination and a range of park offenses that includes remaining in a public park after nightfall.
The approach has been an issue in the mayor’s race, with Assemblywoman Nicole Malliotakis, the Republican candidate, and Bo Dietl, a former police detective running on his own line, both attacking Mr. de Blasio on the issue.
“Make no mistake about it, this legislation signed by our mayor will lead to further deterioration of our quality of life,” Ms. Malliotakis said in June.
But offering less punitive measures to address quality-of-life problems appealed to criminal justice reformers. Rather than dragging tens of thousands of people each year into criminal court, many could go before a hearing officer and get a fine — no warrant involved.
The bulk of the criminal summonses covered public drinking, which fell to 3,057 over the period since the law went into effect, from 38,590 during the same time frame in 2016, the city data showed. Criminal summonses for public urination dropped to 387 from 5,603.
As he cracked open a beer on Friday morning, Lucio Ramirez, 38, said the decline in criminal summonses for low-level offenses was notable in Corona, Queens, an area where quality of life offenses result in complaints by residents and businesses.
Roberto Gonzalez, 42, a resident of the area, said he noticed fewer people getting in trouble for low-level infractions. “They’re only giving out tickets for people who get rowdy,” he said, adding that the decline in tickets did not correspond to an absence of officers. He, like others, said he still sees many in the area.