CALISTOGA, Calif. — On a blackened hillside across the road from Napa Valley’s prized vineyards, investigators have cordoned off driveways and posted round-the-clock security guards, forming a protective seal around what is believed to be the origin of the most destructive fire in California history.
A map shows the origin and extent of a fire that burned 5,200 buildings in hours.
Mr. Eldridge, the Cal Fire deputy chief, says his officers are not favoring one theory over another. They are interviewing witnesses and may call on experts, including metallurgists and arborists. Software that recreates what an area looked like before the fire could also help in the search for the origin, he said.
“They have satellite imagery, they have aircraft, and they have boots on the ground,” said Andrea Buchanan, the chief deputy fire marshal for the city of Alexandria, Va., and a 37-year veteran of fire investigation. And, she added, they will probably need every tool they’ve got.
The company trims or takes down 1.2 million trees near its power lines every year, a spokesman, Keith Stephens, said. California regulations require all branches within four feet of lines be removed.
Grass-stem indicators, as they are called, can tell investigators a lot about the pace and direction of a fire and provide clues about where it began, Mr. Skinner said.
In the case of this month’s fires, investigators are treating the 17 suspected ignition points separately. But many of the fires merged and it remains possible that embers from one fire could have started what are currently being classified as separate fires.
In the Chimney Tops fire of November 2016 that spread out of Great Smoky Mountains National Park in Tennessee, investigators initially blamed two teenagers who had been playing with matches in the park. That fire, driven by 80 mile-an-hour winds — comparable with what firefighters and evacuees faced in Northern California — ultimately roared into Gatlinburg, Tenn., killing 14 people and destroying more than 2,500 structures.
“Once the investigation confirmed multiple fires with multiple points of origin, it became impossible to prove which fire may have caused the death of an individual or damage to a particular structure,” Mr. Dunn said in a statement at the time.
This week, law enforcement officials in Sonoma County were forced to debunk false reports that an undocumented immigrant had been arrested in connection with the California fires. So far, there has been no evidence that the fires were caused by arson.
Sparks from locomotives were once notorious for starting fires, he said, and “power lines are today what locomotives were a century ago” for exactly the same reason — they transit through things that can burn. “The power of fire resides in the power to spread,” he said.
There is no doubt that power lines came down around the vineyards on the edges of Calistoga, Calif.
The power went out in the home of Jim Pence, a retired schoolteacher who has lived on Bennett Lane for nearly four decades. An hour later, at around 11 p.m., he decided to evacuate. “I told my wife, ‘There’s no way a fireman can control that kind of wind.’” He unplugged his desktop computer, put it in his car and drove off.
Chrisdondie Palting, a Filipino vineyard worker who lives nearby, said the winds nearly knocked him over. “You couldn’t stand up straight,” he said.
Directly across from the hill, Paul Block, an artist who converts used wine barrels into furniture and household items, woke to the sound of sirens. Across the street the mountainside was on fire and the flames looked like they were in a wind tunnel. “The flames were 20 feet long and they were horizontal,” Mr. Block said.
