“Personne,” a bronze by Katinka Bock, relaxing in the garden of the Delacroix museum.
Even when the gilded cage is none other than Paris’s Grand Palais, collectors and art lovers want to get outside of the confines of fairs to experience creativity in new settings. A breath of fresh air never hurts, especially if you’re the type who regularly makes the rounds of such events.
That’s why FIAC, taking place in the Grand Palais Oct. 19 to 22, has made such efforts to expand the scope of its offerings not only intellectually, but also physically.
“What people associate with FIAC is the quality and the way we exist throughout the city,” said Jennifer Flay, the fair’s director.
For the second year, one of the fair’s official sectors, On Site, takes place across the street at the prestigious Petit Palais museum and on the street itself, the Avenue Winston Churchill.
Even though it’s only a two-minute walk from the rest of the fair, the change of scene makes a difference, said Christophe Leribault, the director of the Petit Palais and an organizer of On Site.
Thirty-five works in all are located in the Petit Palais and its gardens, and placed outside along the street.
And for people who are baffled by the works — artists include Richard Nonas, Barry Flanagan and Sheila Hicks — there will be guides.
Not far away on the Avenue Winston Churchill is a 14-seat “nomad” movie theater, made from a shipping container, that will present the fair’s “Cinéphémère” series of artists’ films.
Each day of the fair from noon to 8 p.m. features a different program of films, some only two minutes long. The filmmakers range from the famous, like the Belgian director Chantal Akerman, who died in 2015, to the not-so, like the Amsterdam-based contemporary artist Aukje Dekker.
Expanding the circle even further, since 2006 FIAC has offered a program called Hors les Murs, which means “outside the walls” and certainly lives up to its name, spreading projects up to a mile or two away from the Grand Palais.
One component, a collaboration with the Louvre, takes place in the Tuileries Gardens. Although the museum eliminated one piece at the last minute for objectionable content — a sculpture called “Domestikator” by the Dutch art and design collective Atelier van Lieshout and was moved to the Centre Pompidou — there are 27 other pieces filling the allées.
With works by contemporary masters like Thomas Houseago and George Condo amid the fountains and traditional statuary, “We think new audiences will engage with art,” Ms. Flay said.
The Hors les Murs program has two large single-project components, one in the Musée National Eugène Delacroix, devoted to the 19th-century painter, and the other at the Place Vendôme, long one of Paris’s most elegant town squares.
The six works she’s installing will be spread around the house. “Balance of O and I,” a round piece of fabric hanging from a long metal rod, will be in the staircase void. The blocky bronze floor piece “Nachthimmelhaus” will lurk in Delacroix’s studio. “Personne” — the most figural of the pieces, if you squint — will seem to be “relaxing,” Ms. Bock said, in the garden.
With his work “Une Colonne d’Eau” at the Place Vendôme, the Los Angeles-based artist Oscar Tuazon is explicitly riffing on the square’s most prominent landmark, the Vendôme Column, originally erected by Napoleon (it was torn down in 1871 and then rebuilt).
“I am doing horizontal columns in response to the vertical column,” said Mr. Tuazon, whose theme, water infrastructure, might be surprising to those who know the square for its history and the fancy shops that surround it.
The piece is made of large plastic tubes, whose diameter recalls the standing column, which will have tree trunks inside them.
The installation is oriented in the direction of the Seine, Paris’s iconic water feature, located on the other side of the Tuileries Gardens.
Visitors will be able to walk through the piece and interact with it, said Mr. Tuazon, who has made “dry” installations about water something of a specialty.
