Facing withering criticism from members of Congress and the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the governor of Puerto Rico moved on Sunday to cancel a $300 million contract awarded to a small Montana company to rebuild part of the island’s battered power grid.
Some stores, medical centers, restaurants and a fortunate few private residences are running on generators, but most of the island’s 3.4 million people are plunged into darkness after sunset.
Gov. Ricardo A. Rosselló announced on Sunday that he had asked the power authority’s board — which he appoints — to cancel the contract with Whitefish Energy Holdings, two days after FEMA issued a strongly worded statement criticizing the deal. FEMA said it had “significant concerns” and warned that it might refuse to cover the costs of the contract if it was found to be improper.
Mr. Rosselló said he had asked for a federal investigation of the contract award process, and for the power authority to appoint a trustee to review contract bidding. He stressed that no wrongdoing had been discovered, but he said that the contract had become a “distraction” and that attention had to be refocused on restoring service.
“I am making this determination because it is in the best interest of the people of Puerto Rico,” Mr. Rosselló said at a news conference.
The contract had been attracting intense scrutiny in Washington. The House Committee on Natural Resources, which oversees Puerto Rican affairs, sent a letter on Thursday to the power authority demanding all records connected to the contract. That same day, the inspector general’s office at the Department of Homeland Security said it was investigating. Mr. Rosselló also ordered an audit of the contract, and the board that Congress created to oversee Puerto Rico’s financial affairs asked a federal court to appoint a new manager to supervise the utility.
The chief executive of the power authority, Ricardo Ramos, defended the contract, which he awarded. But he said on Sunday that he understood the governor’s decision to cancel it because negative publicity and politics on the mainland had made the situation untenable.
Mr. Ramos said Whitefish had recently requested security protection because people had started throwing rocks and bottles at the company’s crews on the island, in the belief that the contract had been awarded corruptly.
“If you are in your house without power, and there’s a sense that the energy authority gave away $300 million to a company that either had or did not have experience, the reaction is not positive, and we’re seeing that,” Mr. Ramos said.
Democrats on the mainland and opposition politicians in Puerto Rico questioned the deal and were alarmed to see that the company’s chief executive, Andy Techmanski, came from the same small town in Montana as Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke. In an interview shortly after securing the contract, Mr. Techmanski told a local news station that he had been in touch with Mr. Zinke for “more resources.” Mr. Zinke’s son worked for Whitefish last summer.
Mr. Ramos had earlier said that Whitefish got the deal over competitors like PowerSecure because it did not ask for a large payment up front. Other companies, wary of Prepa’s bankruptcy, had demanded hefty sums, he said.
In interviews this month, Mr. Techmanski said he had flown to Puerto Rico before the contract was signed with Prepa on a “leap of faith,” and that his company’s ability to mobilize quickly was vital to winning the contract.
