Parents and advocates of integration in the East Village and Lower East Side have pushed for a plan to improve diversity in their district’s elementary schools for years.
On Thursday, the New York City Education Department announced that it was implementing a school choice system aimed at increasing the racial and socioeconomic diversity in their district, Community School District 1.
Parents in District 1 have been able to choose among any of the district’s elementary schools. Schools that are oversubscribed assign seats by lottery. Despite this freedom of choice, the district’s schools tend to be segregated by race and socioeconomics. In the 2016-17 school year, for example, the students at East Village Community School on East 12th Street were 58 percent white, but Public School 15, the Roberto Clemente School, on East Fourth Street, had only four white students out of 178.
Under the new plan, priority for 67 percent of the seats in kindergarten and prekindergarten at every elementary school will be given to students who qualify for free or reduced-price lunch, live in temporary housing or are learning English. Priority for the other 33 percent of seats will go to students who do not fall into any of those categories.
“The aspiration we’ve set is that each school would reflect the socioeconomic and linguistic diversity of the district as a whole,” Mr. Wallack said.
The city also has opened what it is calling a Family Resource Center, at one of the schools in the district, that is aimed at educating families about their options. Many parents base their choice of school on location or word of mouth, and according to the department, roughly 40 percent of families who applied to kindergarten in 2016 listed only one choice on their application.
The department announced a preliminary draft of the plan in September and then held meetings for parents. Minor changes to the initiative were made, including a pledge that an effort would be made for each school to admit a number of students with disabilities that reflects the districtwide average.
It is not clear what effect the policy will have. According to the department, only three of the district’s 16 elementary schools had kindergarten classes last year that came close to the 67 percent-33 percent breakdown. According to the department, using the application data from 2016, the new priorities would result in three more schools approaching that balance.
The department hopes, however, that the effect will be even bigger, because the staff at the Family Resource Center will encourage families to apply to a variety of schools.
Naomi Peña, the president of the District 1 community education council, an elected parent group, criticized the plan as not doing enough when it was first announced in September. But on Thursday, she was complimentary.
