WASHINGTON — The House took the first major legislative step Thursday toward enacting a promised overhaul of the tax code, approving a budget blueprint that would allow a future tax bill to pass Congress without any Democratic votes.
The House voted 219 to 206 to pass the budget resolution, with 18 Republicans voting against it.
The belated approval of a spending and revenue blueprint for the fiscal year that began on Sunday offered a momentary display of Republican cohesion as the party moves ahead in its attempt to overhaul the tax code for the first time since Ronald Reagan was president.
The document itself ostensibly charts a path toward a balanced budget over the next 10 years, giving Republicans something to offer their core conservative voters while providing Democrats with new lines of attack in the 2018 midterm elections.
But few people believe the broad spending road map will lead anywhere. What is important is parliamentary language that would shield a tax bill from a filibuster in the Senate. A week after Republicans conceded defeat in their attempt to dismantle the Affordable Care Act, that constituted a step forward in their new legislative quest.
“Our budget is the golden key that unlocks pro-growth tax reform,” said Representative Diane Black, Republican of Tennessee and the chairwoman of the House Budget Committee.
For Republican lawmakers still looking for a major legislative achievement in the Trump era, the hard part still remains. President Trump and Republicans in Congress need to agree on the contents of a bill to overhaul the tax code, a daunting task.
Democrats offered a starkly different take on the budget resolution, arguing that Republicans were clearing the way for a partisan tax plan that would benefit the rich.
To ease passage of a tax overhaul, the blueprint passed by the House includes language that would allow for a tax bill to be considered under special procedures in the Senate. That approach would allow approval of the bill with only 50 votes, with Vice President Mike Pence breaking the tie, rather than the 60 votes needed to overcome a filibuster. Republicans have only 52 seats in the Senate.
Republicans followed the same approach in their attempt to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act. But in that effort, they could never come up with a repeal measure that 50 Republican senators would support.
The same challenge looms now that the subject is taxes.
After facing pressure from lawmakers, Republican leaders are already backing away from a proposal to fully repeal the deduction for state and local taxes. Representative Leonard Lance, Republican of New Jersey, said the proposal to do away with that deduction, which is widely used in his state, was one of the main reasons he voted against the budget resolution on Thursday.
“I have confidence that leadership understands our concerns,” Mr. Lance said.
In the House this week, Republicans heralded the budget resolution as a step toward fiscal responsibility. The blueprint charts a course toward erasing annual budget deficits by the end of a decade, calling for trillions of dollars in spending cuts and sketching out major changes to Medicare and Medicaid.
But the changes called for in coming years are only aspirational. For the fiscal year that just started, Republicans and Democrats still need to reach a deal to fund the government beginning in December, when a stopgap spending measure is set to expire.
On Thursday, lawmakers from Texas sent a letter to the leaders of the House and Senate Appropriations Committees seeking $18.7 billion in additional disaster relief in response to Hurricane Harvey, underscoring how fluid the spending side of the budget is.
The budget resolution is also a political document, and its approval provided fodder to Democrats, who warned about the ramifications of the Republican plan.
The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee also seized on the budget resolution, highlighting, in a new online ad, the reduction in Medicare spending that is called for by the budget resolution.
The Senate Budget Committee unveiled its own budget resolution last week, and the panel approved it on Thursday, hours after the House passed its own budget blueprint.
To secure parliamentary protection, the House and Senate will need to agree on an identical budget resolution. Right now, their proposals have key differences.
The House version calls for a tax plan that would not add to the deficit. And in a nod to fiscal conservatives eager to rein in federal spending, it instructs House committees to find at least about $200 billion in savings.
The Senate version, on the other hand, would allow a tax bill that adds up to $1.5 trillion to the deficit over a decade. And Senate Republicans have shown no eagerness to pursue spending cuts as they go about trying to pass a tax bill.