The Metropolitan Museum of Art’s Costume Institute, lauded for the fabulousness of its exhibitions of Comme des Garçons, China and Alexander McQueen, finally has some healthy competition. After 70 years of neglect, the Museum of Modern Art has plunged headfirst into fashion, or something like it.
“Profuse” is a useful word with which to approach this ambitious, high-concept effort. Organized by Paola Antonelli, senior curator of the Modern’s architecture and design department, and Michelle Millar Fisher, a curatorial assistant, it has involved years of research and travel and is as anthropological as it is aesthetic.
It’s big, occupying all of the sixth floor’s galleries for temporary exhibitions, which hasn’t happened since the de Kooning extravaganza of 2011. Brilliant use is made of video and slide shows. Around 30 prototypes, including 20 newly commissioned by the museum, add sparks of ingenuity — and of course there is a gift shop fuller than usual of sartorial temptations.
But all in all, “Items” has few of the showstopping moments of extreme craftsmanship, innovation or material lavishness that are a staple of the Met’s productions. Including “items” like bluejeans, flip flops, tattoos and a burkini, it largely evades the air of expense, exclusivity and hauteur typical of these ventures. It’s even a bit on the austere side, harkening back to the Modern’s displays in the 1930s and ’40s of the latest kitchenware and furniture — shows that argued for modern design as an affordable way to improve modern life. It is, to its credit, an exercise in consciousness-raising that plots the flow of stylistic conventions from subcultures and colonial countries into the Western mainstream and highlights dress as self-expression and political protest — most directly, with a projection of graphic T-shirts.
Faithful to the museum’s way of telling the history of art as a linear, primarily Western phenomenon, “Items” also comes with its own canon — albeit one that is more global and historically aware in scope.
At its core, the show is a Who’s Who of mostly postwar garments and accessories — 111 items called “paragons of design’’ in the press statement. They are listed across a large wall at the exhibition’s entrance, and illustrated by the slide show opposite of “real” people wearing the chosen gear. In the galleries, examples of the anointed objects are presented, usually accompanied by variations that attest to their influence, and by the prototypes, which generally respond to, or extend, the classics.
The South African textile designer Laduma Ngxokolo, for example, gives new life to the venerable Aran fisherman sweater by adding rich colors to its cable-knitted patterns. The Bret.on project, by Unmade, a personalization start-up, has devised a computer program that will enable wearers to add their own Surrealistic swirls to the blue and white striped French sailor’s pullover. And Zhijun Wang, a Chinese designer, has bulked up the basic surgical mask, using designer sneakers as material, thus converting fetishized footwear into post-apocalyptic chic.
The clothing landscape is carefully culled and categorized, as perhaps only the Modern can do. A small section on luxury includes a beat-up Hermes Birkin handbag, a Tiffany diamond and a Rolex watch, but this is undercut by less costly expressions of extravagance, including door-knocker earrings and custom nail art.
Generally, “Items” focuses on garments and accessories that people around the world wear every day for any number of complex reasons — including climate, personal style, economics, religious faith or political stance. It presents the biker jacket, chinos, guayabera shirts and kaffiyeh head scarves, including a new prototype, by the Beirut-based architect Salim Al-Kadi, in bullet-deflecting Kevlar. Also on the list: all manner of sportswear and outerwear tracksuits, parkas, puffers and fleece. It is so people-oriented that it includes a prototype for a plus-size mannequin (most are size 0).
The jaw-dropping wows are likely to be heard just inside the door, with a phalanx of little black dresses — from Chanel to Rick Owens. The other opening salvo is disappointing: a display of undergarments, including the Wonderbra, Spanx and the y-front men’s brief, although the pair of pantyhose for disabled women — a prototype by Lucy Jones for Somarta — is inspiring. And this display is followed by one of the show’s best curatorial progressions, from 1950s maternity wear through the Snugli and fanny pack to a bulbous gingham ensemble from Comme des Garçon’s idiosyncratic 1997 “Bump Collection, ” In between, there’s the prototype for Wei Hung Chen’s Modular Dress 2.0, whose adjustable pleats accommodate both the expanding body during pregnancy and breast-feeding.
The bright red “A-POC Queen” (for A Piece of Cloth), an ensemble was formulated by Issey Miyake and his engineering designer Fujiwara Dai, from a single tube of knit fabric (like the one trailing overhead). It serves as the centerpiece for a big-umbrella idea about single-fabric garments and their economy (it includes the caftan, the abaya and the jumpsuit). At the show’s end, the history of men’s suiting is reprised with versions that include a Savile Row standard, developments by Thom Browne and Yohji Yamamoto, and an amazing -broad-shoulder zoot suit.
Things can become a bit small-grain, which is to say that the show sometimes turns a trifle bland in its familiarity. But when taken garment by garment, it is full of wonderful rabbit holes of narrative and information. Videos demonstrate the donning of hijabs and saris, and the making of the Panama hat and the sevenfold necktie. And sometimes a garment and its moving-image component form a spellbinding experience, as happens with the lacy, peekaboo Kinematics dress (black of course) by the design studio Nervous System. Made with Kinematics’s 4-D printing system it is essentially an aggregate of fractal-like holes each unique in size. But the real treat lies in understanding the dress’s versatility: It is a kind of jumper that all kinds of women can use, wearing whatever they want, or nothing, beneath it.
Sometimes the film outshines the garment.  Against a backdrop of midcentury avant-garde music dance, Ms. Tajima compares the turtleneck as a malleable symbol of dissent for beatniks, Black Panthers, feminists, and men tired of shirts and ties with the hijab and the West’s narrow, often phobic failure to understand it as an assertion of privacy and a refusal of “the consumption of beauty,” among much else. Her film’s argument is one of this invaluable show’s many memorable moments .
There are plenty of others to be gleaned here. Just make like the museum, and plunge in.