LONDON — An opposition lawmaker called on the British government on Thursday to investigate suspicions of Russian interference in Britain’s referendum on quitting the European Union, adding that there were “questions” about Arron Banks, one of the chief financial backers of the leave campaign.
Mr. Bradshaw’s intervention follows the publication of what he called “very worrying” reports “on the role of dark money” in the plebiscite, which was held in June 2016 and in which 52 percent of those who voted opted to leave.
Those who opposed Britain’s withdrawal, or Brexit, argued during the referendum that it would delight Moscow by weakening the European Union, which placed sanctions on Russia. But no links to Russian money have been proved.
The investigative reports into the financing of the leave campaign were published by the Open Democracy website and included a detailed examination of Mr. Banks’s finances.
Mr. Banks is a friend and political ally of Nigel Farage, the former leader of the U.K. Independence Party and one of President Trump’s biggest supporters in Britain. A businessman who made his money from insurance, Mr. Banks is thought to have spent about $12 million in cash, loans and other support for Brexit causes. He was the primary supporter of Leave.EU, for which Mr. Farage campaigned.
The reports by Open Democracy, a liberal advocacy group, suggested that Mr. Banks, who had faced recent business setbacks, was considerably less wealthy than the $330 million he claimed, raising questions about how he was able to provide such large-scale financing for the Brexit cause.
The reports’ authors acknowledged, however, that Mr. Banks’s “present financial status” is “somewhat unclear” because of his complex network of ownership stakes in different companies.
Based on a separate report, Mr. Bradshaw also said that there had been “illegal donations” to the Democratic Unionist Party, a political party in Northern Ireland that campaigned for Brexit and is supporting the British government in key votes in Parliament.
Because of the reporting rules then in effect, the party did not have to divulge the sources of its funds. The campaign finance law has since been changed to add more transparency.
Responding to Mr. Bradshaw in Parliament, Andrea Leadsom, the Conservative leader of the House of Commons, described the issue as “incredibly important,” adding that “any specific information should always be raised with the Electoral Commission,” referring to the body that oversees Britain’s election rules.
Speaking later, Mr. Bradshaw said that he was “extremely concerned that there was Russian interference in our referendum in the same way that there was in the U.S. presidential election.” He added that he was worried that the issue was not being treated seriously enough by the British government.
Mr. Bradshaw, a former journalist and ex-minister in the Labour government of Tony Blair, previously raised concerns about financing in last year’s referendum, during which he argued for Britain to remain in the European Union.
“Any allegation with evidence that a registered campaigner accepted impermissible donations from Russia would be investigated in line with the commission’s enforcement policy,” she added.
At one point, he describes attending a lunch at the London residence of the Russian ambassador, Alexander V. Yakovenko, in November 2015, in which he said he was invited to sample a rare vodka from a batch made for Stalin.
Mr. Banks has denied, however, that any Russian money was used in the Brexit referendum campaign.
