On his new solo album, “Carry Fire,” the onetime Led Zeppelin frontman explores “grooves and moods,” from the blues to North African rhythms.
He had been living in Austin, Tex., with his girlfriend at the time, the singer-songwriter Patty Griffin, who was also his bandmate on his 2010 album and tour, “Band of Joy.” And, for a time, he relished the opportunity to absorb American life and culture. “The hospitality and friendships and initiation into Americana — not just music — was marvelous,” he said.
The process began several years earlier, when he teamed with the bluegrass great Alison Kraus for the Nashville-recorded 2007 album “Raising Sand,” probably the most acclaimed and successful project of his post-Led Zeppelin career. (He last played with his old band 10 years ago this December, during a one-off gig at the O2 arena in London that made headlines around the world.) The pair won an album of the year Grammy, and the LP went platinum; along the way, he discovered an entire world of Appalachian music and the joys of vocal harmonies, which were never a big part of his musical repertoire.
Mr. Plant was calling from the lobby of the Frome Memorial Theater in Somerset, England, which was built just after the First World War and is within easy driving distance of his house in Shropshire, near the Welsh border. Since returning from the United States, he has lived, as he put it, “only eight miles from where I learned how to speak French and do geometry.” Affable and chatty, he cheerfully recounted tales from his past lives: as the golden-maned, howling frontman of Led Zeppelin; in partnership with the Zeppelin guitarist Jimmy Page as Page and Plant; a foray into ’80s synth-rock; and the rootsy solo path he has forged over the last two decades.
On the theater stage, his band the Sensational Space Shifters — an eclectic crew of British musicians, several of whom he’s worked with on and off since the mid-2000s — was running through a mix of solo material and reconfigured Led Zeppelin classics. The group was deep in rehearsals for a tour behind Mr. Plant’s latest album, “Carry Fire,” out on Friday: a swirling mix of deep blues, mountain music, North African rhythms and Zeppelin-heavy weight.
So he returned to the land of his birth, gathered up the band and got back to work, first with the 2014 album “lullaby and ... The Ceaseless Roar,” and now with “Carry Fire,” both of which largely comprise original songs, as opposed to the covers he emphasized with Ms. Krauss and the Band of Joy. With the Sensational Space shifters, Mr. Plant embraces a modern, digital approach distinct from the painstaking analog perfectionism of Led Zeppelin. Various combinations of the band — which includes the keyboard player John Baggott, a veteran of trip-hop acts like Massive Attack and Tricky — split off to write and record interesting chunks of music, which are then woven together in the studio.
The result is a heady, autumnal record, blending Mr. Plant’s early influences (the folk musicians Bert Jansch and John Fahey), blues-fueled riffs, Berber sounds and Bristol trip-hop sonics. Many of the songs, including the title track, are love ballads tinged with fables. In contrast, “Carving Up the World Again … A Wall Not a Fence” is a Sun Records-ish stomper spiked with a curling, Middle Eastern guitar solo that delves into post-“Brexit” and President Trump discourse. Taking part of its title from a quote by Mr. Trump, Mr. Plant takes aim at jingoism and the refugee crisis. “There’s progress in many areas of humanity, but it’s juxtaposed with doors slamming and pain,” he said.
The sole cover, of an old rockabilly tune called “Bluebirds Over the Mountain,” gets new energy from a fractured electronic beat and the twinned vocals of Mr. Plant and the Pretenders’ Chrissie Hynde.
When Led Zeppelin ended in 1980, Mr. Plant set out to live a more human-scale life. To the public annoyance of his old bandmates, he’s been emphatic about not reviving the band for a full-scale tour, and when asked about it he tends to make an artistic argument about wanting to resist nostalgia. (Fans of “Raising Sand” have more reason to hope: “Alison and I talk about it all the time.”) But there might be another, simpler, reason — maybe there just isn’t any payday, no matter how vast, worth more than his carefully cultivated life?
