Lorca had a cagey answer — “I don’t trust doctors.” But the situation sums up “Star Trek: Discovery,” which streams Sundays on CBS All Access. It’s dark — literally and figuratively dark, in the way that ambitious dramas are nowadays. But it’s not clear if all that murk is entirely necessary or productive.
“Discovery” has brought the 50-year-old franchise — transporters, replicators and all — into the present by moving into its past, a decade before the events of the original series.
The series began with a visually striking two-episode head-fake, which found Capt. Philippa Georgiou (Michelle Yeoh) and her First Officer, Michael Burnham (Sonequa Martin-Green) in familiar “Trek” territory, on a mission of exploration. It turned into a battle, as a run-in with the hostile Klingons led to Georgiou’s death and all-out war.
Burnham exemplifies many of the ideals that we once saw in captains Kirk, Picard et al. — respect for the rights of sentient species, the sense of wonder in exploration, restraint in the use of science. But amid the wartime exigencies of “Discovery” these notions are under siege, not ascendant. The potentially fruitful question of “Discovery” is to ask: what happens to your principles when they become inconvenient?
But a little more than halfway through the season’s first eight-episode run (the “second chapter” begins in January), the story lacks momentum. The dialogue is stilted. The chemistry among the still-forming central team is shaky. The series doesn’t have a voice so much as a mood, and that mood is, usually, a bummer.
Some fans have complained that “Discovery” has betrayed the idealistic, optimistic spirit of its earlier fleetmates. I don’t think that’s the problem. “Star Trek” is a kind of national mythology, and it has every right, maybe even the creative obligation, to change to suit its times. (Weirdly, Fox’s joke-not-a-joke “The Orville” is more slavishly like the original series.) Two decades ago, “Deep Space Nine” (for my money the best “Trek”) also focused on the compromises of war.
Rather, “Discovery” feels like it’s adrift between the adventure-of-the-week format of its network-TV predecessors and the kind of complex serial favored by cable and streaming. It has the trappings of serious pay-TV drama: darkness, willingness to kill major characters “Game of Thrones”-style, even profanity. (This “Trek” sets its phasers to “F.”) But they’re mostly superficial.
The most direct antecedent for “Discovery” might not be any “Trek” series but the 2004–09 reboot of “Battlestar Galactica.” That series was also a bleaker riff on a previous series, turning the struggle of humanity against the Cylons — a society of robots that mankind created — into one of the best fictional treatments of the war on terror. Ingeniously, it rethought the Cylons as monotheistic zealots, murderous but with a culture and ideals that could not be easily dismissed.
It would seem that “Discovery” wants to do something similar for the Klingons, the alien enemies (and eventually, allies) who, here, have just united against the Federation. Here, they’re isolationists whose rallying cry — “Remain Klingon!” — one producer has said intentionally echoes Trump-era nationalism.
These Klingons also have elements of cultlike fanaticism, and there’s reference to their having carried out “terrorist” attacks. (They’ve also gotten a makeover, with more prominent prosthetics than their old forehead ridges.) The result is a generic, bellicose mishmash of an enemy, whose subtitle-heavy scenes slow the show down rather than add depth.
There are flashes of promise, especially in the supporting characters. Doug Jones stands out as Lieutenant Saru, whose sensitivity to danger comes from belonging to a species that was bred as prey. His genetically wired wariness, like the spore-drive story, suggests a “Trek” attuned to biology like its predecessors were to physics.
“Discovery” can be effectively eerie and moody. But it’s not urgent or inventive in a way that cuts through the somberness. Dimming the lights, it turns out, does not automatically give you a better view of the stars.