Through Oct. 21. Kaufmann Repetto, 535 West 22nd Street, Manhattan; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , kaufmannrepetto.com.
Over the years she has often collaborated with her husband, Michael Frimkess, glazing vessels that he threw on a wheel. (They made a point of not consulting each other.) There are some of their collaborations here, with Mr. Frimkess’s contributions distinguished by their relative symmetry and finish. But Ms. Suarez Frimkess is at her best when glazing her own small hand-built vessels — plates, bowls, tiles, Japanese-influenced boxes, teacups and teapots — as well as small figurines. Marvelously irregular and sometimes almost as thin as leaves, they have a delicate looseness well-matched with glazes that often leave the clay body showing through. Their spontaneity can evoke Peter Voulkos’s towering, more Expressionistic forms, but on a small scale that is at once worldly, exquisite and laced with humor. They suggest an artist in love with her medium and buzzing with ideas.
Ms. Suarez Frimkess is fairly well known in her hometown, Los Angeles, but this is only her second solo show in New York, following her 2014 debut at White Columns. With works dating back to 1970, this selection is the first in these parts to delve into her past. It proves that she has been a genius for a while.
Through Oct. 22. Klaus von Nichtssagend, 54 Ludlow Street, Manhattan; klausgallery.com.
The horizon lines in Holly Coulis’s exhibition “Table Studies” at Klaus von Nichtssagend function like tightropes or trick devices. These lines bisecting the canvas, where the horizon would fall in a traditional landscape painting, are sometimes table tops or mirroring surfaces in which objects placed bottom-to-bottom reflect one other. Sometimes they seem to indicate a waterline in which vessels are immersed.
Ms. Coulis’s paintbrush produces other tricks. Although the canvases are composed of layers of flat color, the barely defined subjects — food, domestic animals, teapots and other containers — are outlined with two or three veins of contrasting color that create a glowing effect, like neon tubes. You see this particularly in “Cat and Potato Chips” (2017), in which the different-colored outlines amplify the spooky presence of a black cat and the banal (toxic?) food. In “Hot Dog Sun” (2017), sausage links fanning out from a yellow half-circle serve as rays of light, while elsewhere overlapping forms are colored in disparate hues to suggest transparency, refraction or multiple points of view.
The news release accompanying the show suggests a predictable roster of painterly references: Giorgio Morandi, William Scott and Gary Hume. (I would add William Bailey and Cézanne.) Although Ms. Coulis leans heavily on art history, she breaks with it in interesting ways, stripping the canvas down to near essentials and transforming still life into the intriguing-sounding “Table Studies.” Balancing minimal and dense, electric and subdued, her paintings initially seem conservative, but they start with traditional elements and end up turning the tables on them.
Through Oct. 22. JTT, 191 Chrystie Street, Manhattan; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , jttnyc.com.
Dominick Di Meo, born in Niagara Falls, N.Y., in 1927, has spent the better part of a century thinking about his childhood treatment in a polio ward, but you can hardly blame him. He did spend four years strapped to a bed, and saw many fellow patients carried out in body bags. What’s surprising is that his long preoccupation with the specter of death should have achieved, at least as evidenced in his work, such a good-humored, marital intimacy.
In two large black-and-white, mixed-media drawings he made in Chicago in the mid-60s, titled “The Somnambulator” and “Somnambulator,” Mr. Di Meo treats his subject with theatrical distance. Slender white arms, legs and mask-like faces — as well as, in the earlier drawing, forks — fly across a simple landscape of existential night in loose heaps. What isn’t clear is if they are bodies falling apart or provisional human identities coming accidentally into being.
But he grabs his subject in a hearty, if still slightly formal, embrace in a series of small wall-mounted sculptures made between the 1970s and the ’90s, totemic constructions of crumpled canvas mounted on wire mesh and coated in various synthetics. The untitled pieces are all a warm gray color evoking funerary ashes, newspaper ink or discarded papier-mâché and decorated with scores of tiny white putty spheres. Marked with three black dots like the holes in a bowling ball, they split the difference between a skull in the Parisian catacombs and a happy face.
