MEXICO CITY — The forces driving violence in Mexico, which is now on track for its worst year in decades, were first set in motion 20 years ago by two events that were, at the time, celebrated as triumphs.
Since then, a series of bad breaks, missteps and self-imposed crises have led to an explosion of violence. Last year there were more than 20,000 killings. This year is on track to be worse, exceeding the 2011 record, which was thought to be the drug war’s apex.
“Drug trafficking is not this violent in other countries,” Guillermo Valdés, a former leader of CISEN, the civil national security intelligence service, said in an interview in Mexico City.
The implosion of Colombian cartels set off a fierce competition in Mexico for control of the drug trade. A new cartel, La Familia Michoacána, broke off from a larger group, then cemented its power by deploying extreme, theatrical violence. Though they principally targeted other cartels, the gruesome attacks shocked Mexico.
That same year, Felipe Calderón won the presidency by a hair. Though monitors approved the vote, his leftist opponent called it illegitimate, and the narrow victory for Mr. Calderón left him without a strong mandate.
Shortly after taking office, the new president declared war on the cartels and sent in the military.
Critics say Mr. Calderón sought to legitimize his presidency through the show of force.
Mr. Calderón adopted the so-called kingpin strategy, in which troops captured or killed cartel leaders. This generated headlines, pleased the United States and could be accomplished top-down, with little input from corrupt or weak local law enforcement.
But this short-term solution to the drug war deepened long-term problems.
In bypassing mayors and governors because Mexico’s pre-democratic practices had left them systemically corrupt and unaccountable, the government further reduced their accountability.
And in bypassing already weak local police and judges, the government allowed those institutions to atrophy, with money and political attention diverted to military and federal forces instead.
Reforms, desperately needed to fix outdated practices — 24-hour police shifts, poor evidentiary standards, a rule that forbids most police officers from conducting investigations — drifted.
As the kingpin strategy fractured the cartels, smaller groups rose in their place.
Drug trafficking required resources and infrastructure that the new groups lacked, leading many to turn to kidnapping, theft and extortion. Predatory crimes spiked.
Ordinary Mexicans, once bystanders to the conflict, became its targets at a moment when the state had left them vulnerable.
The solution to the problem would seem obvious. Strong police and prosecutors, overseen by politicians who are held accountable by voters, could close the vacuum in which gangs and corrupt officials flourish.
Instead, disorder and violence have risen.
During the one-party era, this was meant to impose accountability, which flowed from party leadership. Oversight institutions, seen as superfluous, never fully developed.
Democracy, as intended, undercut the party’s once all-encompassing power. But the old system built around the assumption of a strong central authority remains in place.
Though recent electoral changes will allow some officials to stand for re-election in 2021, deeper problems are taking root.
As public outrage over corruption rises, party leaders, seeing their own careers in peril, are becoming more reluctant to risk pushing for change.
“I cannot think of a single prosecutor or judge who stands out” on fighting corruption, said Paul F. Lagunes, a Columbia University professor who studies corruption.
“There are people staking their careers on this, but not in the judiciary — in the press,” Mr. Lagunes said.
The combination of corruption, weak accountability and weak institutions has left the state vulnerable. In poor and rural areas, it has effectively receded. Criminal groups and youth gangs are filling the void, co-opting local officials or simply muscling them out.
The result may be less dramatic than Mr. Calderón’s drug war, in which warring cartels publicly displayed dismembered corpses. But it is just as deadly, playing out in thousands of home invasions, gang killings and stickups gone wrong.
Businesses and middle-class Mexicans are hiring private security in record numbers. But like the Army, hired guards cannot solve crimes or lock up suspects.
Rural communities, which are more vulnerable, have formed “self-defense” militias to run off gangs and mayors alike.
Inevitably, the militias are even more corruptible and less accountable than the police they replaced. Nearly all target their onetime sponsors for extortion, robbery and kidnapping. Many are involved in the heroin trade, which is booming as opioid addiction drives up American demand.
In a disturbing trend, desperate and frightened communities increasingly seek at least the illusion of security by lynching suspected criminals.
Each election, he said, brings a new official with a new three-year plan. Most, he added, leave office conspicuously wealthier.
Mr. Valdés, the former head of the intelligence service, described facing a similar struggle in top levels of government.
But he found those institutions — dominated by parties rather than technocrats and subject to the whims of officials who are required by law to cycle out every term — unresponsive, just as Mr. Torjes had.
