And Guilin mi fen (rice noodles) — for which the city is as famed as for its beauty — are still a rarity in New York. Taste of Guilin in Sunset Park, Brooklyn, serves them hot and quick; so did, briefly, a now-shuttered storefront in Flushing, Queens.
At Yuan, which opened in the East Village in July, the noodles are the centerpiece of a menu distractingly stocked with stray dim sum and cross-regional Chinese dishes. Ignore them. The noodles are what you’ve come for.
When the bowl lands on the table, all that is visible is a crowded topography of deep-fried soybeans, ready to cave in with a crunch that echoes in the skull; clips of pickled long beans shining and sour from a wallow in vinegar; and chile flakes, scallion and torn cilantro, looking as if they were flung to the winds. Thin panels of long-stewed beef, agreeably pliant, overlap pork belly cut like bacon and thrust under the broiler until the edges are somehow crisp and chewy at once.
The noodles wait below, as thick as spaghetti, slippery but still springy. At the very bottom is the “secret” sauce. Once churned with the other ingredients — “mix many times,” the waitress instructed gravely one evening — it takes possession.
Its base is a broth of pork and beef, both bones and meat, simmered for eight hours for lushness. Fermented bean curd gives it a salty tang, tempered by the sweetness of star anise, licorice root and dried luo han guo, a small gourd known in the West as monk fruit (and a sugar substitute) and native to Guangxi. A whiff of lemongrass nods to Guangxi’s neighbor across the border, Vietnam. Other spices and herbs must remain nameless.
Jacob Ding, the owner and noodle chef (Yuteng Chen, from Guangdong Province, oversees the dim sum and entrees), grew up in Nanning, Guangxi’s capital, and settled in Missouri with his family as a teenager. In the spring of last year he started moonlighting from his job as a real estate broker to sell mi fen from a food stall at LIC Flea & Food in Queens, a trial run before opening Yuan.
In Guilin, the dish is often eaten at bare-bones shops while you are half-crouched on tiny stools, the noodles heaped in metal bowls with nothing but meat and sauce. Everything else (pickles, chile, herbs) is a condiment, for diners to calibrate as they wish. Soup, too, may be added, ladled from a communal pot or poured from a tap. “It’s kind of self-serve,” Mr. Ding said.
Here, the stools are of comfortable height and polished wood, in a minimalist room with concrete floors and, on the walls, gauzily painted characters from the beloved wuxia (martial arts) novels of Jin Yong. Soup is delivered to the table as a side, a limpid broth of pork bones and ham with a warming lick of ginger. Some might pour it into the noodles halfway through the meal; I preferred it as a chaser and gentle comedown.
The rest of the menu is mostly peripheral, apart from cucumber rinsed in black vinegar and vegetable dumplings with a surprise of crunchy taro, a tribute to the taro-growing Lipu county in Guangxi. Loveliest is a mochi ball with a snow of coconut and, hidden within, red bean paste — no more than a thumbprint’s worth, and just enough.
Mr. Ding offers a few variants on traditional Guilin mi fen, including a gloss of truffle oil, which brings a faint perfume and extra weight on the tongue: interesting, but unnecessary. Elsewhere the noodles, imported from China, recur in a hearty, straightforward hot-and-sour beef soup flaring with chile oil and black bean paste, and mired alongside the enormous Shanghainese meatballs called lion’s heads, in what seems less a soup than a sweet glaze.
Better is lao you fen, translated here as “old-buddy style” noodles, street food from Mr. Ding’s hometown, Nanning. The broth is clear but has a powerful, soul-deep funk, leaching from fermented bamboo shoots. Below are cakes of ground pork laced with rice wine. Stories of the dish’s origins vary — a favorite tea shop, a swim in the river — but boil down to this: A friend falls ill. Soup restores him to life.