Welcome to the Smarter Living newsletter. The Smarter Living team emails readers once a week with tips and advice for living a better, more fulfilling life. Sign up here to get it in your inbox every Monday morning.
Daylight saving time comes to an end for most of us this weekend, bringing that twice-yearly ritual of feeling completely out of sorts the next Monday as we adjust our sleeping schedules.
This is the simplest, but most important, question to ask yourself: Are you tired?
Generally, most adults need seven to nine hours of sleep per night. Yes, life often makes that impossible, but it’s a target we all should shoot for, so go to bed when you’re sleepy (and, if you can, wake up at the same time every morning).
But if you’re getting enough hours in and you’re still sleepy throughout the day, it’s possible the sleep you’re getting isn’t as restful as it could be.
The second most useful app I have on my phone (after my food tracker) is Sleep Cycle. I turn it on when I’m about to fall asleep, and it tracks the duration and quality of my rest. Modern technology — what a world!
Of all the aspects of the quantified self I engage in, analyzing my sleep patterns is by far my favorite. In the same way a food tracker forces you to look at what you put into your body, tracking your sleep makes you realize you’re probably not getting nearly as much sleep as you should.
Of course, you can always go low-tech and keep a sleep diary — and to help you out, here is the handy NYT sleep diary you can print for all your tracking needs.
While we’re listening to our bodies, let’s be honest: Do mornings just not work for you? It’s fine if they don’t! But knowing is half the battle, and by not listening to your natural rhythms you might be trying to create certain sleep habits that simply aren’t a fit for your life.
Here’s the NYT quiz to find out whether you’re a morning person or a creature of the night.
What are your tips for waking up refreshed in the morning? Let me know at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| or tweet me @timherrera.
How Smart a Traveler Are You? Here are a few questions, culled from recent articles from our Travel Tips collection, to test your travel savvy.
The Secret to Good Toast? It’s Your Freezer Buy good bread. Slice and stash it in the freezer. Enjoy delicious toast on demand.
College Advice I Wish I’d Taken I’m a teacher, but as an undergraduate, I was the type of mediocre student I now disdain.
Scared of Dark Paint? Don’t Be Paint companies are predicting a very dark 2018. But designers say that’s a good thing — and here’s why.
How to Build a Skin Care Routine Great skin is not simply a matter of DNA — your daily habits, in fact, have a big impact on what you see in the mirror. We’ll help you sort through the basics of skin care.
■ These 13 Exercises Will Prepare You for Work’s Toughest Situations I nodded along to almost every single paragraph in this article because the advice felt so relatable, as well as so practical.
■ An Illustrated Guide to Categorizing Yourself Nothing feels quite as good as pinpointing your exact personality through the internet, especially when it can help you figure out what will make it easier to thrive at work.
■ Why You Can Focus in a Coffee Shop but Not in Your Open Office As someone who loves background noise, but gets (too) annoyed by people popping by my desk unannounced, the research here made me feel far more justified in this contradiction.
■ Ask These 9 Questions Before Every Meeting to Avoid Wasting Time We’ve all sat in meetings and wondered why we were there. If only everyone asked these nine questions, that would be an issue of the past.
■ Your Handy Guide to How Long You Can Wait to Respond to That Email Because no, you don’t have to answer every single one the second it comes into your inbox.