In early 2014 Ela Darling, 31, a pornographic actress, recorded her first virtual reality sex scene. She was in a college dorm room at the University of Maryland dressed in an R2-D2 swimsuit and high athletic socks. She sat on a twin bed, next to a wooden desk, and spoke to the camera as if it were a real person. There was no story line and no other actors.
Ms. Darling had been filming pornography since she was 22 and took her job seriously. It was her responsibility to convince audiences to connect with her physically and emotionally. She tried everything, including acting out bondage fetishes, performing erotic electrostimulation (“electrosex”) on another woman and dressing as a real-estate agent. Yet no matter what she did to entice and engage, the results had always been voyeuristic, since there was always a screen separating her and her fans.
This time, though, was different. Virtual reality uses many camera lenses to record the same scene from hundreds of angles. When the takes are stitched together, the viewer gets a 180- or 240-degree view of the room and the feeling that he or she is there, participating. As soon as Ms. Darling viewed the scene she recorded, she knew virtual reality would be a sea change to her job and the adult-entertainment industry.
By 2025 pornography will be the third-largest VR sector, according to estimates prepared by Piper Jaffray, an investment and management firm. Only video games and N.F.L.-related content will be larger, it predicted, and the market will be worth $1 billion.
“We’re getting more and more of it every day,” said Mark Kernes, a senior editor at AVN Media Network, which covers the industry. “We are leading the technology in this area. Sex sells, and where there is money to be made, there will be entrepreneurs who want to adopt it and make money from it,” some by offering it for free to increase clicks.
Ms. Darling first experienced regular old VR at E3, a conference for the video-game industry. Excited by the pornography possibilities, she found a college student on Reddit who knew the technology but lacked a star. Before long, Ms. Darling started streaming weekly VR segments live from her bedroom in Los Angeles.
She was one of the first VR webcam women, according to Mr. Kernes. She then started a company named VRTube.xxx to make the technology, now licensed to Cam4.com, which employs over 40 performers.
Though the pornography industry as a whole is challenging to regulate, considering the potential for abuse, disease and exploitation, the virtual kind comes with extra moral and maybe legal issues. For example, can you use someone’s likeness to have sex with them in virtual reality?
“Virtual reality is like the Wild Wild West,” said Bryony Cole, the host of “Future of Sex,” a podcast that explores technology and sexuality.
At this year’s AVN Adult Entertainment Expo, a convention and trade show held each January in Las Vegas, the latest advancements in virtual reality pornography were on display.
There are also companies that are adding taste and touch to the experience.
 “As the action ramps up so does the vibrations of the vibrator,” he said.
One of the most buzzed-about inventions has been the sex robot. The first one, Harmony, was introduced in May by a company named Realbotix. 
“How do you feel about sex?” an unknown presenter asks her in one video.
“Sex is one of the most fascinating things in the world,” she responds in a raspy voice. “I don’t see anything wrong with it.” Harmony can connect with virtual reality so the user can interact with her in that space; she can perform all the acts the viewer is watching.
Many sex therapists and educators are interested in the new technology, just as a dentist might be with the latest plaque-detection gizmos. Ms. Richmond worked with BaDoinkVR, a virtual-reality company in Rochester, N.Y., to create Virtual Sexology, a series of free videos that help men and women overcome common sex problems.
A recent video, updated in June, takes women into the bedroom where they see how one blond, busty woman arouses herself before sex.  As her breathing heats up, a voice-over says that some women need to be physically touched before feeling any desire for sex. The first video, aimed at men, was the most downloaded video on BaDoinkVR.com in 2016 — an impressive feat considering it was competing with noneducational pornography.
Ms. Cole, the podcast host, is most excited about how virtual reality can be used in sex education.
Barbara Rothbaum, a professor in the department of psychiatry and behavioral sciences at Emory University School of Medicine and the director of Emory’s Veterans Program, is studying how virtual reality can help treat people suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder caused by military sexual trauma.
The program is building scenes that take victims to barracks, tents, private living quarters, latrines, offices or remote buildings and vehicles, where the trauma may have taken place. The idea is that going back to these places virtually will help victims confront their memories so they can move forward with more internal peace.
But for virtual reality to work, the scenes have to be so lifelike that users get lost in them and take them for reality. They have to feel like they are participants, not just observers. “We can create 3-D bodies in virtual reality and do whatever we want with them,” Ms. Cole said. As the technology becomes good enough to make that happen, issues are bound to arise.
Mr. McMullen said an issue his company has is clients commissioning dolls that look exactly like people they know in real life, maybe an ex-girlfriend they never got over or someone about whom they fantasize. His company requires written consent from the model for his or her likeness to be used.
She is worried about the technology assimilating into the culture as easily as dating apps, drawing people away from flesh-and-blood encounters.
 It is, after all, much more lifelike than traditional pornography.
