2. Michigan’s voters will decide Tuesday’s biggest presidential contest. Blue-collar whites are driving the popularity of Mr. Trump there, but elsewhere, a backlash against him is mounting: Republican groups are dumping millions of dollars into new attack ads, and Mr. Trump’s harsh rhetoric has prompted some Mexican immigrants to seek citizenship in time to vote against him. On the Democratic side, Hillary Clinton and a notably aggressive Bernie Sanders debated Sunday in Flint.
3. Nancy Reagan will be buried alongside her husband, Ronald Reagan, at his presidential library in Simi Valley, Calif., on Friday. She died on Sunday in Los Angeles of congestive heart failure, at age 94. The former first lady was a fierce guardian of her husband’s image. She was also his trusted adviser and, in his later years, his caregiver as he battled Alzheimer’s disease.
4. Another notable loss may not be a household name, as Mrs. Reagan was, but he created something that is: email, or at least the use of its defining symbol. Raymond Tomlinson, who died Saturday at age 74, was a computer programmer working on Arpanet, a forerunner of the Internet, in the late 1960s and early 1970s when he needed a symbol to separate a user name from a destination address. He chose the plump little @ sign.
5. About 150 fighters from the Islamist militant group Shabab were killed by U.S. strikes in Somalia. The group, which claimed responsibility for an airport bombing in the country on Monday, had been training for an attack against American troops and their allies in East Africa, officials said. In another deadly attack, militants struck a town in Tunisia near the country’s border with Libya, where the Islamic State has aggressively expanded. But in Libya’s capital, Tripoli, shown above, a precarious order holds.
6. Maria Sharapova, one of the biggest stars in tennis, said she tested positive for a banned substance at the Australian Open in January. Her last match was a loss to Serena Williams at the tournament in question. Sharapova, 28, has been the highest-paid female athlete for 11 years in a row.
8. And Hulk Hogan, the former wrestling champion, is getting his day in court against the website Gawker. Terry Gene Bollea — his legal name — is suing the media company in a $100 million invasion-of-privacy lawsuit for publishing a tape of him having sex with a friend’s wife. Mr. Bollea said he felt “pretty darn good” about the case.
9. As it spreads to white, urban, suburban and rural areas in New England and elsewhere, the heroin epidemic is increasingly on display in public places like restaurant bathrooms and even city buses. There’s no record of how many deaths from overdosing have taken place in public, but the problem has prompted some businesses and organizations to rethink who gets access to their bathrooms, and some groups are calling for supervised injection facilities.
10. The final volume of a reprinted “Peanuts” comic strip is due in May, and the author of its foreword is none other than President Obama. Alec Baldwin, Patton Oswalt and Whoopi Goldberg are among those who have introduced earlier installments. “Like millions of Americans, I grew up with ‘Peanuts.’ But I never outgrew it,” Mr. Obama wrote.
Dr. Andreas G. Tzakis from the Cleveland Clinic confirmed that the first uterus transplant performed in the United States was a success and that the patient was doing very well.
11. Lastly, the recipient of the nation’s first uterus transplant, a 26-year-old identified only as Lindsey, spoke on Monday, thanking her donor and the team of surgeons at the Cleveland Clinic.
Want to look back? Here’s the Weekend Briefing.