The daughter of Abe Vigoda, the sad-face actor who died last month at 94 and was known for his roles in “The Godfather” and the television show “Barney Miller,” said on Monday it was wrong for her father to have been left out of the “In Memoriam” segment of the Academy Awards on Sunday night.
Mr. Vigoda’s daughter, Carol Vigoda Fuchs, said she watched the ceremony from her home in New Jersey with friends, expecting to see his image during the segment. “I have to say it was very disappointing, and I feel that we were all cheated and I don’t understand why,” she said in a telephone interview on Monday.
She said she had not heard from the Academy and would not be formally seeking an explanation, saying that should be up to his fans and people in the industry.
Then, as The New York Times reported in 1997, Mr. Vigoda, by dint of name recognition, became a member of that tribe of aged entertainers, politicians and others about whom one can never quite be sure: Are they still alive? Or did I miss the obituary? Websites sprang up to address the question.
On Sunday night, fans were hoping for that final, traditional closure when the Oscar ceremony put aside the glitz and unfurled the mournful portion of the evening, screening a video that sifted through the boldface names of cinema who had passed in the last year: Wes Craven (director, writer producer), Saeed Jaffrey (actor), Miroslav Ondricek (cinematographer).
This was not the first time someone had been left out of the memorial video, of course. Joan Rivers was omitted last year, for example.
The omission seemed perplexing because other entertainers who likewise died in the early part of 2016, like the actor Alan Rickman and the iconic musician and sometimes actor David Bowie, were featured.
Mr. Vigoda was not the only person who was forgotten. The French director Jacques Rivette and the Portuguese filmmaker Manoel de Oliveira were also left out, as was Tony Burton, who played the role of the trainer in the “Rocky” franchise. He died last week. Also missing was Geoffrey Lewis, the father of Juliette Lewis.