NAIROBI, Kenya — When a Chinese clothing company swooped in and offered to sponsor Kenya’s famed runners, Nike panicked, Kenyan officials say.
In a contract signed several years ago, Nike agreed to pay hundreds of thousands of dollars in honorariums and a one-time $500,000 “commitment bonus,” which the former employee called a bribe.
The money was supposed to be used to help train and support poor Kenyan athletes who dream of running their way out of poverty.
Instead, it was immediately sucked out of the federation’s bank account by a handful of Kenyan officials and kept off the books.
Nike has denied any wrongdoing, saying in a statement that its payments were intended to help athletes, and it does not appear to be under investigation by the United States authorities.
For more than 20 years, Nike Inc. has been paying the Kenyan national runners’ association millions of dollars in exchange for the Kenyans wearing Nike’s signature swoosh, superb advertising in the running world.
Ethiopian runners, who also excel at middle- and long-distance races, have a sponsorship agreement with Adidas, but an official there said their contract contained no commitment bonus. Several professional runners said they had heard of signing bonuses for individual athletes, but never such a large one-time bonus for a national federation.
Nearly every day there seems to be allegations of some new scandal: a government ministry buying plastic pens for $85 apiece, a Supreme Court judge taking a $2 million bribe, questions about what exactly happened to the proceeds of a multibillion-dollar bond deal.
Western nations have threatened sanctions, and the United States government has been especially vocal about corruption, with White House officials unveiling a 29-point plan to root it out.
The allegations go back to 2009, when Kenyan officials, according to the email chain, accused Nike of treating Kenya as a “dumping ground” for substandard Nike clothing.
But those complaints may have been a ruse by Kenyan officials to get out of the Nike contract so they could receive a bribe from another company, said a member of the executive board of Kenya’s track and field federation, known as Athletics Kenya.
The former administrative assistant requested that his name not be revealed, saying it was extremely dangerous to expose high-level corruption in Kenya — a sentiment shared by others.
“Put that away! You could get killed for that!” exclaimed a member of Athletics Kenya’s board, his eyes widening when a reporter pulled out the amended contract from Nike listing the $500,000 commitment bonus during an interview at a quiet Nairobi restaurant.
Within days, according to bank records, the $500,000 was withdrawn by Athletics Kenya’s top officials. There were no major track and field activities going on at the time, and the board member and the former administrative assistant said just about all of the money had been concealed from Athletics Kenya’s executive committee, including $200,000 sent to a bank account in Hong Kong. Several analysts said the chairman’s asking for the money to be wired to his personal account and then sending a follow-up email labeled “Urgent!!” should have been a tipoff to Nike that something was untoward.
A federal prosecutor consulted for his opinion on these allegations said that in many corruption cases, concealment was an indicator of criminal intent and that in this case, there was no obvious concealment by Nike — the commitment bonus was explicitly laid out in the contract. The prosecutor, who spoke on the condition he would not be identified, also said it would be very difficult to prove that Nike executives knew that the Kenyan officials were going to steal the bonus.
The former administrator, however, has little doubt.
Analysts said this case was especially tricky because it did not appear to fall under the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, the American law that covers crimes involving American companies and foreign government officials. The Kenyan running association, while it receives some government money, is not a Kenyan government agency. “The world of sports has evolved in a governance hole,” said Roger Pielke Jr., a political scientist at the University of Colorado.
He noted that sports federations, like Athletics Kenya and FIFA, international soccer’s governing body, which is embroiled in its own corruption saga, often fell between the cracks of the rules that governed businesses, public agencies and traditional nonprofit organizations, even though sports federations have qualities of all three.
Mr. Pielke said bribery, embezzlement and “unsavory, improper business practices” were common.
