“The Nest” is a novel in the Squabbling Sibling genre. Unless such stories are told by someone of the caliber of Chekhov or Dostoyevsky, they tend to be domestic comedies padded with lucky coincidences and studded with old grudges. And they need to be set in motion by some convenient family crisis and venue.
That trigger can be a vacation in Majorca, Spain (Emma Straub’s “The Vacationers”), or sitting shiva in suburbia (Jonathan Tropper’s “This Is Where I Leave You”), or a wedding at the family’s once-sacrosanct, soon-to-be-despoiled summer palace. Or, like Cynthia D’Aprix Sweeney’s debut novel, “The Nest,” it can be the bare-bones version. “The Nest” doesn’t need much in the way of set dressing. It just has the author’s excellent antennas for describing the New York area and that evergreen fuel for food fights: an inheritance meant to be divided among adult children.
The West Coast’s influence on Ms. Sweeney is apparent in the book’s opening scene: a movie-ready sex-and-action blowout that will eventually explain where much of the nest went. Fresh out of rehab, Leo is at a glam Long Island wedding, where he picks up a rented Porsche and a pretty waitress, not in that order. All it takes is a bogus promise to advance the waitress’s singing career and drunken Leo has her in a compromising position, speeding down the road faster than you can say “Boom!” Nice prologue. Fade to black.
Now Ms. Sweeney takes her story to Grand Central Terminal, and to the sequence she has said gave her the idea for “The Nest” in the first place. What if a group of siblings were forced to meet for lunch at the Oyster Bar, but each one of them required a fortifying belt at another place before the actual family meeting? It could tell readers a lot about the family in general and the characters as individuals, too.
It’s a handy trick, just right for the Nancy Meyers movie that “The Nest” could easily become. Ecco reportedly paid a disproportionately big advance for this book. But consider what Ms. Meyers or a similar director could do with four adorably mixed-up siblings and their romantic woes, crazy run-ins and rich-person problems. So what if the book isn’t very funny? Neither are those movies, and that hasn’t stopped them. They light some kind of flame in viewers who don’t have lots of attractive relatives and would enjoy learning that love matters more than money, even if it means your kids may have to go to a state school and you may have to belt-tighten down to one house instead of two.
Ms. Sweeney writes like a pro when it comes to moving her chess pieces around a crowded board. Leo behaves throughout like the darling louse he has always been. On the day of the Oyster Bar confab, Leo is once again fresh out of rehab, but trying to buy drugs when he is spotted by female teenagers in Central Park on a snowy day. He seems to briefly consider picking up these teenagers, who are twins, but luckily doesn’t try — they are Melody’s daughters, after all. And the twins will give the book a nice big subplot when one turns out to be a lesbian and they have to adjust to this and God knows they have to hide it from the timid Melody. They were in the park that day only because they were skipping SAT prep, which is why one of them says of the park, “It’s downright ebullient.” At least they’ve learned some vocabulary words.
The other Plumb brother, Jack, is sometimes described as “Leo Lite.” This is not a compliment. It means Jack, who is gay and married, has gotten into his own financial and moral quandary, because like every Plumb he, too, has managed to pre-spend his quarter of the nest. Ms. Sweeney has complicated the book with a tangle of subplots, and Jack creates one when he meets a former fireman who lost his wife in the World Trade Center attacks. The fireman worked in the rubble there for months afterward. He did it as a labor of love. And during that time he found a statue of two lovers that reminded him so much of himself and his wife that he surreptitiously took it home. Jack, who has an antiques dealer’s eye and Leo’s larcenous streak, doesn’t see a fireman’s yearnings in that thing. He sees a well-known, valuable artifact that may be worth more on the black market than Jack’s stolen stake in the nest — and more. There are a lot of these stray plot threads, but this is not a book to leave them dangling.
Finally, there’s Bea, a once-famous writer who is the Plumb closest to Leo. Bea was apparently a wonderful short-story writer. She was also put on the map by an author’s photo that showed her in a bright yellow dress, holding a green parasol with flowers painted on it, with the long braids she always wears, on Mott Street in Chinatown with a group of friends that an au courant magazine labeled “The Glitterary Girls.” Ms. Sweeney is quite knowing about this kind of publication and the aura it creates. She writes a wonderful scene in which Bea, years later, visits some of the other Glitteraries and marvels at what they haven’t turned into.
But Bea herself is no phony, regardless of how her writing goes. It bespeaks a dedication that surely reflects something about the author. Bea’s way of hewing to the literary life is one of the book’s most likable qualities. The fact that Leo moves in with Stephanie, a former agent for Bea who now wants nothing to do with her, is just one more screwball but sugary plot twist here — in a book guaranteed not to spoil anybody’s day, anywhere, ever. An epilogue reduces that figurative nest to nothing but the twigs it was made of. But it predicts sunny skies for one and all. In the idiom of the genre, nothing’s gotta give.