GENEVA — The top United Nations human rights official condemned the Saudi-led coalition fighting in Yemen on Friday, citing repeated attacks on civilian targets in airstrikes, including an attack on a crowded village market this week that killed 106 people.
United Nations officials who went to the site of the attack on Tuesday in Hajjah Province found that airstrikes there had killed 106 people, including 24 children, making them the deadliest episode in the coalition’s yearlong intervention.
The Saudis are backing the contested government of President Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi against rebels, known as the Houthis, who are aligned with former President Ali Abdullah Saleh. The Saudis have been pressuring the United States for support in the conflict, saying that their archrival, Iran, is backing the Houthis.
United Nations officials recorded the names of 96 people who died in the strikes, and they found 10 more bodies that were burned beyond recognition. An additional 40 people were wounded, “but that may be a low estimate,” said Rupert Colville, a spokesman for the high commissioner for human rights, Zeid Ra’ad al-Hussein.
The Saudi-led coalition has repeatedly denied striking civilian targets during operations against Houthi rebels and affiliated forces. But United Nations officials said they had found no evidence of any military targets near the scene of the airstrikes, and Mr. al-Hussein said that may amount to a violation of international law.
Indiscriminate attacks by Houthi forces and their allies have also caused civilian casualties and could also qualify as international crimes, he said.
The coalition airstrikes came three weeks after its aircraft bombed another market, this time in a district of Sana, the capital, killing at least 39 civilians. The latest attack pushed the number of civilian casualties to close to 9,000, the United Nations said, with 3,218 killed and 5,778 injured.
“It would seem that the coalition is responsible for twice as many civilian casualties as all other forces put together,” Mr. al-Hussein said, in a sharp rebuttal of the coalition’s denials. He was alluding not only to Houthis and the militias fighting with them but also to groups backing Al Qaeda and the Islamic State.
