Once upon a time there was a big, jovial king in Queens whose subjects lined up at his falafel cart in Astoria.
The lines were long, the portions were big and the cart owner — Freddy Zeideia, the Falafel King of Astoria — had an outsize personality to go along with his huge frame.
So when a chicken shop went dark last year on Broadway near 31st Street, a block from his longtime cart location at 30th Street, Mr. Zeideia pounced.
He renovated the place and six weeks ago opened a restaurant, also called the King of Falafel & Shawarma, with kitchen, storage and serving space that is comparatively vast.
“This grill is the size of my entire cart,” he said on Tuesday at the new place, which has a dozen tables and wall murals of Manhattan (as seen from Queens) and Jerusalem.
On the back wall, his restaurant logo includes images of his food carts.
Mr. Zeideia is offering the same dishes that were honored twice in 2010 at the annual street food competition known as the Vendy Awards.
He used his mother’s recipes and was known for wearing rubber clogs and a chef’s outfit adorned with funky prints.
Customers enjoyed the oval-shaped falafel balls with homemade tahini sauce, as well as the shawarma pita made of grilled marinated chicken or lamb and beef, topped with pickled turnips, lettuce and onions, on homemade pita bread.
Mr. Zeideia would banter with passers-by. He would crank up the Middle Eastern music and belly dance for his customers, who would often eat in his dining section: a row of mismatched chairs he would set up in an adjacent supermarket parking lot.
“You have to sell yourself, along with your food,” said Mr. Zeideia, who showed up at the Vendy ceremony in 2010 with a team of belly dancers and joined them, to the crowd’s delight.
He became known for his favorite tagline — “Yeah, baby!” — as he served customers, and for the bright green truck he acquired several years back as a rolling kitchen, to expand at the Astoria location.
At his new restaurant, those playful elements live on. Printed on the awning is his slogan — #YEAHHHHHBABY — and built into the facade is a model of the front of his truck, down to its license plate: FALAFEL1.
“I wanted it to look like I backed the truck into the storefront,” said Mr. Zeideia, 50, who lives in East Elmhurst, Queens, and is married with three children and three grandchildren.
Growing up the oldest of six children in Ramallah on the West Bank, he watched his mother cook.
He quit high school and immigrated to New York at 15, where he stayed with relatives in Woodside, Queens. He sold bed linens door to door and worked at his cousins’ pizza shop in Harlem, and then at a stationery store on 36th Avenue in Astoria whose owner was puzzled by his given name, Fares.
For years, he supplemented his income by driving a yellow cab, stuffing his frame — he is 6-foot-3, and has weighed up to 325 pounds — behind the wheel.
While driving, he would eat at Mustafa’s Jerusalem Falafel in Manhattan, now long shuttered, which helped persuade him to open a food cart.
In recent years, Mr. Zeideia has deployed a cart to Park Avenue and 53rd Street in Manhattan, which will remain open, while his Astoria location has moved to Ditmars Boulevard and 31st Street. His dream is to create a franchise, like the Halal Guys, the Midtown street-food empire that has become a chain.
Standing at the cart for long hours has taken a physical toll on Mr. Zeideia, including a bum right knee.
