Security camera images released by the Jupiter Police Department in Florida show Donald J. Trump’s campaign manager, Corey Lewandowski, grabbing a Breitbart News reporter, Michelle Fields, as she tried to ask Mr. Trump a question.
Donald J. Trump’s presidential campaign manager, Corey Lewandowski, was charged with battery Tuesday by the police in Jupiter, Fla., who said he had grabbed a reporter this month as she tried to ask Mr. Trump a question.
His formal arrest was detailed in a police report that cited new security-camera images of the episode, which show Mr. Lewandowski roughly pulling the reporter, Michelle Fields, out of his way — despite his vigorous denials that he ever touched her and his repeated attacks on her credibility.
Mr. Lewandowski, who turned himself in on the misdemeanor charge, was quickly released. But the incident, the way the campaign has dealt with it, and the new photographic images refuting Mr. Lewandowski’s and Mr. Trump’s versions of events seemed to encapsulate much of what has made Mr. Trump’s campaign like no other.
For much of the past year, fact-checkers have struggled to keep up with the frequent truth-stretching and wholesale inaccuracies of Mr. Trump and his campaign, with little discernible effect on his support among a large portion of the Republican electorate. But on Tuesday, the new video — taken from security cameras at a Trump property — confronted the Republican front-runner with a different kind of challenge: hard-to-discount visual evidence directly contradicting him, looping over and over again on cable news and news websites.
Moreover, the allegation of violence came as Mr. Trump faces accusations that he incites or condones violence against protesters at his rallies.
It offered a reminder that Mr. Trump, a candidate whose own communications, whether on Twitter or on television, can often be menacing in tone, has entrusted his White House bid to a political operative whose belligerence extends to physicality. On March 19, Mr. Lewandowski was captured on video grabbing a protester by the shirt collar at a Trump rally in Arizona and yanking him backward — normally the work of security guards, not a top political adviser.
To Mr. Trump, Ms. Fields was out of bounds, and his campaign manager was the victim.
But Mr. Trump’s and Mr. Lewandowski’s depiction of Ms. Fields as a drama queen faking an injury — “How do you know those bruises weren’t there before?” Mr. Trump asked — risked a new level of fallout for a candidate repeatedly accused of making misogynistic remarks who polls show is already viewed negatively by an overwhelming number of American women.
The man whose catchphrase on the television show “The Apprentice” was “You’re fired!” said that it would be easy to fire Mr. Lewandowski, but that it wasn’t his way. “I don’t discard people,” Mr. Trump said.
According to this report from the Jupiter, Fla., police department, Mr. Lewandowski, Donald J. Trump's campaign manager, was charged with one count of simple battery after the police took statements from a reporter for Breitbart News, Michelle Fields, and a Washington Post reporter, Ben Terris, who said he witnessed the grabbing incident.
All told, it was the latest in a series of self-inflicted wounds by Mr. Trump’s campaign, and effectively upstaged his much-ballyhooed rally in the Wisconsin hometown of Representative Paul D. Ryan, the House speaker — scheduled after Mr. Ryan sharply condemned Mr. Trump’s rhetoric.
“Personal attacks, verbal attacks and now physical attacks have no place in politics or anywhere else in our society,” she said.
The episode involving Ms. Fields set off an incendiary dispute within Breitbart News, the conservative website where she worked and that has at times been a vocal champion of Mr. Trump. Several of its journalists resigned after accusing management of failing to support Ms. Fields, who resigned on March 14, six days after the episode.
Corey Lewandowski, Donald J. Trump’s campaign manager, was charged with battery in a run-in with a reporter after a news conference.
The incident in question occurred on March 8, as Mr. Trump’s victories in the so-called Super Tuesday contests on March 1 gave way to more mixed results in subsequent contests. As he made his way out of a crowded room after a news conference at Trump National Golf Club, Ms. Fields approached him.
Ms. Fields said she was trying to ask Mr. Trump a question about affirmative action when Mr. Lewandowski grabbed her and nearly knocked her off her feet. She posted on Twitter a picture of finger-shaped bruises on her arm.
Mr. Lewandowski denied touching her, but Ms. Fields pressed charges three days later. The investigating officer, Detective Marc Bujnowski, took statements from her and from a Washington Post reporter, Ben Terris, who was a witness.
Indeed, the new security-camera images show Mr. Lewandowski reaching for and then grabbing Ms. Fields’s arm, tugging at her clothing as he pulls her, then walking ahead of her as she reacts, close behind Mr. Trump. The entire episode takes less than four seconds.
Mr. Lewandowski turned himself in at the headquarters of the Jupiter Police Department at 8:10 a.m. on Tuesday. He was charged with one count of simple battery and given a court date of May 4 in Palm Beach Gardens, Fla.
But Officer Joseph Beinlich, a spokesman for the department, said otherwise. “A notice to appear is an actual arrest,” he said.
Mr. Lewandowski, 42, has been a combative and sometimes divisive figure in Mr. Trump’s circle. He has been known to scream and curse at reporters with regularity, putting some on a “blacklist” for coverage he considers unfavorable.
In 1999, as chief of staff to Bob Ney, then a Republican representative from Ohio, Mr. Lewandowski was charged with a misdemeanor when he took a pistol into a congressional office building. He said then that it had been an accident. The police seized the weapon, prompting him to sue unsuccessfully in federal court, claiming he had been stripped of his gun without due process.
Before his late-afternoon remarks on Mr. Lewandowski’s behalf, Mr. Trump responded to his arrest in a string of midday Twitter posts.
“Wow, Corey Lewandowski, my campaign manager and a very decent man, was just charged with assaulting a reporter. Look at tapes — nothing there!” he wrote in one.
