TAMPA, Fla. — When Aroldis Chapman stood at his locker in the Yankees’ spring training clubhouse last week, he was resolute in defending himself. He knew that Major League Baseball was investigating his actions in an October episode in which, according to a police report, he placed his hands around his girlfriend’s neck during an argument and fired a gun eight times. He knew he was in great danger of being suspended.
Still, he struck a defiant note.
But Chapman took a far different stance on Tuesday when he agreed to accept a 30-game suspension handed down by Commissioner Rob Manfred that will begin on opening day. It is the first suspension under baseball’s new domestic violence policy, which was written in concert with the players’ union and enacted last August.
Chapman, who will lose about $1.86 million from his 2016 salary of $11.3 million, is eligible to return to the Yankees on May 9. Until then, he can participate in spring training and play in the team’s exhibition games, which begin Wednesday. But once the regular season begins, Chapman, one of the game’s premier relievers and its hardest thrower, will be restricted to working out at the Yankees’ complex here. Whether he will be ready to pitch on May 9 remains to be seen.
Shortly after the ruling was announced, Chapman issued a statement that began with him maintaining that he did not “in any way” harm his girlfriend.
Chapman’s change of heart came after nearly a week of negotiations among Major League Baseball’s chief legal officer, Dan Halem; the chief counsel for the players union, Dave Prouty; and Chapman’s lawyer, Jay Reisinger, according to two people in baseball familiar with the negotiations.
By arriving at a number — 30 games — that everyone could live with, Manfred established a strong precedent with the first case under his new policy and thus avoid any possibility that the suspension would be reduced or even overturned by an arbitrator. In particular, he established an immediate contrast with the chaos the N.FL. has encountered in trying to devise a coherent policy on domestic violence.
In addition, by agreeing not to appeal, the union can avoid being put in the awkward position of having to defend one of its players in a domestic violence case.
In his own statement after the announcement, Manfred cited the use of a firearm by Chapman during the episode and the impact it had on his girlfriend, Cristina Barnea, who, according to the police report, hid in the bushes outside his home while she phoned police dispatchers for help.
According to the police report — the case occurred in Davie, Fla. — Chapman fired the eight shots into a wall of his garage after the altercation with Barnea. She told the police that although Chapman put his hands around her neck, at no point was she unable to breathe.
Chapman’s driver told the police that Chapman fired the gun shortly after punching the window of his car and cutting his finger. The police report also said that no one other than Chapman was in the garage when the shots were fired.
Even after the police chose not to press charges in the case, Broward County prosecutors twice looked into doing so. But they decided not to because of conflicting accounts and insufficient evidence after Barnea and other witnesses refused to cooperate.
Nevertheless, baseball’s new policy allows Manfred to impose discipline regardless of whether a player is charged with, or convicted of, a crime. Under the policy, Chapman is also subject to counseling and possible forfeiture of weapons.
Two women who are professional advocates against domestic violence had differing reactions to Tuesday’s announcement.
However, Judy Harris Kluger, the executive director of Sanctuary for Families, said she was not impressed with Chapman’s statement since he continued to maintain that he had not hurt his girlfriend during the incident.
Others weighed in as well. The Yankees said they supported the suspension and were “pleased that Aroldis has accepted this discipline.” The club, which spent much of Tuesday conducting team-bonding activities that were off-limits to reporters, said other comments would have to wait until Wednesday.
Chapman, who will become a free agent at the end of the season, was on the verge of being dealt to the Los Angeles Dodgers in early December when Yahoo disclosed the October episode. The Dodgers then backed out of the deal. The Boston Globe reported that the Red Sox stopped their pursuit of Chapman weeks earlier after learning of the case.
When the Reds then drastically cut the asking price for Chapman, the Yankees decided that the opportunity to get him was too good to pass up. On Dec. 28, they acquired him for four midlevel prospects.
The Yankees are equipped to withstand Chapman’s absence with Andrew Miller, who saved 36 games in 38 opportunities last season and is line to be an eighth-inning specialist once Chapman returns. Behind Miller is Dellin Betances, an All-Star in his first two seasons in the big leagues. Together, they may form one of the more formidable bullpens in many decades, but not until May at the earliest.