Oregon State Police have synchronized their aerial footage with smartphone footage inside the truck driven by LaVoy Finicum, a protester who was shot and killed.
DENVER — Investigators said Tuesday that Oregon state officers had acted properly when they shot and killed LaVoy Finicum, one of the activists who occupied a wildlife refuge in Oregon this year, but federal officials have opened an inquiry into the actions of F.B.I. agents for not disclosing that they also fired shots during the confrontation.
Mr. Finicum was killed Jan. 26 after the authorities tried to apprehend him at a police blockade outside Malheur National Wildlife Refuge. The wildlife sanctuary had been taken over on Jan. 2 by a band of armed protesters led by two brothers, Ammon and Ryan Bundy, who demanded that the federal government turn over its lands in the West to private owners or local governments.
By the time the confrontation ended on Feb. 11, 25 people had been arrested and charged with felonies; Mr. Finicum was the only one to die, and his shooting at the hands of deputies has become a rallying point for the Bundys’ cause.
Neither of the shots by the F.B.I. struck Mr. Finicum, investigators said. Rather, Mr. Finicum was shot and killed by three rounds fired by Oregon state officers, all of which struck him in the back, they said. The Malheur County district attorney, Dan Norris, said all six shots fired by Oregon officers, including the three that hit Mr. Finicum, were justified.
While the findings are a relief to the local troopers, the F.B.I. agents on the scene face serious questions. F.B.I. agents from the hostage and rescue team were interviewed by investigators immediately after the shooting and again about 10 days later. On both occasions, they denied having fired any shots. Investigators said they had concluded that two of the shots — one hitting the truck — must have come from one of the F.B.I. agents, whose identity is still unknown to investigators.
Once investigators learned last month of the failure of the agents to disclose their full role, investigators in Washington were immediately summoned to Oregon to begin looking into possible impropriety, officials said. The federal inquiry will be done by the Justice Department inspector general’s office along with the United States attorney’s office in Oregon.
Greg Bretzing, the special agent in charge of the Oregon office, declined to say Tuesday whether any of the F.B.I. agents involved in the episode had been suspended while the case was being reviewed. He said that “the question of who fired these shots has not been resolved,” and F.B.I. officials said they were not yet convinced that the shots had come from one of their agents.
But other law enforcement officials, convinced that the two shots had come from the F.B.I., said they were at a loss to explain why the agents would deny responsibility and risk serious consequences. With Mr. Finicum driving his truck straight at an F.B.I. agent at one point, the two mystery shots appeared to be just as defensible as the other six shots, the officials said.
The involvement of the United States attorney’s office in the new inquiry is particularly ominous for the F.B.I. because it signals that Justice Department officials believe the case could rise to the level of criminal charges.
The video released Tuesday was taken by Shawna Cox, who was riding in Mr. Finicum’s car and arrested in the Malheur takeover, and covers the moments before Mr. Finicum’s death.
In the recording, Mr. Finicum sits in the driver’s seat of a truck, wearing a cowboy hat. While stopped, he heckles the authorities.
Pop music plays in the background. Then Mr. Finicum is seen driving away from troopers, and the passengers attempt to crouch down and make phone calls. The camera shakes, and shots are heard. The vehicle then stops after veering off the road and hitting a snowbank.
In January, Mr. Finicum, 54, was one of the first people to occupy the refuge, an 188,000-acre bird sanctuary outside Burns, Ore., that is run by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
Mr. Finicum and other leaders of the occupation, including the Bundy brothers, initially said they were protesting the prison sentences of two local ranchers who had been convicted of lighting fires that spread to federal land. Others joined the activists at the refuge, and the group began to call on the government to relinquish control of all federal lands. Many occupiers affiliated themselves with the so-called patriot movement, a loosely organized group that includes various militias and others who oppose a strong federal government.
On Jan. 26, Mr. Finicum, the Bundys and several other occupation leaders left the refuge in two vehicles, headed to a meeting in a nearby city, John Day, where they hoped to rally supporters. But the state police and the F.B.I. had set up a blockade.
As officers tried to arrest them, Mr. Finicum was killed. A video that the bureau released in January showed Mr. Finicum stopping his vehicle, then speeding away only to end up in a ditch near a roadblock. He then got out of his vehicle, waving his arms and reaching toward his pocket. The police later said Mr. Finicum was carrying a loaded 9-millimeter handgun.
The arrested occupiers face federal conspiracy charges.
Two witnesses to the Jan. 26 episode, Ms. Cox, 59, and Victoria Sharp, 18, have said that they believe the killing of Mr. Finicum was unjust, and that he had his hands up in surrender. Ms. Sharp has said she heard shots hit the truck where she was holed up.
The occupation ended when the last four protesters left the bird sanctuary and turned themselves in to the F.B.I. But occupiers and their sympathizers have gathered since, holding rallies in Portland, Ore.; Salt Lake City; Bend, Ore.; and elsewhere, protesting Mr. Finicum’s death, the arrest of other occupiers and the arrest of Cliven Bundy, who is the father of Ammon and Ryan and a prominent leader of the anti-government movement.
Tuesday’s announcement was met by anger from Mr. Finicum’s family and supporters. After investigators spoke in Oregon, Mr. Finicum’s wife, Jeanette Finicum, read a statement in St. George, Utah, about an hour from her home in Cane Beds, Ariz.
