ALBANY — As the April 1 deadline for the state budget approaches, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo appears close to victories on raising the minimum wage and instituting paid family leave across New York, achievements that would cement his carefully cultivated reputation for progressive leadership.
Yet since announcing in January that he would reduce state funding to the City University of New York by some $485 million, expecting New York City to pick up the balance, Mr. Cuomo has been playing fiscal defense, besieged by a well-orchestrated drive to paint his treatment of the university as a stain on his liberal agenda.
On Wednesday, after several days in which the university’s advocates tried in vain to parse the governor’s past statements on the issue, Mr. Cuomo’s director of operations, Jim Malatras, said that the proposal to offload costs to the city had been no more than a negotiating tactic to force the city and the university to take reforms seriously.
Mr. Malatras announced last week that the state would hire a management consultant to streamline CUNY’s spending. Several days later, the governor’s office clarified that if the Legislature approved the hiring of a restructuring consultant, Mr. Cuomo would support the inclusion of CUNY’s full $1.6 billion allocation in the state budget, with no cost to the city.
If the governor were truly interested in improving CUNY, many university employees say, he would reverse a trend under his tenure: State investment per student has not kept pace with enrollment, falling 3 percent even as tuition has increased, according to the university’s faculty union. Professors tell of the scarcity of basic school supplies like paper and chalk, swelling class sizes, hiring freezes and increasing reliance on poorly paid adjuncts to teach classes. The faculty has gone without a contract or raise for six years.
All in all, many CUNY employees believe, the governor has little love for their schools.
Ms. Lever added on Thursday that eliminating inefficiency and redundancy was not inconsistent with a progressive agenda. “It’s mind-boggling that groups claiming to represent the best interest of those students are instead defending the bureaucracy that diverts much-needed funding away from the classrooms,” she said.
The uncertainty over CUNY’s future has served only to mobilize a coalition of lawmakers, professors, students, liberal activists and city leaders in a coordinated effort to turn public opinion against the governor.
Hundreds marched on Mr. Cuomo’s New York office on Thursday; the rally was part of the alliance’s push to “humanize the folks that will be impacted,” said Javier Valdés, the co-executive director of Make the Road New York, a primarily Hispanic grass-roots group that has supported the governor’s minimum-wage and family-leave efforts.
As CUNY’s surrogates assail the governor, the university and Mayor Bill de Blasio, whose own budget depends on the governor’s and lawmakers’ good will, have struck a more conciliatory tone.
CUNY has also found another Albany antagonist in the Republican-dominated State Senate, which recently embraced Mr. Cuomo’s proposal to shift costs to the city and added a hurdle of its own: It said it would withhold funding until it was satisfied with the university’s response to allegations of anti-Semitism on its campuses.
University officials have hired two former prosecutors to investigate the allegations and condemned “all forms of bigotry and discrimination,” prompting an approving response from the Anti-Defamation League.
Still, the Senate Republican majority has not budged, drawing a rare rebuke from a member of its delegation, Senator Marty Golden of Brooklyn.
Mr. Golden said in an interview that he believed his conference was using the funding as a bargaining chip to prod the city into imposing a cap on property taxes. He said he was confident, however, that the State Assembly, which is dominated by city Democrats, would not allow CUNY’s budget to be harmed.
