The developers of Urby Staten Island, a new rental complex now opening in Stapleton, hope to prove that the North Shore of the “forgotten borough” can have broad appeal, and maybe even be the city’s next hip enclave.
Getting people to move to Urby, which is on an isolated stretch of waterfront about a mile — and two stops on the Staten Island Railway — from the Staten Island Ferry terminal, may not be easy. But the Ironstate Development Company, the project’s developer, is dangling many creative extras: an olive oil shop; a large garden that will grow kale; and a chef-in-residence to teach you how to prepare it.
“This is going to be a game-changer,” said Jennifer Maroni, an agent at the Gateway Arms Realty Corporation who rents apartments in Stapleton but who is not affiliated with the project.
“They had to go big or go home, and in many ways, they’ve done it,” said Ms. Maroni, a lifelong resident of Staten Island.
Spread across seven acres overlooking New York Bay, the $275 million mixed-use development aims to become a city in miniature, as it transforms the site of a former naval base into a dense urban-style neighborhood.
Boxy steel-and-glass buildings of four or five stories hug newly constructed city streets at the site, which has warehouses and carwashes for neighbors.
Stores occupy the bases of some of those buildings, and a skinny new public promenade, which is to open next month, is on the water’s edge, in a layout that recalls Battery Park City.
In the first phase of the project, Urby will offer 571 studios to two-bedrooms that will feature bamboo floors and black and white subway-tile walls.
Designed by Concrete, a Dutch architecture firm, the apartments are laid out with living rooms facing the bay in order to maximize the view and natural light. Kitchens, baths and bedrooms are generally toward the rear of the apartments.
Parts of Urby’s design can seem playful. A tripartite corkboard/blackboard/whiteboard covers electrical panels in the apartments. “We wanted to hide it with something functional and fun,” said Erikjan Vermeulen, a Concrete partner.
Likewise, in the halls, unit numbers are not simply stenciled on a door but pieced together from photos of numerals in different fonts and colors from around the city. The effect, by every apartment door, is a whimsical collage.
Ironstate has leased four of 12 retail spaces: to Coffeed, a coffee shop; Carter and Cavero, an olive-oil company; Lola Star, an apparel store from Coney Island; and an as-yet-unnamed restaurant, from the team behind the Pearl Room, a hot spot in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn.
This commercial strip could fill a major void in Stapleton, a neighborhood littered with shuttered stores. There might also be a social upside, according to David Barry, the president of Ironstate. “Having the retail on-site is important for residents, to help them connect,” he said.
He’s also betting tenants will eat vegetables grown on the premises. A 5,000-square-foot garden will raise crops like kale, spinach, beets, turnips, oregano, parsley and sunflowers, and its produce will be sold in a bodega-style market in the complex. Other plants will wind up in meals prepared in a communal kitchen, where Brendan Costello, the chef-in-residence and a former sous chef at Jeffrey’s Grocery, a restaurant in Greenwich Village, will host cooking classes and other events.
Urby Staten Island is the first in a chain of similar developments planned for the region, including ones in Jersey City, Harrison, N.J., and Stamford, Conn.
The project, which began leasing this month, has studios starting at $1,735 a month, one-bedrooms at $2,165 and two-bedrooms at $3,310. Ironstate is offering one free month on a 13-month lease.
The borough’s North Shore doesn’t have a lot of luxury rentals, but Ms. Maroni had two listings earlier this month in nearby St. George: a one-bedroom for $1,695 a month, and a two-bedroom for $2,000.
Still, compared with Manhattan prices, Urby can seem like a steal. In January, the median rent for a studio was $2,595 a month, according to Douglas Elliman Real Estate.
This first phase of Urby will also include 115 affordable apartments, reserved for those who meet income restrictions. Studios are $867 a month, one-bedrooms are $931 and two-bedrooms are $1,123.
Urby Staten Island’s second phase, on an adjacent site, will include stores and 328 more apartments. It will break ground this spring and be completed in spring 2018, Ironstate said.