When Ricky Phung tried to get Sharon Zhen’s attention by tripping her in the ninth grade at San Gabriel High School in California, he was unaware that she had already fallen for him.
“I thought she was cute and I really liked her, but I didn’t know how to approach her,” said Mr. Phung, a 29-year-old marketing manager at Faraday Future, a company in Los Angeles that plans to manufacture electric cars.
“I spent a year and a half trying to figure out a way to introduce myself,” he said, laughing as he recalled that moment in 2000 when Ms. Zhen tumbled to the floor and into his world.
The task of meeting Ms. Zhen, which soon became Mr. Phung’s most difficult high school project, had begun the year before at Richard Garvey Intermediate School in Rosemead, Calif., where Ms. Zhen enrolled in the eighth grade shortly after her family moved from Los Angeles.
“She was the new, pretty girl in school that all the guys were talking about,” Mr. Phung said.
He was unaware that Ms. Zhen had noticed him just two months after her arrival, when she peeked into the gymnasium during a lunch break and saw him playing basketball.
“I thought he was really handsome,” said Ms. Zhen, 30, who manages online sales of consumer products at DreamWorks Animation SKG, the company in Glendale, Calif., that creates animated feature films and television programs.
They became friends, and by the beginning of their sophomore year, Mr. Phung had hatched yet another plan designed to strengthen their relationship. He suggested they communicate more frequently and gave her what he said was his pager number.
Two months later, a budding friendship turned to blooming romance when he asked her to accompany him to the high school winter ball.
The children of Asian immigrants, they bonded over their heritage, swapping stories of their hard-working parents — hers from China, his from Vietnam. The families settled in the Los Angeles area in the late 1970s and established successful businesses. Ms. Zhen’s parents opened several Chinese restaurants, and Mr. Phung’s built a thriving furniture manufacturing company that they eventually sold.
Ms. Zhen and Mr. Phung continued on a road together: In 2004, both enrolled at the University of California, San Diego.
As juniors, they went on separate study-abroad programs to China for six months, with Ms. Zhen taking a journalism course at the University of Hong Kong and Mr. Phung studying economics more than 750 miles away at Fudan University in Shanghai. Despite the distance, they still managed to visit each other three times that semester.
By the time they graduated in 2008, Mr. Phung’s father knew them well enough as a couple to believe that their journey was only just beginning.
Less than a year after graduating from college, Ms. Zhen and Ricky Phung were both working in the corporate offices of the Walt Disney Company in Los Angeles, she in product development and he in marketing. But in February 2011, she left to take a job as a buyer with a clothing company in Philadelphia.
For the first time since the winter ball, they were not in lock step.
She recalled one late night in Philadelphia when she was talking on the phone with him and noticed that her car was being towed.
As did Mr. Phung.
“At first, it was kind of fun and exciting,” he said. But then he realized how much he missed her.
He decided to join her permanently in Philadelphia, but before they had a chance to reunite, another opportunity, farther east, presented itself. Mr. Phung received an offer from Disney to work at its offices in Shanghai. Ms. Zhen, who also received an offer to work there shortly thereafter, left Philadelphia in August 2011.
“As a couple, all of that freedom allowed us to become pretty fearless,” she said.
Riding a wave of confidence, they decided to leave Shanghai in June 2013 to embark on a business venture in Cincinnati, an online marketplace for boutiques that sold men’s and women’s clothing and accessories, home goods, handmade items and floral arrangements. ShopStoree, as their start-up was called, was partly funded by a Cincinnati-based program called the Brandery, which also provided mentors and advisers who assisted in the introduction of their product.
Despite their enthusiasm and hard work, the business sputtered. With money growing tighter and their workdays longer, Ms. Zhen and Mr. Phung began struggling as business partners and, for the first time, as a couple.
Suddenly, every day became a little more stressful than the day before.
By October, they returned to Los Angeles, moving in with her parents as a way of cutting expenses while trying to jump-start their business.
So they decided to walk away, and did it together.
“We needed a clean break, a chance to do something for ourselves again,” she said.
In April 2014, they took a two-week trip to Denmark, Sweden and Iceland, which was followed by a week in New York, where they visited friends.
Those plans soon began settling into place. She got her current job in June 2014, and two months later they bought a home in Los Angeles.
“I watched Sharon and Ricky grow up together, and never once in all of those years did I ever get the feeling that they weren’t going to stay together,” said Sandy Zhen-Yeh, the bride’s older sister.
They were married Feb. 27 at Alcazar, a Spanish-colonial inn nestled in the heart of Palm Springs on a sunny 85-degree afternoon beneath a brilliant blue desert sky, with the San Jacinto Mountains looming in the distance.
The ceremony took place in the center of the courtyard, where the branches of four palo verde trees intertwine to form a natural arch. With every gentle breeze, leaves the size of rice grains fell onto many of the 127 guests who were seated in a square around the couple.
Alex Cho, a friend of the couple who became a minister with American Marriage Ministries to officiate, had a question for the bride, who wore a white lace dress by Mikaella Bridal, a matching custom-made veil by Kara Wedding and a pair of blush pink Laila wedge shoes from J. Crew: How did she envision herself with the groom in 10, 20 or even 50 years?
“Happy,” she replied.
