INDIAN WELLS, Calif. — Even for the sport’s best, any success against top-ranked Novak Djokovic — however relative — must be appreciated.
In the 48th installment of one of the longest rivalries in men’s tennis, Djokovic dispatched Rafael Nadal, 7-6 (5), 6-2, on Saturday in the semifinals of the BNP Paribas Open. Djokovic withstood an inspired start from the fifth-ranked Nadal before ultimately pulling away for his 25th victory over Nadal. He will face 14th-ranked Milos Raonic in the final on Sunday.
Though Nadal, a 14-time Grand Slam champion, has now lost six straight matches and 13 straight sets to Djokovic, this match still represented progress. He was badly beaten, 6-1, 6-2, in their earlier meeting this year in the final of the Qatar Open. Nadal went on to lose in the first round of the Australian Open and entered the Indian Wells tournament 0-4 against opponents ranked in the top 50 this year.
But after Nadal saved a match point against the German wunderkind Alexander Zverev in the fourth round, his game has reflected his growing confidence. His recently timid forehand has seemingly regained its bullying spirit.
Nadal struck quickly Saturday, taking a 2-0 lead, and though Djokovic immediately leveled the set at 2-2, it was played on the same level footing that has marked their rivalry for much of the past decade.
With Nadal’s topspin forehand accentuated by the thin desert air and gritty courts, Djokovic was forced to summon a more robust defense than in their recent matches.
In the ensuing tiebreaker, Djokovic raced out to a 4-1 lead with three points won on Nadal’s serve, and though Nadal was able to level at 5-5 after a timid smash from Djokovic, his backhand wilted into the net on Djokovic’s first set point.
Consistently able to direct the ball down the line from both wings, Djokovic broke Nadal for 4-2 in the second set, and finished the match with a second break as a Nadal forehand sailed long.
Djokovic will face a different challenge in the final against Raonic, who booked a spot in his third Masters final with a 6-3, 3-6, 6-3 win earlier Saturday over the 18th-ranked David Goffin. Raonic, a 6-foot-5 towering server, has rounded into a more complete player this year. His only loss came in the Australian Open semifinals, in five sets to Andy Murray, when Raonic was battling a leg injury.
Raonic, who was forced to miss much of last season because of an injury after briefly hitting a career high of No. 4 in the ATP rankings, said time on the outside looking in brought clarity to his own game.
Raonic, 25, is hardly young by traditional tennis standards, but he has been all but locked out of the upper echelon of the game in this era of dominance by Djokovic, Nadal, Murray and Roger Federer.
Though 79 Masters events have been played since Djokovic won his first Masters title in Miami in 2007, none have been won by a player younger than him. Djokovic, who turns 29 in May, reflected on the lack of any breakthrough in the generation following his own.
