HAVANA — “I know you’ve been waiting a long time for a party like this,” the D.J. and producer Diplo called out to a sea of pulsating young Cubans here on Sunday evening, during a free concert by his Caribbean-influenced electronic group, Major Lazer.
The spectacle at a waterfront plaza known as the José Martí Anti-Imperialist Platform, in front of the newly established United States Embassy, was remarkable: a seemingly endless crowd of an estimated 450,000 to a half-million stylish locals, largely teenagers, bouncing, dancing and roaring to amped-up electronic dance music, or E.D.M.
This was the first concert in Cuba by a major pop act from the United States since the reinstatement of diplomatic relations between the two countries in December 2014. (Pop acts very rarely made it to Cuba during the embargo; the last large-scale concert was by the band Audioslave in 2005.) It notably featured a youth-oriented genre — E.D.M. is a rising trend among Cubans after trickling down from a boom in the United States and Europe — and a globe-trotting star who’d been quietly plotting his way here for 14 months. The show was also government-approved, and therefore largely depoliticized, its restrictions demonstrating the continuing tension between life on this island for the past half-century and the Cuban culture of the future.
“It’s the very first time I’ve seen my generation so happy,” said Robin Pedraja, 28, the creative director of Vistar, an independent online culture magazine.
Unlike the presumably pan-generational concert in Havana by the Rolling Stones later this month — days after President Obama becomes the first American president to visit in 88 years — this trip was very much oriented to youth culture.
The visit included smaller parties and impromptu D.J. sets, along with a government-organized news conference. There was also a cultural-exchange panel — required for American artists playing in Cuba — with aspiring local producers and electronic musicians, who asked detailed questions about software, distribution and mixing and mastering techniques.
Fabien Pisani, a founder of Musicabana Foundation, a Cuban-American group that helped to organize the show with assistance and approval from the state-run Cuban Institute of Music, worked to bring Major Lazer for the opening event because “I didn’t want it to have a nostalgic act,” he said. “I’m not interested in Havana from the ’50s — I’m interested in Havana in 2050.” For his group, the concert was a momentum-building opening event before its international music festival in Havana in May.
Last month, Diplo won two Grammy Awards for his work with Jack Ü (a collaboration with the producer Skrillex), before setting off for Cuba, one of the few Caribbean nations where Major Lazer, with its reggaeton and dancehall influences, had yet to perform.
“The money D.J.s make is obnoxious and it’s not going to be around forever,” Diplo said in his room at Hotel Nacional, overlooking the growing crowd about an hour before he took the stage.
With Diplo’s influence reaching new heights, the embargo at its most relaxed in a half-century and travel to Cuba becoming increasingly accessible, Major Lazer began exploring a concert in Havana over a year ago.
Major Lazer’s management team and Mr. Pisani worked to stir up interest with young people in Cuba by placing Major Lazer’s work on what is known as el paquete semanal, or the weekly package, a hand-to-hand digital distribution service that spreads bootlegs of songs, YouTube videos, news, movies and TV shows around the country via hard drives and USB devices.
“Where Are Ü Now” and electronic dance music helped Justin Bieber sing for grown-ups. A story of how music is made today.
If the reaction from those in Havana before the concert was any indication, the promotion worked. “Hey, D.J.!” street vendors yelled to Diplo at a popular flea market for tourists, encouraging him to browse their piles of vinyl records.
Giggling locals of all ages politely requested selfies with group members (and even their staffers), along with autographs on local newspaper articles about Major Lazer. “El paquete — I saw him there, on the Grammys,” one middle-aged woman said in Spanish after posing for a photo.
At one late-night dance party on Saturday away from the city center — where more than 2,000 people danced to E.D.M. remixes of Drake and the Weeknd under an ornate tree-fort structure — a guest D.J. set from Jillionaire drew chants of “Dee-plo! Dee-plo! Dee-plo!,” although he was not present.
Onstage at the plaza, Diplo waved a giant Cuban flag and was mirrored in the audience by fans who held up smaller American and Cuban flags — outnumbered only by those bearing the globelike logo for Major Lazer.
Yet the show brushed up against state control for a moment as Major Lazer was barred from welcoming unapproved Cuban musicians — including the rapper Yotuel Romero of the influential Latin rap group Orishas — onstage as surprise guests.
Using additional acts “wasn’t part of the contract,” Mr. Pisani said.
Such a large-scale undertaking was made possible partly by the financial and social capital earned by Diplo in recent years. Known at first as an underground D.J. and party-giver with a penchant for borrowing esoteric world sounds and rhythms, he has since become a go-to hit maker for stars like Madonna, Beyoncé and Justin Bieber — the consummate outsider-turned-insider.
Ahead of the headlining event, Diplo acknowledged his reputation as “that special gringo” and reflected on the popularity of E.D.M. in a place where traditional music has been passed down through generations because of the narrow channels for discovery.
