Former Vice President Al Gore joined Eric T. Schneiderman, New York’s attorney general, at a news conference announcing other states will join an investigation into whether Exxon Mobil lied to investors and the public about the threat of climate change.
The company has supplied thousands of documents in response to the inquiry. While the inquiry could be expanded to include other energy companies and trade organizations, none have been named so far.
Many legal experts have questioned whether the actions and statements by Exxon Mobil can be construed as criminal and outside the protections of the First Amendment.
The attorneys general have a range of laws to work with, including the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, or RICO. Mr. Schneiderman has statutes specific to New York, including the Martin Act, which gives the government broad investigative powers; laws allowing the state to take action against “persistent fraud or illegality”; and the state’s deceptive business and trade practices act.
Mr. Schneiderman reached a settlement last year with the coal giant Peabody Energy over that company’s financial statements and disclosures with regard to climate change.
California started its own investigation into Exxon Mobil this year, but no other state had announced it was joining the effort until Tuesday. States can share information under agreements of confidentiality, and speculation has grown that Mr. Schneiderman has been working to bring other attorneys general into the New York investigation.
Last year, Inside Climate News and The Los Angeles Times published articles from Exxon Mobil archives describing the company’s research into the risks of climate change. An activist uproar ensued, complete with a popular Twitter hashtag: #ExxonKnew.
The accusations, she said, are based on the “preposterous” claim that the company “reached definitive conclusions about anthropogenic climate change before the world’s experts” and withheld it. The company, she noted, shared its findings in peer-reviewed publications.
At the news conference, Mr. Gore drew an analogy to the actions taken during the Clinton administration against the tobacco industry, which denied risks of its products for decades, and noted that state attorneys general had been crucial to that effort. “I do think the analogy may hold up rather precisely,” he said.