WASHINGTON — A former aide to Hillary Clinton has turned over to the F.B.I. computer security logs from Mrs. Clinton’s private server, records that showed no evidence of foreign hacking, according to people close to a federal investigation into Mrs. Clinton’s emails.
The former aide, Bryan Pagliano, began cooperating with federal agents last fall, according to interviews with a federal law enforcement official and others close to the case. Mr. Pagliano described how he set up the server in Mrs. Clinton’s home in Chappaqua, N.Y., and according to two of the people, he provided agents the security logs. The law enforcement official described the interview as routine. Most of those close to the case spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss the continuing investigation.
Mrs. Clinton’s work-related emails as secretary of state, which have been made public as part of a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit, show that she received spam emails intended to try to lure her into clicking a malicious link. Those emails, known as “spear phishing” attempts, were traced to Russia, but it was not clear from the emails alone whether anyone clicked on those links or whether the security was compromised.
Mr. Pagliano told the agents that nothing in his security logs suggested that any intrusion occurred. Security logs keep track of, among other things, who accessed the network and when. They are not definitive, and forensic experts can sometimes spot sophisticated hacking that is not apparent in the logs, but computer security experts view logs as key documents when detecting hackers.
Mrs. Clinton’s campaign reiterated Mr. Pagliano’s information on Thursday. “We’re not aware of any evidence whatsoever that the server was hacked,” said Brian Fallon, a campaign spokesman.
The question of whether Mrs. Clinton’s server was hacked is separate from whether a crime occurred. But if the information was never compromised, it provides a basis for her supporters to portray Mrs. Clinton’s use of a private account as a mistake, but ultimately an inconsequential one.
Barring any changes, the F.B.I. investigation could end by early May. Then the Justice Department will decide whether to file criminal charges and if so, against whom.
Many of the “secret” and “top secret” emails were written or forwarded by Mrs. Clinton’s senior aides. None of the emails were marked classified at the time.
Mr. Pagliano, who last year invoked his Fifth Amendment right not to testify before Congress, cooperated with the F.B.I. under a limited immunity deal. Limited immunity, which means that prosecutors may not use Mr. Pagliano’s words against him, is a far more narrow agreement than what is commonly known as “blanket immunity,” in which the government promises not to prosecute someone for crimes.
It is common for lawyers to request — and receive — such deals before allowing their clients to cooperate. Independent lawyers say that is true even in cases in which witnesses have nothing to hide.
Mrs. Clinton is the front-runner in the race for the Democratic presidential nomination. While aides see a clear path to the convention in July, the fallout from her emails is likely to create distractions in the weeks ahead. F.B.I. agents could seek to question her closest aides, and possibly Mrs. Clinton herself before they close their case. Mrs. Clinton has offered to meet with investigators and has encouraged her aides to cooperate.