Has any director used the kitchen to such devastating effect as Chantal Akerman?
In her first film, “Saute ma Ville” (“Blow Up My Town”), made in 1968 when she was just 18, Ms. Akerman sings cheerily as she trashes a tiny kitchen, then rests her head on a lit burner. The screen goes black, and there is the sound of an explosion. This Belgian filmmaker’s last film, “No Home Movie,” which will be released on April 1, is a documentary about losing her mother, set largely in her mother’s Brussels apartment.
In one scene, the two sit at the kitchen table, eating potatoes that Ms. Akerman has prepared, telling her mother that even she, the peripatetic artist, has mastered a few domestic skills. It’s not hard to see the moment as a reference to a memorable potato-peeling scene in “Jeanne Dielman, 23 Quai du Commerce, 1080 Bruxelles,” Ms. Akerman’s masterpiece from 1975 that depicts, in exacting detail and repetition, the daily routine of a Brussels housewife (Delphine Seyrig), up to an unexpected, violent climax.
The way that kitchens — as much as bedrooms — can confine women but also provide intimate spaces for connection and conversation and serve as a backdrop to the drama and trauma of daily life is a recurring motif in her work. Her features and documentaries will be the subject of a retrospective at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, as well as tributes at Film Forum, Anthology Film Archives, and the Museum of the Moving Image, starting this month and running through April, offering New York audiences a fresh look at a highly influential avant-garde figure, who died in October at 65.
With an approach more instinctive than intellectual, Ms. Akerman had an outsized influence on other directors. Sofia Coppola has said she watched “Jeanne Dielman” in making her 2010 film “Somewhere,” and wanted to experiment with filming in real time. “Somewhere,” set in the Chateau Marmont in Los Angeles, and her 2003 film, “Lost in Translation,” set in a Japanese hotel, also have echoes of Ms. Akerman’s 1978 feature, “The Meetings of Anna,” about a film director (Aurore Clément) traveling to promote a film — a study in stylized anomie, set largely in hotel rooms.
In “I Don’t Belong Anywhere,” the director Gus Van Sant explains how he modeled the cinematography of “Last Days” (2005) on that of “Jeanne Dielman.” Film critics have also cited the influence of the film on “The Seventh Continent,” Michael Haneke’s first feature, which is built on the repetition of daily tasks. Others have spotted Ms. Akerman’s influence in the work of Richard Linklater, whose “Boyhood,” filmed over 12 years, pushed the use of real time in new directions.
The director Kelly Reichardt said in an email that before making a movie, she always rewatched “Jeanne Dielman” and “News From Home” (1977), in which Ms. Akerman reads out loud letters from her mother in Brussels — loving, banal, domestic — over images filmed in gritty New York. “They help clear the mind of all the nagging small moving parts and let you look at some clean lines,” Ms. Reichardt said.
In “Jeanne Dielman,” Ms. Reichardt said she was drawn to Ms. Akerman’s pacing, “the way she lets things move through a frame and how her sound design might incorporate the rhythm of traffic or room tones.” Ms. Reichardt added that she had studied “Too Far, Too Close,” a book of stills from Akerman films, while making “Certain Women,” scheduled for release this year. “I would spend time alone in a room with just my viewfinder and my Akerman book and try to imagine how she might approach the space,” Ms. Reichardt said.
It’s hard to imagine Lena Dunham and “Girls” and their offshoots without the trail blazed by Ms. Akerman, who often turned the camera on herself, sometimes naked, in unexpected and unflattering poses. Just as it’s hard to imagine the lesbian sex scenes in Abdellatif Kechiche’s “Blue Is the Warmest Color” (2013) without the lesbian sex scene in Ms. Akerman’s “Je Tu Il Elle” (1975), which shows the director in bed with a girlfriend.
“I can think of no other film that is, in its sex scenes, as profound and playful a meditation about how we see sex in the movies, by being entirely what erotic experience in the movies is, for the most part, not,” said Jennie Livingston, the director of the 1991 documentary “Paris Is Burning,” about gay and transgender dance culture.
Arun Chaudhary, the videographer for the Bernie Sanders campaign and previously President Obama’s official White House videographer, has written that “D’Est” influenced his videos. “In between casual, home-movie-like shots of President Obama are the Akerman shots: the slow pans around the Oval Office, the tracking down long corridors and through open doors, the frames within frames, the crowds both engaged with and ignorant of the camera,” Mr. Chaudhary wrote in The Forward in October.
“By making these extraordinary situations ordinary, by letting them be observed at length and letting the democratic forces of geometry and geography dictate the shot, I felt like I was practicing the Akerman ideal,” he added.
Inspired by seeing Godard’s “Pierrot le Fou” at 15, Ms. Akerman dropped out of film school in Belgium and lived in New York from 1970 to 1972. There, she was a regular at Anthology Film Archives, which showed classics as well as works by avant-garde filmmakers like Michael Snow. “She was very obsessed, because she came every day,” the filmmaker Jonas Mekas, a founder of Anthology, recalled.
