Mr. Furlong said he decided to ask the school for permission to begin a retirement education program. Its goal was to increase participation in its retirement plan and to educate people on thinking about their savings choices and investment options.
Nearly five years after Mr. Furlong pushed for that education campaign, the school has an average contribution rate of 22 percent, up from 16 percent. (This includes Gilman’s 8 percent match after participants contribute the first 7 percent of their salary.) At the highest end, people are contributing 35 percent of their salary.
Ms. Davidson, whose consultancy works with companies on their financial plans for employees, said that when it came to retirement, her company tried to get employees to think about how much they could set aside each day, and to forget about a larger monthly or annual number.
Avoiding that “whoa,” which is the hesitancy that can derail planning, is what consultants like Ms. Davidson are trying to do. Just as saving a bit more today is going to pay off in the future, not saving enough, failing to participate in a retirement plan or taking money out of a plan too early can significantly reduce the amount of money available decades later.
The National Football League’s Players Association, which represents current and former players, moved to automatically enroll its players in 2007. Since then the participation rate has gone to 90 percent, from 82 percent.
“You don’t miss what you don’t have,” said Dana Hammonds, senior director of player affairs and development.
At Gilman School, Mr. Furlong pushed to limit the number of investment options, cutting the funds its plan offered by 75 percent, while increasing the education about the ones that were available.
Increasing the amount people contribute has also been a challenge. The default rate used to be 3 percent, which wasn’t enough, said Aimee R. DeCamillo, head of retirement plan services at T. Rowe Price, which provides plans for two million people at 3,500 companies. She said a savings rate closer to 15 percent, including the employer match, was better.
Aetna, which has worked with Financial Finesse to develop its workplace program, began a yearlong initiative this month called Retirement Ready. Its goal is to help employees think about what they are saving but also about what that money might be used for in retirement.
Ms. Mooney said the company would measure the program’s effectiveness based on how employees changed behaviors, like increasing contributions to their 401(k) plans or reducing their credit card debt.
