Gov. Andrew Cuomo clearly wants New York to be the first state to enact a statewide minimum wage of $15, but if so, he and the State Legislature will have to move fast to beat California, where on Monday state lawmakers and Gov. Jerry Brown reached a deal on a higher minimum. Mr. Cuomo has included a statewide minimum of $15 in his latest budget. But with an April 1 deadline for the budget, he has an uphill fight to sway Republicans who control the State Senate. His challenge now is to get them to go along without giving too much away.
Some Republicans might vote for a $15 minimum for the New York City area if the governor agreed to a lesser increase for upstate New York. A better approach would be for the $15 minimum to be phased in for everyone on the same schedule that is currently in place for fast-food workers in New York, which lifts their minimum in New York City to $15 by the end of 2018 and in the rest of the state by mid-2021. Any statewide minimum lower or slower than that would only further entrench low wages. What is needed now is meaningful help to lift wages, not the promise of help at some implausibly distant or uncertain future date.
The California deal calls for a $15 minimum to be fully phased in by 2022 for most businesses and by 2023 for businesses with 25 or fewer employees. The details of the deal are interesting, the politics more so.
To address concerns that the increase may prove to be too much, too soon, the proposal would also allow the governor to adjust the phase-in schedule if certain economic or budgetary conditions develop. A pause could be enforced, for instance, if the state experienced an annual decline in sales tax receipts and six months of job losses. Once the $15 minimum is fully phased in, it would be adjusted upward for inflation each year.
Politically, the deal is a grass-roots victory. The Fight for $15, a union-backed effort by low-wage workers, began in November 2012 with a walkout by 200 fast-food workers in New York City. As the effort spread to other cities and states, politicians began to follow where the protesters were leading.
Today, cities including Seattle, San Francisco and Los Angeles have adopted phased-in minimums of $15 an hour. In 2015, New York established a $15 minimum for fast-food workers and state employees, using special powers in state law that allowed Mr. Cuomo to bypass the Legislature. In Oregon and Massachusetts, home-care workers — a large and fast-growing work force — have won minimums of $15. On the presidential campaign trail, Bernie Sanders’s support for a federal minimum wage of $15 is one reason he is competing effectively against Hillary Clinton, who favors $12 an hour.
Workers in New York were the first to demonstrate for $15 an hour. State leaders in New York would be seizing a historic opportunity — as well as doing the right thing — to make $15 an hour the minimum wage for the entire state.