GLENDALE, Ariz. — The best prospect in baseball made his major league debut last September, while the Los Angeles Dodgers were charging toward their third consecutive title in the National League West. He was not there to soak up the atmosphere.
Corey Seager was there to contribute. He will probably stay for many years.
Seager may need some time to help the Dodgers this season. He sprained his left knee running the bases on Friday and the team said he would miss a week or two. The Dodgers will surely not rush a player who hit .337 down the stretch and opened the playoffs against the Mets batting third in the lineup. Seager is 21 but does not seem so young.
Seager’s talent has been validated by Baseball America, Baseball Prospectus and MLB.com, all of which put him atop their prospect rankings for 2016. He hit .293 with 18 homers in the minors last season, before his .986 on-base-plus-slugging percentage for the Dodgers.
Seager also has the pedigree. His father, Jeff, played third base at Fairleigh Dickinson. An older brother, Justin, plays first base for a Seattle farm team, and another older brother, Kyle, is the Mariners’ third baseman.
The Dodgers chose Seager from a North Carolina high school with the 18th overall pick of the 2012 draft. With the next selection, the St. Louis Cardinals drafted Michael Wacha, a college pitcher who eliminated the Dodgers the next fall in the N.L. Championship Series.
Seager, by then, had hit just .160 above low-Class A. But he matured rapidly, hitting .349 at two levels in 2014 and putting himself on a path to the majors. He symbolizes the future of the Dodgers, who carry the majors’ highest payroll (nearly $300 million last season) but have held tight to the jewels of their farm system.
That approach continued at last July’s trading deadline, when superstars crisscrossed the baseball map but the Dodgers made lower-impact deals. Even so, they nearly survived their division series against the Mets, leading by 2-1 in the fourth inning of the decisive fifth game at Dodger Stadium.
Daniel Murphy led off that inning with a single off Zack Greinke. With one out and the Dodgers using an exaggerated infield shift, Lucas Duda walked. With third base unoccupied, Murphy touched second and tore off to steal third, startling Seager and second baseman Howie Kendrick.
Murphy scored on a sacrifice fly and ripped the go-ahead homer two innings later, and the Dodgers never scored again. For Seager, the misplay stung.
“That was the one situation we didn’t go over,” he said. “That’s why everybody was so thrown off. Duda almost didn’t realize it was ball four or whatever, so we both kind of came to the bag instead of normally just kind of walking forward — and he took it. It was a good play by him that really changed the course of that game and that series.
Two decades earlier, in Seattle, the Yankees were eliminated in the division series in a tight Game 5 loss. Their 21-year-old shortstop, Derek Jeter, was not on the roster but watched from the dugout. It was the final career game for Don Mattingly, the Yankees’ captain at the time, who managed the Dodgers last season before leaving for Miami.
In his first full season, Jeter won the Rookie of the Year Award, for which Seager is still eligible, and won the World Series, which the Dodgers have not done in 28 years. Comparisons to Jeter are understandable, given Seager’s comportment and size (he is 6 feet 4 inches, an inch taller than Jeter), but probably unfair.
At the Dodgers’ complex here, Seager’s locker is between Utley’s and Kendrick’s, 23 years of combined major league experience on either side of his 27 games. In time, Seager could be a leader for a team that could probably use one. For now, the best prospect in baseball is happy with his role.
