The New Yorkers work the room, mingling with Stephen Stills, Jackson Browne and Neil Young, but withering under the sunlight and oppressively mellow vibe. This episode, written by David Matthews and directed by Allen Coulter, is the strongest in the series so far, and not just because it’s loose and funny (what took so long?); it deliberately upends many of the show’s clichés. For example, where “Vinyl” usually exploits our knowledge of the world after the show’s 1973 setting to show what a genius Richie is — he’s the only guy in the room who realizes Abba will be huge — this time, when Richie scoffs at the idea of remaking the song “Hooked on a Feeling,” we know that the resulting Blue Swede single will soon top the charts and he’s missing out. This makes Richie something closer to the protagonist of a classical tragedy, struggling in vain to avoid a predestined future.
For the knowledgeable viewer, death hangs over the scene. Zak makes a joke about getting to the buffet table before “Mama” Cass Elliot does — she died in 1974 (legend has it, by choking on a ham sandwich). Gram Parsons tries to get Richie to join him on a road trip to Joshua Tree, telling him he will find “that thing of beauty that you lost or let go.” Parsons overdosed and died in 1973 — in Joshua Tree.
Zak and Richie are on an austerity regime: They’re selling the plane, even though it’s a cherished perk and the site of Jim Morrison’s “last three-way,” so they can get three months of operating expenses for American Century. Richie hasn’t reconciled with Devon, but he’s gotten clean, spurning both coke and booze. When, however, they overhear gossip that Elvis Presley is unhappy in his deal with RCA Records, they instinctively return to their excessive habits, heading straight for Las Vegas — desperately hoping to sign Elvis in a deal they can’t afford.
They make contact with Elvis’s manager, Colonel Tom Parker, who is corpulent and decaying, as if he wandered onto the set from a David Cronenberg film. Parker gives them tickets to a show where Elvis performs “Polk Salad Annie”: Zak complains, “The king of rock ’n’ roll is singing about lettuce!” Later that night, while Zak has his first ménage a trois, Richie makes his way into Elvis’s suite.
This encounter is a companion piece to the beach-house scene: Once again, death is in the air. Richie tells Elvis, “You’re going to die 50 years from now,” but we know Elvis has just three years left to live. Shawn Klush, a professional Elvis impersonator, gives one of the best acting performances by anyone portraying a celebrity on this show. He’s not the spitting image of Elvis, but he skillfully captures the singer’s bloated charisma and his insecurity. It’s the culmination of seven episodes’ worth of musical vignettes by 1950s rock stars: Here Elvis is drinking a Tab, showing off his martial-arts moves and spouting his philosophy of rock ’n’ roll. “I want them to feel the music,” he says, echoing what Richie’s been preaching just about every episode. Richie’s epiphany, it turns out, is just another rock-music truism.
 When Colonel Parker shows up, however, he shuts down the dream. Elvis obediently goes to bed; Richie leaves the hotel suite empty-handed, a fictional character defeated by reality.
This episode suggests that “Vinyl” is at its best when it’s unencumbered by Richie’s substance abuse and domestic drama — and when it doesn’t take itself too seriously. But although it could end with the scene in the hotel suite that bookends the scene at the party, there’s a strong coda: The money from the sale of the plane has gone missing, presumably swiped by the two women Zak took to bed. Zak — who came on the trip to babysit the money, telling Richie, “I trust my wife naked in bed with Burt Reynolds before I trust you with a hundred grand in cash” — is devastated by the consequences of his own irresponsibility. However, we learn in flashback that Richie, after seeing the number 18 repeatedly on his trip west, believed it was a portent, and secretly blew all the money betting on 18 at the roulette wheel.
As they fly coach back to New York, Richie lets Zak marinate in his own guilt — and then, succumbing to his own, Richie falls off the wagon, slamming down a double vodka. A swizzle stick and the miniature liquor bottles leave condensation in the shape of another 18: a ghostly reminder that even when Richie knows he’s the plaything of destiny, he can’t decipher the clues.
• The episode is largely focused on Richie and Zak — which vastly improves the dramatic flow — but back in New York, Clark tries to adjust to working in the mailroom, where he gets hazed (until he pulls out a joint and passes it around).
• Jamie has a confrontation with her mother, who wants her to move out of her aunt’s apartment and leave the record business.
