Brooklyn Academy of Music - Fishman Space, 321 Ashland Pl.
At the end of those three years, he was only 20. But by then he had conducted and ended a fabled love affair with the older Symbolist poet Paul Verlaine and written the entire body of visionary verse that would anticipate future iconoclasts in art movements from Surrealism to punk rock.
No, he didn’t die young (he lived on to a disease-riddled 37), as is traditionally expected of this particular breed of cult idol. Instead, he one-upped the usual gorgeous corpses by walking out on his glory with a sneer and refusing to look back.
In other words, Rimbaud was the opposite of nostalgic, which means he probably wouldn’t care much for “Rimbaud in New York,” which runs through Sunday at BAM Fisher. This earnest collage tribute piece from the Civilians, written and directed by Steve Cosson, celebrates Rimbaud as the man who invented downtown as a state of mind.
That’s the sphere where flaming creative creatures from the margins dreamed into being their own colony of otherness, of a rough and ravishing world on the fringes. Legend has it that the overcrowded, overpriced island called Manhattan once harbored such a world. And it is to that remote civilization that “Rimbaud in New York” looks with a wonder that is only occasionally tempered by skepticism.
As is the wont of the Civilians, who practice “investigative theater,” this production channels the voices of assorted experts, artists and academics on the subject under consideration. They include writers and musicians who knew (or know of) downtown New York from the 1950s through the ’70s, when it was inhabited by the likes of Frank O’Hara, Andy Warhol, Patti Smith, Tom Verlaine and the artist David Wojnarowicz. The speakers themselves are incarnated by an eight-member ensemble, who used various wigs and props to become the show’s assorted pundits and witnesses.
Just who the performers are impersonating is revealed, in haste, only at the show’s end. And you can be forgiven for feeling like an unexpected and uninitiated guest at a gathering of a Rimbaud fan club, whose members self-consciously put on different funny costumes and voices while discussing the object of their fascination.
Sometimes they debate the meaning and legacy of Rimbaud; at other times — and these are, relatively speaking, the best of times — they recite from “Illuminations,” as translated by the eminent American poet John Ashbery (who is also a character here), or perform musical numbers in homage to that work, written by seven composers.
The prose poems of “Illuminations” defy literal interpretation, and it’s best to sit back and let the hallucinogenic images swirl over and around you. Rimbaud, as is often noted here, created his own sui generis landscape, and you can enter it only if you accept it on his terms. Whether incanting or singing, most of the cast members here only rarely suggest that they have fully stepped into that world.
As a teenager, I saw Ms. Smith, an avowed Rimbaud acolyte, reciting poetry in a claustrophobic New York club and had a visceral impression that she was inhabiting a wild and distant planet. I couldn’t see what she saw, but through seeing how she saw — with that alarmed, glazed, jubilant gaze — I felt I could sense the exotic wonder of wherever her mind had gone roaming. Such moments seldom arrive in “Rimbaud in New York,” which has been developed with support from the Poetry Foundation, though there are flickers of Smithian rapture in the poems performed by Jo Lampert and Rebecca Hart.
The show is most engaging in musical numbers that summon the impact of Rimbaud on others, which often feature lively, stylized choreography by Sam Pinkleton that suggests how the Ramones might have danced if Bob Fosse had choreographed them. Among these are the rowdy opener, “Hot Mess Disaster Boy” (with music by Adam Cochran); “The Future of Poetry Is Female” (based on an interview with the poet Ariana Reines), written and performed by Ms. Hart; and Joseph Keckler’s “City,” inspired by Wojnarowicz’s Rimbaud-mask photographs, sung in a larynx-defying range of octaves by Mr. Keckler.
