Henry Street Settlement – Abrons Arts Center, 466 Grand St.
The title of Jackie Sibblies Drury’s stylishly contemplative new play, which opened on Wednesday night at the Abrons Arts Center, is unadorned by punctuation. But it comes with its own built-in question mark, or ellipsis, or both.
“Really” it is called. And though “really” is a really overused word in everyday conversation, it automatically invites skepticism when seen by its naked self. Living with our shifting perceptions and even more variable memories, we can seldom say, with unconditional certainty, what really happened at a given moment, or even how we really felt.
With the collaboration of the always intriguing experimental director (and dramatist) Richard Maxwell and his New York City Players, Ms. Drury has created a work that focuses on fixed images culled from life’s flux. “Really” is a play about photography. And it asks provocative questions about the value of what is seen in pictures that freeze fleeting moments for posterity.
Ms. Drury’s three-character drama may tackle issues commonly debated in aesthetic philosophy seminars, but its tone is never academic. Its language is prosaic, and its basic setup is one that has been recycled throughout modern domestic drama: The possessive mother of a young man who, it would appear, has died recently visits the woman he loved and lived with.
But it soon becomes clear that “Really” is interested in this familiar friction only as far as it serves the larger idea of photography as an art that misses as much as it captures. I’ve said that this play is not academic, but it is highly cerebral, and any personal emotional resonance it may have for you is less likely to involve the relationship between these women than their relationship with Calvin’s art — and, by extension, yours, with pictures of yourself and people you know.
Calvin (embodied here by Tavish Miller), it seems, was widely acknowledged as a first-rate photographer. The character identified only as Girlfriend, played by Kaneza Schaal (whose diffidence about her own extraordinary beauty works perfectly here), is also a photographer, though, by her description, not nearly on the same level.
“I think it might be difficult to actually take the photograph of what you’re picturing,” she says. The words are addressed to Calvin’s Mother (Elaine Davis), who has come to the clean, well-lighted loft that Girlfriend once shared with Calvin (and where she continues to live) to pose for a portrait.
Clearly, the women have high and anxious expectations for this session, hoping they might discover something new and illuminating about each other and the man they both loved. It seems equally clear that such expectations will not be fulfilled.
The production deftly uses the self-consciousness of its characters to create a more pervasive, self-examining consciousness about the artistic process that sets the rhythms for their dialogue. The production begins with Girlfriend slowly and methodically setting up lights, loading a camera, adjusting a lens.
As Mother sits awkwardly in a chair, discussing mundane subjects with numbing velocity, Girlfriend remains silent, except for the occasional monosyllabic answer to a question, or a directive like the one she issues when she asks Mother to keep still.
“I mean you shouldn’t be still, you can move,” she says, “but don’t, like, move move, if that’s okay.” This contradictory instruction hints at more complex paradoxes to come.
Calvin shows up as a full-bodied, present-tense memory. We see him as the willful, difficult, overachieving boy that Mother recalls, and as the hypnotically confident — and maddeningly patronizing — lover of the Girlfriend, whose beauty seems to expand in his vision of her, even as she shrinks in her own estimation.
Girlfriend, on the other hand, can’t stop thinking about not only the motivations of those around her but also the larger world of short, brutal lives on which art makes little impact. The reductionism of photography troubles her. Still, there’s no ignoring the transcendence of a great photograph or the value of finding form for thoughts (a subject that Mother touches on obliquely and affectingly).
Designed by Michael Schmelling (set and lighting), who is also a photographer, and David Zuckerman (sound), “Really” takes place in a stark, simple box of a set. The performances are pitched at the level of heightened neutrality that is the signature of Mr. Maxwell (who titled one of his own plays “Neutral Hero”). Words are spoken calmly and with minimal inflection, as if an excess of shading might block the view of what is really (that word again!) being said.
As is often the case with Maxwell productions, “Really” induces in its audience an intense sobriety that begets dizziness. As we watch Girlfriend arrange lights, pose her subject, click the shutter, photography seems a dry and technical business.
But every so often we hear — and feel — a sonic thrum that suggests something ineffable emerging from this mechanical process. And then, in one ravishingly realized moment, we seem to enter the camera itself and exist in a world between fluid life and stationary image.
Magic has happened, and it’s as unsettling as it is irrefutable. Does any photograph do justice to the reality it tries to capture? I think that Girlfriend would say no (and be right).
And yet, and yet. The focused mind reels. “Really” is unusually clearsighted about the ambiguities of its subject.