This weekend, lots of children will meet the Easter bunny and hunt for eggs.
Spectators will line up for the bonnet festival and parade in Midtown.
Churchgoers will don their Sunday best.
And in the East Village, Hanya Krill will finally take a break.
Ms. Krill, 60, is a pysankarka, a Ukrainian Easter egg maker, and over the last few weeks she has helped create dozens of the brightly colored objects.
Exchanging the Easter eggs, or pysanky, is a tradition among Ukrainian communities.
The practice of decorating them is thought to date to pagan times. The custom has been in Ms. Krill’s family for centuries, she said.
To make her eggs, Ms. Krill scrambles their insides with some vigorous shaking.

“That part is not pleasant,” she said.
Then she uses a kistka, a pointed implement a bit like a pen, filled with beeswax and heated over a candle, to draw designs on the eggs between bathing them in colored dye.
It is a painstaking process that can take anywhere from two to 20 hours, she said.
Or longer, if your egg breaks.
“I’ve shed many tears over broken eggs,” she said.
If you’re looking for a new hobby, this ancient craft is also “very therapeutic,” she said.
Something to chew over during your omelet at Easter brunch.
Today’s high is near 67.
The good news is that it shouldn’t rain on your parade (or egg hunt) over the weekend. Saturday and Sunday are mostly clear, with highs in the mid-50s.
• Scoreboard: Devils roast Penguins, 3-0. Knicks slay Bulls, 106-94. Nets enmesh Cavaliers, 104-95.
• For a global look at what’s happening, see Your Friday Briefing.
• Devils host Capitals, 7 p.m. (MSG). Islanders at Lightning, 7:30 p.m. (MSG+).
• Watch “The New York Times Close Up,” featuring The Times’s Margaret Sullivan and other guests. Saturday at 10 p.m. and Sunday at 10 a.m. on NY1.
• Nets host Pacers, 6 p.m. (YES). Islanders at Hurricanes, 7 p.m. (MSG+). Rangers at Canadiens, 7 p.m. (MSG2). Knicks host Cavaliers, 7:30 p.m. (MSG).
• Devils at Hurricanes, 5 p.m. (MSG+). Rangers host Penguins, 7:30 p.m. (NBC Sports).
• For more events, see The New York Times’s Arts & Entertainment guide. And if you seek things to do outside ofthe city, The Times’s Metropolitan section has suggestions. See this weekend’s listings for Hudson Valley, Long Island, New Jersey and Connecticut.
B, D and Q trains are running with delays.
• Alternate-side parking: Suspended on Good Friday.
Today is Good Friday, a holiday for public schools and some private ones.
Expect crowded museums, zoos and parks.
If you’re responsible for any youngsters, our friends at Mommy Poppins have compiled a list of egg hunts over the weekend.
Many of these events offer children the chance to find plastic eggs stuffed with candy.
In the past, children could also expect to learn a lesson in politics.
In 1937, at the Gramercy Boys Club, an egg with an American flag on it — an attempt to “counteract communist influences,” wrote The Times — was the key to a prize.
And in 1944, at an egg hunt on Avenue B, “two extremely hard-boiled eggs, suitably decorated, named Hitler and Hirohito” were hidden for some “wartime flavor,” The Times recorded.
Speaking of politics, today is your last day to register to vote in the state’s primary. Here’s how to sign up.