PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla. — Brown hair flowing from beneath his blue-and-orange cap, Jacob deGrom moved not a strand when asked about that little old contract deal.
There was no shaking of the head, but, without question, it’s still a sore subject.
“So last week,” Sandy Alderson, the Mets’ general manager, concurred a short while later.
Last week was about what deGrom described as a “business decision,” his not accepting the $607,000 salary the Mets assigned him this season — a formality since he had no negotiating leverage as a player, with not enough major league service to force salary arbitration.
Friday’s story jarred memories of the utterly awkward Matt Harvey innings watch of 2015, but it was clear on Monday that the Mets, deGrom included, preferred to move on to this week’s narrative.
That is, the unveiling of their formidable array of starting pitchers, with Bartolo Colon throwing three innings and allowing one run in a 7-3 victory over the Detroit Tigers, and Steven Matz also debuting with three innings and one run in a split-squad 9-4 loss to the St. Louis Cardinals in Jupiter, Fla.
On Tuesday, Harvey will make the drive to the Disney complex to pitch against Atlanta, deGrom will welcome the Yankees to Port St. Lucie on Wednesday, and Noah Syndergaard will follow against the Cardinals on Thursday.
Time to work out winter’s rust and remind the National League of how the Mets’ powerful rotation is the envy of the industry.
But the subject of baseball economics, or how to preserve and protect their most valuable assets, remains a delicate and potentially divisive one for the Mets. Kicking big-pitching-contract cans down the road while pursuing a return to the World Series may be their most conservative strategy. It still comes with the possibility of antagonizing fans sensing a yearslong recompense for all they have suffered and, worse, planting a seed of doubt or disgust into the mind of deGrom, in this most current case.
On Friday, deGrom did say, “we’re still open to discussing some long-term things” and “I don’t think this will have any effect on that.” But a roughly $50,000 raise for an All-Star pitcher who won 14 games, was at times dominating into the postseason, and stretched his pitch counts in the process, was obviously taken as inflexible and stingy on the part of the Mets.
Baseball’s longstanding arbitration system for players with three years in the majors — long considered fair and equitable — should at least be re-examined in the aftermath of the Harvey case, which raised important issues on risk and potential reward for the young and precocious.
Comparing other professional sports can be an apples-and-oranges undertaking, but for context of how long a slog it can be for a major leaguer to earn anything close to fair market value, let’s consider an at-best marginal Knick — Cleanthony Early. A second-year player who has been idle for most of this season after being shot in a late-night misadventure, Early is making $845,059.
Shane Larkin, a third-year point guard already on his third team, the Nets, is raking in $1.5 million this season. Browse the rosters of the Giants and the Jets, and you will find scores of players you wouldn’t recognize if they tackled you on the street making double and triple what deGrom, a star, will make in 2016.
The best young basketball stars can also be restricted free agents after four years, though Alderson rightly noted that basketball and football use the college system as a minor-league-breeding and player-branding ground.
“The N.B.A. doesn’t spend a dime — maybe a little more, recently, with their D-League — but we put a lot of time and money in our minor league system, and it can take three to six years for players to develop,” he said.
He is also a player who won’t be eligible for arbitration until 2018 and unfettered free agency until 2021. Barring injury, deGrom will earn millions — as Harvey is now — during his arbitration years, if the Mets do not sign him to a long-term extension.
But given his unusual circumstances — an outlier on the developmental scale but an instant and charismatic star — would a few extra hundred-thousand dollars have bankrupted the Wilpon family? A token of the Mets’ appreciation would also have sent a message to deGrom, Syndergaard and Matz that the organization wants them to be as sound of mind as they are strong of arm in the years ahead.
For all the celebrating of the Yoenis Cespedes signing, he may yet be a one-season story. David Wright gave another update Monday on his playing status — “I think we’re close; everything is going exactly the way we discussed it; the back feels fine” — but his long-range health forecast must be called cloudy.
In other words, the pitchers are the backbone of the franchise. No news flash there, but these are young, insecure athletes, and their understanding — or misunderstanding — of what the Mets ultimately have in mind could affect them, and the team.
For this week, no problem. The narrative ahead remains unwritten.