No doubt about it: The crime statistics in New York City look rosy. But Mayor Bill de Blasio is not in a good position to boast — not when people are living on the streets and subways because they don’t want to be robbed, stabbed, beaten or killed in homeless shelters.
Shelter violence has been one of those slow-motion, back-burner issues for the mayor, who admittedly has not lacked for other big priorities in the last two years, from prekindergarten to affordable housing and traffic safety.
But shelters are still filled to bursting, and the surge in homelessness on the streets is obvious to anyone who steps outside in mid-Manhattan. There has been a steady news drip of shelter slashings and stabbings — on top of a litany of horrors exposed by recent analyses of “critical incidents” at shelters by The Daily News and NY1, and by the administration itself. And so Mr. de Blasio announced this week that changes were being made.
The Police Department will help the Department of Homeless Services come up with a security plan for the more than 250 shelters across the city. The police will also retrain the homeless agency’s 600 peace officers in defusing conflicts. And the city will revive a program, abandoned in 2010, that offered counseling and other services within shelters to families at risk of domestic violence. This is particularly important: A city review found that well over half of the violent episodes in family shelters resulted from domestic strife.
The administration’s efforts can be seen only as a start — the retraining, for instance, will be just a few days of tactical brushing-up, and it will not be offered at all to the 1,000 private security guards working for the Department of Homeless Services, or those hired independently by nonprofit shelter operators. And while there has been talk of having actual police officers keep the peace in shelters, this is problematic because it might give residents who fear police harassment and arrest even more reason to stay on the streets.
Further, the changes do not go to root causes — old problems like the human pipeline that sends many troubled inmates released from upstate prisons directly into the city’s shelter system. And the fact that the city’s 27 mental health shelters, home to a heavily disproportionate share of violent incidents, have borne, by default, a growing portion of the city’s mental health care burden.
The huge, horrific state mental hospitals were emptied decades ago. But warehousing has slowly been returning one shelter (and prison) bed at a time. Steven Banks, the commissioner of the city’s Human Resources Administration, who is responsible for the shelter system, came to understand these problems as well as anyone in his decades at the Legal Aid Society. Whether he can turn them around is the question.
It will take management skill. But it will also take money. Both were missing when Gov. Andrew Cuomo promised in January to attack the shelter-security problem with inspections and protection, in what seemed to be more of a political jab at Mr. de Blasio than a serious policy proposal (especially when Mr. Cuomo admits that state-run shelters have their own egregious oversight problems).
Both the city and the state have decades-old shelter-management problems to fix, but Mr. Cuomo also bears heavy responsibility for damaging cuts in state aid for shelters and rental assistance, leaving the city to shoulder more of the growing burden of homelessness. This is reflected on the streets. The state needs to pay a far greater share of the cost of sheltering the destitute, treating the mentally ill and making the shelters places of safety and dignity, instead of chaos and fear.