The remaining Republican presidential candidates are entering the Darwinian phase of the campaign — if they lose in certain states, they get nothing. Democrats are continuing with their proportional allocation of delegates — if they lose, they probably still get a trophy.
Democrats also have more unbound delegates, the so-called superdelegates, than Republicans. Think of the superdelegates as a regulatory body. On the Republican side, voting is more of a laissez-faire market.
Starting to sense a pattern?
The parties’ delegate systems uncannily reflect some of their core values, and those values are having a big effect on this year’s races.
Democrats The setup is nearly the same in every state: The delegates are awarded proportionally; the candidate just has to get to 15 percent to qualify. That means the loser is typically rewarded for his or her fair share of the vote.
Republicans There’s a lot more variation by state, almost as if federalism were the guiding principle, with states as laboratories for democracy. Starting Tuesday, states are allowed to make it more likely that a winner can monopolize the delegates. In another context, Republicans generally approve of the idea that markets create winners and losers. A Pew study said “55 percent of conservative Republicans don’t want the government to do much or anything at all about inequality,” versus about 10 percent of Democrats who feel that way.
How we got here Republican officials hoped to avoid a repeat of the 2012 race, when Rick Santorum helped keep the party’s favorite, Mitt Romney, from a quick and clean victory. So they changed the rules to make it easier for a front-running candidate to deliver knockout blows in winner-take-all or winner-take-most states — never imagining that an insurgent like Donald Trump could be the beneficiary.
The practical effect Mr. Trump could take a major step toward the nomination by winning states like Florida, Ohio, Illinois and Missouri on Tuesday. Bernie Sanders can’t count on making such big leaps to catch up to Hillary Clinton because none of the Democratic races are winner-take-all or winner-take-most.
Democrats About 15 percent of Democratic delegates are superdelegates: party regulars, donors, activists, officials and union leaders. They can oversee the electoral market and potentially overrule the will of the voters. In another context, Democrats tend to be more supportive of regulation. In a Pew survey, about 76 percent of Republicans said government regulation of business did more harm than good, but only 38 percent of Democrats felt the same way.
The superdelegates also offer some expertise. These days, Democrats typically have more trust in that quality. In a Pew survey, 68 percent of politically engaged Republicans said “ordinary Americans would do a better job than elected officials solving the country’s problems.” A smaller percentage of Democratic counterparts, 48 percent, felt the same way.
Maybe expertise shouldn’t be played down. Many Americans don’t know that crime is declining, but a lot of them believe that Bigfoot exists. And while Democrats are more likely to trust experts like scientists who say humans are causing climate change, they’re also more likely than Republicans to believe in astrology.
Republicans The party has fewer unbound delegates, and they are based more on the vagaries of state rules, while the Democrats rely more on central planning. (Several G.O.P. state delegations won’t be bound to any candidate). Markets can be messy, and the chances of convention discord seem higher.
Even without superdelegates, Republicans have been plotting how they can take the nomination away from Mr. Trump, particularly if he can’t reach a clinching number of delegates. We could see our first genuine convention drama since 1976. But as Jonathan Bernstein of Bloomberg View wrote, the weeks before the July convention could be even more fascinating.
On the Democratic side, Mrs. Clinton has a lead in superdelegates of more than 400, giving the impression that her lead is bigger than it is. But as Ms. Brazile noted, “If anyone paid attention to 2008, we can change our minds,” referring to Barack Obama’s narrow victory over Mrs. Clinton.
If Mr. Sanders were to dominate the race from here to the finish, the superdelegates would almost certainly switch to his side.
But if Mr. Sanders wound up overtaking Mrs. Clinton by, say, only two pledged delegates, the superdelegates might not abandon her en masse. A tie or virtual tie would probably go to Mrs. Clinton, the party possibly deciding against the people. But even that probably wouldn’t be as wounding or chaotic as what might await if a big delegate lead by Mr. Trump were overturned at the Republican convention.
Question for readers: Anyone can get a trophy, but only one person can become president. Which system do you believe results in the best-qualified nominee?