Baseball|This Cuban Defector Changed Baseball. Nobody Remembers.
This Cuban Defector Changed Baseball. Nobody Remembers.
Whenever Rene Arocha goes for the lawn mower, he can see it, his younger self, No. 43 of the St. Louis Cardinals around 1993, caught in the familiar hunched-over, leg-up pose of a pitcher hurtling something toward the plate.
It is a tucked-away reminder of his fleeting fame, a fame that he has sought to tuck away himself after a career that began with a flash of hope but ultimately fizzled in disappointments and unfulfilled expectations.
“I am hidden here,” he said, laughing, of the nondescript peach bungalow-style house here where he lives, with a beaten-up 1990s sedan on the lawn, a motorboat in the side yard, squawking parrots on the back patio and a pregnant cat making the rounds.
Yet with one simple but rebellious move, he changed baseball.
Major League Baseball and Cuba are discussing ways for Cuban players to sign with teams without having to defect, taking advantage of a thaw between the countries that will culminate in President Obama’s two-day trip there, set to begin Sunday. A new arrangement would formalize the decades-long flow of Cuban players showing up on American shores and on major league rosters — including star players like Yasiel Puig, Yoenis Cespedes, Aroldis Chapman and Orlando Hernandez, known as El Duque.
Before all of them, and scores of others, there was Rene Arocha.
He never got a big-money contract or played memorably enough to be a household name, even among ardent fans. At best, he may be a curious footnote.
But on July 10, 1991, he committed a simple but utterly rebellious act that opened the way for the modern surge of Cuban players: He walked away from the Cuban national team during a layover in Miami and sought asylum in the United States.
Until then, no active player on the national team, the best of the best in the country, had defected.
Now, the kind of defections to which Arocha opened the way may be on the way out.
After Fidel Castro took power in 1959, he abolished professional baseball and established the National Series, a 16-team amateur league run by a government department.
“This is the triumph of free baseball over slave baseball,” Castro declared, showing his distaste for the buying and selling of players in the United States leagues.
Before Arocha defected, a few players managed to make it to the United States, but none had been active players on the high-profile national team.
One player, Barbaro Garbey, who had been imprisoned on a game-fixing charge and who left Cuba on the Mariel boatlift, a mass migration of more than 120,000 Cuban refugees to the United States in 1980, did make it to the major leagues. But Garbey was not an active player when he left Cuba, Bjarkman said, and his departure did not cause nearly the stir that Arocha’s did.
Arocha, by contrast, was a star pitcher on Cuba’s national team when he left, a right-hander with a 92-mile-an-hour fastball. At 25, however, he was already an overworked pitcher. Cuba tended not to use relievers, so starters often worked entire games, sometimes several a week.
Even as Major League Baseball has applied to the Treasury Department to institute a new system to draft Cuban players to teams directly — a pathway that the league expects would pre-empt the smuggling and the often chaotic and dangerous journeys of Cuban players to the United States — players continue to arrive.
Last month, two brothers, Yulieski Gourriel, 31, and Lourdes Gourriel Jr., 22, left the Cuban national team while in the Dominican Republic, two of the most high-profile defections in recent years.
Their father, Lourdes Gourriel Sr., was one of Cuba’s most celebrated players. Arocha played with him on the Cuba teams that won the 1986 Amateur World Series and the 1988 Baseball World Cup against the United States.
There is pride in that voice.
If Jose Canseco, the Oakland Athletics’ All-Star, had not decided to make a candy bar, Arocha might not have ended up in the majors.
Cuba now closely guards the travels of its players, driving many defecting players to risk harrowing journeys in the hands of unscrupulous smugglers. But Arocha’s defection was remarkably simple.
The team was on a layover in Miami after playing a series of exhibition games against the United States. The players were staying at the hotel in the middle of the airport, Arocha said, and he just walked out.
He did have a plan. In fact, he said, he had been plotting for a long time to make a break from the team, considering and then dropping the idea on at least two earlier occasions when the team was traveling.
Miami, however, made a lot of sense because he had relatives there.
When his father and aunt came to visit at the airport hotel, he told them he was not going back to Cuba and would stay with them.
He slipped out of the hotel and through an exit door in the crowded terminal, apparently not closely watched by Cuban officials, who had not dealt with a defection before.
The next day, according to news accounts at the time, the Cuban team waited on the plane for Arocha. And waited, and waited, until after a few hours it was clear he was not going to show up.
Back in Cuba, he was denounced as a traitor in official media.
He had been playing baseball since he was 13, starting in his hometown, Regla, near Havana.
He had worked his way up through the equivalent of the minor leagues to the Metropolitanos and the Industriales, two of the country’s best teams. In total, he is credited with 100 wins and a .600 winning percentage, Bjarkman said, and was talked up as the probable starter for Cuba’s Olympic baseball team at the 1992 Barcelona Games.
Over the years, a torn Achilles’ tendon set him back and his throwing arm went cold and hot, but he made it to the national team.
With the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1989, Cuba entered what is known as the Special Period, an era of food shortages and want among the worst the country has endured.
Baseball players were not spared.
There were other slights.
The authoritarian ways of the country trickled down to athletics. Players, Arocha said, were tightly controlled. Decisions on who would start which games were never explained, and the players were forced to attend meetings to hear political speeches.
“Nothing was ever explained; they just made decisions and nobody would know why,” he said.
Off the field, people were punished for seemingly minor violations. He recalled the time an uncle was jailed for simply possessing American dollars.
It was all getting to him, he said.
Not even his wife at the time knew his plan, he said. She went to the Havana airport to meet him; they eventually split up, and he has since remarried in the United States.
The sudden freedom to speak his mind bewildered him at first.
At a cafe in Little Havana in Miami, he was stunned to hear fellow Cubans loudly criticizing President George Bush.
The exile community embraced him, though Arocha was wary of political activism.
“I know nothing about politics,” he told The New York Times a few weeks after arriving. As that article noted, Arocha had left shortly before Havana was to play host to the Pan-American Games, perhaps adding to Fidel Castro’s ire.
Gus Dominguez, a Cuban-American working at an advertising firm in Los Angeles, happened to be visiting a Miami radio station to help promote Canseco’s candy bar while word spread of Arocha’s defection.
A sports reporter helped him make the connection.
“I knew Canseco’s agents, so I agreed to bring Rene to Los Angeles to meet them and see what could happen,” Dominguez said.
A week later, the meeting had still not panned out. Baseball had no system in place to draft Cuban players, so everybody was operating with caution and suspicion.
It took several months, but the league decided to hold a special lottery for Arocha. The St. Louis Cardinals signed him.
Pitching in Cuba was one thing; pitching in the big leagues was another.
Arocha went 11-8 his rookie season in 1993. He remembered standing on the mound in that first game against the Cincinnati Reds on April 9, 1993.
It turned out to be the pinnacle of his career.
The next season, he was in the bullpen.
Arocha did not adjust well, mentally or physically, and ended up with an elbow injury that at first was diagnosed as a bone chip but was later found to be a torn tendon. He required Tommy John surgery, and in his eyes and the eyes of his associates, it signaled the end of his career. He missed the 1996 season.
He was cut by the Cardinals after playing three seasons and signed with the San Francisco Giants in 1997 for a season but did not start, relegated to one of their minor league teams.
In 1998, he played for the New Orleans Zephyrs, a Houston Astros Class AAA team, then went on to play in Mexican leagues in 1999 and discussed a comeback with the Mets in 2000, but there was not enough interest, and he retired.
He settled here, because the community had always welcomed him. Thousands of fans of Cuban descent had watched and cheered him here when he had pitched against the Marlins in a game that rookie season.
“Without a doubt, Arocha was a pitcher with a lot of talent, but injuries and bad luck always followed him,” said Ian Padron, a Cuban filmmaker who featured Arocha in his 2003 documentary on Cuban baseball, “Fuera de Liga” (“Out of This League”).
Still, Arocha’s relative success when he was healthy answered doubts about whether top Cuban players could play in the big leagues.

Who, after all, wants to be forgotten?
At the suggestion that he might feel differently if baseball had made him rich or if injuries had not derailed his career, he shrugged.
For a time he did run a youth baseball academy, coaching children, but the business failed in hard economic times and he closed it in 2010.
He gets by driving a van for a medical clinic and spends his free time on his motorboat or with his three grown children, two of whom were born and raised in the United States.
He never got the multimillion-dollar contracts that many Cuban players land now. His signing bonus with St. Louis was $15,000. (“I thought it was a fortune,” he said.) The most he made in a season was $300,000.
He still harbors doubts about Cuba and the talk of changes there. Several of his relatives have gone on trips to Cuba and encouraged him to go, but he said he doubted that much had really changed. His only visit came during a 1994 humanitarian tour to visit refugees at the American military base at Guantánamo, which is walled off from the rest of the country.
“Players are going to keep coming because there still is no freedom there,” he said.
He noted that Puig and a few other players who had defected visited Cuba in November but only as part of a good-will trip organized by Major League Baseball and the players’ union.
In the fading afternoon light, he is waxing the side of his 17-foot boat parked in the yard.
When he takes it out on the seas, it occurs to him he may encounter Cubans on rafts fleeing the island, a common occurrence in South Florida.
He smiles, pausing for effect.
And he laughs loudly at the inside joke, one for the Cuban fans.