CHICAGO — When Jussie Smollett and Jurnee Smollett-Bell were growing up, bouncing with their parents and four siblings between New York and Los Angeles, as the kids pursued careers in modeling, acting and music, their downtime was just another chance for performance and togetherness.
“You put on shows — we had a whole damn production, because we had all these kids,” Mr. Smollett, the third oldest, said. At birthdays and Mother’s Days, “everyone would have to get up and sing,” Ms. Smollett-Bell continued. Poetry readings and dance-offs were standard entertainment. Not long after all six children were cast together in an ABC sitcom in the mid-90s, they renovated their real-life house. “We were like the Swiss Family Robinson,” Mr. Smollett said, crossed with, his sister added, the von Trapps and the Huxtables.
The members of the Smollett clan have made good on their childhood promise. Mr. Smollett, 32, is a singer and a breakout star of the hit drama “Empire,” in which he plays Jamal, the most talented member of the Lyon hip-hop dynasty. Ms. Smollett-Bell, 29, who made her mark as an actress by the age of 10, with the 1997 film “Eve’s Bayou,” is one of the leads in “Underground,” a new WGN America show about a group of slaves who try to escape from their Georgia plantation; her brother guest-stars. Though it’s their first project together in 20 years, it’s clear that the more creative freedom they have, the more their tastes will converge.
The Smolletts have also been outspoken politically and, since their school years, devoted to causes like H.I.V./AIDS prevention and ending apartheid. They were raised in the orbit of the Black Panthers and, lately, have lent their voices to the Black Lives Matter movement. Their trajectory, from child stars to successful adults, is born of their family and its history of activism.
That gave extra resonance to a sequence in “Empire” last season, when Jamal and his onscreen brother Hakeem (Bryshere Y. Gray) dressed as Black Panthers as part of a music-video shoot. Besides seeding the family with an early progressive ethos — Jussie and Jurnee were both with Artists for a New South Africa as teenagers, “and it was not fake work,” Ms. Woodard said of their fund-raising efforts and off-camera visits to orphanages — the activism also had an impact on their sense of worth.
“Underground,” created by the writers Misha Green and Joe Pokaski (“Heroes”), and co-executive-produced by the singer John Legend, who oversees the music, reframes the slave narrative as a courageous adventure story, drawn in part from firsthand accounts of the Underground Railroad. The focus is on heroism and rebellion, giving voice to the underrepresented.
Ms. Smollett-Bell, who has worked with Francis Ford Coppola and played opposite Denzel Washington, said it was one of the hardest scenes she’d ever done. “After we finished it, I just couldn’t stop shaking and crying,” she said. The cast and crew surrounded her, and let her weep.
Mr. Smollett, a friend of Mr. Hemingway’s, plays a runaway slave in some episodes. He has no scenes with his sister, but she came to the set to watch him work. At the interview here, where she was promoting “Underground,” their vibe was not goofy or overly playful, just enviably tight.
Growing up, “we definitely had our own world,” Ms. Smollett-Bell said.
She started modeling as an infant — “At a year old, she was like a mix of Diana Ross and Elizabeth Taylor,” her brother said. “She was boss from the beginning” — and the other children followed. Her recurring role on the mid-90s show “Full House” (a character written for a white actress, which her mother got her to audition for), led to a network tryout for all of the children. “We rapped Public Enemy, ‘Shut ’Em Down,’” Ms. Smollett-Bell recalled.
Jussie and Jurnee have started a production company, hoping to develop more work as a family, though not everyone is in the business. The oldest, called JoJo in his youth, is 38, and works at a nonprofit; the youngest, Jocqui, 22, is at a tech firm. Their sister Jazz is part of their company; Jake is a chef.
Opportunity still comes communally. Jussie heard about “Empire” through family — Jazz sent him the casting notice — and Jurnee, who’d once auditioned for one of the show’s creators, Lee Daniels, helped her brother prepare. Mr. Daniels based the role, partly, on himself, an artist whose father disapproved of his sexuality. Mr.  “It’s a responsibility that I take seriously,” he said.
