ZURICH — When citizens voted to approve a $208 million expansion of this city’s fine arts museum, the Kunsthaus, they expected it would draw international visitors eager to see some of its contents: a spectacular collection of French Impressionist works amassed by a Zurich businessman, Emil Georg Bührle.
But since bulldozers started excavation early this year for the expansion project, a massive sandstone rectangle designed by the architect David Chipperfield, the work has dredged up sensitive issues involving the city’s Jewish history and the Swiss role in the trade of art looted by the Nazis in World War II.
At the urging of a group in New York, hundreds of Orthodox Jews have staged demonstrations outside Swiss embassies and consulates in London, Montreal, New York and Tel Aviv, calling on the museum to protect a 14th-century Jewish burial site that they say is under the new building’s construction site.
Other critics are questioning whether it is proper for a publicly financed institution to give prominence to the Bührle collection in a new wing, given that Mr. Bührle was a Nazi arms dealer who bought art that had been looted from Jewish owners. A book about the collection published last year by two Zurich historians, including a former administrator of the Kunsthaus, argues that the museum should be more transparent about his biography.
The expansion project, expected to be completed by 2020, is being financed by the city and the state government, or canton, of Zurich and the museum’s association of 21,000 members, who have pledged to raise more than $88 million. The Bührle Foundation, created by descendants of the arms dealer to oversee the collection, will contribute an undisclosed amount.
The project gained urgency in 2008 when three masked gunmen stormed a 19th-century villa on the edge of Zurich that housed the foundation’s art collection. They fled with four paintings: “Boy in a Red Vest” by Cézanne, a Degas, a van Gogh and a Monet that were jointly valued at $163 million at the time.
“That moment made it quite clear that the house, which had not been built for a museum, was really no longer up to the task of housing a collection of such importance,” said Lukas Gloor, the director of the foundation. Two paintings were recovered within days, but the villa was closed except by appointment. Investigators recovered the two missing paintings, including the Cézanne, in 2012 in Belgrade, Serbia, in a sting operation.
The expansion of the Kunsthaus was approved by voters in 2012, and the foundation pledged to loan about 200 works to the museum until 2034 on condition that they would be displayed together in the new building.
But despite this broad show of support, the new building has exposed divisions. Leaders of Zurich’s Jewish community are bristling at the demonstrations abroad by the Orthodox rabbis, who in turn contend that those local leaders are too intimidated to challenge the museum project.
“We are not here to stop their project, but to work with them,” said one of the protest organizers, Rabbi David Niederman, the director of the United Jewish Organizations of Williamsburg and North Brooklyn. Rabbi Neiderman, who is also involved with Asra Kadisha, a cemetery protection society that cites old Zurich maps as evidence of a burial site, added: “We have seen the bulldozers over there and they have been indiscriminately doing work, going really deep down. How can you see what you are destroying in the process?” Asra Kadisha has commissioned a book on the cemetery and composed a prayer of mourning to be read aloud at synagogues.
No one disputes that a Jewish quarter was marked on the old maps. But city officials say they have uncovered only remnants of a 16th-century city wall. Urs Spinner, a spokesman for the city’s engineering department, said the construction crew had searched for a burial site by drilling almost the entire terrain with holes every 10 feet at depths up to 164 feet.
Three orthodox rabbis from Zurich have issued a blunt public letter in Hebrew, saying that the cemetery search is a local matter and that outsiders should not “meddle” in it.
The Swiss federation is also wrestling with the implications of displaying the Bührle collection. The Kunsthaus sells a slim book published by the foundation that notes that Mr. Bührle, who died in 1956, was forced by a Swiss court to return 13 looted artworks that he had bought during the war to their owners or descendants. He later bought back nine of them, including a Degas that had once been in the possession of the Nazi leader Hermann Göring.
In August, Guido Magnaguagno, a former vice director of the Kunsthaus, and Thomas Buomberger, an art historian, published “Bührle’s Black Book,” in which they argue that the museum should be more open about the entire Bührle collection of some 600 works and its history.
Around 300 works are privately owned by his three grandchildren rather than by the foundation.
“It’s obvious that the very difficult paintings remain in the private collection,” Mr. Magnaguagno said. To avoid glorifying Mr. Bürhle, he argues that the museum should create a documentary room in the new wing that chronicles his wartime activities.
Mr. Quellenberg, the museum spokesman, said the Kunsthaus and the foundation were preparing a new biography of Mr. Bührle that would explore his past and would also be explained in audio tours. The museum will also house all of Mr. Bührle’s archives, he said, but there are no plans for a documentary center. “We are not a historical museum,” he said.
The Bührle foundation is preparing a catalog of all the works, private and public, Mr. Gloor said. . He said he believed the new wing could improve the arms dealer’s image because he collected most of his works after the war, in the six years before his death.
