SLIEMA, Malta — Minutes before the curtain was set to rise on a production of “Hamlet” at the Salesian Theater here, two buses carrying around 25 migrants in all pulled up in front of the century-old building. Mostly young men from Africa, wearing hoodies and baggy jeans, they hustled into the theater and took their seats to curious stares from some of the older Maltese audience members.
The lights dimmed and the actors playing the guards at Elsinore began reciting their familiar lines, just as they had well over 150 times in the last two years, as part of “Globe to Globe Hamlet,” a project by the London-based Shakespeare’s Globe theater with the goal of presenting the play in every country in the world.
Often playing in small theaters and to audience members who may never have seen a professional production, the Globe is presenting a stripped-down “Hamlet” with eight to 12 cast members, light live instrumentation and a spare set. The tour started in 2014, on the 450th anniversary of Shakespeare’s birth, and will end next month in London — after around 200 countries — to commemorate the 400th anniversary of his death.
Along the way, the mostly young, multicultural cast has endured the usual inconveniences of life on the road, including visa problems, lost luggage and endless takeout food. The actors have also performed during a riot, encountered racially charged comments from audiences and narrowly missed the Ebola outbreak in West Africa.
A world tour is in keeping with the “Hamlet” tradition, said Dominic Dromgoole, the artistic director of Shakespeare’s Globe, noting that “Hamlet” was performed on a ship off what is now Sierra Leone just five years after its London debut, which occurred around 1600.
“Shakespeare not being the possession of one country or one culture has always been part of the stories,” Mr. Dromgoole said.
Because Libya was among the locations the company had to forgo for safety reasons, they had hoped to play to Libyan refugees who have been arriving steadily in recent years. That effort was not entirely successful. At the advice of a local government agency, the Globe brought migrants to the theater, rather than going to the centers where they live — many behind guarded gates in modular metal units. Seventy seats had been reserved, but just two dozen showed up, few of them Libyans.
The young men who came, mainly from Senegal and Gambia, listened quietly. During intermission, the group decided, in a flash, to leave.
Outside the theater, two French-speaking men from Senegal explained that they were having fun but had trouble understanding. In addition, the migrants were tired, the agency worker accompanying them said, and some had work early the next day.
“Hamlet” drew a standing ovation from those who remained. The cast members said they thought the performance had gone well, though some had not noticed the migrants leaving. Within 45 minutes, they had packed and left the theater. The next day, they flew off for a performance in Brussels.
The “Hamlet” tour grew out of the company’s “Globe to Globe” festival in 2012, which brought troupes from across the world to London to stage Shakespeare’s plays in their own languages.
Before its return to London, the group will make a penultimate stop in the real Elsinore (Helsingor in Danish).
In Mexico, spectators scurried up lamp posts and trees to get a view as the cast performed outside of a colonial cathedral. On Tuvalu, a tiny Pacific island, the show was presented alongside a road that doubled as the island’s runway and its main thoroughfare. The audience in Kiev, Ukraine, the night before the 2014 presidential election, included the candidate who would win, Petro O. Poroshenko, as well as people prominent in the citizens’ uprising that ousted his predecessor.
There were uncomfortable moments for some of the actors in the diverse cast. Jennifer Leong, from Hong Kong, said that some members of the audience told her they had not expected an Asian Ophelia.
In Somaliland, an unrecognized republic in East Africa formed in the early 1990s, the actors were picked up from the airport by guards carrying automatic weapons. Clashes broke out on the streets the night they performed.
The group’s hotel there “was like a fortress,” Matthew Romain recalled. The actor, 30, plays various secondary roles in the play.
In an interview in London, Ladi Emeruwa and Mr. Romain reflected on the tour’s end. They were eager to rest but worried about resuming a more settled life — and, like all actors, they were wondering what their next job might be.
“Hamlet” was Mr. Emeruwa’s first professional engagement after drama school, and he had the opportunity to play perhaps the most famous role in Western drama on the stage of the Globe, in a refugee camp in Jordan and in Lagos, Nigeria, where he had grown up.
“Sometimes when I’m just walking around London, you see somebody or you see something that reminds you” of the tour, Mr. Emeruwa said. “It’s a flashback to when you were in Victoria Falls running through clouds, or when you were performing in an amphitheater in Bitola,” in Macedonia.
