ST. PETERSBURG, Fla. — Saying that a sex video featuring the former professional wrestler Hulk Hogan was newsworthy, Nick Denton, the founder and chief executive of Gawker Media, defended his website’s decision to publish it as he testified in a $100 million invasion-of-privacy lawsuit here on Tuesday.
“I think it stands on its own,” Mr. Denton said, “and stands up to the test of time.” Referring to Albert J. Daulerio, the former editor in chief of Gawker who published the video and wrote the accompanying commentary, Mr. Denton said: “He made a contrast between an American icon and the man behind that American icon. I think it was of newsworthy interest” to the site’s readers.
The 1-minute 41-second video is at the heart of the suit by Hulk Hogan, who claims that Gawker violated his right to privacy by posting it in 2012. The former wrestler, whose legal name is Terry G. Bollea, is suing Gawker, Mr. Denton and Mr. Daulerio in a case being heard before six jurors in Pinellas County Court.
Gawker contends that Mr. Bollea made his sex life fair game by talking about it candidly in public, including on Howard Stern’s radio show.
Mr. Denton faced pointed questioning under cross-examination as Kenneth Turkel, a lawyer for Mr. Bollea, tried to show that Mr. Denton had contradicted himself in statements about his journalistic standards.
“Let’s talk, for a lack of a better word, about your philosophy at Gawker,” Mr. Turkel said.
In making the contrast, Mr. Turkel was trying to convince jurors that the sexually descriptive text was much more raunchy than sweet.
Mr. Denton remained composed through the process, and injected some humor into an exchange about his marriage.
Mr. Turkel tried to turn Mr. Denton’s philosophy of transparency against him, asking why he had guests give up their cellphones at his wedding. The suggestion was that Mr. Denton was being hypocritical about a public figure’s right to privacy.
“We didn’t want images to show up” on social media, Mr. Denton acknowledged.
But while he and his husband, Derrence Washington, did not want anyone to post pictures, he said, “we didn’t sue people,” drawing soft laughter from some in the courtroom.
Lawyers for Gawker will most likely appeal any decision against them. If Gawker wins, it could set a powerful precedent for online publishers.