WASHINGTON — The Supreme Court on Monday refused to review an appeals court’s determination that Apple had conspired with book publishers to raise the prices of digital books.
The court’s order, which following custom was issued without any accompanying explanation, puts into effect a $450 million settlement that Apple had agreed to pay if it lost the case. E-book buyers will receive $400 million in cash and credits and lawyers involved in the case will get $50 million.
The case arose from Apple’s 2010 entry into the e-book marketplace, which had been dominated by Amazon and its Kindle reader. Publishers frustrated with Amazon’s low prices welcomed the new retailer, its iPad device and its willingness to let them set their own prices, with Apple taking a cut of each sale.
Last year, a divided three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, in New York, said the terms Apple had offered to five big publishers allowed them to engage in a price-fixing conspiracy.
In urging the Supreme Court to hear the case, Apple Inc. v. United States, No. 15-565, the company said its actions had promoted competition.
The appeals court disagreed. “Competition is not served by permitting a market entrant to eliminate price competition as a condition of entry, and it is cold comfort to consumers that they gained a new e-book retailer at the expense of passing control over all e-book prices to a cartel of book publishers,” Judge Debra Ann Livingston wrote for the majority.
The Supreme Court’s refusal to hear the case is a victory for Amazon, which maintains a dominant position in e-book sales. The online retailer helped precipitate the case by complaining to the Justice Department about the actions of Apple and the publishers.
He said that he and his wife each received a couple of hundred dollars from the settlements paid earlier by book publishers in the case, and Apple’s payment to e-book buyers, expected later this year, will be roughly double that amount.
Apple declined to comment beyond the briefs it had filed in the case.
The case began in 2012, when the Justice Department accused Apple and five publishers of conspiring to raise e-book prices above Amazon’s standard of $9.99 for new titles. With encouragement from Apple, the publishers introduced an agency model of pricing, in which they set the sale price of e-books rather than allowing the seller to charge what it wished.
The five publishers settled the antitrust case, but Apple went to trial.
Judge Cote relied in part on the words of Steven P. Jobs, the company’s co-founder, who died in 2011.
Mike Shatzkin, chief executive of The Idea Logical Company, a consultancy to book publishers, predicted the resolution of the case would have little impact on the book publishing industry. While the move to agency pricing first helped smaller players like Barnes & Noble and its Nook e-readers, subsequent changes in book pricing contracts have once again bolstered Amazon.
“There are still real hard times ahead for the publishers because Amazon’s market share is so large that they are bound to take more and more margin from publishers,” he said.