SANTA MONICA, Calif. — On the morning of the Academy Awards, Ben Affleck was at my hotel door. He entered with neither the swagger of Bruce Wayne nor the bravado of Batman, just with a quiet apology for postponing this conversation, planned for the day before, when he said he’d come down with a migraine.
This is a feverish, perplexing time for Mr. Affleck, 43, as strange as seeing him stuff his brawny, 6-foot-4-inch frame into a cramped room, flop into a chair and stretch his legs across my bed.
Consider the contradictory strands of his life and career that are coinciding for him, and you may find yourself envying, pitying and disliking him all at once.
He is about to star in “Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice,” which Warner Bros. will release on Friday, March 25. The superhero grudge match is the studio’s $250 million moonshot, painstakingly engineered to begin a new, multifilm franchise that is based on the DC Comics characters and to compete with the movies its rivals at Marvel have been making for nearly a decade.
For Mr. Affleck, the dual role of Batman and his wealthy, womanizing alter ego, Bruce Wayne, is a straight-ahead bid for marquee-idol status after the 2014 thriller “Gone Girl,” which cast him as a dysfunctional husband caught in a complex revenge plot.
But this popcorn fare is also a somewhat bewildering choice for someone with an increasingly prestigious reputation as a filmmaker in his own right, one who directed and starred in “Argo,” which won the Academy Award for best picture in 2013. While fans of superhero movies always grouse about their casting, the selection of Mr. Affleck for “Batman v Superman” seemed to arouse an especially vehement and personal animus when it was revealed in 2013.
The comic-book blockbuster has shone an intense spotlight on Mr. Affleck following the announcement that he and his wife, Jennifer Garner, plan to divorce after a 10-year marriage. Amid a torrent of tabloid reports alleging bad behavior, infidelity and questionable tattoos, he finds himself at maximum attention at an especially humbling moment.
In person, Mr. Affleck was friendly and funny, but also soft-spoken and vulnerable. At times he seemed anxious and out of sorts, as if waiting for some other shoe to drop.
Despite vowing not to, he did eventually address Ms. Garner’s Vanity Fair profile.
And though he said he could not pinpoint why he chose to play Batman right now, he did offer a broader theory on the parts that currently appeal to him.
He has also realized that for all of his Hollywood success, some part of him will always feel like a relentless striver who must prove, through his work, that he has a right to be there.
That another film incarnation of Batman would follow soon after Christopher Nolan’s morose, much-praised “Dark Knight” franchise, which concluded in 2012, is the result of “Man of Steel,” the director Zack Snyder’s commercially successful but tepidly received 2013 retelling of the origin of Superman.
In sizing up a possible adversary for Superman to fight in a sequel, Mr. Snyder said he found himself irresistibly drawn to Batman, particularly one who is older and more seasoned than in past movies.
Mr. Affleck, his hair now streaked with gray, and his forearms bulging through T-shirt sleeves to reveal hints of red-and-yellow tattoo ink on one biceps, said he was not interested in a “down-the-middle version” of the hero.
But he was won over by Mr. Snyder’s presentation — further emphasized in a revision of the script by Chris Terrio, the Oscar-winning screenwriter of “Argo” — of Batman as a vengeful vigilante still haunted by the murders of his parents. Having seen the devastation already brought to Metropolis, he is driven to extremes by his fear of the further havoc Superman could wreak.
Jeremy Irons, who plays Bruce Wayne’s loyal aide, Alfred, said that beneath all the special effects and high-tech trappings of the film, Mr. Affleck seemed drawn to the mythical, larger-than-life qualities of the title champions.
Mr. Affleck said he took the role partly to please his 4-year-old son, Samuel, who is already a loyal Bat-fan.
But Mr. Terrio, the screenwriter, suggested that there were deeper connections between Mr. Affleck and Bruce Wayne, a man who is essentially playing a role in public but who becomes someone different in the safety of his Batcave.
“There is performativity in Ben’s life, as there is with any person who is a public figure,” Mr. Terrio said.
“Argo,” about a C.I.A. operative who seeks Hollywood’s help to rescue Americans in Iran, was also a story about a character reckoning with false fronts and deception. “You need to, sometimes, take a moment to remember who you are, before you go back to your family,” Mr. Terrio said.
Duality persists in Mr. Affleck’s world and his career, where he has simultaneously become an in-demand actor and an accomplished filmmaker, having directed movies like “Gone Baby Gone” and “The Town,” and won an Oscar for writing the screenplay of “Good Will Hunting” (shared with his lifelong friend Matt Damon).
To promote “Batman v Superman,” Mr. Affleck took a hiatus from postproduction work on “Live by Night,” which he directed, stars in and adapted from Dennis Lehane’s period crime novel. He stars this fall in the thriller “The Accountant”; has already filmed a Batman appearance for “Suicide Squad,” another DC superhero movie; and resumes the role in Europe this spring to film “Justice League,” an ensemble adventure that also features Wonder Woman, Aquaman and the Flash.
Warner Bros., which will release “Live by Night” and “The Accountant” (and also handled “Argo” and “The Town”), said that Mr. Affleck’s comic-book duties were not any kind of quid pro quo for the films he directs.
Mr. Affleck brushed off his professional relentlessness as “high-class problems,” then added, more soberly, that he often finds himself walking a self-imposed boundary between working too much and feeling that he is not working enough.
“The urge of making it good and trying to make sure that it works, that you’ve done the most interesting version that you can — it’s like a neurosis that drives me to work every day,” he said.
The relief of a project like “Batman v Superman,” for all its complications, Mr. Affleck said, is that he is simply another director’s actor.
Whatever anyone might conclude from her interview, Mr. Affleck said Ms. Garner and their children plan to visit him during the filming of “Justice League” so they can vacation in Europe as a family.
Still, there would seem to be a point at which Mr. Affleck’s recent string of morally compromised screen characters — deficient spouses in “Argo” and “Gone Girl,” even a caddish, love-’em-and-leave-’em Bruce Wayne in “Batman v Superman” — becomes inseparable from how audiences perceive him. Beyond that threshold, perhaps, Hollywood can see him only as his bad-boy facades, rather than as the person he says he is out of view of the cameras.
At the Golden Globes in January, the host, Ricky Gervais, introduced Mr. Damon as “the only person who Ben Affleck hasn’t been unfaithful to” — a gag that Mr. Affleck said did not trouble him.
Mr. Affleck acknowledged that he cannot portray questionable characters onscreen and come away from them as cleanly as some of his peers.
“Denzel Washington can play almost anybody — mass murderers — and you go, ‘But he’s all right!’” he said. “There’s something so appealing about him, and I don’t think I have that.
“The whole lesson of my career has been that what’s really important is the work you do,” he said. “Even in the tough spots, if your movies are good, people will see them. And if you’re not good, you can’t get away with it.
