PHOENIX — A protester was led off in handcuffs from the visitors’ gallery of the Arizona Legislature on Monday amid a fractious debate over Primary Day last week, when a drastic cutback in polling locations left tens of thousands of Arizonans unable to vote, forced to cast provisional ballots or made to wait in long lines for hours in the high heat.
As the anger bubbled over within a packed State Capitol, a sheepish election official blamed the chaos on poor planning and a misguided attempt to save money by closing poll locations.
“I apologize profusely — I can’t go back and undo it,” said Helen Purcell, the Maricopa County recorder, during a hearing of the Arizona House Elections Committee on Monday as more than 100 voters listened.
Maricopa County, which is Arizona’s most populous and includes the greater Phoenix area, had slashed the number of polling places by 70 percent from 2012.
Ms. Purcell, a Republican holding the office since 1988, tried to offer explanations for what went wrong as the county reduced the number of polling places to 60 from 200 — one site for roughly 21,500 voters — but the capacity crowd was having none of it.
One man said, “Not good enough.” The audience cheered.
More than 100 voters filled three interconnected rooms, and more than 30 signed up to testify. Security personnel stood on the sides, and at one point a handful of state troopers moved inside, threatening to remove anyone who was disruptive.
The hearing ended in mid-session at 1:30 p.m. because committee members had to move to another hearing to vote on a campaign finance bill. One of the members, Ken Clark, a Democrat, urged audience members to follow them, and they did. A masked man screamed from the gallery; troopers soon surrounded him and took him outside in handcuffs, delaying the hearing’s start.
Ms. Purcell had already said that her office would make new plans for November, presumably adding more polling sites.
Meanwhile, Michelle Reagan, the Arizona secretary of state — who told reporters before the hearing that she had known about the cutback in polling places, but had not wanted to “second-guess” the county’s decision — said she planned to hold four community meetings in the areas most affected by the long lines, all but one in heavily Hispanic parts of the county.
Election officials said the location and number of polling places in Maricopa County had been determined by informed assumptions, using turnout by mail and at the polls from 2008, when the state hosted its last contested primary.
In the end, the math did not hold up, foretelling some of the problems Arizona could face ahead of the November elections. Fewer voters mailed in their ballots, more people who had received ballots by mail showed up to vote in person and thousands of independents lined up to vote, unaware they were not allowed to participate in the state’s closed presidential primaries.
Though small, the discrepancies were significant enough to overwhelm the polling sites, proving that there just were not enough of them, Ms. Purcell said.
The changes that caused the havoc were some of the first made in Arizona since the Supreme Court annulled a provision of the Voting Rights Act requiring federal approval for modifications in elections rules and requirements here and in 15 other states.
Voters in majority-minority South Phoenix, a working-class enclave, stood in line for several hours; the last ballot at South Mountain Community Center, the area’s sole polling site, was cast at 12:12 a.m. on Wednesday, well past the polls’ closing time. In North Scottsdale, one of the county’s most affluent communities, waits were nowhere nearly as long.
Some angry voters called for Ms. Purcell’s resignation and even for a recount.
The mayor of Phoenix, Greg Stanton, has sent a letter to the Justice Department seeking a federal investigation, a call echoed by many of the voters attending the hearing.
One after another, they stood up to register their complaints at the hearing as the committee’s chairwoman, Representative Michelle Ugenti-Rita, a Republican, sometimes chided them, sometimes egged them on.
“See how messed up this is?” she said at one point.
Danny Robinson, 61, spoke on behalf of his daughter, whom he said could not vote because she ran out of time to wait in line — she had to go back to work.
The Rev. Jarrett Maupin, a Baptist pastor, urged the congregants who called him to “hold the line, hold the line,” he said, even if it meant waiting well into the evening, as many of them did.
Krista Pacion, 39, gave up twice before finally showing up ready for the long wait: She brought her 3-year-old daughter in a wagon loaded with water and snacks.
“Whatever it took, I was going to vote that day,” Ms. Pacion said.