But since his inauguration two years ago, Mayor Bill de Blasio has not visited the Museum of Modern Art. He has not attended a Nets or Knicks game. He has not been to the Guggenheim Museum, the Studio Museum in Harlem, the P.S. 1 art center in Queens, the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx or the Metropolitan Opera — although he did see a movie at Lincoln Center once.
He has never visited the High Line, the renowned elevated park on the Far West Side of Manhattan. In 2014, he skipped a ceremony for the opening of its final portion. Instead, that day he drove six hours to Pittsburgh to attend a baseball game.
Mayors of New York have long considered themselves the city’s cheerleaders in chief, making frequent appearances at its major institutions and promoting the world-class cultural offerings and only-in-New-York attractions that lure millions of tourists from around the world — and persuade New Yorkers that it’s worth putting up with tiny apartments and high rents just for a chance to live nearby.
Mr. de Blasio, by contrast, is more of a homebody who is protective of his privacy and prefers to spend downtime in his old Brooklyn neighborhood rather than out on the town. Uncomfortable in Gracie Mansion — he often refers to the mayoral residence as a “hotel,” and has complained to aides about feeling out of place in its halls — he can frequently be found in Park Slope, exercising at his old gym and sipping cappuccinos at a beloved cafe.
The mayor’s absence from cultural hot spots has caused consternation among arts patrons, who were accustomed to first-class treatment from Mr. de Blasio’s predecessor, Michael R. Bloomberg, a philanthropist and champion of public art projects, including Christo’s colossal “Gates” installation that festooned Central Park in fiery orange. Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani alienated the cultural world when he threatened to cut off funding for the Brooklyn Museum over a provocative exhibition that incorporated elephant dung, but he was also an avid operagoer, requesting that Lincoln Center keep a seat free for busy days when he arrived after the first act. Mayor David N. Dinkins was a familiar figure at United States Open tennis matches in Flushing Meadows, Queens.
Big-city mayors rarely shirk this side of their duty: Mayor Eric Garcetti of Los Angeles often Instagrams his travels, showcasing local restaurants and attractions.
Still, with New York enjoying record-high tourism and record-low crime, some wonder: Does it matter how a mayor spends his free time?
City officials said this month that they were expecting 59.7 million visitors this year, breaking last year’s record of 58.3 million, and that those visitors would generate an estimated $60 billion in economic activity and support about 360,000 tourism-related jobs — numbers that would be the pride of any metropolis.
Fred Siegel, a historian who teaches at St. Francis College, said Mr. de Blasio did not have “an expansive view of the social life of the city.” But he added that some New Yorkers simply might not care where their mayor goes.
“If the city’s streets are functioning well, if crime is maintained, I think the mayor can get by without being a bon vivant,” Mr. Siegel said.
So what does the mayor like to do?
Mr. de Blasio, who declined to be interviewed for this article, does have a cultural side, even if he does not always publicize it. He adored the Afropunk festival in Fort Greene, Brooklyn, telling his cultural affairs commissioner to ensure that the promoters retained their permit. He is a devotee of the 2008 musical “Fela!” — he often urges its soundtrack upon aides — and he attended a concert by the African singer Salif Keita at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. He and his wife, Chirlane McCray, went to the New York African Film Festival at the Walter Reade Theater, and they had aisle seats at “Eclipsed,” the new Lupita Nyong’o play on Broadway about sex slaves in Liberia.
He also eats.
Bar Toto, a casual red-sauce spot in Park Slope, is half a block from the de Blasio homestead, and it is the mayor’s go-to place for leisure and business meetings alike: His campaign fund has spent nearly $11,000 there since 2010.
The mayor as sports fan is a role Mr. de Blasio has adopted with relish, if selectively. He watched the Rangers play in the Stanley Cup finals, and he dropped a ceremonial puck at the first Islanders game in Barclays Center. The mayor cheered on the Mets in the World Series, and he has visited Yankee Stadium several times, but for soccer games; his son, Dante, is a soccer fanatic. He also organized a parade for the national women’s soccer team after they won the World Cup. A Red Sox fan, the mayor did attend a Yankees game — once — although his aides clarified that he stayed only for a few innings.
Now, past the midpoint of his first term, the mayor’s cultural itinerary is starting to pick up.
In the last two weeks, Mr. de Blasio cut the ribbon at the opening of the Met Breuer building on the Upper East Side, declaring that “our identity as a city is caught up in the richness of our cultural life.” He attended the premiere of a documentary film on gun violence. He went to the opening game of New York City F.C., the soccer team that plays at Yankee Stadium.
The mayor’s recent excursions coincide with a broader retooling by his political team before an expected re-election bid. Mr. de Blasio is spending more time in parts of the city like Staten Island and Queens, which are not his traditional bases of support. The mayor’s extensive travels — he has been to Iowa, Israel and Italy, among other places — had prompted grumbling; at one point last year, he had made more public appearances outside New York City than on Staten Island.
Tom Finkelpearl, the city’s cultural affairs commissioner, recalled running into Mr. de Blasio at a Chaka Khan concert in Prospect Park. “He does love culture, understands the need, the financial and economic development need for culture,” said Mr. Finkelpearl, whose department’s budget has grown by more than 10 percent since Mr. de Blasio took office.
He also prides himself on a knowledge of pop culture, giving regular interviews to the hip-hop radio station Hot 97 and making a cameo on “The Good Wife,” one of his favorite television shows. He attended the taping of the 40th-anniversary special for “Saturday Night Live” and has appeared as a guest with Seth Meyers, Jon Stewart, Stephen Colbert and Trevor Noah.
He has taken his son to the Museum of Natural History in Manhattan, his aides said, and enjoys the Louis Armstrong House in Queens and the Snug Harbor Cultural Center on Staten Island. The mayor has attended official functions at the Brooklyn Museum, the Brooklyn Academy of Music and Carnegie Hall, and he watched Diana Ross perform at the renovated Kings Theater in Brooklyn.
Mr. de Blasio’s aides said that in addition to “Hamilton,” he had seen “A Raisin in the Sun,” “Rasheeda Speaking,” “MotherStruck!” and a revival of Tom Stoppard’s “The Real Thing.” He attended Shakespeare in the Park on a night when Senator Chuck Schumer made a cameo. Recently, the mayor posted to Twitter that he wanted to see “Shuffle Along,” a show, opening next month, about a landmark African-American musical from the 1920s.
Ken Sherrill, a professor emeritus at Hunter College, said the mayor — who once said, “I’m not hired by the people to go to parades” — was recalibrating his approach.
The mayor’s interest in parks may be less relevant were it not for the outsize role Central Park has played in his administration.
Mr. de Blasio has spearheaded a widely opposed effort to ban the park’s horse carriages, a pet cause of his political donors. Parks advocates cried foul when he proposed spending upward of $20 million in public funds for a private stable in the park, a plan that collapsed.
After the mayor failed to recall when he had last been to Central Park, his aides emailed a list of 10 ostensible visits there during his term. Several of the events did not actually take place inside the park, including visits to the Museum of Natural History and the inflation ceremony for floats in the Macy’s Thanksgiving Day Parade, which are on Central Park West.
Mr. de Blasio has been scarce at other landmarks as well.
He did not ride the tram when visiting Roosevelt Island for a groundbreaking ceremony last year; Mr. Bloomberg, who also attended the event, took the tram.
In January, Mr. de Blasio hosted a news conference at the ferry terminal on Staten Island, to name a new ferryboat. Rather than ride a ferry, he was driven there in a sport utility vehicle. (An aide said the mayor needed privacy to make phone calls.) At the event, Mr. de Blasio could not recall his last ferry ride, although a reporter from The Staten Island Advance reminded him: October.
Told that Mr. de Blasio was driven to Staten Island, Bill Cunningham, a former spokesman for Mr. Bloomberg, laughed. “You would think if you were going to name a ferryboat, you might ride on a ferryboat, but that’s just the old advance man in me I suppose,” Mr. Cunningham said.
Still, Mr. Giuliani, who was speaking from Warsaw, where he was traveling on business, said a mayor’s presence at major attractions could be important. “People here in Poland may see a picture of the mayor in Central Park, and that makes them want to come to New York,” he said.
