Iris Apfel went to Paris last week, and quite honestly, the city may never be the same. The 94-year-old New Yorker is the subject of “Iris in Paris,” a fashion exhibition and pop-up shop at Le Bon Marché Rive Gauche department store that celebrates her famous, forthright style. And rightly so.
Apfel first saw Paris back in 1952 or ’53 — “I can’t quite remember,” she said over tea and oatmeal cookies at the store last Wednesday; for the chat, she was dressed in a gray and white “very old, very vintage” squirrel coat, loads of her signature big jewelry and a dash of tomato red lipstick. “We started in the South of Italy, went to Spain, and ended in Paris,” she recalled of a several week voyage with her parents. “Paris was all we expected it to be, and more.” After that, she went “twice a year for about 50 years,” with her beloved husband of 67 years, Carl Apfel, who died last August, three days shy of his 101st birthday. Their trips were usually for business: They founded Old World Weavers, a greatly respected textile and decorating firm that participated in White House renovations for nine presidents, from Harry Truman to Bill Clinton. Only the Bushes passed.
The 94-year-old style star rushes through Paris to make the call time — and imparts some wisdom along the way.
So when the Bon Marché called, “I thought it was wonderful!” she said. “It gave me a reason to come back to Paris!” For the installation, she selected a handful of items the store could sell — she wanted useful things, not trinkets. So there is her signature cross-body Mongolian lamb handbag/muff; Iris-like pinball-sized bead necklaces; Iris-style big resin bangles; Iris in Paris notecards; Iris in Paris notebooks, totes and umbrellas — even an Iris in Paris coffee mug. The show is organized around 10 tableaux: “Iris at the Museum,” “Iris at the Flea Market,” “Iris on the Bateaux Mouches” and so on. The French illustrator Eric Giriat produced witty sketches of her dressed in each scene for the store’s windows, and the installation includes a short film of Apfel at home, talking about Paris, among other things.
On Wednesday night, the Bon Marché threw a party to celebrate the opening of the exhibit, with a jazz trio and Champagne. Apfel held court on a modern velvet loveseat, dressed in orange Mongolian sheep fur and serious turquoise. More than 800 attended, and the fete raged on until after midnight — when Apfel left.
She went vintage clothing shopping with her friend, the London-based designer Duro Olowu, who was in town presenting his collection to retailers, and to the Palais Galliera fashion museum to see “La Mode Retrouvée,” an exhibition of the Countess Greffulhe’s late-19th/early-20th century couture wardrobe. She attended a luncheon at the U.S. Embassy for the United Nations Foundation in honor of International Women’s Day. She caught the fashion shows of the designers Rick Owens, Dries Van Noten and Christian Dior. And on Friday night, U.S. Ambassador to France Jane D. Hartley hosted 40 of Apfel’s friends for a cocktail party in the ornate 19th-century mansion that serves as the official residence. Over Champagne and foie gras canapés in the candlelit salons, talk was all about Apfel.
As the applause quieted down, Apfel has a few words to say.
“You are!” Ambassador Hartley responded as everyone laughed.
“So, Iris,” Elbaz asked. “What’s next?
Apfel looked at him through her great big spectacles.
