Dr. Edward Lammer, who was among the first researchers to establish a link between the acne medicine Accutane and human birth defects, and who became an advocate for the families of affected children, died on Feb. 20 in San Francisco. He was 62.
His son, Aaron, said an autopsy was planned to determine the cause.
Accutane was approved by the Food and Drug Administration in 1982, but with warnings on the label and on an accompanying brochure.
Tests by the manufacturer, Hoffmann-La Roche, found that the medicine produced birth defects in animals.
As early as 1984, Dr. Lammer, then with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, had studied more than 150 pregnancies of women who had used Accutane. He found that about two-thirds of them had had elective or spontaneous abortions, that 24 had delivered normal infants and that 28 had had babies with severe birth defects.
Similar cases of what became known as Accutane syndrome were reported that year by Dr. Ira Lott of the University of California, Irvine, and in The Journal of the American Medical Association.
By 1988, Dr. Lammer, who was then with the California Birth Defects Monitoring Program, was warning that Accutane was causing 40 percent of women to miscarry and 25 percent to have babies with major defects, including abnormalities of the brain, skull, face, heart and thymus gland.
He said that at least 62 cases of children with Accutane-linked birth defects had been documented in the United States since the drug was introduced.
Only the virus for German measles and the banned sedative Thalidomide, which had been used to prevent morning sickness, were comparable to Accutane as causes of birth defects, Dr. Lammer said.
He demanded safeguards more strict than warning labels and admonitions to doctors.
He was particularly concerned about women using Accutane early in a pregnancy, when they might not have realized they were pregnant, and teenagers who might have been reluctant to admit to their doctors that they were sexually active.
“There is no other medication that poses an absolute risk anything remotely close to this, even medications used to treat cancer during pregnancy,” he later testified.
The studies eventually prompted the Food and Drug Administration to require female patients to pledge to their doctors that they would use two forms of contraception when taking Accutane and undergo follow-up pregnancy testing.
Roche also began aggressive programs to discourage pregnant women from using Accutane. It stopped selling the drug altogether in 2009 after the company was sued because of side effects and generic versions became available.
Edward James Lammer was born in Dubuque, Iowa, on Feb. 26, 1953, to Benedict Lammer, a milkman, and the former Anne Lyons, a teacher.
He received a bachelor’s degree in biology from Washington University in St. Louis in 1975 and graduated from the University of Iowa School of Medicine.
He first worked for the Epidemic Intelligence Service of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and continued his study into genetic and environmental causes of birth defects as a principal investigator at the Benioff Children’s Hospital Research Institute of the University of California, San Francisco. He retired in January.
In addition to his son, Aaron, Dr. Lammer is survived by his wife, Dibsy Machta; his daughter, Ellie Lammer; his sisters, Diane Kutsch, Susie Orr and Peggy Satterlund; and his brothers, Richard and Pat.