The people through.
Who was all of fifteen years.
For decades, Paul Linehan, a 47-year-old tenor from Narraghmore in County Kildare, Ireland, would sing those lines from the maudlin Irish ballad “Isle of Hope, Isle of Tears,” but last week, for the first time, he choked on the lyrics.
But until this month, Mr. Linehan did not know he was Annie’s first cousin three times removed.
On Wednesday, Mr. Linehan, an emissary of Ms. Moore’s Irish progeny, and Michael Shulman of Silver Spring, Md., a grandnephew representing her American descendants, met in New York for the family’s first trans-Atlantic reunion.
The reunion was arranged by Megan Smolenyak Smolenyak, a genealogist who in 2006 was instrumental in debunking the decades-old myth that Annie Moore died in Texas in 1923.
The Annie who died instantly when hit by a streetcar near Fort Worth that year was apparently born in Illinois, and her family had moved to Texas as early as 1880.
For decades, history had the wrong Annie Moore. The story of the immigrant girl who went west became so commonly accepted that even descendants of the Annie Moore who died in Texas came to believe it. Several participated in ceremonies on Ellis Island and in Ireland.
The Annie Moore who actually inaugurated Ellis Island first joined her parents, who had arrived several years earlier, in Lower Manhattan.
“I’ve been looking for the Irish cousins for 10 years,” Mrs. Smolenyak said on Wednesday.
Mr. Shulman visited Ireland in 1978, generally believing family legend about Annie Moore, but had no luck locating relatives.
The American Moores have become a melting pot. Mr. Shulman’s father is Jewish, and his full name is Michael James Patrick Shulman, an only-in-New York agglomeration.
“People say, ‘Oh, you’re from New York, right?’” he said.
Both he and Mr. Linehan were struck that more than a century after Annie Moore’s journey, Americans were still debating the influx of foreigners.
“As a financial analyst I can say, Do you have any idea of what this country would be like without immigration?” Mr. Shulman said.
Mrs. Smolenyak found that the Annie Moore of Ellis Island fame lived the rest of her life within a few Manhattan blocks, married a bakery clerk, had 11 children and died at 99 Cherry Street of heart failure in 1924 when she was 47.
