This past week brought the announcement that the producer Ben Silverman, with partners, planned to create a television series based on Isn’t That Rich, Richard Kirshenbaum’s column in The New York Observer examining the habits of the Upper East Side penthouse class. Writing from the perspective of someone living in a 5,000-square-foot duplex on Fifth Avenue, Mr. Kirshenbaum, an advertising executive, isn’t agitating for upheaval. Voices quoted in his columns deliver lines like “It isn’t a Woody Allen movie anymore, it’s ‘Moscow on the Hudson,’” referring to New York in the age of Bill de Blasio, but the voices belong to people Mr. Kirshenbaum is working out with, in private gyms, in even more fantastical apartments.
His tone ranges from gentle mocking to shared lament. A column a few years ago recounted the psychological evisceration endured by multimillionaires in an age when they have been surpassed by those who are much wealthier. “Just when you think you’ve made it with your mack-daddy $10 million apartment, your wife comes home and says, ‘So and so just bought a $35 million apartment,’ and you feel like a loser,” one man says in the piece, tempting the reader to send him a bouquet of mood-lifting purple balloons.
When the luxury rail car tycoon George Pullman died in 1897, so fierce was the animosity directed at him from the underclasses, and toward the entire robber-baron population, that his family buried him in a grave lined with steel-reinforced concrete and covered with asphalt for fear that former workers would desecrate it. The reverence or at least quiet sympathy that popular culture extends to the very rich — factors without which the ascendancy of a gaudy billionaire in a presidential election would not be possible — may have been harder to make sense of then.
Consider the example of the addictive Showtime series “Billions,” which made its debut earlier this year. The show (Andrew Ross Sorkin, an editor at The New York Times, is a co-creator) positions Bobby Axelrod, a wildly successful hedge fund manager with a $60 million house in the Hamptons, against Chuck Rhoades, the U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York, the kind of singularly focused prosecutor who believes that “there are no innocent men on Wall Street.” Even given everything — the host of sins perpetuated by the financial industry, the absence of any real repercussions after the crash of 2008, the maddening tax loopholes afforded the hedge fund system — you still watch “Billions” with your liberal heart rooting for Bobby “Axe” over the law. In this case, the law is embodied by the dour and puffy killjoy persona affected by Paul Giamatti as Chuck Rhoades. The show doesn’t merely invite you to do this, it lassos you in and locks you up in the bullpen of Axe’s charisma.
Axe (played by Damian Lewis) grew up as a working-class kid and went to Hofstra. When he decides he wants his name on the front of a major Manhattan cultural institution, it is an act of vengeance as much as vanity. Paying off the downwardly mobile aristocrats whose family name is already there, ostensibly in perpetuity, Axe first promises them $25 million to revoke their naming privilege and then breaks the news, humiliatingly in front of the institution’s director, that in fact he will pay only $9 million.  And there, efficiently, “Billions” has you high-fiving whoever is sitting next to you, cheering for the brash ways of new, and bigger, money over the quieter wastrel ways of old.
You wouldn’t even mind, and would actually be pleased, if Rhoades’s wife, Wendy (who, improbably enough, is a major player at Axe Capital) tossed her husband for Axe, with whom she possesses a more palpable, if platonic, chemistry. “Billions” manages the feat of making you want the guy who has everything to have even more.
