When Prime Minister Justin Trudeau and his wife, Sophie Grégoire Trudeau, arrived at the White House for a state dinner on Thursday, the first given for a Canadian in two decades, it was on a wave of international attention not accorded a Canadian politician in, well, maybe ever.
Often compared to Kate Middleton, Ms. Grégoire Trudeau was similarly thrust into the spotlight alongside a husband who has been known to the country since birth, and she appears to have undergone a similar, acceptably fashionable style overhaul.
Even so, most of the Canadians I spoke with were thoroughly uninterested in what she was wearing other than that she looked both smart and relatable.
When I asked my sister, who is the same age as Ms. Grégoire Trudeau, 40, and also the mother of three small children, what she thought of Ms. Grégoire Trudeau’s style, the only image she could conjure was of the family out for Halloween, dressed as “Star Wars” characters.
To be sure, Ms. Grégoire Trudeau has definitely joined the ranks of Canada’s stylish prime ministers’ wives, which in fairness, is a short list consisting primarily of Mr. Trudeau’s mother, Margaret, who was a beautiful 22-year-old “flower child” (so described to me by my mother, in a tone that suggested this explained everything) when she married Pierre Trudeau, then the prime minister and 29 years her senior. Ms. Trudeau hung out at Studio 54, arguably making her one of the coolest Canadians who ever lived.
There’s also Mila Mulroney, the wife of Brian Mulroney, who replaced Pierre Trudeau as prime minister in 1984 and stayed in office for nearly a decade. Even as a child, I noticed Ms. Mulroney’s shiny, pretty hair. I was far less aware of the fact she was highly criticized for styling herself as a “first lady” (read: American) and for owning too many shoes. In 2012 she was mentioned in a Vanity Fair article toasting the “ladies who lunched” at Manhattan hot spots like Le Cirque.
Like I said, it’s a short list.
It is possible we’ve had other nicely dressed first ladies — presumably they were all reasonably nicely dressed, anyway — and just don’t know about them. (We don’t call them first ladies, by the way; they are simply the spouse, or wife of.) As I tried to come up with this list, I realized I could not name more than the two I have already mentioned. As in, I didn’t know the names of any of our prime ministers’ wives.
Worried this lack of knowledge was the result of my having spent too many years in New York, I asked a few gainfully employed, well-educated Canadian friends if they could name spouses. They couldn’t. “What was Mulroney’s wife’s name”? one asked. “Harper, who?” another said.
The reality is that Canadians and Americans have different relationships with their leaders; we don’t tend to put them on pedestals, or use them as examples of perfect citizenry to which we can aspire. We’re not as interested in their personal lives so much as their ability to run the country. If they look good trying, that’s nice, too.
Which is not to suggest that Canada isn’t, generally, extraordinarily excited about the Trudeaus. Over Christmas I was given a sweatshirt depicting the prime minister riding a horse, set against a backdrop that included a rainbow and waterfall.
But it can be hard to distinguish all the “icon” hyperbole being thrown at the couple from the excitement Canadians feel about being recognized by the United States. Do Canadians genuinely think the Trudeaus are deserving of such high praise, or are our opinions being influenced by the fact that so many news outlets in America are trumpeting them? “I never, ever expected to see my prime minister in Vogue, it’s unreal,” I was told by Anita Clarke, founder of the Toronto-based fashion site I Want - I Got.
It was Mr. Trudeau’s father, Pierre, who famously said, at a 1969 Washington Press Club dinner, that living next to the United States “is in some ways like sleeping with an elephant. “No matter how friendly and even-tempered is the beast, if I can call it that, one is affected by every twitch and grunt,” he said.
To be Canadian is to live with equal parts fear and fury that the United States has no idea who we are (and may inadvertently roll over on us in the middle of the night without realizing it). We don’t necessarily want your attention, but then again, why aren’t you giving it to us?
And while we’ve certainly produced our fair share of internationally recognizable figures (with Linda Evangelista, Pamela Anderson and Ryan Gosling, we’ve got style, sex and hot male feminist covered), they all had to leave Canada to find fame.
Which is why what Sophie Grégoire Trudeau is wearing may be of so little interest to so many Canadians. We don’t get this kind of platform or attention very often. We’re dying to hear what she’s going to say and (quietly) thrilled everyone on the planet appears to be listening.