On the first night of Andrew Schneider’s performance piece “Youarenowhere,” which played the experimentally inclined Coil festival in 2015, Mr. Schneider gathered his crew and gave a pep talk entirely devoid of any pep.
This was only mild hyperbole. During rehearsal, a heavy curtain rig had ripped out of the theater’s ceiling and crashed to the floor.
But Mr. Schneider did not die. “Youarenowhere,” which has begun an encore run at 3LD Art & Technology Center and continues through April 3, became one of the most talked-about shows of the festival and has toured successfully since. A chaotic mix of personal revelation and relativity theory, enhanced by some alarming and splendid visual effects, the show established Mr. Schneider, who had created and run video for the Wooster Group for many years, as a significant artist in his own right. It highlights the particular ways he integrates technology, much of it untidy and homemade and somehow organic, into live performance.
He wasn’t always so vanguard. Mr. Schneider grew up in Milwaukee, the child of two school administrators, and earned a B.F.A. from Illinois Wesleyan University, specializing in musical theater. At 34, he still possesses an “aw, shucks” quality to his demeanor, a shyness and eagerness that leaven his cool-kid cred.
On a recent rainy morning at 3LD, he arrived 15 minutes late, a consequence of a flat bicycle tire. (Technical glitches, large and small, are a hallmark of his work. And his life.) He was dressed in a shredded scarf, bright blue pants, a black T-shirt, a light black jacket and black sneakers, which was perhaps too little considering the weather, but a lot more than Mr. Schneider wears in performance.
In “Youarenowhere,” he appears only in pants and boots. Is there a particular reason for this shirtlessness? Does it speak to a quality of the character he plays, or does it help to cue some of the audio and visual effects? After all, Mr. Schneider, who earned a graduate degree at N.Y.U.’s Interactive Telecommunications Program, has a sideline in wearable tech, most famously the solar bikini, a swimsuit that can recharge a cellphone.
No, he explained. He just never found the right shirt. “A white T-shirt?” he asked. “A button-down? A tank top? It doesn’t make sense to me.” But there’s a lot about “Youarenowhere” that doesn’t make sense — its genesis, its unforeseen triumph and the piece itself, at least as it appears on the page. Even its title, which can be read as “You Are Nowhere” or “You Are Now Here,” is a conundrum.
After college, Mr. Schneider spent a couple of unhappy years in New York, lining up for casting calls and booking roles in regional productions. His baritone typed him as a villain, and he played the dentist in “Little Shop of Horrors” three separate times. It wasn’t especially rewarding. On the advice of friends he had met while interning with the Wooster Group and the Builders Association, he enrolled in the N.Y.U. graduate program. “My parents were kind of devastated that I wasn’t going to be doing musical theater anymore,” he said.
He joined the Wooster Group just after finishing his degree. The position, video technician, wasn’t initially very creative. During their production of “Hamlet,” he remained offstage, “for like 90 shows or something, pressing three keys on a keyboard,” he said. But it offered a stable salary, benefits and the chance to work with artists he admired.
He longed to perform with the group but was so shy that for years he barely spoke to anyone. Still, he brought in items he’d created, like gloves that could cue sound effects, or a robot cat. Some lacrosse sticks that had built-in sound effects and the ability to “glitch out” video were nearly part of “Cry, Trojans!” in which Mr. Schneider finally appeared as an actor. But an enthusiastic fight scene destroyed them.
Elizabeth LeCompte, the Wooster Group’s artistic director, said that she would have used Mr. Schneider and his devices earlier if he hadn’t been so timid. “He was so shy about bringing them in that I thought he didn’t want us to use them,” she said. But she noted that during his tenure, “he began revealing himself very slowly and beautifully,” until he became “a center mover in the company.” When she put him onstage, she discovered a focus and interiority that made you want to watch him. “He has some kind of a private aura that is very powerful,” she said.
But even when he was at last performing with the company, he was already thinking about leaving it, making his exit in mid-2014. The touring schedule allowed him to make only very short works of his own. “I had so many ideas for making things, it was no longer sufficient to insert my ideas piecemeal into Wooster Group shows,” he said. In 2012, he began creating the first elements of “Youarenowhere,” and in 2013, Vallejo Gantner, the artistic director of Performance Space 122, commissioned a full-length version, about an hour long, for the Coil festival in 2015.
“Youarenowhere” began with a lighting idea, a black frame rigged with LED lights that could black out a performer’s face while illuminating the rest of the body. As Mr. Schneider tinkered with that, he began assembling text, “writing some weird stuff to say.” The result is a not especially coherent collage of ruminations on alcoholism, relationships and quantum mechanics. There is also a Ricky Nelson song. “I know the stories that I really want to tell, but I’m generally not very good at telling them,” he said.
After seeing a rough draft of the script and then a work-in-progress showing, Mr. Gantner urged him to reconsider the form and maybe some of the content, particularly a flabbergasting coup de théâtre. “We just didn’t think anybody could pull it off,” Mr. Gantner said, speaking by telephone.
Mr. Schneider had his own doubts, too. He wasn’t sure he could ask audiences to watch a performance without a story. And he worried that the programming and equipment, which he’d built himself, would break down in performance, which they did.
But somehow the piece was a success. Mr. Gantner called it “a jaw drop.” The show managed to seem deliberate and accidental, controlled and entirely unpredictable.
Mr. Schneider is developing a musical based on a Mac Wellman novel, in collaboration with Heather Christian and Ms. Chavkin, and a show that borrows from the light and space artists of the 1970s to explore hallucination.
