PILING UP The kids and our 2-year-old King Charles, Iggy Pup, who’s named after Iggy Pop, wake us between 7:30 and 8. Everyone piles into bed and we make a game plan. The kids write out a list of what they want to do, which is exactly what I did with my father growing up.
TRANSCENDENCE By 8:30 or 9 we kick the kids and the dog out, and then we meditate together for 20 minutes. It’s the one thing everyone respects. The kids watch TV while we meditate on the bed, next to each other. 
RITUALS Diana makes the coffee during the week, so I do it on the weekends. I love Dunkin’ Donuts. My wife hates it. I have a 20-ounce red Vassar mug that I’ve been using for the past 20 years. We live on the sixth floor, right above tree level, and every morning I sit on the windowsill and look out onto Central Park.
SWEAT AND HAVE FUN During the week, exercising is about disciplined classes or aerobics. On the weekends I just want to sweat and have fun. I spin at the SoulCycle on 83rd Street. I love the noon Rockstar Ride class. They play everything from Zeppelin to Van Halen to hair bands of the ’80s.
BAG OF BAGELS After spin class I indulge in fresh bagels, smoked salmon, cream cheese and pastries from Tal Bagels. I’m a sesame guy.
KEEP IT CASUAL At home I shower and dress for the day. I love Tom Ford and wear his suits at work, but the weekend lets my rock ’n’ roll style out. I dress in John Varvatos skinny black jeans, a T-shirt and an edgy sports jacket with a scarf.
PARK-BOUND From 1:30 to 3 is when I give my wife time to herself. I take Iggy and the kids to the park. Regardless of the season, we usually go to the boat pond at 72nd Street, and the kids climb on the Alice in Wonderland statue.
MUSEUM LOYALISTS We love the Museum of Natural History. We’re all science geeks. I’m more of a doctor and artist than a sports guy. My kids are the same. At this age, my kids are not getting as much out of the Guggenheim or the Whitney.
TOSSING KNIVES AND SHRIMP If we’re going out for dinner, which usually means my parents and sister join us, then I have to be honest, and we embarrassingly go to Benihana. We all sit around one big table and watch someone toss knives in the air and throw shrimp into your mouth. As kids we’d go here all the time. We’d tell them it was someone’s birthday just so you could get the free drink and they would sing you a song.
DIVIDE AND CONQUER Then it’s a parade of getting the kids showered, settled and off to bed. Diana and I each take one of the children, then we swap. My daughter’s into Fancy Nancy, so she reads to me from that. With my son, I try to have more adult conversation. We talk about school, his friends and his teachers.
DIFFERENT STROKES By 9 the kids are asleep and we try to watch something on Netflix. We start together, but we end up watching something I’ve recorded, like “The Walking Dead” or “Vinyl,” which Diana doesn’t like, so she goes into the bedroom.
LIGHTS OUT I’m usually in bed by 10:30 to get a good night’s sleep for the week, which usually involves a much faster pace.