ATLANTA — Less than a year after the Supreme Court recognized a constitutional right to same-sex marriage, conservative lawmakers across the country are pushing for a new round of legal protections for opponents of gay rights. But the proposals are meeting the kind of resistance from business interests and gay rights groups that similarly motivated, but less specific, legislation faced last year in Arkansas and Indiana.
The dispute is escalating here in Georgia, where the Senate last month approved a measure barring “adverse action” by the government against anyone following religious beliefs about marriage, including “that marriage should only be between a man and a woman.” Though some of Georgia’s senior elected officials, including the House speaker and governor, both Republicans, have expressed caution about the proposal, business groups are taking no chances.
“We think the lessons learned in Indiana should allow for some straight thinking by our Legislature that this would be harmful to Georgia if passed in the current form,” said Jenner Wood, the chairman of the Metro Atlanta Chamber of Commerce and one of the founders of Georgia Prospers, a coalition of more than 400 companies, including Coca-Cola and Google, that oppose the bill.
Lawmakers in at least seven other states have proposed similar bills, according to the Human Rights Campaign, a gay rights group. The measures are usually known as First Amendment Defense Acts, a new front in the legislative conflict over religion and gay rights.
These bills differ from last year’s legislation in Indiana and Arkansas, where supporters described the proposals as religious freedom laws. Such laws, versions of which are on the books in 21 states and at the federal level, are intended to strengthen but not guarantee the legal position of people whose religious beliefs are in conflict with existing law; none specifically mention same-sex marriage.
But the new bills generally guarantee protection from any penalties and reserve it explicitly for those who, on religious grounds, oppose same-sex marriage. That approach might appear surprising given the repercussions that Indiana faced, including estimates of millions of dollars in lost business. But backers of the strategy argue that a more targeted bill could help consolidate support.
Still, given the corporate backlash in Georgia, where a similar outcry helped derail a religious freedom proposal last year, it appears this new approach may play out in much the same way. Gay rights groups say the new bills simply confirm what the recent religious freedom legislation over the past two years was meant to do all along: discriminate against gay and transgender people.
The new legislation is modeled on the First Amendment Defense Act, a bill introduced by congressional Republicans over the summer amid anxieties about the Supreme Court ruling that recognized a constitutional right to same-sex marriage.
The bills this year shield people and religious organizations from a variety of government actions, including being fired or fined, losing government grants or contracts, losing access to school meeting spaces, having a license revoked or, in some instances, being subject to a civil claim. Among those whose actions would be protected under various bills are counselors, adoption agencies, government employees and, as mentioned in a Mississippi version, wedding florists and photographers.
Advocates and opponents of same-sex marriage acknowledge that the experience of Indiana contributed to a shift in strategy.
The backlash there was substantial, even after legislators reworked the law. Chris Gahl, a vice president of Visit Indy, a tourism group, said a dozen conventions that had been considering Indianapolis cited the law as a reason they decided to go elsewhere. State chambers of commerce around the country have contacted their counterparts in Indiana and Arkansas for advice on how to curtail such legislation.
Because of this, many lawmakers who might have pushed for similar bills have become gun-shy. A religious freedom bill was rejected by the West Virginia Senate on Wednesday, and there are some similar but more narrowly written measures floating around other state legislatures. But in general, lawmakers have kept their distance.
“R.F.R.A.s have become politically toxic,” said Douglas Laycock, a law professor at the University of Virginia, using the abbreviation for Religious Freedom Restoration Acts.
Instead, some states are considering bills like the one in Georgia, where the tenor of the debate shifted sharply in a matter of days. At first, the State House unanimously approved a measure ensuring that clergy members could not be compelled to solemnize a marriage that conflicted with their religious views.
But a sweeping rewrite in the State Senate left lawmakers weighing the far more controversial protections. Ms. Warbelow’s gay rights group contends that the bill could allow government employees to reject the tax returns of same-sex couples, or certain homeless shelters to refuse entry to single mothers and their children. A report by Georgia Prospers, which a Republican former state senator leads, estimated that the state could sustain $1 billion in losses if the current bill were to become law.
The measure’s supporters reject such predictions as fear-mongering.
Other same-sex marriage opponents, such as State Representative Rich Wingo of Alabama, say such legislation reflects concerns more important than commerce.
