A coalition of progressive groups is starting a state-level campaign to close the so-called carried interest loophole, which allows fund managers to pay a substantially reduced federal tax rate on much of their income.
Two New York State assemblymen plan to introduce a bill on Monday that would raise taxes on state residents who benefit from the lower rate, to precisely offset the tax savings they receive at the federal level.
In addition to correcting what its members see as a glaring inequity in the tax code, the coalition hopes to generate revenue that could be spent on public investments in areas like schools and economic development.
The bill would make the tax increase contingent on the passage of corresponding legislation in Massachusetts, New Jersey and Connecticut, so that fund managers could not avoid the tax by simply moving to a nearby state. Those who helped draft the bill estimated that it could raise roughly $3.7 billion a year in New York if the tax increase were to go into effect.
The coalition includes groups focused on reducing inequality and challenging the political power of the wealthy, such as the Patriotic Millionaires and Hedge Clippers. Hedge Clippers is backed by the American Federation of Teachers and targets the influence of hedge funds and private equity funds. The coalition plans to push for similar legislation in California, Illinois and Pennsylvania.
The effort to change the tax treatment of carried interest, long a priority of progressive Democrats in Congress, has attracted support across the political spectrum in recent years. Two Republican presidential candidates, Donald Trump and Jeb Bush, proposed such a change last year.
Despite this growing support, however, Congress has repeatedly declined to make the change.
“It is not just ridiculous and unfair, it is the kind of thing that has led to the rise of Donald Trump,” said Whitney Tilson, a hedge fund manager and member of the Patriotic Millionaires, who has long opposed the tax provision despite personally benefiting from it.
Some of those involved in this latest effort say it was inspired in part by the campaigns to raise the minimum wage on the state and local level, another step Congress has declined to take on the federal level despite widespread support for the idea among voters.
As written, the legislation does not include a provision to end the state-level tax if Congress were to change the federal law. But Assemblyman Ryan said he would insist on that being the case, and some of the bill’s supporters said it would be critical.
Assemblyman Jeffrion L. Aubry, the lead sponsor of the forthcoming bill in New York, noted that legislators in Albany were engaged in the annual budget process, a time when many of their priorities frequently go by the wayside for lack of revenue. He suggested that the ample revenue the bill would generate could help build support for it.
Still, enacting the tax appears to be a long way off, and supporters concede that the effort is as much about raising public awareness about the issue as it is about changing tax rates.
Opponents of this approach say that carried interest is simply compensation for services rendered — in this case, managing other people’s money — not investment gains. That is because the share of profits that fund managers receive through carried interest does not derive from money they have personally invested. As such, opponents say, it should be taxed as ordinary income.
“I’m sorry, you’re selling a service; that means it’s labor income,” said Senator Elizabeth Warren, a Democrat from Massachusetts who is a longtime opponent of the current approach.
Representatives of industries in which fund managers earn carried interest deny that this tax treatment amounts to a loophole. They say that even if the managers’ share of their funds’ profits is not a return on money they have personally invested, it is compensation for the “sweat equity” they invest in building their businesses.
They say their situation is analogous to sales of Facebook stock by the company’s founder, Mark Zuckerberg. He pays the capital gains rate, even though outside investors provided most of the company’s capital. Private equity fund managers should also pay the capital gains rate, they say, on profits from the sale of a portfolio company, even though others provided most of the capital for purchasing it.
