Rob Ford, the combative former mayor of Toronto who gained international notoriety with his confession of crack cocaine use, his public drunkenness and his belligerent clashes with other public officials, died on Tuesday. He was 46.
His office announced his death but gave no other details. Mr. Ford had been undergoing treatment for malignant liposarcoma, a rare form of cancer, since September 2014.
Along with his brother Doug, Mr. Ford was a controversial figure in Toronto politics for years, drawing support largely from conservative residents of suburban communities that had been absorbed into the City of Toronto. In 2013 he acknowledged smoking crack cocaine during one of his “drunken stupors,” as he put it.
After his cancer diagnosis, Mr. Ford withdrew from his mayoral re-election campaign in favor of his brother, who was defeated. But Rob Ford did win the seat on the City Council that Doug Ford had held.
The son of a millionaire, Mr. Ford built his power base among mainly blue-collar, right-wing voters — “the Ford Nation,” he called them — in five former municipalities that joined Toronto in 1998. Mr. Ford was a lifelong resident of one such suburb, Etobicoke, where he was born on May 28, 1969.
He echoed his constituents’ view that urban elitists were inflating taxes through social service programs and excessively generous contracts with public sector unions.
In office he took a bellicose approach to governing, engaging in profanity-laden shouting matches with City Council members and journalists.
Mr. Ford ran for mayor in 2010 after the incumbent, David Miller, a center leftist, decided not to seek re-election after a 39-day garbage strike, which had created the impression that the city was heading out of control.  Sometimes he visited them personally.
Mr. Ford’s father, Doug, had been a member of a Progressive Conservative provincial government with a populist, anti-elitist bent, but it was not immediately obvious that as a young man Mr. Ford would follow a similar path.
After a single year at Carleton University in Ottawa, where he played on the football team but was disappointed not to start a single game, he joined his siblings at their father’s successful adhesive label business.
Much of Mr. Ford’s political career was guided by his brother Doug, who also succeeded their father at the label company.
Mr. Cherry predicted great things for Mr. Ford’s administration, but they largely failed to materialize. Mr. Ford had campaigned on a promise to eliminate waste in city operations, but an audit failed to uncover anything substantial. He was unable to build enough Council support for major projects he championed, including a downtown casino complex. And even a public weight-loss campaign organized by his brother — Mr. Ford once described himself as being “300 pounds of fun” — faded away without results.
Mr. Ford’s fortunes fell precipitously in May 2013, when the website Gawker and The Toronto Star both said their reporters had viewed a video of Mr. Ford smoking crack cocaine. The international news media were soon all over the story.
Months of vigorous denials from both Ford brothers followed. But that November, Mr. Ford, surrounded by reporters outside of his City Hall office, confessed.
Soon extensive police surveillance evidence released by a court showed that Mr. Ford had associated with criminals and had apparently known few limits when it came to satisfying his appetites.
There were widespread calls for his resignation — all of them rejected by Mr. Ford. Unable to remove him from office, the Council reduced his powers to ceremonial, an action that nearly provoked a brawl between heckling spectators and Mr. Ford and his brother. Rob Ford bowled down a 63-year-old councilwoman as he rushed to Doug Ford’s aid.
While much of Toronto cringed at the often lurid revelations about Mr. Ford’s private life, his supporters rallied to him, appearing in greater numbers than ever at the free barbecues the two brothers had long organized for them. He decided to run for re-election.
Two months before the vote, however, his cancer was discovered, and Doug Ford became the family’s mayoral standard-bearer. Rob, meanwhile, sought his brother’s Council seat. Doug’s mayoral bid failed, but Rob was elected.
Mr. Ford’s attendance at Council meetings was dictated by his cancer treatments. But when he appeared, usually wearing a track suit, Mr. Ford often displayed his old pugnacious form.
In addition to his brother Doug, Mr. Ford is survived by his wife, Renata; his children, Stephanie and Douglas; his mother, Diane; another brother, Randy; and a sister, Kathy.
At a news conference after the 2014 election, Mr. Ford was asked how he thought his time as mayor would be remembered.
