It takes almost the entire first episode of the second season of “Daredevil,” the Netflix series about the Marvel crime fighter, before a new nemesis named Frank Castle utters a single line of dialogue.
He is a man of few words and mostly violent actions, but Castle is immediately recognizable to comic-book fans as the Punisher, a merciless antihero.
Beneath his intimidating physique, boxer’s nose and seemingly impassive demeanor, Mr. Bernthal, 39, is a thoughtful, garrulous performer with an unexpected career path that took him from athletics to theater, and from Washington to Moscow to Hollywood.
Though the people he plays are not often easy to like, Mr. Bernthal said he has learned to embrace these roles and to find an actor’s compassion for some inhumane figures.
“They’re characters that build these walls around themselves, that say I’m no longer going to concern myself with morality,” he said.
On a recent visit to the East Village, Mr. Bernthal was sitting on a bench outside St. Mark’s Church, which was once home to the avant-garde Ontological-Hysteric Theater, and where he performed formative work with his experimental stage company, Fovea Floods.
Having grown up in Washington, Mr. Bernthal went to Skidmore College in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., and played baseball, but came to the attention of a theater professor, Alma Becker, after delivering a deceptive monologue in her class.
Ms. Becker, who died in 2013, steered Mr. Bernthal to study acting at the Moscow Art Theater. “She wanted me to get away from the people I was hanging out with,” he explained, “and someplace where there’s statues on every corner, of playwrights and painters and actors.” He went on to earn an M.F.A. through the American Repertory Theater in Cambridge, Mass.
Some early opportunities, like the short-lived CBS comedy “The Class,” fizzled out. But Mr. Bernthal caught a life-changing break when he was cast in “The Walking Dead” as Shane Walsh, a onetime friend and partner of the series protagonist Rick Grimes (Andrew Lincoln), who gradually becomes his rival for the affection of Rick’s wife and the leadership of a group of survivors in a world overrun by zombies.
Going into the series knowing Shane would last a finite number of episodes — and before the show became synonymous with indiscriminate death — was a welcome change of pace for TV, Mr. Bernthal said.
The show’s continued runaway popularity since then has been bittersweet for Mr. Bernthal, but he also finds it a relief to follow other muses. “I loved being on ‘The Walking Dead,’ and I love that I’m off ‘The Walking Dead,’” he said.
The visibility it provided helped earn him roles in films like “The Wolf of Wall Street,” “Fury” and “Sicario,” and gain the attention of the “Daredevil” showrunners Douglas Petrie and Marco Ramirez when they were looking to add the Punisher to its second season.
As in the comics, Castle is a war veteran out to avenge the deaths of his wife and children. His single-minded pursuit of justice brings him into conflict with Daredevil (Charlie Cox).
But he said that the potential offered by a 13-hour narrative — and the likelihood that Netflix viewers would binge-watch it in just a few sessions — made the challenges of the role irresistible.
Mr. Cox said he found in Mr. Bernthal a fellow actor with a similar dedication to immersing himself in his “Daredevil” role — “a crazy, obsessive, unhealthy relationship is probably a more accurate way of describing it,” he said with a laugh.
With his customary stoicism, Mr. Bernthal said that all these apparent burdens, whether absorbing another actor’s fists or an audience’s hostility, were just more chances to demonstrate his aptitude for job.
