HAVANA — Leading Cuban dissidents, including some who have been critical of President Obama’s policy of engaging with the Cuban government, spent nearly two hours on Tuesday discussing human rights with the president.
She added that the president had “expressed a recognition to the opposition publicly” at his news conference on Monday with President Raúl Castro and again on Tuesday in his keynote speech to the Cuban people.
Several Cubans opposed to the government tried to do exactly that on Tuesday, said José Daniel Ferrer, the leader of the Patriotic Union of Cuba, who attended the meeting with the president. Mr. Ferrer said demonstrators in Havana assembled after the president’s speech to demand the rights Mr. Obama had enunciated. When the police carried them off, dozens of other people protested, he said.
Other dissidents who attended the meeting with Mr. Obama included Dagoberto Valdes, a lay leader in the Roman Catholic Church; Guillermo Fariñas, an activist from Santa Clara, Cuba, known for going on hunger strikes; Juana Mora, a gay rights advocate; and Berta Soler, a founder of the Ladies in White, whose weekly protest on Sunday was disrupted when dozens of participants were arrested.
Participants said one of the subjects of Tuesday’s meeting was political prisoners, even though Mr. Castro has denied there are any in Cuba.
Amid the euphoria of President Obama’s visit is a darker reality for the artist Danilo Maldonado Machado, who has been jailed for his work. He hopes this week will spotlight Cuba’s repression.
Mr. Sánchez, of the Cuban Commission on for Human Rights, said Mr. Obama asked him if he had a list of political prisoners.
By the commission’s count, Cuba has 89 political prisoners, including 11 who have been given suspended sentences. An additional 20 or so are pending trial.
Seven prisoners have been accused of violence or taking up arms against the government and are sometimes not counted because they are not “prisoners of conscience,” Mr. Sánchez said.
