In a jarring crash on Saturday, Lindsey Vonn, the women’s overall World Cup leader this season, sustained a hairline fracture in her left knee. Remarkably, even for someone whose career has been marked by dramatic comebacks, Vonn was back racing the next day and led the Alpine combined at the halfway mark of the event in Andorra.
Vonn finished 13th in that race, but afterward, still concerned about her knee, she headed to Spain for additional tests. A closer examination revealed three fractures of the leg’s tibial plateau, not one.
As the 31-year-old Vonn chases a host of World Cup records and what would be her first appearance at the Winter Olympics in eight years, the question is increasingly whether her often-injured lower body can withstand the rigors of her sport. Moreover, is her racing style suited to staying healthy?
Vonn has won 20 World Cup season-long titles, two Olympic medals and 76 World Cup races not only because of her wealth of talent but also because of the way she doggedly attacks every racecourse with a fearlessness that ignores the perils of skiing at 70 miles an hour.
Since she was 21, that strategy has led to dominant performances. Vonn is within 10 World Cup victories of the career record set by Ingemar Stenmark, a mark once thought to be all but unassailable.
But since 2013, Vonn has torn three knee ligaments, has endured two substantial knee reconstructions, has twice broken her tibia and has broken an ankle.
When healthy, in the speed events of super-G and the downhill, she is an almost unbeatable force.
Because she is leading the World Cup overall standings, Vonn on Wednesday called her decision to stop racing “one of the toughest” of her career.
Vonn becomes yet another ski racing star to exit this season’s competition. Anna Fenninger of Austria, the defending women’s overall champion, injured her knee in October and has missed the season. Aksel Lund Svindal was leading the men’s overall standings when he crashed and tore his anterior cruciate ligament in January. Other stars, like Tina Maze of Slovenia and the American Bode Miller, have chosen to sit out the season.
Vonn will unquestionably forge on and mount another comeback next winter. It has always been her approach. At the 2006 Turin Olympics, she limped from her hospital bed to finish eighth in the women’s downhill two days after a harrowing, nearly life-threatening crash.
Once her leg fractures heal, she is likely to be back training again, probably by the summer in New Zealand or South America.
