As he tries to halt the momentum of Donald J. Trump, Gov. John Kasich of Ohio tells people they are made special by the Lord. He urges them to invite lonely widows out to dinner. He freely dispenses hugs.
Mr. Kasich’s aura of civility, kindness and positivity is so pronounced — and so at odds with the fulminations of the real estate mogul — that an anxious voter in Worcester, Mass., wondered whether he could summon the combativeness required to be an effective president.
“I worry that you’re just so nice,” the woman said.
Today, as Mr. Kasich makes comity a centerpiece of his long-shot bid for the Republican nomination, they describe his candidacy as an exercise in remarkable self-restraint that has managed to keep his crankier instincts mostly out of sight.
“We see a completely different side of him,” said Lou Gentile, a Democratic state senator. Mr. Gentile recalled Mr. Kasich pulling him aside after a news conference and unspooling a vigorous grievance about how Democrats had not supported a proposal he had championed.
“I literally said, ‘Governor, governor, can I please get a word in here?’ ” Mr. Gentile said.
These days, Mr. Kasich presents himself as a soothing and unifying figure who can heal a broken country. The approach seems to be working, to a degree: A poll this week showed him catching up to Mr. Trump in Pennsylvania, and national surveys suggest he would make a stronger rival against a Democrat in the fall than the divisive Republican front-runner.
At the Ohio Statehouse, however, Mr. Kasich could be impetuous and unforgiving.
As a Democratic state representative in a Republican-dominated legislature, Denise Driehaus recalled joking to Mr. Kasich at a bill-signing ceremony that she might never again find herself at such an occasion.
Mr. Kasich, she said, did not react well. In a reply that left her startled, he shot back that her statement was the problem with Democrats: They would not work with Republicans. The room grew tense, she said, and the celebratory mood was lost.
Mr. Kasich’s volatility crosses party lines — and it has earned him a reputation for moodiness that has left even Republican allies treading lightly around him.
Jay Hottinger, a Republican state senator, summed up the challenge of working with Mr. Kasich in a recent text message to his wife. Mr. Hottinger, a veteran legislator, had attended one of the governor’s campaign stops in Ohio not knowing whether to expect warmth or chilliness from Mr. Kasich.
To his relief, Mr. Kasich acknowledged Mr. Hottinger’s presence at the event and embraced him afterward. “It was Dr. Jekyll today instead of Mr. Hyde,” Mr. Hottinger texted his wife.

Several of the governor’s allies and adversaries said they were watching the newly genial Mr. Kasich, as a presidential candidate, with bewilderment.
“I think a lot of people are kind of scratching their heads saying, ‘Where did this John Kasich come from?’ ” said Fred Strahorn, the Democratic minority leader in the Ohio House.
Republican voters who attend his campaign events said his conciliatory approach was a major lure, setting him apart from the taunting and caustic style of his rivals Mr. Trump and Senator Ted Cruz of Texas.
To hear Mr. Kasich tell it, he has indeed changed, attributing it to a revival of his Christian faith and to his role as a mature chief executive, rather than a young Republican rebel.
“As I’ve gotten older and more faithful, I probably have mellowed a little bit,” he said not long ago.
He recalled his days as a House member in less than flattering terms.
Mr. Gingrich, still a friend from the two men’s days waging what they saw as a Republican revolution, has a different explanation for the transformation: Mr. Kasich, after years of being single, married again in 1997.
Mr. Gingrich noticed a difference right away. “When I started working with him, he was pretty lonely, and it was pretty tough,” he said.
Of course, Mr. Kasich has long relied on a soft touch to blunt his biting impulses, a disarming and potent combination, according to those who have experienced it. Alex Fischer, a Republican who heads the Columbus Partnership, a business group in Ohio, remembered a long, heated disagreement with Mr. Kasich over policy during his 2010 campaign for governor. As both the temperature and the volume rose in the small conference room where the episode played out, Mr. Fischer feared the conflict could permanently damage their rapport.
Still, Ohio lawmakers and political operatives privately wonder if — or when — the old, irascible Mr. Kasich will reappear under the stress of the campaign.
“He has shown great discipline,” said Chris Redfern, a former state representative and onetime Ohio Democratic chairman who still remembers Mr. Kasich’s pungent admonition to the state’s entrenched interests a few years ago.
Mr. Kasich seems sensitive to the possibility of a relapse, even warning reporters who travel with him to be on guard. After snapping at a journalist over an unwelcome question this month, Mr. Kasich apologized, and at a news conference later he asked for the news media’s help in monitoring his behavior.
“If any of you ever see me getting out of control, I want you to take me aside and I want you to say, ‘Remember what you told us at that press conference,’ ” he said.
Such assurances notwithstanding, Mr. Kasich is not ready to forsake his abrasive side entirely, holding it in reserve for the right moment.
“I think nice usually wins,” he said after the event in Worcester last month where the voter had worried about his congeniality.
