Dr. Myron G. Schultz, whose detection of a cluster of pneumonia cases in the early 1980s helped public health officials identify the AIDS epidemic, died on Feb. 19 in Atlanta. He was 81.
The cause was pulmonary hypertension, his wife, Selma, said.
Dr. Schultz, an infectious disease epidemiologist with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, created the Parasitic Diseases Drug Service to provide physicians with medicines to treat rare illnesses. One was pentamidine. Prescribed for patients with African sleeping sickness, it was also made available to treat patients with pneumocystis pneumonia in the early years of the AIDS epidemic, when few alternatives were available.
“In August 1981, because we were providing pentamidine, cases of pneumocystis in adult males quickly came to our attention, and that was the opening salvo for the AIDS epidemic,” Dr. Schultz recalled in 2012 in an interview with The Global Health Chronicles, a journal published jointly by the Centers for Disease Control and Emory University.
Dr. Schultz, who was known as Mike, was the director of parasitic diseases in the Division of Epidemiology at the Centers for Disease Control. He also founded the travelers’ health unit and developed a brochure called Health Information for International Travel — now known as the Yellow Book — to advise international travelers about health risks.
Myron Gilbert Schultz was born in the Bronx on Jan. 6, 1935, the son of Everett and Ruth Schultz. His father was a diamond setter. He graduated from the Bronx High School of Science, Cornell University’s College of Veterinary Medicine and Albany Medical College. He was working as the track veterinarian at Saratoga Raceway in upstate New York when he decided that he would rather practice on humans.
In addition to his wife, the former Selma Rosenthal, he is survived by their daughter, Naomi Mass; their son, Dr. Joseph Schultz; a sister, Faith Zubaski; 13 grandchildren and six great-grandchildren.
Dr. Schultz’s curiosity took him beyond the scores of field investigations he supervised. He once theorized how Robert Louis Stevenson was able to complete two versions of “The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde” in six days and six nights (he burned the first) without rest and yet remain untired.
“I found a notation from Stevenson’s stepson that his mother, Fanny Osbourne-Stevenson, was an avid reader of ‘The Lancet,’ in order to find anything that might help her husband,” Dr. Schultz said, referring to the venerable medical journal.
