It’s 1979. Earth, Wind & Fire’s “Getaway” had just been blasting on the stereo in Davis’s West 77th Street apartment. He slides open the door to a walk-in closet and the journalist sees a collection of silks, furs, scarves and lamé jackets.
The main action takes place as Davis is considering a comeback after a five-year, self-imposed exile on the Upper West Side, with deft swings back to the 1950s and ’60s. No matter the decade — as a sideman to Charlie Parker in the 1940s; birthing cool jazz with Gil Evans in the early ’50s; moving further ahead with John Coltrane in the late-’50s and then the mid-’60s, before an electric period from 1968-75 — Davis is the focal point, in part because of what he wore.
With Davis, it wasn’t a case of style over substance. His style was essential to his substance.
“His music, of course, everyone is familiar with,” said Marcus Miller, the bassist, composer and producer who was part of Davis’s band in 1980. “But when I knew him, he was painting as much as playing, and that was a real reflection of him, as well — and then his clothes. It was all the same thing. It was a statement of who he was and how he wanted to present himself.
Miles Dewey Davis III was born into upper-middle-class comfort in Alton, Ill., in 1926. His father was an oral surgeon and his mother was a music teacher; the family moved to East St. Louis when Davis was 1.
Later, he took his cues from movie stars like Fred Astaire and Cary Grant. “I created a kind of hip, quasi-black English look: Brooks Brothers suits, butcher boy shoes, high top pants, shirts with high tab collars that were so stiff with starch I could hardly move my neck,” he wrote.
Like many jazz musicians, Davis was hampered in the early ’50s by heroin addiction, which took about four years to kick. When he finally did, he credited the discipline he observed in the boxer Sugar Ray Robinson. Davis eventually took up a boxing program to stay fit; it’s one of the reasons clothes draped so well on him.
Davis was not afraid to change with the times, either in the music he made or in the way he dressed. In the late 1960s he wore dashikis and loose Indian shirts and suede pants from the young African-American designer Stephen Burrows.
Envelope-pushing Japanese designers like Kohshin Satoh sent him stuff. In 1987, Davis modeled for a Satoh presentation at the Tunnel with Andy Warhol. He also wore his designs during a White House visit with Cicely Tyson, his wife at the time.
