The retailer Lands’ End was scrambling to disentangle itself from the feminist icon Gloria Steinem after an interview printed in a recent catalog prompted criticism from parents at Christian schools and anti-abortion activists.
Ms. Steinem, a writer and women’s rights activist who has long maintained that abortion should be accessible and remain legal, was interviewed by the company’s chief executive, Federica Marchionni, for a new feature called “Legends.” Ms. Marchionni, an Italian who came to the company from Dolce & Gabbana last year, has voiced ambitions to expand Lands’ End into a global brand.
But when the catalogs landed in mailboxes last week, the interview — illustrated with photos of both women sitting on a beige settee — met with swift reaction. Anti-abortion activists and bloggers expressed their displeasure. Some Christian schools that recommend only Lands’ End products for uniforms moved to cut ties with its lucrative school uniform business. Boycotts were threatened.
The company, it seemed, faced two options: Keep the interview and endure the criticism and boycott threats; or pull it and prostrate itself to critics.
Lands’ End went with the latter choice.
“It was never our intention to raise a divisive political or religious issue, so when some of our customers saw the recent promotion that way, we heard them. We sincerely apologize for any offense,” the company said in a statement, which was also posted to its Facebook page.
That statement inadvertently spurred new boycott threats — from potential shoppers who saw the company’s decision as an affront to women’s rights. A debate soon erupted on the Lands’ End Facebook page.
While the original interview drew the ire of anti-abortion activists, it did not broach the topic of abortion. Ms. Steinem instead talked about the need for an Equal Rights Amendment that would formally acknowledge that men and women have equal rights.
A spokeswoman for Lands’ End, Michele Casper, declined to comment Monday on the future of the interview series, and would not say how many schools had cut ties with the company.
Lands’ End, a catalog-based company that made its name by selling primary-colored chunky sweaters and khakis, has in recent years struggled to reinvent itself. But now its first order of business appears to be weathering criticism from both sides of the abortion debate.
Kristie Wolfe, the president and principal of Father Tolton Catholic High School in Columbia, Mo., said in an interview that parents began emailing her in droves after receiving catalogs in the mail last week.
Ms. Wolfe said that the school’s leadership team quickly decided to cancel its contract with the company, in which the school recommended only Lands’ End products to its 292 students in exchange for a percentage of the profits. Another school, College of the Ozarks, in Point Lookout, Mo., also said it would end its relationship with the company.
