Can’t help you there, but here is another one that we can think about: Why are there different dates on New York City baseball caps sold in souvenir shops in Times Square?
Here is another: Which animal is on the “Alice in Wonderland” statue in Central Park, the March Hare or the White Rabbit?
In a city with construction cranes everywhere and taller-than-ever skyscrapers on their way up — along with persistent problems of homelessness and income inequality — these are trivial questions. Maybe they were brought on by the almost summery sunrises and the definitely summerlike temperatures last week. Or maybe it was being out in the softer, gentler air, walking around in a city of walkers — and noticing little things like the baseball caps.
If the presidential candidates cannot agree on immigration reform and trade policy, perhaps it is no surprise that souvenir manufacturers cannot agree on something as basic as the year in which New York was founded.
It turns out the caps come from different manufacturers. The 1625 caps are made by a company in Queens called Elidan.
“I did research, unlike other people,” said Daniel Yun, an owner of Elidan and the “dan” half of the company’s name.
He decided to go with the date on the city seal, 1625, not 1664, when the British ousted the Dutch and rechristened New Amsterdam as New York.
A call to Michael Miscione, the borough historian of Manhattan, essentially confirmed that version of events.
There is a but.
“Some historians, and I’m sort of in this camp myself, think 1624 was a more critical date” than 1625, Mr. Miscione said. In fact, “The Encyclopedia of New York City” made no mention of 1625 in its entry on Manhattan. It gave 1624 as the year the Dutch arrived there and referred to 1664 as the year that New Amsterdam came under British control.
Sam Gohari, one of the partners at Torkia Apparel and Pet Inc. of Secaucus, N.J. — maker of the 1664 caps — shrugged off the question of how he chose that date.
So he decided to go with the date the British came to power?
So much for the baseball caps. Now for the March-Hare-or-White-Rabbit mystery.
It was raised the other day at a book party for G. A. Mudge, the author of “Alice in Central Park — Statues in Wonderland,” which he calls the only book about all the statues in the park.
He said the parks department website describes the figure a few feet from Alice, the Mad Hatter and the Cheshire cat as the March Hare. But the website of the Central Park Conservancy, which manages the park and raises 75 percent of its budget, states that it is the White Rabbit. As if that were not confusing enough, Mr. Mudge said the conservancy’s website also has a two-minute audio recording by Whoopi Goldberg that refers to the March Hare.
“It’s the White Rabbit,” said Lorrie Goulet, the widow of Jose de Creeft, the sculptor of the statue.
We stopped by the statue on the way to work the other day and can report that none of the children climbing on it were wearing either kind of New York cap. We can also report that like so many before us, including Philip Hamburger of The New Yorker almost 57 years ago, we dashed off. How late it’s getting. It’s terribly late. Terribly late.