324 pp. Melville House, $25.95.
Carmel is the sort of child whose teachers think she’s “quite special.” Preternaturally sensitive and given to oracular pronouncements like “You realize, Mum, that I won’t always be with you,” she enjoys solving hedge mazes and making mental lists of her favorite words. Her disappearance into the mist at a storytelling festival sets in motion the plot of Hamer’s novel, which is divided into parallel story lines charting the attempts Carmel and her mother make to survive their separation.
Although the book is cast as a thriller in the mold of “Gone Girl” or “The Girl on the Train,” Hamer seems primarily interested in attempting to explore the interior lives of her characters, using her child narrator to engage in language experiments in the style of Emma Donoghue’s “Room.” (Carmel’s first taste of spicy food is like a “dragon”; worms are “thin like the lines in my writing books.”) But while the novel’s uncanny atmosphere successfully evokes the surreal horror of losing a child, Carmel isn’t a convincing character, ultimately emerging as little more than a vehicle for the author’s stylistic flourishes.
255 pp. Graywolf, paper, $16.
The novel uses Furo’s shifting status to provide a cross-section of contemporary Lagos, from its traffic-clogged streets and crowded offices to the luxury malls and secluded enclaves of the newly rich, who drink expensive cognac and watch the Kardashians on television but lapse into the local dialect when they’re drunk. Although uneven, the novel vividly captures the frenetic energy of one of the world’s ­fastest-growing cities and provides a perceptive and engaging meditation on the mutability — and the stubborn persistence — of identity.
257 pp. Bloomsbury, $26.
Frank Clifton, a returning soldier, and Wendell Wilson, a small-town taxidermist, become lovers in the years immediately following World War II. Cutting themselves off from their rural Southern surroundings, they move to a secluded house in the woods, which becomes both a refuge and a prison. For more than half a century, their life revolves around the circumscribed domestic rituals of cleaning, gardening, cooking and keeping house, maintaining little contact with the outside world.
175 pp. Semiotext(e), paper, $15.95.
Fame, we are told, is fickle. But the quantification enabled by social media — the ability to calibrate the precise degree of attention paid to every post and tweet — seems to have made popularity less subjective, easier to measure if not always to explain. Stagg’s slim novel deftly explores the shifting landscape of celebrity through the story of a young woman’s rise from obscurity to Internet stardom — the “low numbers” to the “high ones” — after an online flirtation with a semifamous social media personality. The two fall in love (“We began,” as she puts it, “to merge our following”) and go on the road, narrating twin accounts of their life together and getting paid to promote parties they don’t attend. Told in the affectless, minimal style of Jean Rhys’s “Good Morning, Midnight,” the novel avoids direct descriptions of the virtual world at its center, instead focusing on the anonymous hotel rooms and black-lit nightclubs that serve as its staging ground. Against this bland backdrop, the mechanics of the attention economy stand out with unnerving clarity.
289 pp. Harper/HarperCollins, $25.99.
In 1933, the Russian choreographer George Balanchine immigrated to the United States. Over the following decades, he reshaped American dance, introducing an aesthetic of strong, clean lines that emphasized the power and athleticism of the female body. This ideal — the Balanchine girl — is at the center of Wilson’s novel, which is divided into two strands. One, set in the 1970s, follows Mira, a gifted young student at Balanchine’s School of American Ballet in Manhattan; the other, which takes place in the present day, is anchored to the more prosaic perspective of Kate, a teacher and dance historian looking back on her own past.
A former ballet student, Wilson skillfully details the world of her teenage dancer: the “spiderweb-thin” nylon hairnets; the salmon pink tights under Fiorucci jeans; the grimy Capezio slippers carefully cracked at the arches. But the book’s subject is less the ballet itself than the costs of early virtuosity — the feeling of being propelled by a force you don’t understand and can’t control — and the dangerous intoxication of the perfect, weightless moments when everything but “air, motion, height” falls away.