Perhaps no one will remember the setting, a hearing room for the House Energy and Commerce Committee, or the person who asked the question, a member of the House of Representatives from Illinois. But seven words spoken in the Rayburn House Office Building in Washington on Monday could profoundly affect the country’s most popular sport.
After years of the N.F.L.‘s disputing evidence that connected football to chronic traumatic encephalopathy, the degenerative brain disease found in nearly 100 former players, a top official for the league for the first time acknowledged the link. To many, it was an echo of big tobacco’s confession in 1997 that smoking causes cancer and heart disease.
Jeff Miller, the N.F.L.’s senior vice president for health and safety policy, said, “The answer to that is certainly, yes.” His response signaled a stunning about-face for the league, which has been accused by former players and independent experts of hiding the dangers of head injuries for decades.
His reply came moments after a leading C.T.E. researcher — Dr. Ann McKee — had presented her findings, showing that dozens of former players who had died were afflicted with the disease.
N.F.L. on Football’s Link to C.T.E.
The N.F.L.’s senior vice president for health and safety, Jeff Miller, acknowledged on Monday a link between football-related concussions and chronic traumatic encephalopathy.
“The answer to that question is certainly yes,” Miller said in testimony recorded in a video clip posted by the television sports channel ESPN on its website.
“The comments made by Jeff Miller yesterday accurately reflect the view of the N.F.L.,” Brian McCarthy, a league spokesman, said Tuesday, confirming that Mr. Miller had not misspoken.
Lawyers for some players involved in a lawsuit with the N.F.L. over its handling of brain injuries quickly seized on the league’s admission.
A settlement was approved by a Third Circuit district court judge last April but is on appeal. The players argued that the league should pay damages to all players found with C.T.E., not just those found to have the disease before the settlement was approved a year ago.
More broadly, the league’s public position could influence other levels of football because many college, high school and youth leagues take their cues from the N.F.L.
The N.F.L. has spent millions of dollars in efforts to tamp down fear among parents over football’s physical toll.  It gave $45 million to USA Football, a formerly obscure nonprofit, to promote safe tackling and reassure jittery parents that football’s inherent risks can be mitigated through on-field techniques and awareness. The league has hired experts to monitor games.
On Monday, Mr. Miller became the second.
“I certainly felt gratified that he said that, because the statement that I led with was that the N.F.L. had a really bad track record of denial,” Representative Schakowsky said in a telephone interview Tuesday, referring to Mr. Miller’s answer during the round-table discussion.
Mr. Miller, 45, stands behind only Roger Goodell, the commissioner, in terms of league responsibility on the issue. A Wisconsin native and graduate of the University of Pennsylvania and the University of Chicago Law School, he was hired by the N.F.L. in September 2008 as its first full-time Washington lobbyist, working on issues ranging from antitrust matters to labor relations. Before that he had served as a lawyer for the United States Senate Judiciary Committee.
Several years later, the N.F.L. made Mr. Miller its senior vice president for health and safety policy. He successfully lobbied many state legislatures to pass laws that require any youth athlete who sustained a concussion to return to play only after being cleared by a medical professional. He was involved in enacting the league’s “concussion protocol,” which mandates how teams handle injured players and later clear their return to action.
In 2013, amid reports that fewer children were playing organized football because of parents’ worries about brain safety, Mr. Miller told the NFL Network that the league was concerned.
The N.F.L.’s denials of any link between football brain trauma and C.T.E. began before the first case was even identified. In a study published in the journal Neurosurgery, which examined head injuries sustained by players from 1996 through 2001, the league’s committee on concussions said that no player had developed the disease — even though C.T.E. can be diagnosed only by examining brain tissue after death, and no deceased player had ever undergone such a procedure.
After a fourth C.T.E. case was found in June 2007, Mr. Goodell said there was no proof that the player ever sustained a concussion — that he might have developed his disease from swimming.
Mr. Miller’s answer Monday might serve the N.F.L. well, some legal experts said. It could make it harder in the future for a player to accuse the league of concealing the dangers of the sport.
