At a meeting last week, board members demanded to know how the Metropolitan Transportation Authority could have spent $2.4 billion on a project that leaks.
Asked last week whether the leaks were tied to the spray-on concrete, the authority’s chairman, Thomas F. Prendergast, said an investigation by an independent engineer would examine the issue.
“It is essential that we let the world know that conditions like that are unacceptable for a project of that significance and that importance to the City of New York,” Mr. Prendergast told the board last Wednesday.
For now, the leaks continue at the Hudson Yards subway station. Yonkers Contracting will pay $3 million for a different subcontractor to make what the authority hopes will be permanent repairs, the agency said.
At the same time, the authority is facing a lawsuit from a subway rider who said she and her mother fell down an escalator at the station last month after moving to avoid water dripping from above. Meng He, 29, who lives near the station, said the women felt drops hitting their heads as they rode the escalator up to the ticket-booth area. Her mother shifted her body to the side, letting go of the handrail and falling back into her daughter, Ms. He said.
“I tried to push her back up, but there was too much momentum, and we went tumbling down,” she said.
Ms. He says she injured her right foot and ankle and has had to use crutches. Her lawyer, Robert W. Georges, notified the authority that she planned to sue, claiming it should have fixed the hazardous conditions at the station.
At the authority’s board meeting last week, Michael Horodniceanu, the president of capital construction at the agency, said officials had known about the leaks since 2012. Officials thought the leaks were fixed, he said, but they kept reappearing. Despite the problems, Mr. Horodniceanu said the station was safe.
After the authority halted construction at the station in summer 2013, it allowed work to start again in December 2013. The authority said the station would open by summer 2014, though it did not actually open until September 2015.
The authority has been criticized for repeated delays and cost overruns on major projects like the Fulton Center transportation hub, which opened in 2014, and East Side Access, a plan to bring the Long Island Rail Road to Grand Central Terminal.
Nicole Gelinas, a senior fellow at the conservative-leaning Manhattan Institute, said the leak problems had hurt the agency’s credibility.
“This is their big marquee project, and the fact that they can’t have it open and looking good a few months later doesn’t speak well to their ability to do these things,” Ms. Gelinas said.
The contractors that worked on the station continue to blame one another for the leaks. Yonkers Contracting sued Superior Gunite, the subcontractor that installed the shotcrete, and KJC Waterproofing for breach of contract and negligence. The subcontractors have sued Yonkers Contracting for not paying them.
Heather Cuffel, a spokeswoman for Yonkers Contracting, said the company was working with the authority to resolve the problems and declined to comment on the lawsuits.
Frank Townsend, the East Coast area manager for Superior Gunite, said in a statement that shotcrete was an appropriate material for the project and that it was commonly used in underground structures across the country. Mr. Townsend said the leaks were caused by a “failure of the waterproofing membrane,” which the company did not provide or install.
Lawyers for KJC Waterproofing said in a statement that any damage to the waterproofing system happened after it was installed. Workers who later applied the shotcrete or installed rebar at the site could have damaged the system, the lawyers said.
