The short and resonant essays in Carlo Rovelli’s “Seven Brief Lessons on Physics” began as columns in Il Sole 24 Ore, the Italian newspaper. Even better, they appeared in that paper’s culture section, its editors sensing that its arty readers could use a bit of stretching.
Mr. Rovelli is a theoretical physicist, one of the founders of loop quantum gravity theory, and he possesses a welcoming prose style. His columns were a sensation. First gathered into a book in Italy two years ago, they outsold “Fifty Shades of Grey” in that country. The book has gone on to be a best seller in several countries including, this month, the United States.
Of the five words in this book’s title, the second explains its immediate appeal. If one is going to make one’s head hurt — and some of the counterintuitive aspects of quantum mechanics made even Einstein’s head hurt — short doses have their appeal.
The essays in “Seven Brief Lessons on Physics” arrive like shots of espresso, which you can consume the way the Italians do, quickly and while standing up. As slim as a volume of poetry, Mr. Rovelli’s book also has that tantalizing quality that good books of poems have; it artfully hints at meanings beyond its immediate scope.
The seven lessons are about Einstein’s general theory of relativity, quantum mechanics, the architecture of the cosmos, elementary particles, quantum gravity, probability and the heat of black holes and, finally, how humans fit into this picture. We are stardust, the author reminds us, impossibly minor players in the pageant of the galaxies, and well on our way to becoming the agents of our own demise.
Mr. Rovelli, who is director of the quantum gravity group at the Centre de Physique Theorique of Aix-Marseille University in Provence, understands that the way to reach fickle literature majors (his book is for “those who know little or nothing about modern science”) is to appeal to their aesthetic sensibilities.
He is at his best, however, when spanking those same literature majors for their condescension toward higher mathematics. Stories matter; knowledge matters more.
“When we talk about the big bang or the fabric of space,” he writes, “what we are doing is not a continuation of the free and fantastic stories that humans have told nightly around campfires for hundreds of thousands of years.” You might tell a great campfire story about an antelope, he comments. Knowing how to track and kill one is more relevant to survival.
“Myths nourish science, and science nourishes myth,” Mr. Rovelli says. “But the value of knowledge remains. If we can find the antelope, we can eat.” His book politely suggests that anyone who is not interested in modern physics cannot be an entirely serious human being.
Once you have opened this book’s pod bay doors, as Hal is asked to do in “2001: A Space Odyssey,” you confront a world in which, as Mr. Rovelli puts it, “space is granular, time does not exist, and things are nowhere.” This information shouldn’t be estranging, he writes. It should jump-start curiosity.
Curiosities do abound here. While explaining quantum theory and the big bang, for example, Mr. Rovelli prints a drawing of a V-shaped series of bubbles that seems to show the arc of a tennis ball taking a single bounce.
About this drawing, he writes: “Our world may have actually been born from a preceding universe that contracted under its own weight until it was squeezed into a tiny space before ‘bouncing’ out and beginning to re-expand, thus becoming the expanding universe that we observe around us.” In other words, we may be in a rebound relationship with the matter around us.
It’s an oddly cheerful image on the page. The fearful aspects of “Seven Brief Lessons on Physics” arrive in its final chapter. The author is withering about humanity’s unwillingness to confront global warming.
Mr. Rovelli, in this translation from the Italian by Simon Carnell and Erica Segre, imparts a sense that we may have begun to wave farewell, and his book is a roll call of the scientists who have taken us so far, from Einstein and Niels Bohr through Werner Heisenberg and Stephen Hawking.
Like us and everything else in our universe, they emerged from one small, dense hot cloud. These men’s intellects simply burned a bit brighter. The lessons in Mr. Rovelli’s book, as elegiac as they are incisive, do them justice.