In a Soviet-looking courthouse in St. Petersburg, Fla., just a few blocks from the water, the wrestler Hulk Hogan, whose real name is Terry Bollea, is taking on Gawker Media, its founder, Nick Denton, and the former editor of Gawker.com, Albert J. Daulerio. The case, which began on March 7, is a series of implausible and seemingly outlandish arguments, featuring a cast of characters that might have been assembled for a biting satire of celebrity and gossip culture. But buried under courtroom discussions of penis size and sex-tape mechanics are fascinating — and even important — issues of privacy, free speech and the very nature of news in the Internet era.
In 2012, Gawker was sent the video — stills from which had been published elsewhere — by an anonymous source, and it published a brief excerpt with an accompanying piece by Mr. Daulerio, then Gawker’s editor. His post — and the layers of self-awareness mount up here — considered the fascination with celebrity sex tapes.
Mr. Bollea had told Howard Stern that he slept with Ms. Clem with the blessing of her husband. Mr. Clem had also previously said publicly that Mr. Bollea was aware that the encounter was being filmed.
Nevertheless, Mr. Bollea sued Mr. Clem in late 2012, based in part on the idea that he did not know he was being filmed. Mr. Clem later said that Mr. Bollea had not, in fact, known about the camera. Mr. Clem, according to a legal filing by Gawker, extricated himself from the lawsuit by promising to testify, “to not disparage Mr. Bollea, and to not help us,” and paid Mr. Bollea what was described as the substantial sum of $5,000.
In 2012, Gawker was sent the video by an anonymous source, and it published a brief excerpt with an accompanying piece by Mr. Daulerio, then Gawker’s editor.
For purposes of suing over the tape, that left Gawker, its founder Mr. Denton, and Mr. Daulerio. Gawker, which has a stated aim of publishing the kinds of salacious stories that reporters tell among themselves, rather than the sanitized versions Mr. Denton feels are usually presented, is sued quite regularly. But this time the sides failed to reach a settlement, and so the trial — in which Mr. Bollea is seeking $100 million in damages — commenced.
Gawker argues that its decision to publish the excerpt is protected by the First Amendment. Further, it argues that Mr. Bollea often referred to his sexual exploits in public — in his autobiographies, with Mr. Stern, and on television — and so it is difficult for him to claim his privacy was infringed in this area.
Mr. Bollea’s lawyers have said that the video was not newsworthy, that its publication caused him “emotional stress and harm” and that Gawker posted it only for financial gain. Moreover, Mr. Bollea argues that Hulk Hogan, the character, made all those sexual boasts, not Mr. Bollea himself. And that Mr. Hogan, the character, is given to exaggeration and falsehood, which explains any contradictory statements he made about the tape and his knowledge of it. Mr. Hogan, he agrees, does not have much privacy left to violate. But Mr. Bollea does.
The Hulk Hogan sex tape case is one of several high-profile suits in which the line between news and privacy has been blurred.
Mr. Denton started Gawker in his living room more than a decade ago. It now encompasses more than 250 employees, across seven sites, dedicated to sports, feminism and gadgets among other things, most of which have a track record of producing controversial scoops.
It has been majority-owned by Mr. Denton since its founding, and it took outside investment for the first time only recently, to secure funds for this case. In an interview last year, Mr. Denton put the chances of the case precipitating a disaster — that he would need to sell a controlling stake in the company to keep it afloat — at 1 in 10.
In recent months, following another scandal, Mr. Denton had vowed to clean up the site — it is now heavily focused on politics. So a reminder of its more sordid past is certainly not burnishing its reputation. (Nor that of the press at large, according to some arguments.) More broadly, Gawker argues, a ruling in favor of Mr. Bollea could curtail the freedoms afforded the press when pursuing more salubrious causes.
Mr. Bollea’s lawyers argue, on the other hand, that the privacy of many Americans could be damaged by a ruling in favor of Gawker, and that the tape was simply not newsworthy.
The trial has seen a clash of three provocative worlds — of the shock-jock and the former wrestling star, of the Manhattan media, and of the jurors, who presumably live in neither. That has led to a string of surreal moments.
Mr. Bollea, while on the stand, to illustrate the distinction between himself and his fictional character, said that Hulk Hogan was better endowed than he was. Mr. Daulerio got in trouble for being sarcastic during a deposition, when he made a joke about sex tapes involving children, which he later clarified.
“No,” Carmichael replied smoothly. She left it at that.
The trial is nearing its end. The jury is likely to hear closing arguments this week, and must then decide whether to find for Gawker, or for Mr. Bollea. If it finds for Mr. Bollea, it must also set the scale of the damages.
In that case, Gawker may have to pay a bond while it appeals, though that payment is itself subject to appeal.