When a photo of a wall covered in lush green foliage showed up on Grace Clarke’s Instagram feed, she felt an immediate urge to track it down. Stressed out and headed to a meeting at Madewell, where she works as a social media copy editor, Ms. Clarke saw that the wall’s location was on East Eighth Street in Manhattan at a meditation studio called MNDFL, which opened in November.
The next morning, Ms. Clarke, 29, went to the studio and spent 30 minutes in a meditation class led by Lodro Rinzler, one of MNDFL’s founders.
With increasing attention being paid to the physical and emotional benefits of meditation — lowered levels of stress and anxiety, an improved immune system, better sleep and a drop in blood pressure, to name a few — practice is finding new adherents in New York City. As meditation studios like MNDFL and Unplug are opening, classes and events are also being held in public parks, art museums, hotels and branches of the New York Public Library.
Meditation has been around for more than 2,500 years, but it has taken a secular approach and scientific research — not to mention added publicity from technology companies like Google and Apple, which encourage employees to meditate — to reintroduce it into popular culture. But can meditation, and its cousin, “mindfulness,” become staples of urban life the way that yoga, a rarity until the early 1990s, has become a widespread activity?
The cozy, contemporary lounge area at MNDFL fills up before and after each class with people hanging out and sipping tea. Ethan Herschenfeld, a 47-year-old actor and opera singer, took his first meditation class in December and has since gone to classes almost daily, experimenting with MNDFL’s varied offerings (Breath, Mantra and Heart, for example), which are each based on a different tradition. “Meditation brings me serenity and helps me deal with the things that are out of my control,” he said.
MNDFL has grown quickly since it opened, Mr. Rinzler said. “People sign up to give it a chance for a month and can then practice on their own, but they come back because it’s the community that supports the endeavor,” he said. The fee for the first month at MNDFL is $50 for unlimited classes, and after that jumps to $200 a month. Individual classes are priced at $15 for 30 minutes and $25 for 45 minutes. Normal classes seat 22, but when an event features relatively well-known teachers like Sharon Salzberg or Elena Brower, they’ll squeeze in a few extra cushions so 40 people can attend.
The Path offers its customers a chance to meditate but without a home base. The business has formed partnerships with places like ABC Home and the Standard hotel in the East Village, which host sessions. The weekly “sits” — 30 minutes long with meditation and tea — at the Standard cost $24 and are free to hotel guests; a monthly membership of $85 includes admission to the weekly sits and some meditation-related social events.
For people who want to deepen their experience, there are places that teach traditional vedic meditation, where practitioners are given a specific mantra to use wherever they are in a session. At both Ziva Meditation and Ben Turshen Meditation, you can take a free introductory class, and then sign up for the eight-hour course, given over four days, which costs $400 to $1,200.
Dr. Patricia A. Bloom, an associate professor of geriatrics at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, leads a weekly drop-in meditation session at the Asia Society on the Upper East Side, where the crowds have been growing. During the 30-minute session, which are open to the public and free of charge, Dr. Bloom exposes people to a different practice each week: sitting meditation, concentration practice using mindfulness techniques and walking meditation, using the aisles of the auditorium.
At a recent session, Dr. Bloom saw the room fill with people from the area: a young couple who had just moved from Australia, a crew in their 20s and an older woman in a wheelchair. “Right away people appreciate the benefits and say, ‘Oh yeah, that felt really good,’” she said.
Some doctors have recommended meditation for patients who have illnesses like heart disease and high blood pressure, or are just plain worn out. “For these stressed-out finance dudes, they are not stumbling across meditation because they want something more spiritual, they are coming because of the health benefits,” Mr. Rinzler, a MNDFL founder, said.
Nili Suhami, 46, brought meditation to Governors Island Park last summer, opening it to anyone. A former technology product development manager who moved to New York from Israel 16 years ago and now teaches meditation, Ms. Suhami loved the idea of bringing meditation to the public; no need to venture to a retreat if you can find it in a public park. After applying for use of a building in Nolan Park, she created Meditation Summer. For six summer weekends, people could attend a guided meditation session, attend an educational presentation, and peruse an exhibit on meditation and the brain, at no cost. She is in the process of planning this year’s program.
