On a visit last month to the Cort Theater, Edie Brickell and Steve Martin were looking over the production design of their new musical, “Bright Star,” before its opening here on Thursday, March 24. Some of what they saw pleased them, like a model locomotive running on tracks high above the audience, and a cabin that rotates onstage, containing the show’s house bluegrass band.
A technician explained to them that workers at the Cort had been inspecting its architecture ahead of renovations to take place as soon as “Bright Star” closes.
As “Bright Star” prepares for its Broadway opening, after a three-year development process, there are many reasons for its creators to feel optimistic, and plenty for them to be biting their nails.
Its fictional narrative is original and multilayered, about an aspiring writer returning home to North Carolina after fighting in World War II; the esteemed magazine editor he hopes to impress; and the emotional trauma she suffered in her youth.
That “Bright Star” is not based on any previous book, movie or theme-park ride would already make it a rarity in a Broadway season jam-packed with revivals and adaptations, including one dominant hip-hop musical about the life of a Founding Father.
Add an overall sensibility that its creators acknowledge is earnest, unironic and absent of cynicism, and it becomes even harder for them to gauge whether “Bright Star” is going to burn brilliantly or fade away.
“That wall,” Ms. Brickell said with a laugh.
Their creative process was helped along when Ms. Brickell was introduced to the story of the Iron Mountain Baby, a real-life incident in 1902, in which an infant was discovered in a valise near a Missouri railroad after having probably been thrown from a passing train.
Mr. Martin, whose plays include “Picasso at the Lapin Agile,” said that from that incident (a scene inspired by it takes place in “Bright Star”), the musical’s book began to suggest itself.
Walter Bobbie, the director of “Bright Star,” said that when he was first offered the musical a few years ago, it consisted of a complete book and score but needed much work.
While Mr. Martin and Ms. Brickell were ready to make the necessary revisions, Mr. Bobbie wanted them to be prepared for a long haul.
It took just about that long for “Bright Star” to make its way to Broadway, beginning with a 2013 workshop production at the Vassar & New York Stage and Film Powerhouse Theater in Poughkeepsie, N.Y., and a staged reading in New York. It was presented at the Old Globe in San Diego in 2014, and the following year at the Kennedy Center in Washington.
Throughout this period, the musical underwent constant adjustment: Whole characters were jettisoned, new songs were written, and the story line was reworked to absorb these changes.
Carmen Cusack, who plays the magazine editor, said that a deluge of new material began to come her way starting in San Diego, meant to bring out the contrasts of a woman who is depicted as both a headstrong teen in the 1920s and a wounded, more tightly wound adult in the 1940s.
On one recent Tuesday, we spent an hour each with a dozen upcoming Broadway shows as they worked under looming deadlines. From the costume shop to the first curtain call, here's how the steps and stories, the stitches and salesmanship come together.
“I showed her a picture of our first-act curtain,” Mr. Bobbie recalled, “and I said, ‘You have to show me how we get to there.’” Within a day, he said, Ms. Brickell had written a new song, “If You Knew My Story,” that now opens the show.
For all of his previous stage experience, Mr. Martin said the continual revision that “Bright Star” required was both totally expected and something he was still getting used to.
Still, there is no telling if the names of Mr. Martin and Ms. Brickell, who do not appear in “Bright Star,” will be enough to sell the show to early audiences, or if the current cultural mood will align with a musical that aspires to the emotional sincerity of “The Sound of Music” or “Carousel” and proudly wears its feelings on its sleeve.
While trying to remain positive about their prospects, the creators say their partnership has been strengthened by the “Bright Star” experience, and even commercial failure would not cause them to avoid each other in public.
Mr. Martin said, more sardonically, that if nothing else, they had accumulated more trunk songs for a potential future album.
