The Battle of Versailles, the 1973 showdown between five French design houses (Yves Saint Laurent, Hubert de Givenchy, Emanuel Ungaro, Pierre Cardin and Christian Dior) and their American counterparts (Halston, Oscar de la Renta, Bill Blass, Stephen Burrows and Anne Klein), which is credited with putting American fashion on the international map, has long been a topic of fascination for the style world.
A 2015 book, “The Battle of Versailles,” by the Washington Post fashion critic Robin Givhan, and a 2012 documentary, “Versailles 73,” tried to crystallize its significance.
The latest entrant is a documentary called (surprise!) “Battle at Versailles.” Produced by M2M, the new fashion TV channel from WME/IMG, the film had its premiere amid much drumbeating (and at least a few snickers, since most of the fashion world was not in New York at the time, but rather at Paris Fashion Week) before an audience of about 500 at the Paris Theater in New York on Thursday night. It will be available on Apple TV, Roku, Amazon Fire TV and other platforms Sunday.
But while gorgeous to look at, the documentary is not exactly an original trip down memory’s runway. Most of the dozen main interview participants, including the former models China Machado, Bethann Hardison and Pat Cleveland, were also in the 2012 documentary.
Imagine if the art department of a glossy magazine were hired to redesign your child’s history textbook, and you’ll get the picture.
Handling narration duties is Stanley Tucci (not coincidentally, a WME voice-over client; how is that for synergy?), who tells the story of how Eleanor Lambert, the fashion world doyenne, organized the battle not just to raise money for the restoration of the dilapidated palace, but also to bring international renown to a group of designers who previously had little exposure outside of New York.
Aside from the models, those recounting the Americans’ triumphing over their more experienced European rivals include the publicist James LaForce and the former Fédération Française de la Couture chairman Didier Grumbach. Donna Karan, Anne Klein’s assistant at the time of the battle, was such a last-minute addition to the film that the team interviewed her last Tuesday morning, and finished editing Thursday afternoon — at which point she flew to Paris to attend the Rick Owens show.
The documentary also features old footage of Liza Minnelli, fresh off her 1973 Oscar win for “Cabaret,” who joined the American caravan with her friend Halston and performed for the crowd. Halston had a tantrum during rehearsals, reminiscent of Kanye West at “Saturday Night Live,” and walked out of the proceedings.
Unfortunately, the documentary is so focused on ticking off boxes (interviews with every major model, snapshot bios of Ms. Lambert and each of the designers) that it never settles on any of its characters long enough to give their stories emotional heft.
It may have made sense to focus on Mr. Burrows, the last living designer among the Americans and a man whose ups and downs in the industry raise myriad questions about the nature of creativity and what it is like to be black in a largely white business.
At the after-party, held at the Plaza Hotel Rose Club, Fern Mallis, the former executive director of the Council of Fashion Designers of America, argued that even without fleshing out Mr. Burrows’s narrative, there was still resonance to a story in which a group of models, many of them African-American, helped lead Mr. Burrows and the Americans to victory.
Certainly, it is timely, given that designers on both sides of the Atlantic were pilloried for excluding black models from their shows just a few seasons ago. But Mr. Burrows, standing nearby in a billowing coat and dark glasses, was more measured in his response.
