The Upshot|How Much More Can the Labor Force Grow?
How Much More Can the Labor Force Grow?
WASHINGTON — The immediate headlines out of the latest jobs numbers — that growth was solid and the unemployment rate unchanged in February — would seem to be not terribly exciting. But there’s some great news beneath the surface: Americans are returning to the work force in the largest numbers in many years.
The American work force, according to the Labor Department’s survey of households, rose by a whopping 555,000 people in February. Over the last three months, that number totals 1.52 million, the highest it has been in 16 years. In other words, this winter a lot more people have been either working or actively looking for work.
That’s good. The proportion of Americans in the labor force plummeted during the 2008 recession and its aftermath. That was partly because of demographic forces, like baby boomers retiring.
It was also caused by millions of Americans who saw little opportunity and became disengaged from the workplace, their incomes suffering, their skills atrophying and the nation’s economic potential diminishing in the process.
But there is evidence that in the last few months that trend has started to reverse. The proportion of the adult population in the labor force and the proportion of the population with a job are both up half a percentage point since September. For the first time in years it’s fair to say that these changes are decisively pointed in the right direction.
Just last summer, as the United States expansion entered its seventh year with booming job growth, there was reason to doubt that an improving job market would ever start to pull people in who had become detached from the labor force. After all, if seven years of job growth wasn’t enough to make more people enter the work force, what would be?
We still don’t know for sure how much more room there is to grow. Presumably most people who dropped out of the labor force around retirement age are out of the work force for good, no matter how many job opportunities present themselves. But the data in 2016 will help us find out how much room for expansion there really is in labor force participation.
There is some interplay between the growth in the number of workers and the most disappointing signal in the February jobs numbers, which was a step down in average hourly earnings. Over the last year, this number has risen 2.2 percent, which amounts to a modest rise in pay for American workers thanks to very low inflation. But it hardly suggests the kind of booming economy indicated by the low unemployment rate.
What seems to be happening is the pool of “shadow workers,” who have been employable but were not looking for work, has kept a lid on wage increases. We’ve been able to keep up strong job growth without strong wage gains because there are still a lot of people who are not working and not formally looking for a job, but who are available to take one when the opportunity arises.
As 2016 unfolds, which of these forces will prove more powerful? If the labor force keeps growing at the gangbusters pace of the last three months, all those new entrants will keep the downward pressure on wages. On the other hand, it might take higher wages to keep pulling people out of their homes and into the workplace.
But here’s the wild card. All this assumes the strong rate of job creation — 242,000 positions added in February, plus positive revisions to previous months — doesn’t get undone by an era of Federal Reserve interest rate increases and volatile global markets.
For the first couple of months of the year, the big story in the job market has been rising participation. The question for the months ahead is how long that can persist absent stronger wage growth — and whether the momentum driving job growth is strong enough to persist despite ever-present risks.
The evidence from the February numbers points in both directions for the Fed, as it decides how quickly to raise interest rates. The solid rate of job creation will give the central bank confidence that the recovery is proceeding reasonably robustly and that higher interest rates make sense.
On the other hand, the combination of the sharply rising size of the labor force and flat wage growth support the idea that there is plenty more slack in the job market and that inflation isn’t an imminent risk. That suggests the Fed could wait longer before raising rates again to see whether potential workers are becoming so scarce that wages start rising sharply, creating pressure on inflation.
That’s why the rising labor force isn’t just good for the millions of people who have an income that they wouldn’t otherwise, but also because their existence can allow the Fed to be more patient about waiting for wages to pick up.
For now, the thing to do is celebrate the 1.5 million Americans who are in the labor force who weren’t in November — and to look for evidence of how many more people like them are out there, ready to work, as they increasingly have the opportunity.