BEIJING — Protests by angry workers at a vast failing state coal mine in the rust belt of northeastern China have forced a senior official to admit that he understated their problems, and signaled how President Xi Jinping’s plans to shake up slumping state-owned industries could run into resistance.
The demonstrators had denounced the official, Lu Hao, the governor of Heilongjiang Province, after he said miners working down shafts there had been paid on time even as the government was trying to cut costs and jobs at the mine.
“We must live, we must eat,” said some banners displayed by protesters, according to images on a website that monitors social unrest across China. “Lu Hao tells lies while his eyes are wide open,” said another.
Mr. Lu made the rare public reversal Saturday in Beijing, where officials have gathered for the annual meeting of the legislature, the National People’s Congress. Their discussion this year has focused on cutbacks at mines and sectors of heavy industry that are producing more than China’s slowing economy can consume.
The state-owned Longmay Mining Group, which Mr. Lu had held up days before as an example of progress in restructuring, now looks more like an example of how the effort could go awry. A thousand or more miners and their supporters at a subsidiary in Shuangyashan City, Heilongjiang, took to the streets last week, according to images and reports online, as well as messages from residents.
In comments that appeared late on Saturday, Mr. Lu acknowledged that Longmay workers’ wages were overdue and obliquely blamed subordinates for his earlier misleading statement, according to a report on a Heilongjiang government website.
In his public comments, Mr. Lu did not mention the protests, and the Chinese state-run news media has not reported on them.
Such protests could multiply, especially in China’s hard-hit northeastern industrial regions, unless the central government assigns more money to ensure that laid-off workers receive unpaid wages and social welfare and pension contributions, said Geoffrey Crothall, a spokesman for the China Labor Bulletin in Hong Kong.
During the boom times for China’s coal industry, big state-owned mines across northeastern China took on hundreds of thousands of employees whose wages were sustained by rising coal prices. But demand has slumped as the Chinese economy has slowed and relied less on industrial growth.
Coal consumption for energy fell 3.7 percent in 2015 compared with the previous year, when it had also fallen. Mining conglomerates are struggling with an oversupply of workers and production capacity. Longmay, the biggest coal miner in northeastern China, sa id in September that it planned to lay off 100,000 workers.
Yet Mr. Lu had told reporters that the Longmay Group showed that the difficult changes could be accomplished without ignoring workers’ needs.
“Longmay has 80,000 workers down mines, and today, not one has not been paid monthly wages and their income hasn’t fallen a penny,” Mr. Lu said at the National People’s Congress a week ago, according to The Paper, a Chinese news service.
Last week, angry workers and their supporters gathered in front of government and company offices in Shuangyashan, demanding that Mr. Lu and other officials accept their complaints that wages had often gone unpaid for months.
Some online accounts said many thousands of people, even 10,000, had taken part. But pictures from the protests suggested numbers lower than that.
