Here’s our analysis of the 11th Republican debate.
DETROIT — In the first Fox News debate, he seethed at her. Before the second debate began, he walked.
But on Thursday night, Donald J. Trump and Megyn Kelly will be back on stage together for the 11th Republican presidential debate, and Fox’s third of the primary season.
As the front-runner for the nomination and coming off a string of Super Tuesday wins, Mr. Trump will be at center stage, fending off attacks from his remaining rivals and questions from what could be fairly described as his least favorite moderating team.
This week the three of them talked about their preparations and how they see their roles.
Fox News shattered cable news records with 24 million viewers for its first debate, in August. Mr. Trump was angered that night by Ms. Kelly’s questioning of his treatment of women, including insulting remarks he has made in the past. After the debate, he seemed to suggest that she had been menstruating. He skipped the second Fox News debate after the network refused to remove Ms. Kelly from the panel.
“He for some reason didn’t think that question was fair, and then, I think, spent many weeks proving to the world it was fair,” Ms. Kelly said.
Recent debates have drifted away from policy into schoolyard taunts, creating “an embarrassment for the Republican Party,” Mr. Wallace said.
Before Mr. Trump made it official that he was skipping the second Fox News debate, the moderators had “two different blueprints” for the debate, as Mr. Baier put it, one with Mr. Trump and one without.
In preparing for their debates, the moderators divide up the questioning by issues, or “buckets,” and each host has to be conversant in his or her topics in order to fact-check and question candidates’ assertions immediately.
Before the debate, they aggressively pick apart each proposed question, pointing out potential “dismounts,” as Mr. Baier calls them, or ways a candidate could evade the question, and highlighting weaknesses by thinking with the same blunt, pointed and assertive nature as a candidate.
