Inside Silka Rittson-Thomas’s flora-filled Notting Hill house, unique botanical studio and vibrant project space.
The cerebral world of contemporary art may not seem like the most fertile ground in which to start a flower business, but that’s just what the private advisor and curator Silka Rittson-Thomas decided to do last year. The German native — who served as a director for the Blum & Poe gallery in Los Angeles, helped establish Phillips’s contemporary department in England and later ran her own London space — felt the volatility and skyrocketing prices of the art market had become, as she puts it, ‘‘completely mad.’’ And so, she started spending most of her time outside of the city at the Cotswolds farmhouse (once owned by the Duke of Marlborough) that she shares with her husband, the English photographer and art patron Hugo Rittson-Thomas. She decided to plant a cutting garden on the grounds of the estate and began selling her bounty at the local train station in ­Charlbury from a Thai-style tuk-tuk that had been lying idle in the barn. Soon after, a tiny storefront in London’s Mayfair opened up that caught the thirtysomething’s eye — and inspired her to create a space devoted to the relationship between art and nature.
Last spring, the aptly named TukTuk Flower Studio opened its doors and, during Frieze London in ­October, showed its first exhibition from the Mexican artist Milena Muzquiz, who created naïve sculptural vases in which Rittson-Thomas arranged roses and wild ­grasses from her garden. Since then, the studio has served as both a traditional flower shop and gallery space for contemporary ceramicists handpicked by Rittson-Thomas (next up is the Swiss artist Fabian Marti). In addition to the oversize, Alice in Wonderlandesque paper blooms Rittson-Thomas makes for the shop, the studio’s offerings have expanded from what her garden can provide seasonally — fruit blossoms in the winter, cow parsley, hyacinths and hellebore in the spring, dahlias and cosmos in the fall and tangles of sweet peas in the summer — to the flowers she finds at the Covent Garden flower market and from select purveyors including the English rose specialist Tempest, who provides stock to a very small circle of clients including 5 Hertford Street, a London social club known for its spectacular arrangements.
Rittson-Thomas’s fascination with botanicals has seeped into other aspects of her life, too. The décor of the couple’s Notting Hill house is a quirky departure from the spare, gallery-like homes typical of so many of London’s art dealers. Throughout the space, dark wooden folk furniture from Romania and Scandinavia carved with primitive flowers set off contemporary art pieces from the likes of Josh Smith and Rob Pruitt. ‘‘I just love this kind of traditional mountain furniture, it’s so cozy and warm,’’ said Rittson-Thomas. ‘‘It’s quite a weird pairing with stark modern art but I think they somehow fit beautifully together.’’ In the kitchen, traditional leaf-printed window treatments from Décors Barbares complement a liquid-silver Ron Arad breakfast table and, in the dining room, a lush abstract Mark Grotjahn painting echoes the abundance of greenery that can be found on a long Guyton/Walker table nearby. The ­paint-swirled surface acts as an elegant potting bench for a constantly changing roster of flower arrangements Rittson-Thomas creates in her collection of antique Delftware tulip and ­celery vases.
Around the corner from the couple’s residence is a derelict postwar townhouse they’ve been using as a venue for temporary art installations — another example of their expanding and interconnected ecosystem. The couple runs the initiative, entitled Rise Projects, together, inviting artists to transform the space however they like for roughly a year. The residency is offered in exchange for work from the artist, which they add to the Silvie Fleming Collection, named after Hugo’s mother (her cousin was James Bond creator Ian Fleming). Currently inhabiting the Rise Projects space is a joint work by the buzzy Swiss artist Nicolas Party and the British ceramicist Jesse Wine wherein the house’s interior is covered in vibrantly colored Matisse-like murals of jellyfish, snails and — yes — giant ferns and flowers. ‘‘We only planned for this to be up for a short time,’’ said Rittson-Thomas. ‘‘But I love it so much I can’t bear to take it down.’’ Instead, she’s planning on teaching paper flower-making classes for children in the neighborhood amid the installation’s wild beauty.