Sophie Grégoire Trudeau and Michelle Obama before the state dinner at the White House on Thursday.
Ryan Reynolds and Blake Lively.
Michael J. Fox and his wife, Tracy Pollan.
Grant Hill, a former basketball player and member of the President’s Council on Fitness, Sports & Nutrition, and his wife, Tamia.
The actress Sandra Oh and Lev Rukhin.
The singer Sara Bareilles (in red skirt), who performed at the dinner, with Jennifer Bareilles.
Representative Nancy Pelosi, Democrat of California, with her husband, Paul Pelosi.
Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine, with Peter Vigue.
The comedian Mike Myers and his wife, Kelly.
Audie Cornish-Emery of National Public Radio with Theodore Emery.
Gary Bettman, the National Hockey League commissioner.
The “Saturday Night Live” creator Lorne Michaels with his wife, Alice.
Senator Patrick Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, with his wife, Marcelle.
Senator Jon Tester, Democrat of Montana, and his wife, Sharla.
The U.S. ambassador to Canada, Bruce Heyman, and his wife, Vicki.
The National Basketball Association commissioner, Adam Silver, and Maggie Grise.
Margaret Trudeau, center, former wife of the late Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau of Canada. She is the mother of Prime Minister Justin Trudeau.
After New York, London, Milan and Paris … Toronto? Long overlooked by the fashion folk, Canadian designers were front and center at the state dinner in the White House on Thursday night, as modeled by both Sophie Grégoire Trudeau, wife of Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada, and Michelle Obama.
Mrs. Grégoire Trudeau wore a royal purple gown with a train and orange detailing on the bodice by the Romanian-Canadian designer Lucian Matis, a regular at Toronto Fashion Week (yes, there is one, and it takes place next week and in the fall). Mrs. Obama wore a strapless navy blue floral jacquard by the Taiwanese-Canadian Jason Wu, a designer who shows during New York Fashion Week and also made both her inaugural gowns. The dress was notably more relaxed than the formal ballgownlike styles by Carolina Herrera and Vera Wang that Mrs. Obama wore to the state dinners for France and China, perhaps reflecting the relative youth and relaxed attitude of the Trudeaus.
Still, it was consistent with Mrs. Obama’s signature approach to state dinner dressing, given that she has made something of a specialty out of wearing relevant cross-border design names to these events, including the Japanese-American Tadashi Shoji to the Japan state dinner in April 2015, the Chinese-American Ms. Wang to the China state dinner in September 2015, and the Indian-American Naeem Khan to the India state dinner in 2009.
And it was indicative of another current fashion reality, which is that many Canadian designers feel it is necessary to leave Canada to achieve international recognition. Earlier on Thursday, Mrs. Obama wore a dress by Tanya Taylor, a young Canadian designer who now works in New York, for the arrival ceremony on the South Lawn; other famous Canadian design names not currently associated with Canada, at least in the public mind, include Erdem Moralioglu, who grew up in Montreal but now shows as part of London Fashion Week (and is based in London), and Thomas Tait, who grew up outside Montreal, but is now also based in London, and recently held a presentation in Paris.
If Mrs. Grégoire Trudeau has anything to do with it, however, that may all be about to change. Her stylist, Jessica Mulroney (the daughter-in-law of a former Canadian prime minister, Brian Mulroney), has said that Mrs. Grégoire Trudeau is committed to using her new position, and profile — The New York Post called her the “hottest first lady in the world,” and she already has the requisite blog dedicated to her style, Sophie Grégoire Fashions — to increase the profile of Canadian designers on the global stage.
To that end, her local industry boosterism did not stop at the state dinner. Mrs. Grégoire Trudeau also wore a white trouser suit by the Vietnamese-Canadian Duy Nguyen when she stepped off the plane with her family at Andrews Air Force Base; a floral jacket by Ellie Mae Studios for the Canada 2020 reception; a red and pink floral sheath by Mr. Matis (again) for the “Let Girls Learn” event with Mrs. Obama; and, along with her gown, Zvelle shoes designed by Elle AyoubZadeh, an Iranian-Canadian, and an Ela bag by Ela Kowalewska to the state dinner.
Needless to say, the designers are pretty excited. “Sophie Trudeau wearing Lucian Matis twice in one day!” Mr. Matis posted on Facebook (well, he posted a lot, but this sums it up).
“Honoured to be a small part of this historic occasion,” Zvelle wrote on its Instagram feed.
Pointedly, many of the clothes Mrs. Grégoire Trudeau selected emphasize Canada’s growing profile as a melting pot of nationalities, ideas and aesthetics, which could be a coincidence, but is probably not. When it comes to fashion and politics, clothes are never just clothes. They are a strategic tool.