WEST HOLLYWOOD, Calif. — Serious, successful businesswomen banding together as “girlie girls” to help end gender inequality in the workplace?
The notion makes some professional women recoil. But Shelley Zalis, the former chief executive of a Hollywood research firm, who is leading an effort to advance corporate women, says pour on the pink.
Ms. Zalis, 53, is the loquacious, iron-willed founder of the Girls’ Lounge, which started four years ago as a hastily arranged gathering spot for women at the International Consumer Electronics Show. This year, Ms. Zalis will take the Girls’ Lounge to 10 major business events. She was at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland in January; on Friday, the Girls’ Lounge will arrive at the South by Southwest music, film and technology festival.
In the most basic sense, the Girls’ Lounge is a free space — a hotel penthouse, for instance — where businesswomen can relax and mingle between meetings and seminars. There is fruit to snack on. Hair, nail and makeup experts offer mini-makeovers. Ms. Zalis, assisted by four full-time staff members, sometimes brings in a “confidence coach” to give pep talks. Pink flowers, throw pillows and plush sofas add to the slumber-party feel.
Girls’ Lounge attendees — roughly 5,000 by now, Ms. Zalis estimates — are also encouraged to network and explore business deals, both with one another and with any men who find themselves in their midst. Gail Tifford, for instance, was unable to find a spot at a 2014 convention to discuss business with Stephen Quinn, who was then Walmart’s chief marketing officer, so she asked him to meet her in the Girls’ Lounge.
Ms. Zalis, who is married to a surgeon and has three grown children, is a qualitative media researcher by trade. (Her sister Rachel Zalis reports on style for “Access Hollywood” and other shows.) In 2000, after an early career spent at Nielsen, she founded a research company called Online Testing Exchange to assess consumer interest in planned movie trailers and related 30-second television spots. Before long, every major studio was a client and her findings were influencing the allocation of billions of dollars in movie marketing money.
She sold OTX to a French company in 2010 for roughly $80 million. Since then, by her estimate, she has spent $1 million of her own money on the Girls’ Lounge and related efforts, and raised another $3 million from sponsors.
As the Girls’ Lounge has grown, landing partners that include Visa and Google (and, at some events, The New York Times), so have Ms. Zalis’s ambitions. Early on, she said, she was simply interested in “the power of the pack”: making women feel like less of a minority at heavily male business events. (Men outnumber women at Davos by more than five to one.) But then she noticed that Girls’ Lounge attendees were having meaningful conversations about sexism at work and how to combat it.
“Pairing and sharing,” said Ms. Zalis, who has a fondness for catchphrases.
Now the Girls’ Lounge offers more formal talks. Recent participants have included Rosie Rios, the treasurer of the United States, who is working to put a woman on the $10 bill; Adam Bain, the chief operating officer of Twitter, which has its own issues with diversity; and the ever-present Arianna Huffington. Ms. Zalis has started to include more men, in part because she believes that the sexes must work together to solve gender inequality in the workplace — “fe-‘MEN’-ism,” as she spells it.
The Girls’ Lounge definitely has its detractors. While reluctant to publicly criticize another woman, especially one working toward an admirable goal, a half-dozen women I approached — senior media executives, a retired state judge, lawyers — told me that they thought Ms. Zalis was hurting professional women by using the “G word.” “A girl is a juvenile, someone who isn’t ready, and I’ve fought my entire career to avoid being perceived as that,” one Warner Bros. executive said.
Ms. Zalis, who sometimes describes herself as “chief troublemaker,” knows that she offends some people by using the world “girls” to describe grown women, especially businesswomen. And she doesn’t care.
Ms. Rothbard also supported the salon atmosphere. “Without some kind of psychological safety, it is often very difficult to have these conversations,” she said.
Ms. Zalis is certainly talkative. During our nearly two-hour coffee (and subsequent phone chats), she barely let me get a word in, veering from serious to informal and back to serious. One minute she was listing plans for the future — Girls’ Lounge “boot camps” for companies, a bus tour with Ms. Huffington, a partnership with Barneys New York — and the next she was recounting a “signature Shelley moment” involving an airborne bra.
