FOR decades, Iran’s politics have centered on a contest of visions that pitted democratic reformists against hard-line theocrats. Under President Hassan Rouhani, that binary has begun to give way. Last week’s elections showcased a coordinated movement toward the center of Iran’s political spectrum.
This reflects not only the ascendancy of Mr. Rouhani’s centrist faction, whose priorities are not civic empowerment or human rights so much as diplomatic and economic re-engagement with the world. It also reflects a transformation within the reformist camp. Today’s reformists are the left wing of a muted coalition. They navigate a world of lowered expectations and play by rules that demand ingenuity and patience.
Reform, in earlier times, was a visionary movement for democratic development. Together with his brain trust of luminaries and strategists, the reformist president Mohammad Khatami held the country’s first direct elections for local government in 1999, and made the security establishment accountable for some of its most flagrant human rights abuses. His movement was embattled from the start, then stymied. Later it was criminalized as a seditious conspiracy. But Mr. Khatami remained perhaps the most enduringly popular figure in Iranian politics.
By the time of last week’s election, Iranian news media was forbidden to publish Mr. Khatami’s image or to quote his words. Still, he managed to circulate a video on social media. Reformists and pragmatic centrists had endorsed lists of candidates for Parliament and the Assembly of Experts, the clerical body that will most likely select Iran’s next supreme leader. In his video, Mr. Khatami conveyed a simple message: Anyone who cared about reform should vote for every name on both lists. “I repeat,” he said, “every name on both lists.” Voters took the message seriously. The reformist-centrist lists achieved a stunning victory.
In today’s centrist climate, Mr. Khatami made no promises and offered no vision. What he advocated was a strategy: Every name on both lists, he had to repeat, because the lists included some unsavory characters, like the former intelligence minister Mohammad Reyshahri, popularly known as “the scary ayatollah” and associated with political executions in the 1980s. But voting for everyone on both lists, reformist and centrist political operatives had determined, was the best and probably the only way to defeat the hardest of the hard-liners who obstructed Mr. Rouhani’s agenda.
The defeat of these hard-liners, some of them closely associated with the supreme leader, was a rebuke to those who stood in the way of the nuclear deal, tarred the allies of the popular president as foreign stooges and promised to block foreign investment in the newly opening economy. For the first time in at least eight years, the Parliament will be substantially new, with neither a clear majority nor fixed partisan lines.
This election was not a victory for reform. Reform was not on the ballot, though some reformists were. Even if every one of them prevailed, they could not produce visionary change as a minority in Parliament. But by ticking off “every name on the list,” pro-reform voters effectively opened a bottleneck. Like the election that brought Mr. Rouhani to the presidency in 2013, this vote was a victory for pragmatism — as a political faction, but more significantly as a frame of mind.
Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, a pugnacious hard-liner, succeeded Mr. Khatami as president. The contrast between them appears to illustrate the extremities possible under Iran’s Islamic Republic, even though Mr. Khatami’s reformists were nobody’s extremists. They advocated an incremental process of internal change — evolution, not revolution, they liked to say, toward greater pluralism in thought, politics and even religion.
But their vision challenged the hard-liners’ strongly held beliefs about the fundamental nature of the Islamic state. For this reason, among others, the reformist project ran up against the security establishment. Under Mr. Ahmadinejad, particularly in his second term, Iran was governed with a heavy, forceful hand by a faction more in harmony with the security services and in open conflict with civil society. Both presidencies were defined by a zero-sum contest for political survival.
Iran’s pragmatic centrists offer a way around that deadlock. They seek to harness the popularity of the reformists to the institutional power of the conservatives, and to define a national interest on which the most temperate elements of both camps can agree. This approach holds out hope for a more constructive and inclusive politics, and for real improvement in Iran’s material circumstances and its standing among nations. But it also comes with dangers: that the center will be defined increasingly rightward, as it has been throughout the life of the Islamic Republic, and that important but controversial reformist priorities — human rights, representative politics and the rule of law — will languish beyond the pale of political expediency. The reformists risk sacrificing their identity in this coalition; outside of it, they sacrifice their relevance.
Iran’s revolution is a work in progress. Its protagonists and its factional alliances are protean. Yesterday’s hard-liners are today’s pragmatists. Today’s reformists were something else yesterday. The way Iranians vote — whether they see voting as an expression of support for the system, a demand for sweeping revision, a meaningful exercise of political choice or a strategic tool — is in constant flux. The demand for inclusion is raucous, relentless, life giving. The centrists must not take it for granted, for they owe it all their strength.