As a Polish immigrant in New Jersey, struggling to make a decent living, care for her son and find a suitable man — modest goals that seem to be receding into the distance — the New York stage veteran Marin Ireland gives a performance of beautiful complexity in “Ironbound.” This quietly gripping play, by Martyna Majok, opened on Wednesday at the Rattlestick Playwrights Theater in a co-production with Women’s Project Theater.
We first meet Darja (Ms. Ireland) sitting at a lonely bus stop beneath a freeway in 2014. The play spans more than 20 years, moving back and forth in time, but the bus stop, where all the scenes are set, remains in place, looking as bleak as a bus stop can (which is pretty bleak). It’s a winter night, and her boyfriend, Tommy (Morgan Spector), a letter carrier, is cajoling her to get into his car rather than wait for a bus that will still require her to walk through the dark streets of Newark to their apartment.
Darja swats away his pleas with chilly contempt. She knows that Tommy has been having an affair with another woman — a woman for whom she cleans house. Darja demands to know how many times they slept together, although it turns out she has already done her homework by guessing his cellphone password. “Fourteen times it’s not mistake,” she says.
“Fourteen times it’s career,” she adds with sour humor.
Tommy, played with live-wire magnetism by Mr. Spector, offers the usual excuses. He was lonely at nights when she worked late; he really loves her, et cetera. But Darja, who at 42 has already been married twice, has grown hardened. 
The next scene takes place exactly 22 years before, and Darja is sharing the bus stop with her husband, Maks (the wonderfully tender Josiah Bania), another Polish immigrant. They flirt and kiss but have their own sources of tension. He hopes to move to Chicago to pursue his dream of becoming a blues musician. The pragmatic Darja, who at this point works two jobs — at a factory near the bus stop and cleaning one house — has already grown disillusioned about the promise of America. Another thing: She’s pregnant.
Ms. Majok’s perceptive drama, with its bone-dry humor and vivid characters, illustrates how vulnerable people like Darja are, hostages to the vagaries of chance, unless they can manage to climb out of poverty. At times, Ms. Ireland positively vibrates with the force of will that keeps Darja moving ahead, even after the factory closes, and she has to turn to full-time housework. But no amount of tough talk, no thick carapace of cynicism, can insulate a woman in her position from the hardships of the world she has to negotiate.
Although we never see him, we glean that Darja’s second husband was abusive — from Tommy’s scornful references to him and from a scene in which she is once again seated at the bus stop at night. This time, however, she’s not heading to or from work but fleeing her husband’s brutality. The bus stop at least provides the comfort of the familiar (grim and even dangerous though it is).
This scene brings some welcome humor, as she’s joined by the teenage Vic (a vibrantly funny Shiloh Fernandez), who’s not exactly the tough street kid he appears to be — he works, willingly, as a male prostitute but also attends a fancy high school — and who offers her sympathetic advice.
Ms. Ireland, a Tony nominee for “reasons to be pretty” and something of a star in Off Broadway productions, never leaves the stage for the roughly 80-minute duration of “Ironbound” (the title refers to a neighborhood in Newark), which has been directed with economy and delicacy by Daniella Topol. That’s tough enough for an actor, but with her extensive background on the stage, I imagine it’s the least of the challenges Ms. Ireland finds in the role.
What’s harder is softening the edges of a character who is, at times, her own worst enemy. When she’s in combative mode, as she often is when sparring with Tommy, Darja has a take-no-prisoners tone that rebuffs sympathy even when she needs it most. But she must also put aside her pride and ingratiate herself, even accepting a gift of money from Vic after initially refusing it outright.
Ms. Ireland moves between Darja’s mercurial moods with a fluidity that makes us sense the calculations behind them, the ever-present sense that she is continually forced to make compromises to keep herself afloat. She also makes achingly clear how deeply Darja loves and misses her son, for whom she will do just about anything, although she’s bound by circumstances that repeatedly thwart her.
