Even before revelations that the reporter Erin Andrews was secretly videotaped naked by a stalker in a hotel room in 2008, female sportscasters understood how frightening obsessed fans can be.
Andrea Kremer recalled that in 1988, while she was working for NFL Films, she was in a hotel room when a man called late at night as she was falling asleep.
After another call to the front desk, she said, the hotel stationed a security guard outside her door.
Female sportscasters have unparalleled reach in an age of round-the-clock sports broadcasting and the widespread dissemination of their work across social media. There are more of them now than ever, across multiple channels and websites.
But the flip side is unwanted attention from a male-dominated audience that can include fans who get uncomfortably close, or even stalkers.
Female newscasters and celebrities have long faced harassment and threats — one newscaster said in 2012 that she had had to quit her job in St. Louis after repeated threats from a stalker. But some sportscasters work in highly visible and potentially vulnerable places like stadiums and arenas, where they are close to passionate fans, many of them men.
The sportscasters routinely take precautions like asking hotel clerks not to say their name loudly when checking in, refusing to step into elevators if they see glaring male eyes, and opting for private transportation late at night, to avoid the flock of people who often gather outside studios, innocently or not. Some check to make sure the eyehole on their hotel door has not been tampered with, as it was in the case of Ms. Andrews, who at the time worked for ESPN and is now with Fox Sports. Several female sportscasters described their concerns in an article published by Sports Illustrated this week.
In one of the most disturbing episodes faced by a female sportscaster, a man used a hacksaw to alter the peepholes of Ms. Andrews’s hotel rooms in Nashville and Columbus, Ohio. Jurors on Monday found the man, Michael David Barrett, and the companies that manage the Nashville Marriott responsible for invading Ms. Andrews’s privacy and awarded her $55 million in damages.
Jessica Mendoza, an analyst on ESPN’s “Sunday Night Baseball,” said that what had happened to Ms. Andrews had made her wonder about taking more than minor precautions, like closing the blinds in hotel rooms.
“You think about all the times you’re in a room — and how scary that someone could see me in there,” she said.
But less egregious encounters can also leave female sportscasters unsettled and almost always on guard.
Alyssa Roenigk, a reporter for ESPN the Magazine who also appears on the air, primarily covering action sports like the X Games, said she had rarely given her security much thought. For years, she usually walked from venues to her hotel, even late at night. But as she began to do more television and was recognized more often, she was told by her bosses to start taking the courtesy car provided by the network.
In another instance, she said, she was on an airport shuttle on her way to pick up a rental car when a man approached her. She was still not sure if he was an ardent fan or something else.
“This guy turns right into me and says, ‘Hey, Jamie, so you going to so-and-so today?’ ” she recalled. “I was like, ‘Whoa, hey, well, I’m here for Nascar.’ And he kept trying to make small talk. I went down another escalator, and when I looked over, he was literally standing there staring at me, on his phone.
Laura Okmin, a sideline reporter for N.F.L. games on Fox, dealt with a stalker in the mid-1990s when she was working at a TV station in Chattanooga, Tenn. The man became angry when she did not respond to letters he had sent her and gifts he had dropped off for her. Eventually, police officers escorted her home several times, and security was provided at events that she covered. Later, a man kept calling her at every hotel she checked into.
Ms. Okmin mentions these experiences at seminars she holds for aspiring female sportscasters through her company, Galvanize.
After the jury’s decision, Ms. Andrews was thankful for the encouragement she said she had received from other victims of harassment, and she suggested the case’s outcome would improve safety.
