Elizabeth Wolf lives with her 81-year-old father and 65-year-old mother who both have dementia. Here, Elizabeth helps her mother, Nancy.
Elizabeth and her father leaving the house for Lou’s singing lesson.
Lou has a weekly singing lesson on Tuesday afternoons.

Elizabeth wraps her legs around her mother to steady her and prevent her from running off while washing hands.
Elizabeth and her husband, Casey, with her parents.
Elizabeth disguising her mother’s medicine in banana slices.
Elizabeth and Casey serving dinner.
Elizabeth with her father. “More than anything, the grief or loss I feel is in the form of loneliness,” she said.
Elizabeth helps her mother bathe.
Elizabeth helping her mother after a shower.
Framed pictures of the Brood family in their Mt. Laurel, N.J., home.
It had been going on for a long time, and we had all been so focused on my dad we had missed it. We ended up taking her to the same neurologist, and she got an Alzheimer’s diagnosis, too.
I told Casey, “We’re going to come back for two months, October through December.” It became apparent very soon that we would need to stay longer.
The doctors told me that people with Alzheimer’s have an average life span, between diagnosis and death, of five to seven years. So I knew we’re in this for the long haul, whatever that looks like.
Now, every morning, I wake up around 6 or 6:30. I’ll bring Dad his medicine.
I take Mom to the bathroom. I have to take her every couple of hours, otherwise we have what happened this morning, when there’s not only a major accident, but the mess ends up everywhere and I have to get her in the bath.
I prepare their breakfast. She takes medicine for diabetes, hypothyroidism, high blood pressure, and she’s on seizure medication and two antipsychotics because she has hallucinations. She stopped swallowing pills willingly a few years ago — we were having all-out wars. Now we hide them in chunks of banana.
My dad goes to a day program for adults with Alzheimer’s and dementia. Five days a week, he gets picked up at 8:40 and comes back between 1 and 1:30.
My mom doesn’t have much of an attention span for activities anymore. A lot of what we do all day is wander and sit and stare out the window.
At night, we have a motion sensor so that any time their bedroom door opens — if my mom has to go to the bathroom, she’ll wander into the hallway — a receptor in our room bings. It goes off maybe six times a night, on average. Some nights it feels like every half-hour.
