Opinion|What Liberals Can Learn From the N.R.A.
What Liberals Can Learn From the N.R.A.
The passion underlying such condemnations may be understandable, especially in the wake of the horrific mass shootings that often prompt them. But this rhetoric does little to change the gun debate, and most likely reinforces gun owners’ worst fears about how liberals see them. Rather than demonize the N.R.A.’s strategies, liberals should emulate them. The organization is, after all, the most effective civil rights group in the United States today.
Consider what the N.R.A. has accomplished. Just a few decades ago, even loyal conservatives rejected the idea that the Second Amendment protected an individual right to bear arms, as opposed to the states’ prerogative to raise militias. In 1990, the retired Supreme Court chief justice Warren Burger, a Nixon nominee, dismissed the idea as a “fraud.” Yet in 2008, the Supreme Court in District of Columbia v. Heller ruled that the individual right to bear arms was no fraud, but a constitutional right.
How did the N.R.A. do it? It did not litigate Heller itself. But its efforts over three decades paved the way for the court’s decision.
The strategy paid off: By the time the Supreme Court took up Heller, most state constitutions protected an individual right to bear arms; nearly all states afforded citizens a right to carry concealed weapons unless they were specifically disqualified from doing so; gun makers enjoyed immunity from tort liability for illegal use of their guns; and the right to self-defense had been strengthened — all at the urging of the N.R.A. These changes made it much easier for the Supreme Court to recognize a federal right to bear arms, because for all practical purposes such a right already existed in so much of the country.
The N.R.A. also enlisted the academy. Beginning in the 1980s, it offered grants and prizes designed to encourage scholarship that buttressed its view of the Second Amendment. With N.R.A. assistance, legal scholars transformed the academic understanding of the Second Amendment, so that by the time the Supreme Court ruled in Heller, the dominant view in the legal literature supported an individual right to bear arms. Justice Antonin Scalia’s majority opinion closely tracked that scholarship.
In addition, the N.R.A. succeeded in getting both Congress and the executive branch on record as endorsing the view that the Second Amendment protects an individual right to bear arms.
In 1982, a Senate committee headed by Senator Orrin Hatch, Republican of Utah and an N.R.A. member, adopted the individual-rights view of the Second Amendment; Congress as a whole followed suit in gun rights legislation in 1986 and 2005. Later, the N.R.A. organized a friend-of-the-court brief in Heller on behalf of majorities in both the Senate and the House reiterating this position. And when John Ashcroft, another N.R.A. member, became attorney general in 2001, the N.R.A. prompted his decision to reverse the Justice Department’s long-held position that the Second Amendment protects only the states’ prerogative to raise a militia.
Most significantly, the N.R.A. recognizes the importance of political pressure to the realization of constitutional rights. It grades every candidate for state and federal office on his or her commitment to gun rights, regardless of party affiliation, and urges its five million members to vote accordingly. The N.R.A. was one of George W. Bush’s biggest backers in 2000 and 2004. When President Bush had the opportunity to appoint two justices to the Supreme Court in 2005, it was no surprise that both nominees — John G. Roberts Jr. and Samuel A. Alito — were supportive of gun rights. The vote in Heller was 5 to 4, with both Justice Roberts and Justice Alito in the majority.
There is nothing nefarious about any of this. It’s how constitutional law changes in America. In a similar fashion, advocates of same-sex marriage concentrated on bringing about change in the states before presenting the issue to the Supreme Court, and pursued a similarly multipronged advocacy strategy. Liberals who are unhappy with the state of constitutional law today — whether on voting rights, racial equality, campaign finance or, indeed, guns — would do well to stop condemning the N.R.A.’s methods and start following in its footsteps.