There’s a basic reason not to vote for Gov. John Kasich, the ad proclaims: math. Through chalkboard arithmetic and some condescending narration, a new ad from the Club for Growth political action committee adds an anti-Kasich message to its anti-Trump campaign, accusing Mr. Kasich of splitting the opposition to Donald J. Trump.
The ad reverberated not just for its proclamations, but for what accompanied it — the Club for Growth PAC endorsed Mr. Cruz, the first time the influential anti-tax group has endorsed a candidate in a presidential primary. It also put in stark, black and white terms what Mr. Cruz and some other anti-Trump Republicans have been arguing: that only Mr. Cruz can beat Mr. Trump, and that voting for Mr. Kasich hurts Mr. Cruz’s chances. Mr. Kasich insists that as the race now shifts to more moderate states, he will begin beating Mr. Cruz and can win the nomination at the convention.
The Club for Growth has spent more than $7 million in negative advertising against Mr. Trump since last year, according to Kantar Media/CMAG. The group had been critical of Mr. Kasich in the past, releasing a “white paper” last year saying he had a “mixed record on matters of economic liberty.” But this is the first time the group has advocated support for a specific candidate. With its evident willingness to spend heavily on stopping Mr. Trump, it could very well become another “super PAC” in Mr. Cruz’s growing arsenal of advertising support.
Aloha! Vote for Me?
It seems a heartwarming tale of fighting for the American dream: A mechanic opens his garage to welcome daylight, recalls how his father “started this business decades ago,” talks about the good times, the bad times, and his worries about Mr. Trump’s “empty promises” before proclaiming that Mr. Cruz is a “principled leader.” But the story ends there.
$309,790 The amount spent by Democratic candidates so far in Hawaii.
$11.1 MILLION The amount of political advertising already seen in New York and Wisconsin, two states that vote in April.