YOSEMITE NATIONAL PARK, Calif. — Marilyn and Jack Whitcher have been regular visitors to the glacier-carved valley of Yosemite National Park since they were dating more than five decades ago. This trip was different.
“They changed all the names on us!” Mr. Whitcher, 75, said after stopping at a gift shop where the staff had just hours before cleared out all the T-shirts emblazoned with Yosemite National Park.
A bitter contract dispute has intruded into the Northern California wilderness, embroiling Yosemite, one of the country’s most beloved national parks, in the question of who, if anyone, should own the trademark to the park’s name and attractions. Delaware North, a company based in Buffalo, N.Y., has trademarked the name “Yosemite National Park” and other famous brands affiliated with the park, such as The Ahwahnee Hotel and the Wawona Hotel. The company is seeking $44 million for the next concessionaire to continue using them.
Shortly after midnight on Tuesday, when Delaware North’s contract to service the park expired, workers began riveting new names onto road signs and placing black tape over plaques that used the old names.
Longtime visitors toured the park in amazement — and swelling anger.
The changes were bewildering to Yosemite veterans.
Sheelah Gehring, 76, who lived nearby and whose parents visited the park in the 1940s, carried a small notebook on Tuesday with the old names and the corresponding new names. “It’s sad that it came to this,” said Erich Gehring, 76, her husband.
Curry Village was changed to Half Dome Village; the Wawona Hotel was now the Big Trees Lodge; and the Badger Pass Ski Area was now called the Yosemite Ski & Snowboard Area.
The National Park Service says the name changes were necessary to avoid infringing on trademarks claimed by Delaware North, which until Tuesday ran the park’s hotels, restaurants and shops. The new vendor is Aramark, another large concessions company that has multiple contracts with the National Park Service.
On Friday, the National Park Service filed a petition with the United States Patent and Trademark Office to cancel the disputed trademarks owned by Delaware North.
The company, which had a concession to help manage the park’s outlets for more than two decades, values its trademark of Yosemite National Park at $15 million. In September, Delaware North filed a lawsuit demanding compensation.
Park lovers have decried the intrusion of commerce into one part of the country that they hoped would somehow remain pristine in this regard.
With its massive walls of granite towering toward the sky and waterfalls that plunge into a U-shaped valley filled with incense cedars, Yosemite is among country’s most visited parks, drawing 4 million people a year.
After a lengthy bidding process, the Park Service announced in June that Delaware North had lost the concession and that it had selected Aramark. The chairman of Delaware North, Jeremy M. Jacobs, who also owns the Boston Bruins, promptly called for compensation for the “intangible assets,” including trademarks.
Records show that Delaware North, which has a concession at the Kennedy Space Center, has also trademarked Space Shuttle Atlantis and owns the rights to the Wuksachi Lodge in Sequoia National Park.
Delaware North says the issue of the trademarked names is a red herring designed to distract from its claims on a wide range of intangible assets that the company has accumulated during its time managing the park, including web domain names and databases of customers.
Mr. Jensen disputes that the company surreptitiously trademarked the names.
Sarah Maxwell, an official at the trademark office, said the law barred trademarking national or state flags, but there was no explicit prohibition on the trademarking of other American icons.
Affection for Yosemite runs deep. Yosemite Valley was set aside by Abraham Lincoln, who in the midst of the Civil War was shown photographs of the area and signed the Yosemite Grant Act, which protected Yosemite “for public use, resort and recreation.” The Park Service says Lincoln’s decision was the first time the federal government acted to protect land, paving the way for the creation of the National Park system.
Rhonda Salisbury, the chief executive of Visit Yosemite Madera County, a nonprofit organization that promotes tourism in the area, said the trademarking of Yosemite was “a big deal” among those fond of the park.
