Ken Adam, a production designer whose work on dozens of famous films included the fantasy sets that established the look of the James Bond series, the car in “Chitty Chitty Bang Bang” and, for Stanley Kubrick’s “Dr. Strangelove,” the sinister war room beneath the Pentagon, died on Thursday at his home in London. He was 95.
His death was announced by a James Bond Twitter account run by MGM Studios and Eon Productions.
Mr. Adam was hired by the producer Albert Broccoli, known as Cubby, to design the sets for the first Bond film, “Dr. No,” released in 1962. (The two had worked together on the 1960 film “The Trials of Oscar Wilde,” with Peter Finch and James Mason.) With a budget equivalent to about $300,000 today, Mr. Adam delivered the title character’s sleek, futuristic headquarters, his extravagant living room with wall-size aquarium and his creepy, grottolike laboratory.
In “Goldfinger,” the third movie in the series, Mr. Adam put Bond, played by Sean Connery, into an Aston Martin equipped with an ejector seat. He envisioned Fort Knox as a cathedral of gold.
Klaus Hugo Adam was born on Feb. 5, 1921, in Berlin, where his father, Fritz, a former Prussian cavalry officer, helped run S. Adam, a famous sporting-goods store. Klaus attended the prestigious French Gymnasium before the family, which was Jewish, emigrated to London in 1934.
In London he attended St. Paul’s School and became entranced by German Expressionist films, which he had not seen in Berlin. “They were so theatrical, these artists who dreamt up these fantastic dreamlike environments, and it struck a note with me,” he told The Sunday Telegraph in 2008.
He studied at University College, London, to pursue architecture as a way of breaking into production design, heeding the advice of Vincent Korda, a brother of the film producer Alexander Korda and a resident of the Hampstead boardinghouse run by Mr. Adam’s mother, the former Lilli Saalfeld. He enrolled in the Bartlett School of Architecture.
Shortly after the start of World War II, he joined the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve. In 1943 he took his place as a pilot flying long-range bombing missions over Europe. After the D-Day invasion, his squadron flew support missions for troops on the ground.
He was hired as a draftsman on his first film, “This Was a Woman,” in 1948, and for the next several years worked on numerous films as an assistant art director. His work on “Around the World in 80 Days,” a 1956 film that won an Oscar for best picture, gave him cachet in the industry and elevated him to production designer for “Curse of the Demon,” a 1957 film directed by Jacques Tourneur, and “The Angry Hills,” a 1959 war drama starring Robert Mitchum and directed by Robert Aldrich.
The Bond films — he worked on seven of them, the last of which was “Moonraker,” with Roger Moore as the superspy, in 1979 — put him in the front ranks of production designers.
The collaboration produced some of his most memorable work, most notably the war room in “Dr. Strangelove,” which he conceived as a vast bomb shelter with an illuminated table in the center, suggestive of a nefarious game of poker in progress.
Mr. Adam, who was awarded a knighthood in 2003, is survived by his wife, the former Maria Letizia.