LONDON — When Jaleh Shahmanesh inherited her mother’s wedding ring, she knew she would treasure it but never wear it.
The blue sapphire, surrounded by diamonds and set in white gold, was almost 100 years old and typical of the ornate rings popular in Iran in those days. Ms. Shahmanesh, born in Iran and now living in London, does not like white gold and felt the setting was too old-fashioned.
But instead of letting it gather dust in her jewelry box, she took it to Fiona Knapp, a British-based jewelry designer and gemologist from New Zealand. During a number of meetings they discussed how Ms. Shahmanesh planned to wear the ring, her personal style and her own design ideas for the piece.
So, what do you do when you have a similar vintage piece that needs restyling? Finding a designer or goldsmith you can trust with your heirloom and who has a similar design aesthetic can prove to be really difficult.
Lorenz Bäumer, whose boutique is on the Parisian jewelry hub Place Vendôme, said it is a good idea to get recommendations from people you trust and then research the names thoroughly. “Elements of criteria are style, reputation, accessibility, trust, getting along with the designer once you have met,” he said in an email.
“If you feel unsure, have detailed shots of your stone by bringing it to a gemologist to have it certified, so when you pass it on to a jeweler, you know the gem they give back to you is yours,” said Ms. Tan, who trained in New York and worked for the jewelry designer Kara Ross.
Once you find a jeweler or designer to work with, the next step is determining what you want your new piece to be — from simply getting a gemstone placed in a new setting to reworking a pearl necklace as a matching pair of cuff bracelets.
Murrey’s Jewelers on 3rd Avenue in New York has been around for almost 80 years and the father of the current owner, Earl Kahn, learned his trade sitting across a desk from Harry Winston. When the consulting designers there restyle a piece, they first disassemble the jewelry and arrange the gems by size and quality on a white sheet of paper, moving them around until both the designer and client are satisfied.
The gems then are set in a carved wax model of the new design and, if necessary, even fitted into a silver model before the final setting is created in an even more precious metal, such as yellow gold or platinum.
Sometimes problems are uncovered, like a crack that was hidden until the gem was removed from its setting or tampering with the gem’s color, which sometimes involves painting the rear of the stone with enamel if the original color is dull.
A piece’s history also is something jewelers should take into consideration when restyling. “I will not let people ruin, take apart or repurpose special pieces,” Mr. Kahn said, referring to characteristics such as the intricacy of the design, aesthetic appeal or a special provenance or creator’s signature.
Above all, say those who have had pieces reworked, is the joy of reviving an heirloom.
“I think repurposing jewelry is a fabulous thing because you are keeping yours, but you are enhancing it and making it more valuable,” said Harriette Rose Katz, a New York party planner who has been going to Murrey’s for a number of years.
Elisabeth Turner, a New Yorker, had a number of pieces she inherited from her mother restyled by Murrey’s and by Ms. Knapp, including her mother's diamond ring changed into a cocktail ring with rubies and a pair of diamond cluster earrings crafted into an Art Deco setting.
