After I wrote about the new guidelines last week in a blog post, many readers wrote me to share their reactions. I want to use this column to give voice to those reactions, which ranged from skepticism to gratitude, sometimes with a healthy dose of caution thrown in.
But first, some background. The new policy has been in the works ever since The Times published (and then had to recant major parts of) two articles within six months that were based on anonymous sources: One reported that the Justice Department had been asked to do a criminal investigation of Hillary Clinton’s email practices; another described the supposedly out-in-the-open social media support for jihad by one of the San Bernardino killers.
After the articles were fixed, and hefty corrections or editors’ notes attached, the executive editor, Dean Baquet, told me that he thought current practices needed strengthening. He assigned a team of senior newsroom managers, led by the standards editor, Philip Corbett, to work on it; and they in turn sought the opinion of some of The Times’s most experienced reporters and editors.
The result is a sensible, wise and much-needed approach to a problem that readers have long complained about. It’s one of the concerns I’ve heard the most about during my time as public editor.
Under the new guidelines, articles in which the main point hinges on an anonymous source or sources must get special scrutiny; they have to be flagged for review and approval by Mr. Baquet, or by one of two deputy executive editors, Matt Purdy and Susan Chira. Mr. Purdy, in an interview last week, described these kinds of stories to me as potential “journalistic I.E.D.s” because they may explode and do great harm to The Times’s credibility.
Any other use of anonymous sources must be approved by a “desk head” — for example, the top culture, metro or international editor — or that person’s deputy. And the guidelines reinforce a longstanding policy that an editor must know the identity of each anonymous source.
Finally, the guidelines state that the use of direct quotations from unnamed individuals should be rare. Mr. Purdy told me that too often, these quotes allow sources to express “their impression, their spin, their agenda” without accountability and without allowing readers to evaluate their motives. After all, readers don’t know who’s behind the quoted words.
And Jim Poling, managing editor of The Hamilton Spectator, a daily newspaper in Ontario, Canada, praised The Times for what he called an important step and for emphasizing the importance of credibility. He distributed the guidelines to his own staff for consideration.
Philip Kalikman of New York said that editors’ assurances that the guidelines would indeed be followed, “rest on a lot of wishful thinking and good intentions.” He proposed a reader-driven policing of the guidelines: “How about a requirement that whenever a reader writes to the public editor to question or object to the use of an anonymous source, and the public editor deems the objection valid, the news editors must respond to the specific incident with more information.” I’ve passed the idea along to Mr. Corbett.
Another reaction — less common but certainly worth thinking about — was concern that the policy might hurt enterprise journalism. Some readers realize that sometimes anonymous sources are the only way important stories can come to light.
His comments are astute. Whenever I’ve written on this subject, mostly to urge The Times to follow its own guidelines on using anonymous sources only as “a last resort,” I’ve acknowledged that confidential sources are indispensable to a lot of great journalism.
These new guidelines certainly don’t ban anonymous sources, nor should they. But they will probably make them less common and more carefully scrutinized; that was evident already in the pages of The Times last week. The guidelines are a commendable development. It will be important to adhere to them conscientiously, not just in this initial phase but in the long run.
Sometimes it takes a crisis to create change. But no matter what prompted it, newsroom leadership has listened to readers’ concerns and taken firm action. That’s heartening — and crucially important for the future of The Times.
A post in last week’s Public Editor’s Journal took up reader concerns about the post-publication editing of an article on Bernie Sanders’ legislative accomplishments, which changed its tenor without notification or explanation to readers.