With Bernie Sanders making headway in Wisconsin before next week’s vote there, Hillary Clinton turned her energies on Wednesday to winning a more pivotal contest: the New York primary on April 19, where a Sanders victory would be a humiliating outcome for her.
In a forceful opening bid to win New York, which she represented in the United States Senate for eight years, Mrs. Clinton presented herself as the quintessential hometown candidate at a jubilant rally in Harlem, recalling her efforts to help emergency medical workers after the Sept. 11 attacks and create opportunities for struggling businesses upstate. Her advisers also unveiled a television commercial that criticizes Donald J. Trump, the leading Republican candidate, in hopes that targeting him will galvanize New York Democrats far more than attacking Mr. Sanders, who is popular among many liberals in the state.
But Mrs. Clinton did draw some contrasts with Mr. Sanders during her rally at the Apollo Theater. Describing her work in Harlem to combat a childhood asthma crisis when she was senator, Mrs. Clinton said she was focused on working with doctors and community leaders to get concrete results — an implicit jab at Mr. Sanders, whose ambitious ideas like free public colleges would probably go nowhere if Republicans continue to run Congress.
Mr. Sanders, who plans to hold a rally in the Bronx on Thursday afternoon, crisscrossed Wisconsin on Wednesday and kept up his criticism of Mrs. Clinton over her past support for free trade deals; her six-figure speeches to Goldman Sachs and other banks; and her vote, as a senator, authorizing the American-led invasion of Iraq. He began the day in Kenosha, speaking to a crowd of 2,750 at Carthage College, where he listed several automobile and manufacturing companies that had closed plants in Wisconsin and opened them in Mexico and elsewhere as a result of trade deals like the North American Free Trade Agreement.
A Marquette Law School poll of likely voters in the Wisconsin Democratic primary, published Wednesday, found that Mr. Sanders had a small edge over Mrs. Clinton; he has been gaining on her in Marquette polls in recent months. The senator is well behind Mrs. Clinton in their race to accumulate the 2,383 delegates needed to win the Democratic nomination, and is counting on victories in Wisconsin and especially New York to pick up delegates and deal setbacks to Mrs. Clinton. It would be a blow for her to lose the New York primary, given her history and ties in the state; while it might not significantly affect her delegate lead, it would inevitably lead questions about the strength of her candidacy and her appeal among liberals.
Mr. Sanders is making an aggressive stand in Wisconsin. His senior adviser, Tad Devine, said the campaign was running two 60-second ads, including his Simon and Garfunkel-backed “America” ad that has been seen 3.5 million times on YouTube, as well as five 30-second ads on trade policies, fracking regulations, Social Security, farming issues and Wall Street reforms.
The Clinton campaign is also running commercials in Wisconsin, including one assailing the state’s Republican governor, Scott Walker, for cutting education budgets.
While not conceding Wisconsin to Mr. Sanders, Clinton advisers said that they thought he had some advantages in the state, given its history of progressive politics and the likelihood that the primary would attract many college students and independents — two key parts of the Sanders base.
Advisers said that Mrs. Clinton would return to Wisconsin before the primary and campaign in Eau Claire and Milwaukee; Mr. Sanders plans to campaign there again on Friday and Sunday.
Brian Fallon, a spokesman for Mrs. Clinton, said that the Wisconsin outcome was likely to be close and, therefore, not yield substantially more delegates to one candidate. Democratic primaries and caucuses award delegates proportionally based on each candidate’s share of the vote.
Sanders advisers have expressed optimism that a big victory in Wisconsin will provide political momentum for Mr. Sanders in New York, where he hopes to debate Mrs. Clinton before the primary, and in Pennsylvania, which he is also visiting on Thursday and holds its primary on April 26.
At the Harlem rally, both Mrs. Clinton and Senator Chuck Schumer, who introduced her, repeatedly invoked her history as a New Yorker — she moved to the state to run for the Senate in 2000 — to distinguish her from Mr. Sanders, even though he was born and raised in Brooklyn.
Mrs. Clinton had tougher words for Mr. Trump, saying he “plays coy with white supremacists” — Mr. Trump was slow to disavow the support of David Duke, the former Ku Klux Klan leader — and “says demeaning and degrading things about women.” She also used the same language from the new campaign commercial, which says New Yorkers of all races and backgrounds pull together to tackle major problems and implicitly derides Mr. Trump for offering solutions like building a wall on the Mexican border.
