The designer Dries Van Noten explains the creative choices behind his Antwerp studio and shows his enormous fabric collection.
Q. What was this building used for originally?
A. It was built to store wines and strong spirits. Then, in the Second World War, first the building was used by the Germans and after by the English. You can still find traces of the old occupations on the walls of the building. From the 1950s on, it was used as a warehouse for old museums. It was completely crammed full of stuff. There was a 13th-century mummified man, a 1950s hairdresser salon, big paintings made completely in postage stamps. We came here in the 2000s and had to empty the space.
Q. Did you like the fact that the building had all this history attached to it?
A. I like it always. The house where Patrick, my partner, and I live in is an old house with a lot of history. Good and bad things happened in the house. A lot of the furniture also has a history. The table and the chairs are coming from the courthouse here in Antwerp. They sold the whole lot just the moment that we came to this building, they kicked all their oak furniture out and took everything into plastic and ugly materials, so the cupboards and everything just came from the courthouse. The rug in my office is from a friend. In the 1980s, I was quite well known for my knitwear, and a lot of inspiration came from carpets, where I found ways to use structures and colors and depth of colors. Sometimes, the fastest way to explain to my manufacturer here in Belgium how I wanted it to look was not saying, “O.K., one roll of this and stitched like this and the yarn like that.” It was just showing the carpets. And that carpet was one of the sweaters.
Q. Is it important to you to be near the harbor?
A. I think the light, the view of the water, the way you really can look far down from here, is always important. To get quiet, I need a view. Sounds maybe kind of like a spoiled guy but I — I need it.
Q. What is the key quality in an office?
A. Our office before was in a house that had 82 rooms. It was very charming but it was impossible to find somebody. So we wanted to have an open office with everything visible, because it was like a fresh start. We don’t have a heavy company structure, but I’m kind of a control freak. I wanted to have a good view on what everybody’s doing.
Q. 
A. My office looks very empty compared with my house. The house is completely crammed full with things that Patrick and I love. It’s very eclectic. There are things that have no value but which we like. We have a lot of Belgian painters; we have international painters. We have nice things; we have ugly things. I don’t want that things are predictable. I think it’s clear in my collections. It’s also clear in the house and everywhere where we live. But for me, it’s important to have all those things around me. It’s something that, I think it gives me strength. I think it gives me ... energy.
Q. Do you always have flowers?
A. Always. I bring from the house, from the garden. The garden is my second profession. It’s 22 hectares, which is a big garden. I really need it, going from the flower garden, the shrubs and the trees, the vegetable garden, all these things. I want to share them also with people, so when the peonies are in full flower, it’s really fantastic that you can come here every three, four days with your arms full of peonies and just put all the offices full.  For me, it’s one big thing. I think in the same way when I’m cooking, when I’m gardening, when I’m choosing fabrics. It’s a way of living.