WASHINGTON — As Hillary Clinton moves toward the Democratic presidential nomination, she faces legal hurdles from her use of a private computer server as secretary of state that could jar her campaign’s momentum in the months ahead.
Foremost among a half-dozen inquiries and legal proceedings into whether classified information was sent through Mrs. Clinton’s server is an investigation by the F.B.I., whose agents, according to one law enforcement official, could seek to question Mrs. Clinton’s closest aides and possibly the candidate herself within weeks.
It is commonplace for the F.B.I. to try to interview key figures before closing an investigation, and doing so is not an indication the bureau thinks a person broke the law. Although defense lawyers often discourage their clients from giving such interviews, Democrats fear the refusal of Mrs. Clinton or her top aides to cooperate would be ready ammunition for Donald J. Trump, the Republican front-runner.
A federal law enforcement official said that barring any unforeseen changes, the F.B.I. investigation could conclude by early May. Then the Justice Department will decide whether to file criminal charges and, if so, against whom.
“As we have said since last summer, Secretary Clinton has been cooperating with the Justice Department’s security inquiry, including offering in August to meet with them to assist their efforts if needed,” said Brian Fallon, a campaign spokesman.
Federal law makes it a crime to mishandle classified information outside secure government channels when someone does so “knowingly” or — more seriously — permits it through “gross negligence.” Mrs. Clinton has correctly pointed out that none of the emails on her server were marked as classified at the time.
The bureau’s investigators have already interviewed Bryan Pagliano, a former aide who installed the server Mrs. Clinton had in her home in New York and used exclusively for her private and official email while secretary of state from 2009 to 2013.
Mr. Pagliano, who last year invoked his Fifth Amendment right not to testify before Congress, has cooperated with the investigation, according to the law enforcement official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to discuss the matter publicly. Mr. Pagliano’s lawyer declined to comment.
Mr. Fallon said the campaign was “pleased” that Mr. Pagliano was cooperating, noting that it had previously urged him to cooperate with the Capitol Hill inquiry.
In addition to the F.B.I. investigation, there are continuing inquiries into Mrs. Clinton’s emails by the inspector general of the State Department, the inspector general of the intelligence agencies, the State Department’s Bureau of Diplomatic Security and the House Select Committee on Benghazi.
Aides to Mrs. Clinton and officials from the State Department also face the prospect of questioning under oath in a separate legal proceeding brought by Judicial Watch, the conservative government watchdog group, under the Freedom of Information Act. In that case, the group has sought emails related to the special employment status given to Mrs. Clinton’s close aide Huma Abedin so she could receive additional salaries beyond the one she received from State.
Last week Judge Emmet G. Sullivan of United States District Court in Washington allowed the questioning after a hearing in which he criticized the State Department’s “constant drip” of revelations about emails from the server and said there were many unanswered questions about who authorized its use.
He ordered lawyers for Judicial Watch to submit a “narrowly tailored” plan for questioning that could begin in April as primaries continue to be held in states like New York, Connecticut, Pennsylvania and Maryland. The organization, according to its court filings so far, is expected to seek depositions from Ms. Abedin and Mr. Pagliano; Mrs. Clinton’s former chief of staff, Cheryl D. Mills; and department officials like Patrick F. Kennedy, the undersecretary of state for management.
Judge Sullivan’s ruling left open the possibility of additional testimony, including testimony from Mrs. Clinton. “I think there are some legitimate issues that arise because of this very atypical system that was created,” he said.
The flurry of questions around Mrs. Clinton’s server stem from the Benghazi committee’s inquiry into the attack on the American government outposts in Libya on Sept. 11, 2012, that killed four Americans, including the ambassador to Libya, J. Christopher Stevens.
It was through the committee’s request for records that the use of the server became known. Mrs. Clinton testified before the committee last October in what was widely viewed as a highly partisan confrontation.
The committee’s Republican chairman, Representative Trey Gowdy of South Carolina, pledged recently to release its final report “as soon as possible,” but the committee continues to schedule additional witnesses, suggesting its findings could still be months away. Mrs. Clinton’s supporters have ridiculed the committee’s partisan edge.
In an interview on MSNBC last Friday, Mrs. Clinton described the Judicial Watch case as a partisan one, too, and referred to the F.B.I.’s investigation as a “security inquiry.” She added that the two were often wrongly conflated.
The F.B.I.’s case did begin as a security referral from the inspectors general of the State Department and the nation’s intelligence agencies, who were concerned that classified information might have been stored outside a secure government network. But multiple law enforcement officials said the matter quickly became an investigation into whether anyone had committed a crime in handling classified information.
The bureau’s inquiry is being overseen by career national security prosecutors at the Justice Department, including a member of the prosecution team that won a guilty plea last year from David H. Petraeus, the former general and director of the Central Intelligence Agency. The case against Mr. Petraeus looms large over this investigation, according to officials and lawyers involved, and its outcome will inevitably be a measure of the one this time.
Mr. Petraeus not only wrote down highly classified information in eight black notebooks he kept in his home — including such details as the names of covert officers and programs — but he also shared the notebooks with his lover and biographer, Paula Broadwell. Those secrets were far more sensitive than the information on Ms. Clinton’s server, a federal law enforcement official said, and Mr. Petraeus told his biographer so in a recording she made of one of their interviews.
“Umm, well, they’re really — I mean they are highly classified, some of them,” he told her, according to a transcript that was included in the plea agreement filed in United States District Court in Charlotte, N.C., in March 2015. Mr. Petraeus went on to refer to the code names that are used for the nation’s most guarded information, programs and operations.
Mr. Petraeus also lied when initially questioned by the bureau’s agents. After a lengthy back-and-forth, the Justice Department — over the objection of the F.B.I. — negotiated the agreement for Mr. Petraeus to plead guilty to a misdemeanor charge of mishandling classified information.
While Mr. Petraeus was recorded saying he knew the information was classified, no similar evidence has surfaced regarding Mrs. Clinton or her aides.
On the contrary, in some of the emails that have been made public, Mrs. Clinton and her senior aides make reference to the restrictions on discussing classified information on the “low side,” as the department’s unclassified system is known, versus the “high side,” the department’s classified computer system.
Since none were marked classified at the time, the question is whether classified information — details of secret programs or sources — nevertheless slipped into the emails. Many of the “secret” and “top secret” emails were written or forwarded by Mrs. Clinton’s senior aides.
In their investigation, F.B.I. agents have sought to compare electronic timestamps on classified sources to figure out whether the aides reviewed the sources and then retyped the information into emails that were sent or forwarded to Mrs. Clinton’s private server. That has proved challenging, and one official said investigators have not concluded that such retyping occurred.
State Department officials said that an employee who divulges classified information in the department’s unclassified network could face administrative punishments, including reprimands or in severe cases the loss of any security clearance.