After a few minutes with the Flemish designer Job Smeets, you start to feel sorry for the water jug at his elbow. Sleek and minimal, it seems a perfectly normal pitcher from, say, Umbra or Ikea, but Mr. Smeets prods it like something rotten. He holds it up, literally and figuratively, as a symbol of what’s wrong with design.
That pared-down pitcher, he insists, succumbs to every cliché of modern good taste, whereas he and his work partner, Nynke Tynagel, embrace kitsch and chaos, sex and death, history and politics. Studio Job, as their Antwerp firm is called, has made a banana-shaped lamp, a table that looks like a polluting factory, and wallpaper covered in skeletons and rotting flowers.
Even the firm’s name is in flux: We’re invited to pronounce it “job,” as in “employment,” or “Job” like the biblical figure, or “yobe” — rhymes with “robe” — which is how you say Mr. Smeets’s first name.
The 16-year-old enterprise has a big following in Europe, but is only now getting an American retrospective with “Studio Job MAD HOUSE” at New York’s Museum of Arts and Design (a.k.a., “MAD”) through Aug. 21. It is bound to win the pair new attention — and brickbats.
One of the first pieces you encounter is a towering model of Dubai’s Burj Khalifa, the tallest building in the world and one of the showiest. As though to amp up the skyscraper’s extravagance, Studio Job has put a clock in its base and made light shine from its tower, while a King Kong ape climbs its flank.
Not far from that piece sits the Job banana lamp, its yellow “skin” rendered in polished bronze, peeled away to reveal a white center that glows. The phallic reference is obvious, and deliberate, but Mr. Smeets also cites a source in the banana imagery beloved of Andy Warhol. He’s an important role model who toyed with bad taste and excess in a 1960s art world still devoted to sober modern forms.
The founders of Studio Job feel that today’s design world is at a similar point, still valuing futuristic modern styles — think Zaha Hadid or Karim Rashid — over anti-modern options that may be harder to take. For Mr. Smeets, the elegant minimalism now practiced by most of his peers has become “the worst kitsch you can get.” He’s determined to fight back against it.
He is not the first designer to feel this way: Studio Job has an obvious precedent in the work of 1980s postmodernists such as Ettore Sottsass and his colleagues in the Memphis Group. But for Murray Moss, the influential New York design dealer, those radical product designers and architects started a new language that few have used to much lasting effect, whereas Mr. Smeets and Ms. Tynagel are at last realizing the earlier movement’s full potential. The first time Mr. Moss encountered Studio Job, in the early 2000s, “I had an adverse reaction to it, but a fascination,” he said. “It was completely out of my world.” That’s what still makes him cherish Job works.
Ms. Tynagel had parents who were well-known modernist designers, and she never doubted that she’d follow in their footsteps. Mr. Smeets’s father tried his hand at different careers; Mr. Smeets sees that turbulence as the root of his own eagerness to try his hand at new things.
Although Studio Job still produces its works in small editions — finances demand it — the couple’s goal would be to make each work a one-off, as fine artists do. “It gets more interesting, more creative, because you can develop new pieces every time,” Ms. Tynagel said. Rather than aiming to seed practical objects into homes everywhere, Studio Job is happy to enter the culture via exhibitions and magazines, as fine art does. Although they’ve dabbled in mass production and have even designed a Dutch postal stamp, their signature works sell to collectors in white-cube galleries rather than to decorators in showrooms. What they produce can have less to do with a chair by Philippe Starck than with a sculpture by Jeff Koons.
This explains their work’s controversial take on function. It’s important to them that almost every object they make fits some “normal” design category: a spaghetti pot, a vacuum cleaner, a table. But their pots have been cast in massive bronze and then polished to a golden mirror finish; putting them on a stove is unthinkable, even if you could handle the weight. Their $50,000 vacuum cleaner, on display at the museum, looks much more normal except for the bronze horse’s head on top. Its eyes glow electric-red, and the vacuum’s exhaust has been channeled through its nostrils, so they snort.
Even a factory-shaped coffee table is so heavy that it puts a strain on floorboards and is so expensive that it begs to be surrounded by a velvet rope.
The studio’s 20,000-square-foot workshop is home to more than 20 artisans who labor on each piece for months, and dubious comparisons have been made between Job’s work and the miraculous objects once produced for the royal courts of Europe. But the designers themselves insist that skill is a red herring in understanding their projects: “All the objects in the history of art that are too related to technique are never interesting any more,” Mr. Smeets said. If all you want is painstaking craft, check out the life-size glass mermaids or bronze panthers that decorate many a Palm Beach condo. Or, the designers said, look at the laboriously made prototypes that eventually get turned out as shiny cars or modernist water jugs, as utterly flawless as any Fabergé egg. The big difference between those prototypes and the pieces from Studio Job is that modernist designers do their best to hide the craft that gives birth to their pieces, whereas Studio Job objects always take care to look beautifully sculpted.
Ms. Tynagel and Mr. Smeets are now at work on a piece that may sum up their career. It’s a standard urinal cast in bronze and then erected atop a sculpture’s pedestal, in obvious homage to Marcel Duchamp’s landmark “Fountain,” now in its 100th year. There’s just one difference between the ready-made original and Job’s bronze remake: The new one is fully plumbed for use.