GLENDALE, Ariz. — Sometime around Christmas, Chicago White Sox General Manager Rick Hahn called his new catcher, Alex Avila, to ask about a player Hahn was interested in signing.
“Where are you?” Hahn asked.
“Oh, I’m with my folks,” Avila replied.
Avila’s father, Al, is the general manager of the Detroit Tigers, a rival of the White Sox in the American League Central. From his major league debut in 2009, Avila had played only for the Tigers. Now, his loyalties are elsewhere.
Funny question. In theory, Al Avila could have done something about it. But in his first winter as the Tigers’ general manager — after 13 years as the top assistant to Dave Dombrowski, who was fired last August — Avila let his son leave as a free agent.
Limited to 67 games last season because of a knee injury, Avila hit .191 and earned $5.4 million. The rookie catcher James McCann played 114 games and hit .264 — at one-tenth the salary. Avila signed with Chicago for $2.5 million, and McCann is now the Tigers’ starter. To Alex Avila, the logic was obvious.
The Avila family is quite familiar with the value of baseball players. Ralph Avila — Alex’s grandfather and Al’s father — signed Ramon and Pedro Martinez, Raul Mondesi and Jose Offerman as a pioneering scout for the Dodgers. Al Avila helped sign Livan Hernandez and Miguel Cabrera as a scouting executive for the Marlins.
Given his background, his position on the field and his strong communication skills, Alex Avila would seem to have plenty of options when his playing career ends: scout, executive, manager, broadcaster. But he said he was not close to considering them. At 29, Avila intends to play for a while.
Avila won a Silver Slugger Award and started for the American League in the 2011 All-Star Game, hitting .295 with 19 homers for the season. But he sustained a concussion during each of the next three seasons, before last year’s knee trouble. His averages from 2012 to 2015 were .243, .227, .218 and .191.
Yet Avila still managed a .339 on-base percentage last season — the major league average was .317 — and said it was easy to maintain his plate discipline.
Avila said his postconcussion symptoms had never been serious; he has heard stories of vertigo and nausea in others, but he has been lucky. And while the knee injury ruined last season, he has never needed surgery. The White Sox expect him to share the catching role with another veteran, Dioner Navarro, and noticed his skill in guiding Justin Verlander and Max Scherzer to Cy Young Awards with Detroit.
The White Sox finished 76-86 last season, but their left-handed starters stood out: Chris Sale set a club strikeout record, with 274; Jose Quintana had a 3.36 E.R.A.; and the rookie Carlos Rodon struck out 139 in 1391/3 innings. Shaky defense and the worst offense in the A.L. doomed the team.
Now the White Sox have added veterans at four positions besides catcher: Todd Frazier at third base, Brett Lawrie at second, Jimmy Rollins at shortstop and Austin Jackson in center field. The White Sox are trying again to contend, with Sale, Quintana and the slugging first baseman Jose Abreu on reasonable contracts.
Last season, the White Sox finished ahead of only one other team in the A.L. Central: the Tigers, who reloaded with pitcher Jordan Zimmermann and outfielder Justin Upton. Alex Avila could have guessed that his father would act aggressively on the market — the Tigers always do — but he did not sound overly impressed.
