An art fair in New York may seem redundant. After all, the city already has offerings for new art spread among hundreds of galleries in centers like Chelsea, SoHo and Bushwick, in Brooklyn. What’s more, many of them don’t charge for admission.
So what’s the value in paying about $25 for any of the several big art fairs that pop up around Manhattan every March? Ken Johnson, an art critic for The New York Times, said that more than anything, they provide a chance to take the temperature of global culture.
If possible, Mr. Johnson said, speak with the art dealers about any exhibitions that you find interesting. The opportunity of having so many of them in one place is rare, and dealers are generally experts on the art they are involved with. “Oftentimes, they know more about it than any critic or historian,” he added.
With several major art fairs spread across multiple locations, Mr. Johnson said, it can feel difficult to choose where to begin. He recommended knowing in advance what you’re interested in seeing. Below is a guide to help you get started.
Despite its name, the Armory Show is located at two piers on the Hudson River. (There is, however, an unrelated fair at the Park Avenue Armory. More on that later.) Now in its 22nd year, this art fair provides a global survey of 205 exhibitions from 36 countries.
Mr. Johnson said that nearly everyone he speaks with about the Armory Show has the same complaint: “They say, ‘I went, and it was amazing and terrifically exciting for the first half-hour.’ Then suddenly you hit a wall. You’ve got to break that up somehow.” Visitors should plan to be at the Armory Show for at least two hours, he said, and even then the trip should involve many stops for refreshments.
The Armory Show’s affiliate, Volta NY, is smaller and more focused. Its exhibitions, billed as rigorously curated, are by invitation only and feature just one artist each. Getting a sense of one person’s art is more manageable than the sprawling pavilions of larger fairs, Mr. Johnson said, and Volta is a good opportunity to speak with dealers about the works they represent.
This annual fair, presented by the Art Dealers Association of America, is “pretty manageable and viewer-friendly,” Mr. Johnson said. Its focus is on mainstream American galleries, many of which tend to put on curated or solo shows.
Over the years, smaller art fairs have popped up with niche themes, often reacting to the mainstream. Independent New York, for example, aims to be more of an art exhibition than a trade fair. This year, it opens in its new downtown digs, with 25,000 square feet of open, flexible space.
Pulse New York prioritizes contemporary art, with an eye to cutting-edge works and emerging galleries.
As the name suggests, Art on Paper features sculptures, drawings and paintings by artists who work with paper as their medium. The fair is back for another round after its debut last year.
