160 pages. Graywolf Press. $16.
The stories in Sara Majka’s arresting collection, her first book, mostly feature (seemingly) the same narrator, a searching, lovelorn woman in the Northeast. “Life hadn’t been quite what I wanted,” she says in one story. “I didn’t have the things I would say I wanted most.” One story starts: “During the trip, the lover I had left behind in New York had stopped calling.” Another: “Maybe 10 or 11 years ago, when I was in the middle of a divorce from a man I still loved, I took the train into the city.” The stories are peppered with broad, effective declarations of emotional philosophy: “We fall out of love only to fall in love with a duplicate of what we’ve left, never understanding that we love what we love and that it doesn’t change.” They are also anchored in keenly observed specific details and pivot around deceptively imaginative plots. These are modest-seeming stories that hold deep truths, by a writer of great promise.
183 pages. Nightboat Books. $15.95.
Brian Blanchfield’s brief, multivalent essays are titled to echo the master of the form, Montaigne. They include “On Withdrawal,” “On Tumbleweed” and “On House Sitting.” In the beginning, some sentences might send you scurrying. To wit: “Ordained confinement wherein embrace is organized as a situational necessity is recognizably the ground floor of my erotic imagination.” But stick with it. Mr. Blanchfield’s more high-flown reflections not only become more palatable over time, they’re also slyly used in juxtaposition with the plain-spoken memories of this “working class white boy” from North Carolina, who grew up with an abusive stepfather and a mother who, when he was 17, told him, “You’d better not be gay.” (He was, and is.) He calls the essays “inroads to disinhibited autobiography.” One becomes acclimated to, and impressed by, the way he transitions from, say, an etymological investigation of billiards terminology to the way his father shot pool.
266 pages. Liveright. $26.95.
This debut novel revolves around the relationship between Maya and Stephen, professors at Columbia University living the bourgeois life in Park Slope, and their troubled daughter, Ellie, who has dropped out of college, hangs around with a troubled crowd and has a penchant for escaping into drugs. Ellie wants to convince her parents that “there are whole gradations of just trying to have a little fun that don’t end in tragedy and homelessness,” but we learn early on that Ellie’s story does end in tragedy, after she is sent to Florida to stay with Annie, a longtime friend of her mother’s. We even know, more or less, how. Ms. Strong has a highly sensitive awareness of the special kind of disappointment — and the painfully undying connection — that comes with family. There’s mercifully little armchair psychology about Ellie and no blatantly obvious reason that she should be so damaged or careless. She just is, and in that way feels authentic.
167 pages. Catapult. $15.95.
307 pages. Doubleday. $27.95.
Pat Barker wraps up another trilogy of novels with her first book about World War II. (Her “Regeneration” books were set against World War I, as were the first two books of this series, “Life Class” and “Toby’s Room.”) The painters Elinor Brooke and Paul Tarrant are now married and helping with the war effort in London during the Blitz, Elinor as an ambulance driver and Paul as an air-raid warden. Art students in the earlier books, they here contend not only with the continual danger from above but also with the strains of middle-age love. As usual, Ms. Barker deftly handles a large cast, including a medium who claims to speak with the dead and a young boy taken in by Elinor’s family after he was orphaned by the war. Ms. Barker set the bar so high with her profoundly imagined “Regeneration” trilogy that the more recent novels can feel a bit slick by comparison. That still leaves them room to be historical fiction of a high order.
325 pages. Riverhead Books. $27.
