LUBUMBASHI, Democratic Republic of Congo — Sitting in his palatial living room amid lots of marble and white leather, Moïse Katumbi gives off an unmistakable air of being content with his place in the world.
A former governor in the Democratic Republic of Congo’s influential Katanga region and a flamboyantly successful tycoon, Mr. Katumbi has money, power, the adoration of the masses, solid political skills and a bit of an aura. He even has his own professional soccer team, the Bulldozers.
Of 80 million Congolese, analysts say, Mr. Katumbi is best positioned to be Congo’s next president if the election is fair and if the current president, who faces term limits, steps down this year.
But those are two big ifs.
Once again, Congo is lurching toward a political abyss, and Mr. Katumbi will be a crucial figure in what happens next.
Congo’s next election is supposed to be in November, and its Constitution requires that President Joseph Kabila leave office. But as Mr. Kabila’s counterparts across the continent have shown, to varying degrees of success or chaos, constitutions can be tinkered with or simply ignored.
In Congo, with dozens of armed groups and a long history of bloodshed, any serious instability could cause the country to explode.
And Congo is no Burundi, its diminutive neighbor driven into turmoil after the president clung to power. Congo is the biggest country in sub-Saharan Africa. When it split open in the 1990s, its civil war dragged in many neighbors, swallowing nearly a third of the continent. Millions are believed to have died.
Because of the stakes, Congo’s usually fractured political opposition has shown an unparalleled unity, with opposition figures coalescing around Mr. Katumbi.
On a recent morning, as he sat in his mansion with exotic birds chirping in the backyard, Mr. Katumbi delicately danced around the question of his presidential ambitions.
“At the moment, everything is a bit stuck,” he said.
He said that he could not formally announce his intentions until the opposition agreed to hold a primary, a first for Congo, and that his top concern was not about his own prospects, but about democracy.
Many observers believe this is Congo’s most interesting, and dangerous, political juncture in decades. If Mr. Kabila leaves power, the country will have its first open presidential race since an army officer named Joseph-Desiré Mobutu seized power more than 50 years ago.
Mr. Kabila, who has ruled Congo for 15 years, is a bit unusual in the annals of African politics: He is widely seen as a dictator, but an ambivalent one. People close to him say that he does not have a burning desire to stay in power but is concerned about his personal safety and his wealth if he leaves office.
Mr. Kabila is sending mixed signals, saying he will respect the Constitution but at the same time clearly trying to delay the election far past November, or possibly change the Constitution to eliminate term limits.
Mr. Katumbi said that he had tried to persuade Mr. Kabila to step down, but that it was impossible to tell what Mr. Kabila was thinking.
“You know the president don’t talk a lot,” he said.
The two men, who used to be close, seem to be opposites. Mr. Kabila, 44, is taciturn, pensive, hard to read and reclusive. He is a former soldier. He has recently gained weight, and the rare times he appears in public, he has huge bags under his eyes. It looks as if he never sleeps.
Mr. Katumbi, on the other hand, is a light presence. He is a chatty, svelte, athletic 51, playing tennis every day (with the forearms to prove it). He says he has never touched a gun, and if he did become Congo’s president, he would be the first in five decades to arrive without his own army.
Laughing easily, he loves to be at the center of things, whether he is hosting foreign visitors or waving to the poor youths who crane their necks along the streets of Lubumbashi to get a peek at him.
The other day, as he stepped out of a church, a crowd yelled out to him to complain about the rising price of flour.
Mr. Katumbi is popular for two reasons. He is very rich (probably worth more than $100 million in one of the world’s poorest nations), and people see what he has done in Lubumbashi, Congo’s second-largest city after Kinshasa, the national capital. They believe he can do that for the rest of the country.
As governor from 2007 to 2015, he is widely recognized as having helped raise revenue, collect more taxes, curtail bureaucratic harassment, prosecute corrupt officials and punish predatory soldiers.
Today, Lubumbashi is cleaner, less hectic and safer than any other major Congolese city, though Mr. Katumbi cannot claim all the credit. Lubumbashi has always been a bit of an exception, a copper mining hub and a tolerant, welcoming city that has attracted many foreigners, especially Belgians, Lebanese and Greeks.
Mr. Katumbi is a product of this. His father was a Jewish refugee from Rhodes known as Nissim the Handsome, and his mother was a Congolese woman from the Bemba ethnic group. Both were initially shunned by their communities while they pursued their romance.
With that same independent streak, Mr. Katumbi married a woman of Burundian descent. Often, as governor, he clashed with the authorities in Kinshasa.
As Mr. Katumbi draws closer to running for president — an opposition group is expected to announce its support for him this week — there is bound to be more scrutiny of his business deals. He and his brother made a fortune subcontracting for mining companies, and the family business has been implicated in corruption scandals in Zambia and Europe. Another State Department cable from WikiLeaks, this one classified secret, cited “strange activity” in his and his wife’s bank accounts and said that the Belgian authorities, and possibly the British, were investigating him.
Mr. Katumbi waves his hand breezily, saying this was simply the dirty work of Mr. Kabila and others trying to tarnish his good name.
But sometimes his smile is a little tight. He says that Mr. Kabila’s men recently grounded his private jet, and that security agents followed his children to school.
He insists that he is not scared — “I’m scared only about God.” But he is facing a government, an army and a security apparatus that is hardening around Mr. Kabila, jailing dissenters and killing protesters.