The Boston Pride defeated the Buffalo Beauts this weekend in a best-of-three series in Newark for the first National Women’s Hockey League championship. As the winners, they received the Isobel Cup, which, in time, may become as coveted and cherished as the N.H.L.’s Stanley Cup.
There was already an award named after Lady Isobel Gathorne-Hardy, a pioneer of women’s ice hockey in Canada, and it has been given since 2000 to a Canadian female player with the kind of dedication and characteristics displayed by the namesake of the award. Now there is a team award.
“All who pursue this Cup, pursue a dream; a dream born with Isobel, that shall never die,” reads part of the engraving on the silver Isobel Cup.
Dani Rylan, the commissioner of the league, said Friday that it was a “no-brainer” to name the N.W.H.L. trophy after Lady Isobel. One reason was that Lady Isobel, who lived from 1875 to 1963, played an enormous if somewhat overshadowed role in hockey history.
Lady Isobel was one of 10 children of Frederick and Constance Stanley. In 1888, her father, now Lord Stanley of Preston, became governor-general of Canada, which had gained independence 21 years earlier but was still a dominion of the British Empire.
The family moved into Rideau Hall in Ottawa, the Canadian capital, and later attended an ice hockey game between the Montreal Victorias and the Montreal Amateur Athletic Association at a winter festival in Montreal, “and fell in love with it,” said Jennifer Conway, a cataloger at the University of North Dakota library and a hockey historian.
The children wanted their own rink, so Lord Stanley had one built next to the house. The whole family often played. Often, winter parties at Rideau Hall included hockey games between pickup teams of men and women.
“That was very unusual for nobility — higher-class workers — to be doing,” Conway said.
Three sons played on an Ottawa-based team that toured Ontario. Donning a long skirt, Lady Isobel played regular shinny games among women at the rink. According to CBC.ca, a photograph of an 1890 game at Rideau Hall is believed to be the first recorded image of women playing hockey.
“What she did was really, really pioneering for the sport, in a bunch of ways,” Conway said.
Lord Stanley’s stint as governor-general came to an end in 1893, when he became the 16th Earl of Derby. Before moving back to England, Lady Isobel and her siblings talked their father into buying a silver cup to present to the best amateur ice hockey team in Canada. He spent 10 guineas, or $50.
Lord Stanley stipulated that the Dominion Hockey Challenge Cup would never be owned by one club, no matter how many times it won. The Montreal A.A.A. won the first Cup, and professional teams from the National Hockey Association began competing for it in 1910. N.H.L. teams first vied for what became known as the Stanley Cup in 1926.
Without Lady Isobel’s enthusiasm, there might not be a Stanley Cup. When the four-team N.H.W.L. was founded last year, Rylan knew the championship trophy had to have the right name. Once she heard about Lady Isobel, she knew she had found the woman to honor.
“I wasn’t familiar with the Stanleys’ history, other than the family donated the Stanley Cup,” Rylan said.
The family took the sport back to England, even staging an exhibition game before Queen Victoria, Conway said. Ice hockey thrived there through the 1930s. But Lady Isobel had already left her biggest imprint on the game. And now women are battling for a Lady Stanley Cup, of sorts.