A DEFINITE if wobbly line connects the Yiddish theater of 19th-century Eastern Europe and the Lower East Side to the giants of modern American entertainment. It traces a long road from the ghettos and shtetls to Broadway and Hollywood and the likes of Marlon Brando and Barbra Streisand.
That connection is a major theme of an exhibition that opened this week at the Museum of the City of New York. With 250 posters, playbills, photographs, film clips, set designs, costumes and other artifacts, it shows how what began as traveling troupes performing for poor Jewish audiences in Europe turned into a major New York entertainment center that provided a vital escape for the Lower East Side’s sweatshop workers and pushcart peddlers at the start of the 20th century.
The exhibition, “New York’s Yiddish Theater: From the Bowery to Broadway,” includes treasures like Miss Streisand’s gray and lavender gown from “Funny Girl,” the 1964 musical about the Jewish vaudevillian Fanny Brice; Zero Mostel’s rumpled Tevye outfit from “Fiddler on the Roof” the same year; and a photograph of a young Frank Sinatra smiling at a poster of Menashe Skulnik, who styled himself as the quintessential nebbish.
Major Hollywood actors whose stars have dimmed with time — Edward G. Robinson (Emanuel Goldenberg) and Paul Muni (Frederich Weisenfreund, whose Yiddish nickname was Moony) — got their start in Yiddish theater. In 1998, Mandy Patinkin, whom young Americans know mostly as Saul Berenson of Showtime’s “Homeland,” staged a one-man show of Yiddish songs (or American songs like “Take Me Out to the Ballgame,” sung in Yiddish). Tony Kushner, the Pulitzer Prize-winning playwright of “Angels in America,” his drama about AIDS and gay life, adapted the Yiddish theater classic “The Dybbuk,” by S. Ansky, in 1997.
Boris Aronson, a Ukrainian rabbi’s son who designed the sometimes surrealistic sets and costumes for Unser Theater, a Yiddish house in the Bronx, went on to win six Tony awards for shows like “Cabaret,” “Company” and “Follies.” And where would American comedy be without inspirational Catskills jesters like Sid Caesar, Jerry Lewis, Danny Kaye and Jackie Mason, all of whom, as one exhibition label says, “came of age in a world deeply shaped by New York’s heritage of Yiddish performance”?
The show, organized by Edna Nahshon, professor of theater at the Jewish Theological Seminary, tells the story of how Yiddish theater emigrated here with the three million Jews fleeing the poverty and pogroms of Russia, Poland and Romania. The first production, in 1882, was the middling operetta “The Witch,” by Abraham Goldfaden, regarded as the father of the modern Yiddish theater.
Melodramas and musicals followed, and going to the theater soon became the favorite pastime of hard-pressed tenement dwellers — seeing a show was what you splurged on — and helped ease new immigrants into the English-speaking world. Though some of what was offered could be considered mawkish schlock, much was vigorous and moving, particularly once the literary playwright Jacob Gordin insisted that actors stay faithful to the text and stop larding it with shtick. Plays like “Yoshe Kalb,” based on a story by I. J. Singer (Isaac Bashevis’s older brother), drew visits by Albert Einstein and Charlie Chaplin and glowing remarks from a mainstream critic, Brooks Atkinson of The New York Times.
There are hints in the show of the roiling humanity of the theater’s personalities, and the kind of foibles that a Yiddish Page Six might pounce on.
Glimpses of the Jewish Rialto are visible on Second Avenue today. Most prominently, there remains the Yiddish Art Theater, now called Village East Cinema, at the southwest corner of 12th Street. Its interior has been declared a landmark, and the original Star of David is still visible on its domed ceiling.