If Fidel Castro had only confiscated ill-gotten properties, the Cuban economy would not have collapsed or become the disaster it is today. In fact, Mr. Castro confiscated all privately owned properties, factories and banks and, within a few years of taking control, barbershops, beauty parlors, newspaper stands and other businesses without a scintilla of due process. As a rebel in Cuba’s mountains, Fidel Castro assured the world that, with the end of the Batista dictatorship, Cuba’s Constitution and the due process of law would be fully reinstated. It never was and hasn’t been since the Obama administration precipitously moved to restore diplomatic relations with Cuba, which was also done without public discussion.
The president’s action set a bad precedent. The confiscation of Mr. Lopez’s properties had little to do with his relationship to the Batista regime; it was part of the total confiscation of all businesses and private property on the island.
After almost 60 years, Cuba’s Communist regime says whatever it wants without challenge. The fact remains that no judicial process or assessment of the real-estate or industrial, financial and communications businesses that were confiscated ever took place then. Neither is there one now for people who want to “do business” in Cuba today.
The writer is executive director of the Center for a Free Cuba.
Re “Australia turns its back on climate science” (March 4): Australia remains committed to climate science research and to increased global action to address climate change. The Commonwealth Science and Industrial Research Organization, or Csiro, Australia’s top science agency, is making a strong contribution to the growing body of international climate change knowledge.
There is also significant research being funded under the National Environmental Science Program, through the Australian Antarctic Division, and the climate data analysis, monitoring and forecasting efforts of the Australian Bureau of Meteorology.
Csiro will continue to lead the way, spending about 83 million Australian dollars a year on research into climate change mitigation and adaptation.
Australia will continue to meet its climate change obligations and commitments, including those made in the Paris agreement.
The writer is Australia’s ambassador to the United States.
Re “Syria’s White Rose” (Feb. 19): I don’t fault Roger Cohen for pushing for more action on Syria. Too often, Americans believe they do much more for struggling nations than they actually do.
However, in his attempt to explain the rise of ISIS, Mr. Cohen invokes the voodoo concept of “pure evil” as a legitimate origin of violence. Reducing the scourge of ISIS simply to a “contempt for humanity” overlooks the extent to which, historically speaking, American aggression and do-nothingism has played into the hands of violent extremists.
Keeping the memory of those mistakes in the forefront of our minds is crucial when moving forward, not just with Syria, but with other countries at risk of being exploited and terrorized by radicals.
Specifically, it is important that the United States look for opportunities to help such countries with diplomacy and aid before using force. All too often, we have seen how failing to use the former can lead to excessive use of the latter.
Joseph D’Amore, Groveland, Mass.