Such conversations are becoming routine in doctors’ offices across the country. A growing number of states are enacting measures to limit prescription opioids, highly addictive medicines that alleviate severe pain but have contributed to a surging epidemic of overdoses and deaths. This week the federal government issued the first national guidelines intended to reduce use of the drugs.
As politicians and policy makers decry the opioid crisis, the country’s success in confronting it may well depend on the ability of physicians like Dr. Wergin to reconcile their new role as enforcer with their mission of caring for patients. Collectively, primary care physicians write the greatest volume of opioid prescriptions — according to a recent study, 15.3 million prescriptions for Medicare patients alone in 2013. The burden of monitoring patients for potential abuse, while still treating pain that is chronic and real, falls largely on these front-line gatekeepers.
In prescribing opioids, Dr. Wergin, who is also chairman of the board of the American Academy of Family Physicians, is taking professional and personal risks. He must go through an elaborate prescription checklist, with state and federal officials looking over his shoulder. He has faced threats from addicts who show up at the hospital emergency room, desperate for pills. Following the recommendation of his malpractice insurance carrier, he now requires his patients to sign “pain management contracts,” in which they must agree to random drug tests before receiving an opioid prescription.
Though he has been enmeshed in his patients’ lives for decades, having gone to grade school with many of them and delivered their children and grandchildren, the new vigilance has injected an uncomfortable layer of suspicion in his relationships with them.
Pain is one of the chief reasons people go to their doctor. Once overlooked and even dismissed, pain has been a standard vital sign on a patient work-up for nearly two decades. But unlike blood pressure, it is difficult to measure, not least because people’s ability to tolerate pain is highly individual.
The patient follows up with a primary care doctor, who now has to manage the patient’s opioid use.
Dr. Wergin’s patients often lack the means to consult pain specialists in Lincoln, the closest city, 30 miles away. So he is their doctor of first and last resort. Wherever you turn in Milford (population 2,090), there he is: the doctor for a local nursing home, for the town’s volunteer fire department, for the high school sports teams, sometimes making house calls in his weather-beaten Chevy Tahoe. When his patients are hospitalized, it is to him they complain about the overcooked salmon, expecting he can take care of that, too.
Buoyant and chatty, Dr. Wergin seems to have stepped out of a Norman Rockwell painting, with his faux-threats to give rambunctious young patients a “mind-your-mother shot,” and his prescriptions for relieving his own stress: baking pies or road-testing his 1962 red Corvette. And so he is particularly uneasy about the skepticism he must now bring to patient care.
Why? When a random drug test of one longtime patient showed no trace of prescribed opioids, Dr. Wergin had to “fire” him for breaking the contract. Instead of taking the pills, the patient had been selling them.
“You don’t want to become so jaded that you assume everyone in the E.R. is a drug-seeker,” he said.
Still, he has made adjustments. He now rarely writes prescriptions for oxycodone, which is prized on the street. For other painkillers, he logs into an electronic pharmacy registry to view the patient’s other medications. Although every state but Missouri has such a system, Nebraska’s, like many, is not foolproof: patients can opt out for privacy reasons and not all insurers, who supply the data, opt in.
And most state electronic systems are not compatible with one another. “A Nebraska patient can just drive 80 miles to a Kansas E.R. and get another prescription and no one would know,” Dr. Wergin said.
The management of chronic pain has had a long, fractious history in the United States. In the 1990s, doctors were admonished for undertreating pain. Opioids, they were told, including newer ones like OxyContin, could be safely prescribed and bring life-changing relief. Now the pendulum has swung sharply back and doctors have been scrambling for alternatives.
Some state medical boards recommend limiting the number of opioid doses per month. Others limit by strength of daily dose. The new guidelines by the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention advise primary care doctors to treat pain first with measures such as aspirin and ibuprofen. Three days of opioids will usually suffice, they said, and rarely more than seven.
Although much contention surrounded the drafting of the guidelines, everyone generally agrees that patients should not be custodians of large quantities of opioids. One of Dr. Wergin’s patients, Gene Filbert, 64, had been taking 240 short-acting hydrocodones a month, or about eight a day, to keep at bay the pounding pain that has resisted five surgeries for the elbow and wrist he smashed in a fall while installing a telephone line. An alternative, fentanyl, a slow-release, higher-dose patch, nauseates him. Dr. Wergin has now inched him down to 180 pills a month — but the coming Nebraska limit may be 150.
In a small town, lots of folks know about Mr. Filbert’s pain — and his pills.
Like many doctors who prescribe opioids, Dr. Robert L. Wergin requires patients who receive these medications to sign this agreement.
Many medical associations now offer doctors training about opioids and chronic pain, urging them first to use other remedies: physical therapy, acupuncture, anti-inflammatories, antidepressants, counseling.
But alternatives are unrealistic for some. Physical therapy is too expensive for Ms. Kubicka-Welander: she can scarcely make the rent on her home in a trailer court. Patients with a compromised liver cannot take high doses of acetaminophen. Those on blood-thinners should not use ibuprofen.
Dr. Wergin is careful not to assure patients that they will be “pain-free.” Instead, he talks about setting realistic goals while living with pain. Can they work? Walk? Sleep?
He reviewed the list of her medications.
“Let’s at least try to reduce those headaches so she can talk with her friends and family,” he said, recalibrating doses.
Dr. Robert L. Wergin examines Gene Filbert, 64, at the Milford Family Medical Center in Milford, Neb.
A patient talks with Dr. Wergin about her medication.
Dr. Wergin, a family medicine physician, still makes the occasional house call.
Dr. Wergin visits Dorothy Stauffer, 94, at the Crestview Care Center in Milford, NE.
Dr. Wergin prepares food and talks to his son, Brett Wergin, a medical resident.
Dr. Wergin and his granddaughter, Shiloh Long, look at a bird feeder.
Dr.  She asked not to identified because she worried her opioid use might jeopardize her job.
Her fibromyalgia was flaring up, she told Dr. Wergin. Pain was aggravating her insomnia.
“And you have to cut my pills again?” she asked.
Dr. Wergin nodded. “It will be very difficult to get an override for your dose.” Instead, he increased her antidepressant.
“It’s people like my husband who screwed the rest of us over,” she said.
Her husband, she explained, used to sell methamphetamine and OxyContin. His doctor in Lincoln would readily write prescriptions. One night six years ago, she found her husband on the floor of their bedroom, dead, mostly likely from an overdose.
“It’s rough cutting back when I’m at a level that almost works,” she said to Dr. Wergin.
A rare flicker of frustration crossed his face.
“I’m sorry,” Dr. Wergin said.