Last summer, after deceptively edited videos were used to accuse Planned Parenthood of selling fetal tissue, congressional Republicans voted to block all federal financing for the organization, and threatened to shut down the entire federal government if they didn’t get their way.
The charges against Planned Parenthood were completely bogus — investigations in 12 states found no wrongdoing, and one, in Texas, resulted in the indictment in January of the video makers.
By then, however, the damage was done. Even before the push in Congress failed, state governments had begun to cut funds for Planned Parenthood, without much national attention.
Since last July, 23 states have tried various ways of cutting money for the organization. So far 11 have succeeded, most recently Florida, where Gov. Rick Scott on Friday signed HB 1411, a sweeping anti-abortion bill that, among many destructive provisions, prohibits Medicaid and other public funds from being used to reimburse organizations that work with abortion providers.
The federal government has warned states that such efforts may be illegal, because federal law entitles Medicaid beneficiaries to receive care from any qualified provider they choose. But that hasn’t stopped Republican efforts; similar laws are poised to be enacted in Arizona and Missouri in the coming days.
The harm inflicted on the poorest and most vulnerable women is substantial and immediate. Planned Parenthood provides contraceptives and other health care services, like cancer screenings and treatment for sexually transmitted diseases, to millions of women around the country; for many low-income women it is the only option. Abortions are a tiny fraction of the services Planned Parenthood clinics offer, and public money cannot be used for abortions in almost all cases anyway.
State lawmakers and governors claim that these health care needs can be easily met by other providers, like community health centers. In reality, many of these “centers” are housed in elementary schools or other facilities that are ill-equipped to handle the large number of patients who previously relied on Planned Parenthood.
Last August, after Gov. Bobby Jindal of Louisiana tried to eliminate $730,000 in Medicaid reimbursements to the state’s two Planned Parenthood clinics, neither of which perform abortions, a federal judge in Louisiana questioned the list of alternate providers the state proposed. “It strikes me as extremely odd that you have a dermatologist, an audiologist, a dentist who are billing for family planning services,” he told state officials.
Meanwhile, in Indiana, funding cuts forced the closing in 2013 of the Planned Parenthood clinic in Scott County, which was the area’s only H.I.V. testing center. An outbreak of H.I.V. quickly followed.
And in Texas, which drastically cut funds to Planned Parenthood in 2011, birthrates among poor women jumped 27 percent in three years, according to a new study in the New England Journal of Medicine. That increase coincided with a 36 percent drop in benefit claims for long-acting contraceptives like IUDs, which are among the most effective forms of birth control.
All these fights, of course, circle back to the decades-long crusade by conservative lawmakers to end women’s access to safe and legal abortion — and increasingly, to reduce their access to contraception. On Thursday, Gov. Mike Pence of Indiana signed a bill that further limits reproductive services in that state, including a flatly unconstitutional ban on abortions for fetal abnormalities and a provision making doctors legally liable in such cases.
