The appearance by the first lady — and, on March 11, by President Obama speaking about technology at the overlapping SXSW Interactive conference — was a sign of the prestige of the 30th annual South by Southwest. Yet it was also a matter of one more song seeking attention in one of the many ways music now receives that attention: concerts, downloads, video views, streams, singalongs or a shimmy on the dance floor. Technology has turned SXSW inside out, only to see it thrive.
East Sixth Street, with blocks of clubs at the center of downtown Austin, is a blare of music and an impassable throng of bodies through most of the festival. But SXSW, which books an ever-expanding number of spaces around Austin, also has some quiet sanctuaries. For me, two of the festival’s most telling performances took place in churches. Julien Baker sang richly poetic songs of trauma and redemption, moving from almost unbearable fragility to confessional strength. Ry X, from Australia, infused folky, spooky meditations with flickering dance-music beats.
When South by Southwest started in 1987, a few years before the commercial Internet, it focused on live music as the measure of a band’s quality. SXSW was a regional showcase, then a magnet for independent music, and soon a badge of credibility for major-label acts and international delegations. The initial lure was site-specific, exclusive and ephemeral: a performance at a particular Austin club that could only be seen by as many people as could squeeze in, later to be propagated by word of mouth.
Now SXSW generates content for people who don’t have to be there, from professional video shoots to shaky cellphone souvenirs to social media mentions. At the same time, SXSW has become less pivotal for acts that are busy promoting themselves in many other ways. This year’s conference didn’t yield a handful of obvious buzz bands. Instead, it executed incremental parts of countless rollouts and game plans.
South by Southwest has become a victory lap for top hip-hop acts. This year brought an unannounced (but thronged) appearance by Drake at the Fader Fort, which takes place alongside SXSW but is not an official part of it. With subwoofers booming the ominous bass tones of the tracks, Drake promoted acts from his label Ovo Sound — sweet-voiced R&B crooners with thuggish perspectives — before leading full-scale shout-alongs on six of his own songs about success, competitiveness and revenge, including his new single, “Summer Sixteen.” He announced that his next album, “Views From the 6,” will appear in April.
Yet unlike recent years, this SXSW wasn’t top-heavy with celebrities or random corporate stunts, while the most prominent sponsors (along with a ubiquitous beer) were largely connected to music. There were fewer distractions from the new and midlevel acts that are SXSW’s staples.
But SXSW remains largely a festival for performers who aren’t on a path toward the Top 10. It’s a festival of country-tinged Americana, with performers like Aubrie Sellers, who puts Southern-rock muscle behind her gentle voice; Margaret Glaspy, who writes canny songs about lovers’ ambivalence and delivers them with lean, bluesy understatement; and Julia Jacklin, from Australia, singing thoughtfully about the everyday experiences of heartache. It’s a festival of updated soul from belters like Fantastic Negrito, a whimsical vocal acrobat, and the Seratones, a rowdy blues-rocking band from Louisiana. It’s about eccentrics and experimenters, like the Welsh trio Rozi Plain, whose serenely minimal songs bristle inside with hints of Krautrock; the D.J.-producer JLin, who pushes the brittle, spasmodic rhythms of Chicago footwork to startling extremes; and the Taiwanese rapper Aristophanes, who moved from abstract vocalizations to rapid-fire rhymes in Chinese.
One of SXSW’s most promising expansions is across the Americas. It had dozens of showcases this year from south of the border, including a superb showcase of music directly from Cuba and bands from Colombia, like Systema Solar and El Freaky, mixing D.J. electronics with local traditions like cumbia. They were making fans the way SXSW used to, one night, one club and one dance step at a time.