An explosion shook the neighborhood of Greenwood, in the north-central part of the city, early on Wednesday. Several firefighters were injured in the blast, which was caused by a gas leak.
A major explosion in north Seattle’s Greenwood neighborhood wounded nine firefighters and damaged multiple buildings. Rough Cut (no reporter narration). NATURAL ROUGH CUT (NO REPORTER NARRATION) A major explosion in north Seattle’s Greenwood neighborhood early on Wednesday wounded nine firefighters and damaged multiple businesses, officials said. The cause of the blast was not immediately known. Fire investigators were working to determine the cause, and gas workers were checking to see if gas was involved, officials said. Eight firefighters and one battalion chief were taken to a local hospital with minor injuries, according to Seattle Fire Department spokeswoman Corey Orvold. The explosion occurred at 1:43 a.m. local time, leveling a restaurant and convenience store and heavily damaging a coffee shop, Orvold said. Businesses across the street also were hit. At about 6 a.m. local time Seattle Fire Chief Harold Scoggins told reporters there was still an active gas leak and fire at the site but the public was not in danger. Gas valves have been shut down on the block where the explosion occurred, Puget Sound Energy representative Andy Wappler said in a news conference. Survey crews have been deployed to check that the neighborhood is safe, Wappler said. Dozens of firefighters, command staff and medics responded to the scene, the fire department said on Twitter.
An explosion caused by a gas leak in Seattle on Wednesday flattened two buildings and shook a neighborhood, prompting a large response by emergency officials. At least nine firefighters were reported injured in the blast.
The explosion, reported around 1:45 a.m. Pacific time, was so loud that it could be heard as far away as Shoreline, a community about 10 miles north of downtown Seattle.
The police and firefighters descended on the scene, near the intersection of Greenwood Avenue North and 85th Avenue North, in Greenwood, a neighborhood in the north-central part of the city.
The blast shook the neighborhood, which is known for its concentration of restaurants, bars and coffee shops and has of late been home to middle-class families and upscale professionals.
According to the news website seattlepi.com, the explosion leveled two buildings, one of them a convenience store, and blew out several windows of nearby buildings.
The Fire Department said that 67 employees were sent to the scene.
The television station KING said that a natural gas leak had been reported about 40 minutes before the explosion. A reporter for another station, KOMO, said that the explosion resulted in large amounts of shattered glass.
Harold Scroggins, the Seattle fire chief, said gas was still leaking at the site Wednesday morning but there was no immediate danger to the public, according to The Seattle Times.