Politicians in states around the country have moved in recent years to rein in the pensions of government employees, which in many cases had become more generous and less risky than those of their private sector counterparts.
Now that movement may be breaching yet another firewall: the pensions of federal employees.
On Thursday, the board of the Tennessee Valley Authority Retirement System, the pension program for roughly 11,000 workers and 24,000 retirees at the venerable New Deal-era agency, approved a tentative plan to lower the system’s funding shortfall by reducing benefits.The plan will be implemented later this year if the T.V.A.’s management and board go along with it.
The immediate impetus for voting on the changes was a proposal put forth in December by William D. Johnson, the agency’s chief executive, who argues that demographic trends and the retirement system’s historical generosity make it unsustainable. Mr. Johnson’s proposal, a modified version of which the board embraced, called for shifting many employees from a pension that guarantees a fixed level of benefits, a feature of most federal employees’ retirement package, to a 401(k) plan. It would have also lowered the cap on cost-of-living increases even for current retirees, effectively cutting a benefit they had already earned.
That is particularly galling to union officials at the T.V.A., who point out that Mr. Johnson’s total compensation in 2015 was approximately $6.4 million, which is believed to be the highest pay for any federal employee in the country. President Obama earns a salary of $400,000.
Moreover, Mr. Johnson’s plan runs counter to common practice in the private sector.
The T.V.A. retirement system was substantially overfunded as of the late 1990s, when a booming stock market was fattening its investment accounts.
Thereafter, several developments conspired to throw it some $6 billion out of balance. The costs of an extra benefit that the agency added when times were flush were starting to rise, as was the ratio of retirees to employees. The bursting of the stock market bubble in the early 2000s and the financial crisis of 2008 dented its investment returns. And while the agency has long contributed the minimum amount that the retirement system asks for each year, it has frequently not contributed much more.
Many T.V.A. workers and retirees say that this chronic reluctance to make sufficient contributions is the biggest culprit of today’s shortfall. As evidence, they point to some of the T.V.A.’s peers in the private sector, which improved the funding position of their pension system over much of the same period that the public power agency’s was deteriorating.
Mr. Johnson protested that the comparison with private sector competitors was inappropriate because they could more easily raise rates on their customers to cover pension shortfalls.
Mr. Johnson, who came to the T.V.A. in 2013 after working his way up the ranks to become chief executive of the investor-owned utility Progress Energy (now a part of Duke Energy), has generally won favorable reviews. That includes a 2015 report by the liberal Economic Policy Institute saying the agency appeared to be “on a more sustainable financial path” under his leadership.
But this amalgam of private and public sector features has created a kind of loophole that could leave rank-and-file workers more vulnerable to pension changes than even private sector workers.
Under federal law, for example, a private sector company that underfunds its pension plan for several years could face large excise taxes and other penalties, Mr. Bostick said.
Government agencies like the T.V.A. are not subject to these restrictions, however. Workers and union officials say Mr. Johnson and his predecessors have been able to earn private sector wages without observing the rules that are supposed to keep corporate executives in line.
“There is nothing regulating them to handle their pensions properly, except management’s good graces,” said Gregory J. Junemann, the international president of the engineers’ union.
Frustrations boiled over on both sides as Thursday’s vote approached. At a meeting in early February, Mr. Johnson fumed at Ms. Henson for pleading her case to congressional aides during a trip to Washington the week before.
