Following is a transcript of the Republican debate, as transcribed by the Federal News Service.
BAIER: ... they may have already been — we also expect them to be respectful, and we want the candidates to get their full time. So, somewhere between a library and a Red Wings game.
Every country we lose money with. As far as I’m concerned, we’ve got to reduce — we have to redo our trade deals 100 percent. I have the greatest business people in the world lined up to do it. We will make...
Now that said, I would much prefer to have a policy debate. I hope that’s what we will have here tonight. Let’s have a policy debate...
RUBIO: ... let’s talk about Donald Trump’s strategy and my strategy and Ted’s strategy and John Kasich’s strategy when it comes to ISIS. And on health care and on the important issues facing this country.
Here is what the numbers also say. Two-thirds of the people who have cast a vote in a Republican primary or caucus have voted against you. They do not want you to be our nominee.RUBIO: And, the reason why is because we are not going to turn over the conservative movement, or the party of Lincoln or Reagan, for example, to someone whose positions are not conservative. To someone who last week defended Planned Parenthood for 30 seconds a debate stage. To someone, for example, that has no ideas on foreign — someone who thinks the nuclear triad is a rock band from the 1980’s.
TRUMP: Oh yeah, you’re...
KELLY: ... Go ahead, Mr. Trump, and then we’re going to have to go to Governor Kasich.
TRUMP: ... That national poll — excuse me...
TRUMP: ... The national poll — a national poll where he’s at 15, he’s at 14... RUBIO: ... (INAUDIBLE)...
TRUMP: ... And, I’m at 49, so when he says 75 percent, that would mean that 80 percent of the people don’t dig you, and I’m back down to 50...
RUBIO: ... If you’re our nominee, we will lose...
RUBIO: If you’re our nominee (INAUDIBLE)...
TRUMP: ... I think I’m talking...
KELLY: ... The audience cannot understand when you’re talking over each other. Finish your point, Mr. Trump.
TRUMP: ... I beat Hillary Clinton in many polls. The Cue (ph) poll just came out. I beat Hillary Clinton in a recent Fox poll, I beat Hillary Clinton in USA Today, I beat her today in a poll in Ohio. I beat — I’m the only one that beats Hillary Clinton.
I beat — and I have not started on Hillary yet. Believe me, I will...
TRUMP: ... start soon. I haven’t even started.
KASICH: You know, this so much about process. It frankly is boring to me. I would like it clear though, since we’re talking about polls, I beat Hillary Clinton by more than 11 points, and the reason it happens...
And, by the way, I won’t need on the job training because I know how to do all of this, and within the first 100 days I will have a plan that will pass the Congress because...
BAIER: ... But Governor, this is all about process. For voters, they need to see a path to get to the nomination if they’re going to support you.
KASICH: ... Well, Bret, I think we’re all really there.  
RUBIO: Well, first of all, government doesn’t...
TRUMP: And they’re killing — they’re going to...
RUBIO: But he doesn’t answer the employment question.TRUMP: I have employed tens of thousands of people.
TRUMP: By the way, that’s the other thing...
TRUMP: ... false, totally false. And now the funny thing is he didn’t talk about the hundreds of really successful jobs, the buildings all over the world that have made a fortune.
The Times reporter Nick Corasaniti discusses key moments from the Republican presidential debate on Thursday in Detroit, as the field of candidates narrowed to a four-man race.
WALLACE: You have got to do better than this. TRUMP: This guy has a number one — the number one absentee record in the United States...
We don’t bid properly. We don’t have proper bidding procedures. The reason we don’t is because they take care of all of the senators, all of the congressman, and they don’t bid. They don’t go out to bid. WALLACE: Mr. Trump...
TRUMP: Take a look — excuse me. You are talking about hundreds of billions of dollars...
You say that Medicare could save $300 billion a year negotiating lower drug prices. But Medicare total only spends $78 billion a year on drugs. Sir, that’s the facts. You are talking about saving more money on Medicare prescription drugs...
TRUMP: And that’s a huge — of course it is. We are going to buy things for less money. Of course it is. That works out...
Now, at the end of that there will still be an office in the Treasury Department to receive the postcards but it will be dramatically simpler. CRUZ: And let me take a moment, Chris, to go back to go back to this exchange that was going on.
TRUMP: ... is it’s total gridlock. Nobody gets along. We need people to get along. We need to be able to get things done.
Listen, we could all understand if you write a check to a city commission because you’re looking for a zoning waiver on building a building. That may be corrupt, but you could understand real estate developers doing that.CRUZ: That’s not what Donald Trump did. Donald Trump supported Jimmy Carter over Ronald Reagan. Donald supported John Kerry over George W. Bush. If you don’t like Obamacare, Donald Trump funded Harry Reid and Nancy Pelosi taking over Congress to pass Obamacare.
KELLY: Senator Rubio, you not only supported the failed immigration reform effort through the Gang of Eight, but you’re still on record as favoring an eventual path to citizenship for those who are here illegally. And in addition...
... you favored in-state tuition for Florida illegal immigrants. You’ve been hitting Mr. Trump hard on this flexibility discussion with the New York Times, but his supporters might say at least his opening stance was tough.
RUBIO: Well, first of all, let me say that on the issue of the off-the-record, that’s not up to the New York Times. That’s up to you, Donald. If tonight you tell the New York Times to release the audio, they will do it, and we can exactly see what your true views are on immigration...
RUBIO: ... because it is a major issue, in your campaign that you’ve made a center issue. Now, as far as my record on it is concerned, I absolutely want to solve this issue. And I did the best we could in a Senate that was controlled by liberal Democrats and Harry Reid in the hopes that the House, made up of conservatives, would take it up and make it even stronger. And I said that repeatedly at the time.
TRUMP: ... I’m changing it, and I’m softening the position because we have to have talented people in this country.
KELLY: And you’re not releasing the discussion with the New York Times behind closed doors...
KELLY: Which will have some asking whether, on your immigration policies, you’re really just playing to people’s fantasies, which is a tactic...
TRUMP: ... No, I’m not playing.
But, for everyone at home who’s mad at politicians that lied to us, Donald’s record right now as he standing here...
It’s a few months, five months at the most. People don’t want a short-term job. They don’t want — so, we will bring people in, and we will send the people out. All done legally, all done with the process that’s...
TRUMP: ... Approved by government in Palm Beach, or West Palm Beach. We bring people in, we bring them out. We want to hire as many Americans as we can, but they don’t want part-time, very short part-time jobs.
RUBIO: That’s not accurate. I’m sorry, Megyn, that’s not accurate. That’s my — there were at least 300 Americans that applied last year, none of them were hired. Some of them...
TRUMP: ... That’s wrong.
RUBIO: ... And, here’s why he does it this way, let me explain why he (INAUDIBLE) H2-B...
RUBIO: ... Because when you bring them in this way, when you bring someone in on one of these visas they can’t go work for anybody else. They either work for you or they have to go back home. You basically have them captive, so you don’t have to worry about competing for higher wages with another hotel down the street. And, that’s why you bring workers from abroad.
You argue that you’re here to fight on behalf of the American worker, but when you have chances to help the American worker... (BELL RINGING)...
RUBIO: ... but when you have chances to help the American workers, you’re making your clothes overseas and you’re hiring your workers from overseas.
... releasing the New York Times tape. Because, listen, maybe it’s right.
CRUZ: ... that you didn’t tell them you’re misleading the American people. If that’s the case...
TRUMP: Tapes were not on the subject, but that’s...
TRUMP: We made a mistake going into Iraq. I’ve never said we made a mistake...
KELLY: Two more, and then you’ll have the floor. Next on whether we should accept the Syrian refugees...
And I was always against going into Iraq. In fact, I — believe me, I was always against it. There was some cases where I sort of — in one interview with a great friend of mine, and yours, Howard Stern — said that — said that...
We cut taxes in Ohio more than any governor in the country, and $5 billion dollars worth of tax cuts — we’re not running a surplus in Ohio. But, you see, what’s getting in the hearts and souls of the people is they want change, and they keep putting outsiders in to bring about the change, then the change doesn’t come. Then they put more outsiders in because we’re putting people in that don’t understand compromise. They don’t understand policy...
KASICH: ... They’re getting more and more frustrated with the system which is why we must pick somebody that has a record of achievement, not just talk.
RUBIO: ... This isn’t just about flexibility.
RUBIO: Well, he did, and that’s why Trump University...
TRUMP: ... That’s not right...
RUBIO: ... Is so relevant here. I saw this video last week where he’s sitting in front of a camera saying we’re going to hire the best people, and I’m going to hand pick them. There are going to be hand picked and instructors, the best instructors in the world. One of them, but the way, was the manager at a Buffalo Wild Wing. And, that’s who they hired to do this, and people borrowed money, and they signed up for this fake university.
TRUMP: ... We’ll find out when we have the (INAUDIBLE)...
RUBIO: ... And, we’re not going to do that to our country...
TRUMP: ... This is a case I could have settled very easily, but I don’t settle cases very easily when I’m right. Ninety-eight percent approval rating, we have an “A” from the Better Business Bureau...
TRUMP: You’re going to see, you don’t know...
RUBIO: ... The Better Business Bureau gave it a “D” minus.
KELLY: ... It’s Senator Rubio’s turn...
KELLY: ... Senator Rubio, standby, let him finish his point, and then I’ll give you the floor...
TRUMP: ... Before they had the information it got — it is right now an “A”, once they had the information...
TRUMP: ... The only reason that is was a “D” was because we didn’t care — we didn’t give them the information...
TRUMP: ... When they got the information it became an “A”...
KELLY: ... With respect — wait. With respect...
TRUMP: ... Marco you don’t know (INAUDIBLE)...
KELLY: The rating from the Better Business Bureau was a “D” minus...
KELLY: ... that’s the last publicly available rating in 2010, and it was the result of a number of complaints they had...
TRUMP: ... But it was elevated to an “A”...
KELLY: ... That’s never been publicly available.
KELLY: ... Let’s just bring the viewers up to speed, let’s just bring the viewers up to speed.
TRUMP: ... It was elevated to an “A”.
TRUMP: ... The lead plaintiff is now getting out of the case because it’s so bad for her...
KELLY: OK, no, but — standby. But, what happened in that case was you counter-sued her. The court threw out your counter-suit, and made you pay almost $800,000 dollars in legal fees of hers, and you made the same argument about 98 percent of the people being happy with Trump University. And, that woman in particular signing a survey saying she liked it while someone was standing over her shoulder...
TRUMP: ... She’s trying to get out of the case. She’s trying to get out of the case...
KELLY: ... And this is what — standby, this is what the Court of Appeals found. They said that the plaintiffs against you are like the Madoff victims...
TRUMP: Give me a break.KELLY: This is what the court of appeals said.
And you refused to give them their money back. Why don’t you tonight...
TRUMP: I gave many people their money back. RUBIO: Then why don’t you tonight say you’re going to give the money back to everybody who wants...
KELLY: With respect, Mr. Trump, one-third of the plaintiffs in that case demanded refunds. So it’s not the case that 98 percent were...
The people in Florida wouldn’t elect him dogcatcher. He couldn’t get any — he’s right now 21 points down to me. And, you know...
TRUMP: ... again, there will be a lot of advertising. It’s the only thing that might save him. But I doubt it.
And if we nominate Donald, we’re going to spend the spring, the fall, and the summer with the Republican nominee facing a fraud trial...
KELLY: Go ahead, Mr. Trump.TRUMP: I don’t believe these politicians. All talk, no action. I’m standing here listening to — I’m hearing him say about a percentage. CNN, he gets 15. That means 85 percent, based on what you’re saying, of the people don’t dig you, number one, number one. Is that a correct statement? How do you get — are you at 15 in the new CNN poll? Do you believe in CNN? I mean, I know we’re with FOX. But CNN spent — CNN...
CRUZ: All right, I’ll respond...
KELLY: All right. I’m going to let Mr. Trump — I’m going to let — let me just...
But accountability is important. I will say, I give the governor credit. He took responsibility for what happened. And he’s talked about people being held accountable...
... and the need for change, with Governor Snyder. But here’s the point. This should not be a partisan issue. The way the Democrats have tried to turn this into a partisan issue, that somehow Republicans woke up in the morning and decided, “Oh, it’s a good idea to poison some kids with lead.” It’s absurd. It’s outrageous. It isn’t true.
The New York Times checks assertions made by the Republican presidential candidates during Thursday’s debate in Detroit.
It is right after the defense of the freedom of speech for a reason, for clearly the founders of our nation understood and the framers of the Constitution understood that you cannot have life and you cannot have liberty and cannot pursue happiness if you are not safe.RUBIO: And the Second Amendment — when people talk about gun laws, what they need to realize is, criminals don’t follow gun laws. They’re criminals. By definition, they ignore the law.
I wrote one op-ed supporting President Bush’s nomination after he made it. I would not have made that nomination. But let me point out...
CRUZ: You can do it. You can breathe. I know it’s hard. I know it’s hard. But just...
Here’s the bottom line. And I’m going to repeat it again. The world today is as complicated and as complex as it has been certainly in a very — certainly in the lifetime of anybody here today. You indeed do have a lunatic in North Korea with nuclear weapons. You indeed do have the Chinese government taking over the most important shipping lane in the world. And Vladimir Putin, who you’ve expressed admiration for, Donald...
WALLACE: If I may — sir, if I may ask my question...
WALLACE: I think you were kidding...WALLACE: But it was your video and the serious question is, because the suggestion is, do you think that Donald Trump is naive about the threat that Vladimir Putin represents?
KASICH: Yeah. But — and I kind of think that, before it’s all said and done, I’ll be the nominee. But let me also say...
TRUMP: ... OK — that I’m very, very proud of — millions and millions of people have come to the Republican Party over the last little while. They’ve come to the Republican Party. And by the way, the Democrats are losing people. This is a trend that’s taking place. It’s the biggest thing happening in politics, and I’m very proud to be a part of it. And I’m going to give them some credit, too, even though they don’t deserve it. But the answer is: Yes, I will.
