Jeff Nichols narrates a sequence from his film about a boy with mysterious special powers.
A father takes his son, a boy with special powers, on the run in “Midnight Special,” the new science-fiction thriller from the writer and director Jeff Nichols (“Take Shelter,” “Mud”).
They’re being pursued because of the boy’s supernatural abilities, which are left ambiguous through much of the movie. This scene, featuring Michael Shannon, Joel Edgerton and Jaeden Lieberher, takes place at a gas station where the boy makes a discovery.
In an interview, Mr. Nichols discussed the film. Below are excerpts from that conversation.
Q. How do you see issues of faith factoring into the movie?
A. Faith is a driving factor for the plot. It’s at the core of this chase. There are people chasing them, but they’re really running toward something as well, a deadline. So it’s a chase on both ends.
The film does deal with a number of spiritual issues. What were your goals with the movie?
I see the movie being about this constant process of defining what this boy is. Especially for Michael Shannon’s character. He’s trying to figure out what this boy needs. It’s less an allegory for spirituality and more for what I think it is to be a parent.
I was so afraid when my son was born that something bad would happen to him. I was connected to a feeling that this child could die at any moment and I have no control over that. You start to extend that and say: I have zero control over who this boy grows up to be, what kind of man he grows up to be. So what am I doing then? If I can’t control the environment he’s in to keep him safe, or control the way he grows up, what’s my job here as a parent?
I quickly realized I’m constantly trying to redefine who he is. And then I just give him everything I possibly can to help him realize that. That’s the closest I’ve come to a definition of parenthood. What I really made was something to try to sum up the sense of what it feels like to be a parent and how scary it is.
Why did you decide to explore those ideas in a genre movie?
That’s the battling of two sides of myself. I started to take hold of it with “Take Shelter,” in this idea of combining art house cinema with genre. I was thinking that I wanted to do a movie that people will pay to make and eventually pay to see. I wanted to make movies for bigger and bigger audiences.
And so the genre elements in “Midnight Special” became a bigger cornerstone of the film. But oddly enough, I just made more things blow up. I came up with bigger set pieces. But the underpinnings; the desire to work against narrative cliché, the desire to remove expository dialogue and the desire to inject my personal struggles and emotions from my own life into all of this; that all remained the same.