BERKELEY, Calif. — Savannah Rennie realized last summer that something was terribly wrong.
Her health concerns began back home and continued once she arrived in Berkeley to start classes at the University of California and prepare to join the Golden Bears volleyball team as a freshman. She had unbearable headaches and high fevers. Nausea and loss of appetite. Soreness and then pain in her abdomen. Body aches and weight loss.
Not just the flu. Rennie knew that much.
Months later, she is headed to Indiana University to await a liver transplant because of a rare disease that has kept her off the court for Cal and thrown her a curveball at 19. She remains steadfast, determined to play volleyball again, surrounded by a campus community that has supported her through the tears, the missed classes, the isolation and the fear of leaving her friends behind with no firm return date.
In September, Rennie was found to have congenital hepatic fibrosis with portal hypertension. The disease typically affects newborns and the elderly, not people her age.
Rennie tells herself each day just to stay healthy enough that she will be ready the moment a liver becomes available.
Recovery time after the surgery is about three months — less than that for reconstruction of an anterior cruciate ligament, Rennie noted.
The three-time beach volleyball gold medalist Kerri Walsh Jennings has offered support on Twitter, as have the indoor volleyball Olympians Jordan Larson, Kelsey Robinson and Tori Dixon.
“We are all behind you!” Larson wrote. The gold-medal-winning beach and indoor volleyball star Karch Kiraly sent prayers and thoughts from the Olympics-bound women’s national team, which he coaches.
Rennie’s mother started a GoFundMe page to raise money for the medical expenses. The effort had raised more than $70,000 toward the $100,000 goal as of Thursday night. Steve Kerr, coach of the Golden State Warriors, and his wife, Margot, donated $1,500.
Once at Indiana University, Rennie will wait. She will be treated by a renowned liver transplant doctor — and she has been told the process should not take more than a few months. In the Bay Area, by comparison, it could be several years, she said.
Last weekend, she visited basketball games and the baseball field to root for fellow student-athletes.
Rennie reminds herself that she will soon be on the path to recovery. And, she hopes, back to playing volleyball for the Bears come fall.
