For those on a budget, this worldwide organization is a terrific way to become acquainted with a city. It’s simple: local tourism boards match visitors with residents who want to show them around — free. Hundreds of places are part of the Global Greeter Network, including New York; Chicago; Tokyo; Buenos Aires; Naples, Italy; and Haifa, Israel.
Note: some local guides on Tours by Locals as well as the other sites mentioned here list rates per person (helpful for solo travelers); others list rates per tour. If you’re traveling solo and don’t see rates for one person, message the guide or the site to see if you can work something out.
This cheerful, easy-to-use site allows you to search for “experiences” offered by local artists, teachers, photographers and chefs, among others. There are bright, clear photos of the guides, user reviews and descriptions written by each guide of what you’re getting à la Airbnb. A recent search found a number of compelling options, such as a three-hour culinary walking tour of Chinatown in Flushing, Queens, with stops for specialties such as Hainanese pot stickers, Sichuan chicken, Xinjiang lamb kebabs and Korean kimchi dumplings, for $85 — food and soft drinks included.
In Paris, a guide wrote that she would meet visitors anywhere in the city and show them around their chosen neighborhood (or pick one for them), as well as offer tips about Parisian culture during a three-hour walking tour for $200 (up to three other people are allowed at no additional cost). It’s nice to know, too, that if for some reason your guide doesn’t show up, Vayable.com will refund your money.
Private tours include eight-hours in Bali with stops at Ubud; a spice and coffee plantation; Kintamani, an active volcano, and the Tanah Lot temple ($60), as well as a five-hour tour in Mexico City focused on the homes and work of Frida Kahlo and Diego Rivera, with stops at places such as Museo Casa Estudio Diego Rivera in San Ángel, the Anahuacalli building designed by Rivera and the Museo Dolores Olmedo in Xochimilco ($175 for up to four people). Professionally licensed guides have green tags, and if you like you can filter your searches to find them. I’ve used Viator for a couple of small group tours, but keep in mind that the company does not screen or conduct background checks on private guides. For more information: Tourguides.viator.com.
This one is temporary and has too many variables for it to work for most travelers, but it’s too neat not to mention. If you fly KLM Royal Dutch Airlines from the United States, Canada or Italy, a new, free service allows travelers with a layover of at least six hours at Amsterdam Airport Schiphol to meet up with an Amsterdam local. Thus the program name: Layover With a Local. After touching down at Schiphol, the Layover With a Local app provides travelers with instructions. Travelers also receive a free train ticket on Dutch Railways to the city center, where they can meet their assigned person to learn about Amsterdam and have a drink. Even better: the first round is on KLM. Available through May: Layoverwithalocal.klm.com.