And we can watch the spreading panic in a corporate world no longer certain that business has five reliable friends at the court. Last Friday, Dow Chemical agreed to settle a class-action price-fixing case for $835 million rather than take its chances in a Scalia-less court. The company’s appeal of a $1.06 billion jury verdict in a long-running antitrust case, brought by purchasers of urethane, had been pending at the court since last March. Justice Antonin Scalia’s death means an “increased likelihood for unfavorable outcomes for businesses involved in class action suits,” Dow said in a statement announcing the decision to settle.
There will be more such turnabouts — appeals withdrawn, appeals not filed — as players for whom the Supreme Court status quo almost always brought good news recalculate their risks and cut their losses. I picture the Beltway now as a giant poker game, a fitting memorial to the poker-loving justice.
Because no one knows what happens next. Hearing what the new court sounds like is a far cry from knowing what it will look like six months, nine months, a year or more from now. We don’t know, and neither do the eight justices. It’s a rare moment that finds the court and the public stumbling around behind the same veil of ignorance. Just as advocates and their clients have to make strategic calculations, so do the justices. The stakes couldn’t be higher on either side of the bench.
Despite some 500 new appeals that had piled up during a four-week midwinter break — Justice Scalia died in that time — the court added no new cases to its docket this week. The argument calendar for the current term closed in late January, meaning that any cases accepted from now on won’t be heard until after the new term begins in October. But who will be filling the ninth seat then? Will anyone? While it takes the votes of only four justices, a minority, to grant a case, a majority of five is needed to prevail on the merits.
The distance from four to five can be unbridgeable — and abruptly so, as Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr., architect of the constitutional attack on public employee unions, has no doubt discovered. He had the upper hand back in January, when the court heard argument in Friedrichs v. California Teachers Association. The union was on a clear path to losing by a vote of 5 to 4, freeing workers who chose not to join public unions from paying for the union’s collective bargaining work. Now it’s probably just a matter of days before the court announces a 4 to 4 tie vote. That would be an unanticipated reprieve for labor unions (which won in the lower courts, and a tie vote affirms the lower court judgment) and a blow not only to the anti-union forces but also to the justice who by his repeated invitations to bring just such a case had nurtured their carefully planned litigation campaign.
That’s not to suggest that Justice Alito is about to fold his tent. On Monday, he issued an opinion dissenting from the court’s refusal to hear a prisoner’s complaint against the North Carolina prison system for failing to accommodate his wish to get together with fellow Jewish inmates for an hour every week to pray and study religious texts. At 11 pages, Justice Alito’s dissent was unusually long for an opinion of this kind. It’s the first time in his 10 years on the court that I can recall him ever expressing empathy with a prison inmate.
The case, Ben-Levi v. Brown, had some unusual features. Israel Ben-Levi, born Danny Loren, is a 68-year-old man serving a life sentence for rape. After his two-page handwritten petition arrived at the court last June, North Carolina waived its right to respond. The court ordered a response and, after the response arrived, took the case to conference five times before denying it on Monday. Justice Scalia participated in the first four of those conferences. It’s a good bet that he was planning to sign, or perhaps had already signed, Justice Alito’s dissent from the denial; the two justices had previously collaborated on such opinions, aimed at calling public attention to what they saw as the court’s failure to attend adequately to religious claims.
Mr. Ben-Levi complained that prison officials violated his First Amendment right to free exercise of religion by imposing a rule for Jewish inmates that it didn’t apply to others. Based on advice from a rabbi that Jewish worship requires a minyan or quorum of 10 adult Jews, the state’s policy provided that if Jewish inmates wanted to meet in a group for religious purposes, they had to meet in a group of 10 unless a rabbi agreed to supervise a smaller group. There were evidently only three Jewish inmates in the Hoke Correctional Institute, and no rabbi around.
In dismissing Mr. Ben-Levi’s lawsuit, James C. Fox, a federal district judge who refused the inmate’s request to appoint a lawyer, held that the requirement did not unduly burden Mr. Ben-Levi’s religious rights because no one was stopping him from praying and studying on his own. Noting the state’s assertion that prisoners had used religion to mask gang activity, the judge said further that the prison system’s position was “reasonably related to legitimate penological interests.” The United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit affirmed the dismissal in an unpublished one-paragraph opinion.
In urging the justices to deny the petition, the North Carolina attorney general’s office took issue with Mr. Ben-Levi’s argument that because he wanted to meet for study and not formal worship, a minyan was not required. The state cited the rabbi whom the prison system’s chaplain had consulted and who “confirmed that a minyan or qualified rabbi is required for Torah and Talmud study.” The district judge had accepted the state’s testimony, concluding that the prison’s refusal to authorize the three-person group was “in line with the tenets” of Judaism.
Why did Justice Alito go on at such solitary length about a case that had obvious procedural problems (the state has modified the policy, and Mr. Ben-Levi has been transferred to a different prison) and that no current colleague cared enough about to want to hear?
Justice Alito is not given to wasting his time, and both the question and the answer jumped out at me as I read his opinion. On March 23, the court will hear the second of the term’s major culture-war cases (the first being the Texas abortion case, argued on Wednesday). Zubik v. Burwell is the challenge by nonprofit religious organizations to the Obama administration’s effort to accommodate their objection to making contraception coverage available in health insurance policies issued to their female employees, as required by the Affordable Care Act.
The administration asks only that the groups notify the Department of Health and Human Services of their religious objection, at which point all responsibility for the coverage passes to the insurance companies and out of the employers’ hands. The plaintiff groups argue that as a matter of their religious doctrine, this arrangement doesn’t relieve them of complicity for making contraceptives available to women who might choose to use them, and that the accommodation therefore imposes an unacceptable burden on their religious freedom.
Does it? Do courts have no choice but to defer to plaintiffs’ assertions about complicity and burden? In the seven consolidated cases before the court, no lower court thought so. All ruled for the government. Based on his majority opinion two years ago in the Hobby Lobby case, which exempted for-profit companies with religious ownership from compliance with the mandate, it’s safe to assume that Justice Alito disagrees. The vote in Hobby Lobby was 5 to 4. A tie in the new case favors the government. In this post-Scalia world, Justice Alito may still be swinging for the fences, but he may have been using the case of Israel Ben-Levi to practice his dissent.