Julian Niccolini, a longtime co-owner of the Four Seasons, pleaded guilty to misdemeanor assault on Thursday in a deal with prosecutors to resolve an allegation that he sexually abused a 28-year-old woman during a party at the celebrated Manhattan restaurant in May.
Appearing in Criminal Court in Manhattan, Mr. Niccolini pleaded guilty and admitted he had put his hands on the woman, causing scratches and bruises to her hip and thigh.
Though the assault offense carries a penalty of up to a year in jail, the restaurateur will not serve any time. On the recommendation of prosecutors, he was sentenced by a judge to “conditional discharge,” meaning he remains free unless he breaks the law in the next 12 months. Still, he will have a criminal record.
Mr. Niccolini declined to comment as he left court with his lawyer, John Moscow. “The record speaks for itself,” Mr. Moscow said.
Mr. Niccolini, 62, was initially charged with felony sexual abuse when he surrendered to the police in June. The victim, who has not been identified by the authorities, was an acquaintance of Mr. Niccolini’s, the police said.
According to a criminal complaint, the woman told investigators Mr. Niccolini had tried to kiss her in the bar of the Four Seasons, on East 52nd Street, touching her legs and buttocks and pulling her toward him. Then he reached through an opening in the back of her dress, tugged on her bra until it ripped and tried to pull down her stockings, the complaint said. She had scratches and bruises from the encounter.
The police said the episode occurred at 9 p.m. on May 9, but the victim did not file a report with the Midtown North police precinct until May 11.
For nine months, Mr. Niccolini had waited to see if a grand jury would indict him on a charge of felony sexual abuse, appearing four times in court only to be told no action had been taken. That crime carries a maximum sentence of seven years in prison.
On Thursday, the prosecutor, Maxine Rosenthal, told the court that the charge had been reduced to simple third-degree assault, a misdemeanor that requires no grand jury vote.
Judge Lyle Frank warned Mr. Niccolini that he faces a year in jail if he fails to live a law-abiding life over the next year.