Visitors entering the Hudson Valley Center for Contemporary Art in Peekskill will find themselves standing beneath a cluster of shiny silver umbrellas that seem to be tumbling in the wind. Looking up, they will notice that lines of text have been cut into each umbrella. On the wall below, as if raining from above, silver letters are arranged vertically to form words: “kindness,” “dream” and others.
Each of the more than 70 works in “Word” incorporates text: isolated letters, bold words, enigmatic phrases, provocative sentences or fragments of stories. They are painted, printed or photographed; projected, beaded or sewn. They are etched into bronze, scribbled onto plywood, outlined with nails. Lines of text create diamond patterns in the wallpaper in Kristyna and Marek Milde’s living-room-like installation, “Home in a Home.” In Bill Schuck’s “Sometime,” the letters of the work’s title are seeded with grass that will grow through the run of the show.
“Word” features 55 artists, who range in age from their 20s to their 80s. Most were selected from the center’s first-ever regional open call. Their work is displayed alongside pieces by established international artists including Ms. Kimpton, Ann Hamilton, Oscar Murillo, Stefan Brüggemann, John Mellencamp (yes, the musician) and Robert Indiana, whose iconic “Love” towers eight feet tall.
Ms. Kimpton explained that the texts cut into her umbrellas are from some of the Old Testament’s bloodier passages, and that the more uplifting words on the wall consist of individual letters from those verses. “The umbrellas are dropping letters to rain out the positive words from the negative ones,” she said during the show’s opening last month.
Museumgoers may ponder the elusive meaning of the word “just,” present in each of Inguna Gremzde’s 12 tiny circular paintings of a lone figure with an empty shopping cart in an endless supermarket aisle. They may chuckle at Carla Rae Johnson’s portrait of a woman overwhelmed by her devices — phone, computer, iPod, Kindle, remote and a tangle of wires — beside the phrase “I am listening.” They may start humming the Culture Club song that was the source for Jeffrey Gibson’s beaded tapestry “In Time We Could Have Been So Much More,” the lyric set within a black-and-white checkerboard.
Other sorts of unsettling experiences are documented in the center’s mezzanine gallery, painted in emphatic letters on the shirtless backs of anonymous subjects in a series of photographic portraits. The portraits are new additions to “The ‘I’m Tired’ Project,” a social-media-based campaign illuminating the harmful effects of common discriminatory remarks. The statements of every participant begin with “I’m tired of …,” with the results addressing race, gender, health, politics and culture.
To date, the “I’m Tired” Facebook page has over 32,000 followers from more than 45 countries, with nearly 65 photographs that have sparked spirited online discussions. Last month, Prime Minister David Cameron of Britain named Ms. Akpan and Ms. Evans the 481st and 482nd winners of the daily Points of Light award, a program honoring volunteers that was established by President George Bush in 1990 and initiated in Britain in 2014. At the “Word” opening, Nick Astbury, a British deputy consul general, presented the award to the pair (Ms. Evans, now employed full time and unable to travel, joined in on Skype).
