The song starts with unmistakable flourishes from the dance-music playbook: a throbbing beat and four piano chords. Then the fast-spoken vocals come in, a husky voice singing, “You got a fast car/I want a ticket to anywhere.” They’re familiar for a reason: They’re the opening lines to “Fast Car,” Tracy Chapman’s bittersweet 1988 folk-pop ballad.
With its fluty synths and chilled-out vibe, this version of “Fast Car” — by the London producer Jonas Blue — is an example of tropical house, the type of electronic dance music, or E.D.M., that the producer Kygo has helped bring to the mainstream.
The song is Mr. Blue’s debut single, but he isn’t the only artist for whom Ms. Chapman’s track has struck a chord recently. In an exceedingly strange case of simultaneous musical inspiration, both Mr. Blue and the producer Tobtok, from Sweden, released dance covers of “Fast Car” within a week of each other this winter. Both are viral hits in Europe and gaining traction in the United States; both artists — Mr. Blue is 26, and Tobtok, 23 — are too young to have heard the original when the singer and songwriter Ms. Chapman first released it.
Ms. Chapman’s original “Fast Car” spins a yarn of hope, relying primarily on an acoustic guitar and her own throaty, impassioned vocals. The song won a Grammy Award and was her biggest hit. It has been covered many times — by artists from Xiu Xiu to Sam Smith — but never before to such an enthusiastic response. Mr. Blue’s version, the more successful of the two covers, has charted on iTunes in more than 50 countries, hitting No. 1 in five, and has been streamed more than 100 million times on Spotify.
Tobtok takes a somewhat sunnier approach in his peppy, brighter tropical house mix, featuring the singer River, which has made the iTunes charts in Ireland, Australia and Germany. He said in a phone conversation that he got the idea for the cover after seeing the music video for Ms. Chapman’s original at the Hard Rock in Budapest.
Both songs have been popular on Shazam, the song-recognition app that has increasingly become a predictor of mainstream chart success. (Neither song has yet reached the Billboard Hot 100; Ms. Chapman’s version peaked at No. 6 there.) Tobtok has hit No. 1 on Shazam in Ireland and Germany, while Mr. Blue is currently No. 9 worldwide. A representative for Shazam said that its data could predict a song’s future popularity about a month before the song reaches mainstream charts — in some cases, before an artist even has a Facebook page. That was the case with Fetty Wap, whose “Trap Queen” was an immediate viral hit; a Shazam executive publicly predicted that OMI’s “Cheerleader” would top the Billboard chart two months before it did just that last summer.
