404 pp. Alfred A. Knopf. $26.95.
In the 12 years since the founding of Facebook, young people’s use of social media has been the subject of fear — kids are rotting their brains and ruining their ability to form friendships! — and then a backlash: Don’t worry, savvy parents, social media is just another way for kids to connect.
The journalist Nancy Jo Sales isn’t convinced by such reassurances. In “American Girls: Social Media and the Secret Lives of Teenagers,” she offers a sort of third wave of social-media criticism. After talking to girls between the ages of 13 and 19 in 10 states, she believes we should be very worried indeed.
Too often, discussions of teenagers exclude teenagers themselves, and it’s clear that Sales has gone to great pains to listen to her subjects and to earn their trust. These girls have a lot to say not just about the apps on their phones but also about beauty, gender, race and class, and the book is at its most fascinating when they chat among themselves, sometimes as though Sales isn’t even there. For most of them, social media is a necessary evil. It’s an inextricable part of daily life — “Girls our age live on their phones,” one 16-year-old says — but also a source of anxiety and jealousy and a tool for harassment and abuse.
Anecdotes like this make a persuasive case that social media has ratcheted up the pressure girls have long faced to appear both desirable and chaste. Less clear from “American Girls” is what anyone can do about it.
Maybe — but it’s just as likely that Padma began posting more ­sexually charged photos of herself as she grew older, and kept doing it because she got positive reinforcement. The question of whether she can make that choice freely in a society that vigorously polices her appearance and sexual expression is a valid one. But such questions have been asked many times before, and Sales doesn’t bring much that is new to the debate.
Sales wrote a Vanity Fair story last year on the effect of Tinder and other dating apps on contemporary sexuality. In it, college women complained that men their age had no interest in courtship or even basic politeness — “Tinder has destroyed their game.” And 20-something male Tinder aficionados made a variety of repellent comments suggesting women are disposable and interchangeable: “If you had a reservation somewhere and then a table at Per Se opened up, you’d want to go there,” one of them said.
But social media didn’t create boys like this — as Amanda Marcotte at Slate put it in response to the Vanity Fair story, “gross dudes were not invented by apps.” Sales does point out real double standards for male and female sexual behavior, which have been far slower to change than technology. (While she talks to gay teenagers — one girl says friends of her ex-girlfriend harassed her on social media after the two broke up — most of her discussions of dating and sexuality focus on heterosexual kids.) But there’s something exhausting about hearing, yet again, that boys and young men can’t be bothered to be boyfriends; critics of hookup culture have been repeating that claim since some of Sales’s subjects were in diapers.
“American Girls” is also limited by its single-gender focus. While Sales talks to some older boys and young men, male voices are largely absent from the sections dealing with younger teenagers. The choice makes sense in a way — girls seem to suffer sexualized harassment and shaming on social media more frequently than boys do. But excluding boys’ perspectives gives readers an incomplete view of the problem and its potential solutions.
Do boys, too, feel pressure to present a certain image — maybe that of a player who’s talking to lots of girls? What do they think when their friends demand nude pictures from girls or harass them online? Do they ever feel guilty about how they treat girls on social media? What, if anything, might get them to change?
This time (which Ethan somewhat amusingly puts “in the ’70s”) wasn’t necessarily a happy one for women — many jeremiads about today’s sexual freedoms forget the oppressiveness that came before. But Sales doesn’t probe Ethan’s odd and possibly illuminating mixture of bravado and romanticism. And while she does mention the lack of female representation in Silicon Valley, she doesn’t spend much time discussing what tech companies could do to fix some of the problems she identifies. The effect is to make apps like Facebook and Twitter seem static and unchangeable, when in fact they change all the time, and their corporate owners could modify them to protect younger users.
It feels a bit strange to call for more talk of boys and big corporations in a book about girls. But when it comes to dating and sex, teenage girls are already subject to near-constant scrutiny, and they’re too often considered in isolation, as though the dangers and injustices they face are entirely theirs to solve. By focusing almost exclusively on how girls suffer, Sales repeats the usual unhelpful and defeatist refrain: It’s a terrible world out there, and girls have to navigate it all on their own.