The New York Philharmonic’s program this week could hardly be simpler or more moving. It consists of a single hourlong choral work by Brahms, “Ein Deutsches Requiem” (“A German Requiem”), exquisitely prepared and performed.
The orchestra has given many notable performances of the work over the years, perhaps none more so than the one led by Kurt Masur soon after the Sept. 11 attacks in 2001, a fitting and stirring memorial. The current version has no such reason for being but is its own occasion, with the eminent Brahmsian Christoph von Dohnanyi conducting and the New York Choral Artists, trained by another eminence, Joseph Flummerfelt, taking part.
The work, bypassing any standard liturgy for the requiem, sets reflective biblical passages selected by Brahms himself, mostly for full chorus and orchestra, and in Thursday’s performance, the dark, somber textures could not have been richer or better balanced. Mr. Dohnanyi, looking hale at 85, almost seemed at times to be playing an organ, pulling this or that stop to shift colorations seamlessly and blend sonorities smoothly.
His pacing was everywhere persuasive, and it paid special dividends in the second movement, “Denn alles Fleisch es ist wie Gras” (“For all flesh is as grass”). As Mr. Dohnanyi built to the two explosive climaxes — inexorably but without speeding up, everything in its own good time — the restraint was palpable, almost painful. A few odd but consistent accentuations and articulations of the text left room for head-scratching, yet scarcely detracted from the overall effect.
The work of the vocal soloists was not quite on the same exalted level. Matthias Goerne, the baritone, got around the notes well with a somewhat heavy, cavernous sound, but as so often, his physical mannerisms proved distracting. Camilla Tilling, the soprano, was clear of pitch and enunciation but a bit colorless of tone.
The orchestra, obviously well rehearsed for a short program, responded superbly to Mr. Dohnanyi’s vigorous direction. The strings — as usual, it seems, when Sheryl Staples, the principal associate concertmaster, is in charge — were especially fine: smooth and supple, and breathtaking in some of their pianissimos.
This performance is indeed an occasion, and not to be missed.