CHICAGO — By 25, Donnell Flora was a regular in the court system here. He had been convicted of shoplifting, found guilty twice in stolen property cases and sentenced to prison for drugs.
But those past sins were minor compared with what officials said happened on April 28, 2014, when Mr. Flora gave his 14-year-old niece a gun she used to shoot two of her peers on the South Side. One of the girls, Endia Martin, 14, died from a gunshot wound to her back. The other victim, a 16-year-old, has recovered.
On Monday, Mr. Flora, now 27, was sentenced to 100 years in prison — 65 years for Endia’s murder, plus 35 years for the attempted murder of the other girl. The authorities said the motivation for the shooting by Mr. Flora’s niece, who is awaiting trial for murder in juvenile court, was a dispute about a boy. Officials said the handgun used in the shooting had been illegally transferred and then falsely reported stolen before it ended up in Mr. Flora’s possession.
Endia’s death stood out among the hundreds of killings here each year, both because of her age and because of the petty motive. Derrick Rose, the Chicago Bulls basketball player, paid respects before her memorial service, and in the months since, Endia’s name has frequently been invoked as a tragic example of Chicago’s proliferation of guns and homicides.
“There is no excuse or rationalization for giving a child a gun to take to a ridiculous fight about a boy — none,” Judge Thaddeus Wilson said Monday in court, according to The Chicago Tribune.
The police said Mr. Flora accompanied his niece to the site of the shooting in his wheelchair, which his lawyer said he uses because he was shot and paralyzed in Chicago years earlier. After Endia’s shooting, prosecutors said, a 16-year-old took the gun from Mr. Flora’s niece and returned it to Mr. Flora. That 16-year-old has since been convicted and sentenced to probation.
Chicago is struggling to contain a surge in violent crime. Through March 13, there had been 114 murders this year in Chicago, double the total from that period in 2015. Other crimes, including robbery and aggravated battery, are also up, according to Chicago Police Department statistics.
Last week, three Chicago police officers were shot and wounded during a narcotics investigation, and the suspect was killed by the police. Also this month, the father of a 9-year-old boy killed last year was himself charged with shooting three people.
