Times Insider|My Job: Watch ‘Downton Abbey.’ Poor Me.
My Job: Watch ‘Downton Abbey.’ Poor Me.
Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how news, features and opinion pieces come together at The New York Times. In this piece, writer Louis Bayard describes what it was like to write The Times’s “Downton Abbey” recaps.
No! It was the right cheek!
Season 5, Episode 6 of “Downton Abbey” had just played out across America’s TV screens. My recap had gone online, and the fun was getting underway.
That’s because, in one of the show’s key plot developments, Thomas Barrow, the sporadically evil underbutler, had undergone a quack regimen to cure himself of homosexuality and had developed a nasty abscess on his ...
There was the rub.
You see, I remembered seeing the lesion on his left buttock. But within minutes of my blog going live, a swarm of commenters (and emailers and Facebook posters) rose up with one voice to flag my error.
It’s one thing to hear America singing; it’s quite another to hear it fact-checking. But the Great Buttock Controversy of 2015, in addition to producing one of the more amusing corrections in The Times’s recent history, reinforced for me just how closely “Downton” viewers were watching — and just how ardently they felt about getting it right. Or left.
It’s in the nature of fandom, of course, to crouch protectively over a beloved program. But I would argue that the “Downton” passion is unique in that it admits any manner of opposed feelings — impatience, hilarity, agnosticism, scorn, bafflement — and still thrives and still endures.
The assignment to recap “Downton Abbey” fell into my lap (that’s very much how it felt) in December 2014, about two weeks before the fifth season began. I honestly wondered if I was the right person for the job. Like many viewers, I had gobbled up the first season, hung on through the next two and then begun to drift sometime after the death of Matthew Crawley. (There should be a moniker for this phenomenon: the Crawley Crawl? the Matthew Malaise?) So recapping the show meant more than just catching up; it meant coming to grips with what I really thought about Julian Fellowes’s creation.
So, going in, I was clear about one thing: I would need to have some fun with this show.
Of course, I didn’t want to be a nattering nabob of negativism, so I made sure to throw in categories like “Best Line” and “Best Scene” to keep me on the side of the angels. And since I invariably had to research Mr. Fellowes’s allusions, I came up with “I Google so you don’t have to.” Looking back, I can see I was just bracing myself against the backdraft of viewer rage: How dare you treat our show this way?
The “Downton Abbey” viewers — the Abbots, as I called them — were completely on board from the start. Really, I think you could make a case that they are the least pious fan base in the world. (Don’t believe me? Try getting snarky about Don Draper.) They knew exactly what kind of program they had on their hands. They had followed it through all its stages of silliness and excess and torpor — and, yes, its occasional moments of transcendence.
Certainly they wanted to talk about what Maggie Smith had said or what Michelle Dockery was wearing. But I think, at bottom, they just wanted to assure each other: It’s O.K. to be here. It’s O.K. to love this show, warts and all.
Indeed, one of the most heartening aspects of recapping “Downton Abbey” was seeing commenters take some open-ended question I had posed (e.g. “What’s going to happen to Edith? Will Mary find love?”) and not just pose an answer but run with it. If you go back to any column, you can find an hour’s worth of entertainment just reading the comments, which are a display of wit and literacy — and engagement — that any show would be proud to lay claim to. Recapping, in the end, is a collaboration. And from where I sit, the more the merrier.
“Till the gong calls us back,” I wrote in my last recap. I sincerely hope it will.