Credit...Photographs from Getty Images. Animation by Jessica Tang.
Welcome to Social Capital, a series devoted to analyzing the social media presences of celebrities.
When you’re a stan – a portmanteau of “stalker” and “fan” meant to elicit the idea of unconditional love — you’re also a sleuth, forever seeking more information to satiate your unending curiosity. Original sources — the celebrities themselves — provide unsurprising results: photos of a day spent by the pool, a post that’s a not-so-cleverly cloaked ad for tummy tea.
It’s the secondary sources who deliver the revelations. In this way, a good Instagram sleuth knows what a good painter knows: The success of a portrait hinges on the consultation of shadow as much as the sketch of a face. As official — that is, highly stylized and controlled — celebrity accounts monopolize access, the Instagram feeds of the fame-adjacent provide the insight that probing fans desire. With a discipline not unlike that of the great masters, the most serious fans sort through the Instagram accounts of people close to their beloved celebrities, whether family, friends or fabulous assistants, to procure an oblique, relatively unmanicured view into a famous person’s private life.
I am one of those fans. I follow Melissa Forde, best friend of Rihanna, to get supplementary behind-the-scenes content of the singer at work and at play. I check Tina Lawson’s account obsessively, not for insights into her daughter Beyoncé’s life — because there are none — but for the rush of normalcy that comes when Lawson posts photos of her Sunday-morning trips to Costco for the free samples. The casual mundanity is a thrilling reminder of the mortality of our biggest celebrities (They’re Just Like Us! Their Moms Eat!), most likely the only thing they still share in common with their fan base.
But then there is Dennis Graham, father to Aubrey Drake Graham, the biggest rapper in the world, whose feed lies somewhere between celebrity-backed extravagance and boring supermarket trips. It’s a doting, excessive, almost embarrassing record of his life with his son, a virtual refrigerator door where fans can discover scores of new information and Graham, above all, can flex on his progeny.
On his Instagram feed, Dennis Graham repeatedly falls in conspicuous love: with the Apothecanna cannabis pain cream he bought while in the studio in Denver; with the many women wearing brows arched to mathematical precision; with the cartoon busts artists make of his already animated, mustachioed likeness. Graham is a consummate fan and a hater of little (except, vehemently, of other haters). Seriously, never aim at Drake under the omnipresent watch of Father Graham. The 63-year-old veers from his reliably ebullient tone only in service of protecting his son: “For all y’all that don’t know and are talking [expletive] about Drake being soft Trust Me Don’t Try Him,” followed by nine exclamation points. What can you say? The man loves his son. So do millions of other people: This gaiety and ferocious paternal love delights his followers, 127,000 migrants from Drake’s @champagnepapi account who are now sincere fans of @TheRealDennisG.
Even the most thorough sweep of Drake’s digital footprint won’t tell you much about his years at Forest Hills Collegiate Institute in Toronto. But from a post to Graham’s account, a “Forest Hills Public School presents: Les Misérables” cast-and-crew T-shirt, we learn that the rapper was somehow involved in the show. (How good of a Javert would a young Aubrey Graham have been?) Such are the delicious fruits of @TheRealDennisG. Graham’s Instagram account works as a logical thoroughfare for learning more about a celebrity whose performance mononym otherwise conceals his family heritage. Dennis Graham’s photos and the wild pride animating the captions that follow tell us a bittersweet story of family reunion.
Until he joined Instagram in 2013, Graham was mostly known to fans as the man tattooed on Drake’s ever-growing biceps. We caught a glimpse of Graham’s aptitude for instant virality when he, white-suited and dark-spectacled, sauntered elegantly in front of hot pink Cadillacs in Drake’s “Worst Behavior” video, which brought scores more fans to his Instagram account. In terms of coolness, the child was not father to the man, clearly. And in the manner that a parent’s quirks reveal some occult knowledge about the child, Graham — a musician who, at 4, received a drum set from James Brown as a recognition of talent but never achieved fame himself — soon roused a fandom on his own terms.
You’re never too old to mature, though — or in digital-media speak, to aestheticize. Graham’s rectangular glasses and lustrous handlebar mustache proved only the beginning. It seemed that once he got the hang of the app, Graham’s feed transitioned to conveying a lifestyle of middle-aged joie de vivre and sartorial singularity. Taylor Lautner supports him at his shows; Cedric the Entertainer wanted to take a picture with him. Graham likes either tropical-print bucket hats or tight white knit ones, and for his OVO totem chain to swing heavy on his chest. (Never predictable, he also enjoys “attire from India.”) He travels to Stockholm to shoot a video; to Los Angeles to visit the OVO store; to Memphis, his hometown, to write music, flashing peace signs all the way around the world. He especially adores performing — “Always fun to play drums when I get the chance!” one blurry post reads. “Nothing can take these days away from me,” he writes underneath a shot of a worn Enyce T-shirt, catnip for the compulsively nostalgic followers in his comments, who responded with flurries of heart and prayer-hands emoji. Graham’s jocular captioning style — exclamation points! Emoji! Sentence fragments! – is not unlike a teenager’s, although his imperfection is effortless rather than engineered.
Graham is fiercely present in his son’s life, appearing at Drake’s studio sessions, at basketball games, on vacations. He coordinates a luxe athleisure suit with his son’s at Drake’s 29th birthday dinner in Las Vegas; the photos he posts of that night are obscuring and taken at unsteady digital-foreigner angles. They feel more intimate than the ones we get from Drake’s account a few hours later. Through his dad’s eyes, the musical sensation known as the Boy looks like his boy—“my baby,” the caption says. Even for a father, the frenzied adoration is remarkable.
Maybe that’s because Graham wasn’t always there. The same year Graham started his posts, his son released “Nothing Was the Same.” In “From Time,” Drake croons over a list of anxieties, including some regarding his father. “I’ve been dealing with my dad speaking of a lack of patience/Just me and my old man getting back to basics.” At first glance, this seems pedestrian: Many rappers dip into autobiography and persona at sophisticated turns. Moreover, the thematic primacy of family, biological or found, defines rap as a sentimental art. But as loaded as Graham’s feed is, there is a missing chronology on his posts that underscores Drake’s lyrics: We see pictures of Dennis doting on a baby Drake, and pictures of them from the recent adult friendship, but little in between. Graham’s frequent absence during Drake’s childhood and incarcerations during Drake’s adolescence affected their relationship as much the father’s knowledge of Memphis blues did. A 2014 profile of Graham in The Memphis Flyer finds the father defensive when the reporter questions him about Drake’s portrayal of their relationship. Graham refuses to answer directly about the estrangement. “I want to be known as Drake’s dad,” he says instead. “That’s my son.” The sheer accumulation of photos speaks for him and their recuperated closeness, Graham’s brand of public contrition. Graham says he’s happy, but his outpouring intimates that he’s also sorry.
If parents are the original critics, then they are also the first stans, unrestricted by the distancing effect of fame’s machine. That love is never perfect, but it can, perhaps, always be salvaged. Parents are hams for their kids: the doting messages, the outsize concerns, the self-sacrifice. Anyone, famous or not quite, who has been the living, breathing investment of one or two more individuals recognizes, and probably cringes at, their parents’ deeply camp habits.
The cliché is that parents want to give their kids a better life. Sometimes, it’s the children who forge that better life for themselves and end up taking care of their parents. On Instagram, Graham is experiencing a second youth and the exhibitionism of love, style and work that accompanies it. Watching him pursue his ambitions – chief among all, a relationship with his son — in middle age means watching a fantasy weightier than achieving celebrity. Everyone wants Dennis Graham to win, schmaltzy as he is. And if that means scrolling through no fewer than four separate posts about a blues session he headlined in Memphis, then so be it.
An earlier version of this article misspelled part of the name of Drake’s school. It is Forest Hill Collegiate Institute (not Hills).