Months ago, I relished the prospect of Donald Trump’s landing the Republican presidential nomination, in a bring ’em on sort of way. As such a prospect inches closer to reality, I realize that I (and the rest of the cynical left) should have been careful what we wished for.
What’s getting me down is that Mr. Trump’s base doesn’t care about his inability to reflexively denounce the Ku Klux Klan, his combative rhetoric, his lack of a real platform. I sense only anger and despair among the base, and a nasty sort of glee in pushing a candidate built on those anti-values into contention for the presidency.
While I can’t even think about the prospect of a Trump win without cringing despair, what worries me even more is the fact that I feel no connection with the people who make up the base. I don’t understand their despair, the factors that are pushing them to endorse this negative candidacy in spite of Mr. Trump’s glaring drawbacks.
And I get the sense that the base doesn’t understand my left-of-left coastal urban anxieties, my existential environmental dread and deep skepticism of late capitalism’s ability to build a society that serves anyone but the 1 percent. But I desperately want to believe that we are not “the other” to each other, that we could connect as fellow citizens, as human beings.
Which brings me to my modest proposal: What would happen if there were a forum for people from around the country to share their political hopes and fears? I’m envisioning short letters in which folks from every ideological background can explain their positions, spend time reading about how other folks feel, and (hopefully!) start to understand what the other side fears. It would be an opportunity for those of us who haven’t been speaking up in this election cycle to voice our opinions, in a setting that would hopefully tone down the vitriol and, perhaps, inspire some real empathy.
Politics is all compromise; perhaps if we understood where some of our fellow voters were coming from, we’d be less inclined to vilify and more willing to abandon our rigid political views to work out something politically flexible and appealing to (almost) everyone.
Editors’ Note: Mr. Suhr, your wish is granted. We invite readers to comment on what personal experiences, anxieties or ideals have led you to support a particular candidate.