Here is a recipe for a fast meal: Put one teaspoon of miso in a mug and dissolve with a tiny bit of hot water to make a sort of loose paste. Add a squeeze of lime juice and fill the mug to the top with hot water from the kettle. Stir. You have just made the simplest form of miso soup, and a pretty tasty one.
The flavor — sweet, salty, nutty, mellow — is all derived from miso, the traditional paste made from fermented soybeans, used in Japan and throughout Asia. Miso’s main contribution to Japanese cooking, besides its beneficial nutritional and probiotic elements, is the way it deepens the flavor of food, imparting an extra dimension.
But there are, of course, other ways to make a miso soup with more complexity.
Shaved bonito flakes or dried shiitake mushrooms are often part of the mix too, adding an almost instant boost of umami.
If you make a batch of dashi and keep it on hand, refrigerated, for several days, you can make miso soup at the drop of a hat.
Indeed, a giant bowl of miso soup (as opposed to the elegant but diminutive portion served in sushi bars) is exactly what I want for dinner some nights. For my customized vegetarian version of miso mushroom soup, I slice fresh shiitake and king oyster mushrooms, then season them with sesame oil, garlic and ginger before simmering them briefly in dashi.
Then comes the miso. In most Asian groceries, there are lots of different types of miso to choose from, but generally speaking, the paler so-called white miso is milder and sweeter than the longer-fermented red miso, which tends to be saltier and taste stronger. Try different types to see which kind you like most.
After stirring in the miso, I ladle the soup over chunks of silken tofu. It really doesn’t need more than a few chopped scallions before serving, but it’s fun to assemble a mix of other toppings — slivers of toasted nori, sunflower sprouts, fragrant shiso leaves, the tips of tiny enoki mushrooms, toasted sesame seeds.
For me, a good pinch of crushed red pepper is always the final flourish.
