Opinion|I’m Not Evil. I’m a Landlord.
I’m Not Evil. I’m a Landlord.
I collect stories and hardships, too — and rent. I’m a landlord. Eviction notices — I buy them by the carton from Ohio Legal Blank. I’ve probably evicted 100 people, two or three a year for 40 years. Two weeks ago I evicted a recovering, or not so recovering, drug addict. He was stealing from his wife, and she wanted him out, so I evicted him. When the locksmith changed the lock, I gave the wife but not the husband new keys.
I’m familiar with the bailiffs and magistrates at municipal court. I carry a clip-on tie in my car so I look sharp — blue tie over a green shirt, the middle-school art-teacher look. I’m not a lawyer, but I know what “forcible entry and detainer” means. Eviction.
I try to give my apartments a middle-class feel. The buildings are in an inner-ring suburb of Cleveland. The rents are typically $490 to $630 month. No dishwasher, no central air, no granite countertops. But clean and painted. The tenants are teachers, nurses, food servers and landscapers. Many live paycheck to paycheck.
Rule No. 1: A tenant can be late with her rent (and pay a $20 late fee), but she can’t cause trouble in the building. In “Evicted,” one of the landlord’s sons says, “We can’t have police coming up in here.” Well, exactly.
I told him to wait. “The police are investigating,” I said. The police found heroin needles in the bedroom dresser. Luckily — for me at least — the death turned out to have been a suicide. If it had been murder, the building would have emptied out.
Granted, there are some unscrupulous landlords. A friend who managed properties in Dallas said his competition sometimes removed the locks when tenants were late with their rent. That’s called a “self-help” eviction and is illegal.
I said: “I’m evil, I know that. You don’t like me.” I hung up and called the bank. The check was good. Peace and prosperity — until next month, when she was back in Bounce City.
Her baby’s father wasn’t paying child support. But that was her problem, not mine. I went to eviction court, and she had 10 days to move.
I think I’m better at providing affordable housing than the government. I have a tenant in his 70s who pays me $189 a month, and the government pays the remaining $351. He can’t get out of bed, so a social worker brings him food. A government inspector periodically tells me what to repair. The inspector is checking boxes. For instance, she wrote, “Paint peeling in the hallway.” Which hallway, I wondered: common-area hallway or in the apartment? I called and she said “in the apartment.” This tenant’s walls turn yellow every six months because he smokes so much.
“I don’t even want the paint job,” he said to me. We painted the walls anyway.
The inspector comes by twice a year. The building manager is there every day, and has been for 36 years. He picks up litter, shovels the sidewalk, does minor repairs and makes sure nobody is dying or puking or going nuts — at least not in public. Rule No. 2: Do whatever you want in your apartment, but outside we’re all going to act middle class.
My dad, who started the family landlord business, used to say, “We are not a social services agency.” He was wrong.