On March 15, the CBS crime procedural “NCIS” will air its 300th episode. As I write in my look back at 13 years of the series, reaching that number is a rare feat, and it’s usually a fairly circumspect type of show that does it. But while it might be easy to think of “NCIS” as comfort food, it is deeper and more ambitious than most people realize. Here are my nominations as the five most compelling “NCIS” episodes — ones that went unexpected places or showed especially deft writing and acting. (You can watch them all on CBS’s subscription streaming service, CBS All Access; the show’s first 12 seasons are also currently on Netflix.) Agree? Disagree? What episodes really got your attention? Offer up your choices in the comments section.
 The episode, tense and emotional, really served to strengthen the links between the characters. If the NCIS crew wasn’t fully a team before this, it was after.
A case puts Gibbs in contact with his father (played by Ralph Waite of “The Waltons”). To say that they don’t talk much is an understatement. But, at the episode’s end, in a beautifully subtle bit of writing, we learn where Gibbs’s famous “rules” — which he has used over the years to correct, guide and torment staff members — came from.
A lot of eyes were on “NCIS” at this point, thanks both to a Season 6 cliffhanger and the show’s increasing popularity in general. This episode is a tour de force for the actor Michael Weatherly, who spends much of it tied in a chair, injected with truth serum. Full of flashbacks, the episode was a bold departure from the standard format, defying the “predictable” label that’s often stuck on this series.
In an inspired bit of casting, Bob Newhart plays Ducky’s mentor and predecessor, who visits the autopsy room in search of something he can’t quite articulate. Ducky realizes that his old friend is looking for his memories, which he is losing. Never mind the crime of the week, although there is one (about the murder of a recruiter and don’t-ask-don’t-tell); this is all about two television veterans finding depth in a simple story.
A hit-and-run reminds Abby of her first “case,” when she was a young girl. Pauley Perrette, often reduced to being a bit ditsy, shows her serious side, a performance complemented by a perfectly cast Brighton Sharbino, who plays young Abby. At the episode’s end, Gibbs gives Abby one of TV’s most heart-wrenching pep talks.