Television|‘House of Cards’ Season 4, Episode 6: Is Pollyhop a Sillier Name Than Slugline?
‘House of Cards’ Season 4, Episode 6: Is Pollyhop a Sillier Name Than Slugline?
Frank Underwood is back in business. After a successful liver transplant, he recovers, leaves the hospital and, by episode’s end, reclaims his job from Donald Blythe.
As usual, restoring Frank to a position of political strength means that other people must die. As we see in a quick scene before that graphic depiction of Frank’s surgery, the liver that saves him comes from a young suicide victim named Danny. Anthony P. Moretti, a father of two bypassed by the president on the liver-donation recipient list, also dies because of Frank.
In classic “House of Cards” style, any concern about collateral damage is swept aside so the focus can remain on the ambitions of Claire and Frank, who resume their status as a formidable, united front. In retrospect, their reunion now seems inevitable.
Later, after she returns to the White House ahead of Frank’s return, Claire is again deliberately positioned in the frame to look small, particularly when she’s curled up in the fetal position on the love seat at the foot of her bed. Knowing that Frank is back, she looks minimized, diminished and drained of purpose. Frank, still in recuperation mode, looks diminished as well; the slick brown dye in his hair has faded to gray, making him appear older and, coupled with his reduced physical size, frail. Kevin Spacey’s performance in the whole Claire reunion sequence — when he chokes up over Meechum’s death and struggles to walk with Claire’s help — may be the best work he’s ever done on “House of Cards.” For once, he gets to exhibit vulnerability that feels genuine.
Frank promises her that she can have something more than just the role of first lady, continuing the “House of Cards” tradition of treating that job dismissively but also giving Claire what she wants and making them co-pilots again. Question: Shouldn’t Frank be more angry with Claire? She abandoned him while he was undergoing surgery and wouldn’t even take his call when he woke up for the first time in days, if not weeks. That certainly seems like grounds for holding a grudge. But Frank doesn’t resent those choices because they resemble the choices he would have made; he looks at Claire and he sees shades of himself. Either that or he’s super-woozy from the meds he’s taking.
Frank’s hallucinations, consciously or subconsciously, seem to renew his resolve to do whatever it takes to stay alive and in the White House. The simultaneously sultry and threatening sequences involving Peter Russo and Zoe Barnes play like an attempt to seduce Frank into sweet death, much the way Frank lured them to theirs. (“You tried, Frank, which is more than most people ever do,” Peter coos in Frank’s ear. “Right now, it’s just us. And we have all the time in the world.”) The image of Frank, Peter and Zoe wrapped together in a freakish purgatory orgy eventually gives way to another mental snapshot: of Frank and Claire sitting across from each other in the Oval Office. That, it seems, is what brings Frank back.
Pollyhop is a fictional, Google-esque search engine that according to Leann’s polling expert is being exploited by the Republican candidate Will Conway in ways that suggest Underwood can’t possibly beat him in the general election. The explanation of how Pollyhop works is convoluted at best, but the gist is that Conway and his people are manipulating search engine results so that only positive coverage of their side appears. As to why that alone would completely tip the election scale in favor of Conway — I don’t know. Maybe a search on Pollyhop would uncover the answer?
At the very least, Frank no longer has to worry about competing against Heather Dunbar, whose commitment to running an honest campaign proves to be her undoing. Heather decides to speak candidly with investigators about the fact that she met with Lucas Goodwin and about Frank’s lack of a moral compass. Once the video of her interrogation hits the news media, she winds up looking as paranoid as Lucas and, worse, disrespectful of a commander in chief who is still ailing. As Doug tells the health and human services secretary, a person can either change her ethics or lose her job. Heather seems smart and seasoned enough, however, to maintain her ethics without being quite so dumb; she could have easily decided to be truthful without going the extra-naive step of allowing the video of her interview to be released.
In any case, during the second half of Season 4, it seems that Frank’s opponent will no longer be Heather or Claire. Now he’ll have to deal with an entity perhaps even more formidable: a rich and very electable Republican.