WASHINGTON — Paul D. Ryan made his name as a master of budgets, putting forward sweeping documents that epitomized the Republican Party’s preference for slashing taxes, curtailing spending and shrinking government. But his first chance to pass a fiscal blueprint as speaker of the House is at risk of being derailed by the conservatives who forced a government shutdown in 2013 and ousted his predecessor last fall.
On Monday night, hours before the House Budget Committee unveiled a $3.9 trillion budget for 2017, members of the hard-line House Freedom Caucus issued a statement saying they would oppose the plan because it adheres to an agreement reached last fall between Congressional Republican leaders and President Obama that includes modest increases in federal spending.
If the Freedom Caucus stays united, Republican leadership probably will not have enough votes to pass the budget.
Privately, Mr. Ryan has been preparing colleagues and staff for the possibility that Republicans would fail to reach an agreement, an outcome that might embarrass him personally. It would also deny Republicans some procedural weapons and probably disrupt the regular appropriations process. But ultimately, a spending plan would most likely be approved at the previously agreed-upon levels.
At a news conference on Tuesday, Mr. Ryan said that while he still hoped to adopt a budget, the decision would be made by the entire House Republican conference, clearly allowing for the prospect of failure.
Democrats pointed out how quickly Mr. Ryan had found himself in a similar predicament as his predecessor, John A. Boehner, who clashed repeatedly with Freedom Caucus members over fiscal policy.
Representative Tom Price, Republican of Georgia and chairman of the House Budget Committee, has scheduled a hearing on Wednesday to make final adjustments to the $3.9 trillion plan. He has expressed confidence that he will have the votes to move the proposal to the floor.
In recent weeks, Mr. Price and other Republican leaders have tried to address the demand for further spending reductions by proposing $30 billion in cuts to mandatory programs like Medicare and Social Security. Those reductions would theoretically offset increases in discretionary spending that were part of the agreement with Mr. Obama last fall.
Many hard-line conservatives, however, have been unmoved, in part because they do not believe that Mr. Obama would sign legislation making those reductions.
In a statement on Monday night, the Freedom Caucus noted that the national debt now exceeds $19 trillion and that the deficit increased by $105 billion this year. The group said it could not go along with the budget drawn up by Mr. Price and his committee.
Republicans said that Mr. Price’s proposal would reduce deficits and create economic growth, while Democrats said it would benefit the wealthy and harm working-class Americans.
Maya MacGuineas, the president of a watchdog group called the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, said that the Republican budget proposal demonstrated a positive move toward fiscal restraint, but she also cautioned that Congress had repeatedly failed to deliver on its promises of deficit reduction.
“Chairman Price should be commended for releasing a plan that calls for reversing the growth of our national debt, reforming entitlement programs, improving the budget process, and facilitating concrete action to begin reducing deficits,” Ms. MacGuineas said in a statement.
