Its report was released at a news conference Wednesday in Flint.
It particularly focused on state employees: analysts in charge of supervising water quality, state-appointed emergency managers who prized frugality over public safety, and staff members in the governor’s office who adopted a “whack a mole” attitude to beat away persistent reports of problems.
In making that declaration, the five-member panel put a spotlight on a long-running civil rights issue: whether minorities and the poor are treated differently when it comes to environmental matters, relegating them to some of the most dangerous places in the country: flood prone areas of New Orleans that were devastated after Hurricane Katrina; highly polluted parts of Detroit and the Bronx; and “Cancer Alley” in Louisiana, where residents who live near factories suffer disproportionately from disease.
Many of the panel’s other findings reiterated facts and ideas that had emerged in thousands of pages of documents, and several congressional hearings, about bureaucratic indifference and mistakes that not only caused the crisis but prolonged it. More investigations are continuing, with the possibility of criminal charges, and the report notes that other investigators with subpoena powers might unearth even more egregious information.
The decision to switch the water source — and the failure to add crucial chemicals to the city water supply to block pipe corrosion, the source of the water’s lead contamination — was made in an attempt to save money, the report says. And it warned that emergency managers, who are usually appointed to deal with governments that are in dire financial crisis, as was the case in Flint, were not equipped to handle health and environmental issues, which demand a special expertise.
“It goes in and takes away democratic rights, primarily in communities of poverty,” Mr. Ananich said.
The panel, created by Mr. Snyder in October, met to discuss the findings and conducted some 60 interviews. Its members are Dr. Matthew Davis, a pediatrician and professor of public policy; Mr. Kolb; Dr. Lawrence Reynolds, a pediatrician in Flint; Eric Rothstein, a water consultant; and Mr. Sikkema.
The panel made 44 recommendations, including that the governor’s office review the state’s emergency manager law, that environmental regulations be clarified, and that the governor’s office improve its method of assessing information.
Mr. Snyder, who has been heavily criticized for the slow response to the crisis, accepted the report at the news conference in Flint. “There are a lot of excellent recommendations here,” Mr. Snyder said, adding that the state was putting some of them in place. He has repeatedly apologized for the mistakes and indifference cited in the report, and argued that he was repeatedly reassured by “career bureaucrats” and “so-called experts” in state government that the water was safe.
Two resignations followed the release of a draft of the task force report in December: Dan Wyant, the director of the Department of Environmental Quality since 2011, and Brad Wurfel, the communications director. The final report did not recommend any specific firings or resignations.