LOS ANGELES — In his final term as California’s governor, Jerry Brown has made the battle against climate change a signature issue: He is fighting to vastly reduce the state’s emissions of greenhouse gases, to accelerate the move to electric cars and to rewire the state’s electrical grid. In December, he had a star turn with world leaders at the United Nations climate change conference in Paris.
But despite all his efforts, California’s emissions rose modestly over the first three years after he took office in 2011, the last years for which data is available. The latest blow came from Porter Ranch, a Los Angeles suburb where a breach at an underground natural-gas storage site in October released 107,000 tons of climate-changing methane and ethane — the largest such leak in terms of climate impact in American history — before it was capped late last month.
A report in the journal Science last week concluded that the Porter Ranch breach, at its peak, effectively doubled the amount of methane emitted daily in the Los Angeles Basin, highlighting how such accidents can set back even the best-intentioned climate policies.
Speaking on behalf of the Brown administration, Mary D. Nichols, the chairwoman of the California Air Resources Board, said her agency had been working on regulations for methane as a short-lived climate pollutant when the leak occurred.
She said that the environmental policy makers — not just the Brown administration — had only recently started to focus on the effects of pollutants like methane, and that the Porter Ranch leak had added a sense of urgency to address that.
“It’s been a jolt for everybody, realizing what potential for really major harm can come from this sector, which we have tended to take pretty much for granted,” Ms. Nichols said. New studies have shown that, even aside from the leak, “there’s more methane escaping into the atmosphere than we previously thought,” she added.
The leak not only snarled the state’s climate-change efforts but also prompted complaints that the governor was slow to address the problem and that his regulators had failed to prevent it.
Food & Water Watch, a group that works to ban hydraulic fracturing and protect the water supply, sometimes brings a papier-mâché likeness of Mr. Brown to its rallies to decry what it sees as his support for the oil and gas industry. The governor has shunned calls to move toward reducing the state’s oil production, and while he has supported strict regulation of hydraulic fracturing, commonly called fracking, he has opposed a ban on the technique.
In the last year, Mr. Brown has pushed through legislation accelerating a shift to renewable energy, and struck clean-energy agreements with a host of states and cities. California now gets 26 percent of its power from renewable sources, compared with an average of 10 percent in other states.
Ms. Nichols said that the governor “has a broad view of what the state needs to be doing on these issues, and it’s now been incorporated into the work of every relevant agency.” For example, the Department of General Services now considers the environment when buying fleets, she said, and the Department of Transportation includes greenhouse gas emissions in its plans.
But there have been setbacks for the governor and his goals besides Porter Ranch. In 2013, the state was unexpectedly forced to close the San Onofre nuclear power station north of San Diego, eliminating a zero-emissions source of electricity. Last October, the California State Legislature spurned what was perhaps Mr. Brown’s most ambitious proposal — to cut petroleum use in half by 2030 — after a campaign by the oil industry raised voters’ fears of higher gasoline prices.
And there are signs of fatigue here with environmental regulations in general. Last month, the agency charged with preserving California’s coastline ousted its executive director, who was deemed too hostile to development. And on Friday, the regional commission that oversees air quality for 17 million people in the Los Angeles area made a similar move: Republicans committed to making pollution regulations more business-friendly, who took control of the commission last month, ousted its executive director.
John Laird, California secretary for natural resources, offered a laundry list of accomplishments during the Brown administration, beginning with the focus on climate change, but moving on to a variety of habitat protection efforts that are far less heralded, like negotiating a deal with Nevada to maintain Lake Tahoe and creating a network of marine protected areas.
Yet even many who applaud that record suggest that Mr. Brown should guard against overconfidence.
Some criticisms verge on Monday-morning quarterbacking: Mr. Brown, environmental advocates say, has not courted state legislators enough to secure their votes on crucial issues — like the proposal on petroleum use — that might have passed with more effort.
But some are more substantive. Example one is the San Onofre shutdown, after which Mr. Brown pushed to quickly replace lost electrical generating capacity with a brace of new gas-fired power plants. The plants have been approved, but they carry a different cost: Gas-fired generators emit climate-changing gases that nuclear reactors do not.
Some scientists say that the trajectory looks positive. Together with colleagues, Jeffery Greenblatt, a scientist and expert on low-carbon technology at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in Berkeley has used computer models to study whether the first step toward Mr. Brown’s 2050 goal — getting greenhouse-gas emissions back to 1990 levels by 2020 — was feasible. Under three different scenarios, the resulting graphs show a line representing carbon emissions steadily dropping until the 2020 goal is met.
That the line was still rising in 2013 is interesting, he said, but not worrisome — yet.
