Told to reduce his son’s time in the clubhouse, Chicago White Sox first baseman Adam LaRoche took a different path: He said he planned to retire and walk away from a $13 million salary.
The president of the White Sox, Kenny Williams, confirmed Wednesday that he had twice asked LaRoche in the last week to “dial it back” with his 14-year-old son, Drake.
Williams said LaRoche’s son was a “quality young kid” and not a distraction. But Williams indicated he did not want anything to disturb the team’s focus this season.
“Sometimes you have to make decisions in this world that are unpopular,” Williams said before Chicago played a spring training game in Phoenix against Milwaukee.
The situation seemed likely to stir a debate beyond the sport: What is a proper take-your-child-to-work environment?
It was unclear what LaRoche, 36, would ultimately do or how the White Sox would fill his spot if he did not return.
On Tuesday, LaRoche abruptly said he planned to leave the game. White Sox General Manager Rick Hahn described it as a “personal decision” without elaborating, and LaRoche was asked to reconsider.
LaRoche drew plenty of support from fellow players. He is in his second year with the White Sox, his sixth major league team.
LaRoche, a son and brother of major leaguers, knows about that.
It has become part of major league culture to see sons in the clubhouse and on the field with their fathers for early pregame practice. Ken Griffey Jr., Cal Ripken Jr. and Prince Fielder are among the many stars who came up that way.
Different teams have had different rules. Some clubs have allowed children in the clubhouse after Sunday games, provided they were victories.
That led Williams to speak with LaRoche, who hit only .207 with 12 home runs last season.
Williams emphasized that he thought it was “great” to have kids around a team. “I just don’t think it’s great every day,” he said.
PUIG WON’T BE DISCIPLINED Los Angeles Dodgers outfielder Yasiel Puig will not be punished by Major League Baseball for his involvement in an incident in a Miami nightclub last fall.
Puig was left with a swollen eye and facial bruises on Nov. 26. A Miami Police Department spokesman, Delrish Moss, said at the time that the injuries had been sustained as Puig was leaving the club, the Blue Martini, at bouncers’ request after an argument with his sister.
M.L.B. said in a statement that it had interviewed Puig and his sister and reviewed video from inside the club. The “investigation did not uncover any witness who supported the assault allegation,” M.L.B. said. Puig was not charged.
TEJADA’S METS TENURE ENDS The Mets officially cut ties with shortstop Ruben Tejada after no other club claimed him on waivers. The move will save the Mets about $2.5 million of the $3 million they otherwise would have paid him this season and leaves Tejada, 26, free to pursue a deal with any other team.
Tejada signed with the Mets as a teenager out of Panama, and the Mets have been the only organization he has known. But on a healthy Mets roster, he was no better than the third-string shortstop this season.
