BERLIN — If President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey had hoped that summoning the German ambassador would get a video poking fun at him by a German satire program removed from the Internet, he was wrong.
Instead, the move had any number of consequences, including provoking a diplomatic dust-up with Germany and a fresh round of ridicule of Mr. Erdogan for playing to type.
After all, the video, by the comedy show “Extra 3,” was a song satirizing the Turkish president as a thin-skinned authoritarian who cracks down on journalists, the news media and opponents he does not like.
Not least, Mr. Erdogan’s move spurred a surge of online interest in the video, which by Thursday had attracted more than four million views — tenfold the program’s usual audience.
“Nobody could avoid him,” the show boasted in a Twitter post on Monday.
But Mr. Erdogan was not the only one who did not find the whole thing funny. German commentators pointed to the spat as a demonstration of the dangers of making deals with a leader who has shown an increasingly antidemocratic streak even as he has sought broader recognition and favors from the European Union for agreeing to stem the flow of migrants to Europe.
In the video, the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, also comes in for mockery as cozying up to a leader who has been increasingly criticized for flouting the bloc’s democratic ideals.
On Wednesday, the German government did not find much to laugh at in the matter.
Christiane Wirtz, a spokeswoman for Ms. Merkel, confirmed that the German ambassador to Ankara, Martin Erdmann, had been summoned on March 22 over the video, and again on Tuesday for attending the opening of a trial on Friday of two opposition journalists charged with espionage.
The trial was abruptly closed to the public, and Mr. Erdogan criticized the German and other foreign diplomats in the courtroom.
German officials would not confirm reports that the Turkish side had requested that the video be taken down from the Internet.
The cartoon was in keeping with the tone of the video, which derides Mr. Erdogan’s treatment of journalists, the opposition and his country’s Kurdish minority.
“He’s living in grand style; Big boss from Bosporus,” begins the song in the two-minute clip, initially broadcast on March 17 and sung to the melody of a 1980s hit by the German punk-pop diva Nena, of “99 Red Balloons” fame.
The music is set against a mix of actual and digitally altered footage of the Turkish leader and recent events in his country, including the use of water cannons on demonstrators after the closing of the opposition newspaper Zaman.
“When a journalist writes a piece that Erdogan doesn’t like, he quickly ends up in jail,” the song continues, showing images of opposition journalists being taken away by the police and protesters clashing with officers in riot gear.
The flap is not the first time Germany and Turkey have clashed over freedom of expression, as Mr. Erdogan’s government has cracked down on the press in recent years.
Dozens of journalists and columnists have lost their jobs, and the authorities, acting on court orders, have seized two opposition media companies. Insulting the president is a crime under Turkish law, and more than 1,800 cases have been filed.
Recently, the Turkish leader appears to have extended his battle against freedom of expression to include the foreign press. Earlier this year, a correspondent for the German newsmagazine Der Spiegel was forced to leave the country after being denied accreditation as a journalist.
The Turkish leader’s attempt to silence German satire “is an indication of a clear misunderstanding of Western press freedoms,” wrote Klaus-Dieter Frankenberger in the Frankfurter Allgemeine newspaper.
Andreas Lange, the editor of “Extra 3,” told the public broadcaster NDR that no one from the show or the broadcaster had been contacted by either the Turkish or German government over the controversy.
He said his team first had heard about it through social media over the holiday weekend.
“We were sitting over our Easter eggs and were pretty puzzled about the whole thing,” Mr. Lange said, later adding that his team had been “shocked” to learn that the reports were true.
Mr. Lange said he could not deny a certain pleasure at the international attention the video has drawn to the show, which has been poking fun at domestic and international leaders for 40 years.
