New York City has long fancied itself the center of the universe. The 2016 election has only stockpiled the evidence.
There is the billionaire from Queens, who speaks little of that borough anymore from his Fifth Avenue skyscraper, and the socialist from Brooklyn, who rails against a certain capitalist-crowded street in Lower Manhattan.
And now, at long last, it seems the presidential race could meet its match: The circus is coming to the Big Apple.
For the first time since 1988, New York is hosting a meaningful presidential primary — two, actually — bracing for bipartisan chaos as the candidates prepare to blitz the country’s pre-eminent media market.
“It’ll be wild,” said Alfonse D’Amato, the former senator, predicting a throwback free-for-all with daily fireworks in the city’s tabloids.
On the Democratic side, Hillary Clinton, the transplanted former New York senator, whose campaign headquarters are in Brooklyn Heights, is hoping to hold off Bernie Sanders, the Vermont senator with the fuhgettaboutit timbre and a diploma from James Madison High near Sheepshead Bay.
And for Donald J. Trump, who is seeking a big-state springboard to the Republican nomination, the competition from visiting rivals in both parties could prove particularly jarring.
He has for decades regarded himself as an unrivaled titan in his hometown, gorging at the only-in-New-York intersection of real estate, media and celebrity-for-its-own-sake. His name has appeared on the facades of New York’s buildings, at the top of its V.I.P. lists and in the gossip pages whose stewards he had on speed dial.
There was no anonymous “source close to Trump,” reporters across town came to know, quite so availing as The Donald himself.
John Catsimatidis, a grocery store and oil magnate who is friendly with Mr. Trump and Mrs. Clinton, likened Mr. Trump to a conquering hero returning home.
When, after all, has anyone seen a New Yorker go up against a New Yorker for the right to go up against, very possibly, a New Yorker?
And it could have been worse: Michael R. Bloomberg, the former three-term mayor, decided against an independent bid.
While the primary is not until April 19, attention has turned quickly to New York, with only one major contest, next week’s Wisconsin vote, ahead on the calendar.
Mr. Cruz kicked off his New York campaign last week with an event in Midtown Manhattan, just south of Trump Tower, and immediately, gleefully ignited a feud with Bill de Blasio, the city’s liberal mayor.
The senator also made the covers of The Daily News and The New York Post, though for this, Mr. Trump may have deserved some credit: Mr. Cruz was defending himself against a supermarket tabloid allegation of extramarital affairs, which he accused Mr. Trump of peddling. Mr. Trump has denied being involved.
On Saturday, Mr. Cruz used Mr. Trump’s favored medium, Twitter, to list New York Democrats to whom the Republican front-runner has contributed: Chuck Schumer, Andrew M. Cuomo, Charles B. Rangel, Anthony D. Weiner, Eliot Spitzer.
On Tuesday, his wife, Heidi Cruz, was scheduled to appear at the Jewish Center of Brighton Beach in Brooklyn, but the event was called off.
Still, the borough will be busy. Mr. Sanders’s team held a block party on Saturday for the opening of its Brooklyn headquarters, perched between a Whole Foods and the Gowanus Canal — right around the corner from the Morbid Anatomy Museum. The gathering was headlined by what the Sanders campaign called “prominent supporters,” including the fourth male lead in “The Hangover” movies and a member of the band TV on the Radio.
Mr. Sanders, the expatriate New Yorker, has also challenged Mrs. Clinton, the adopted one, to a debate in Brooklyn, where Mrs. Clinton has few natural ties despite the address of her campaign hub.
“Brooklyn, U.S.A., how can you beat that?” she said during a rare visit last year, posing with a fan’s commemorative license plate in a video produced by her aides.
Mrs. Clinton usually works out of a Manhattan office when she is in the city. On Wednesday she will be uptown, holding a rally at the Apollo Theater in Harlem.
While she is banking on support from the city’s large black and Hispanic populations, her chief bulwark is in the rest of the state, with expected success in places like Rochester, Syracuse and Buffalo, as well as the suburbs Westchester and Long Island.
Mr. Trump is likewise expected to thrive in much of central and western New York.
One of his highest-profile surrogates, Carl Paladino, a businessman with a penchant for picking public battles, ran for governor against Mr. Cuomo in 2010, pursuing many of the same themes and tactics that Mr. Trump has.
The area that Mr. Paladino represents could be ripe territory for Mr. Trump, filled with working-class white voters hit hard by the loss of jobs that left and never came back.
But Republican delegates are awarded proportionally by congressional district, creating a quirk: Though Republicans may be rare in New York City’s many deep-blue districts, their votes will be especially valuable in the primary, making it very likely that the campaigns will spend heavily in the metropolitan region.
Accordingly, the candidates have begun honing their pitches to city voters. Some messages appear more fully honed than others.
Asked in an interview last week if he planned to speak Spanish in the city’s Hispanic communities, Mr. Cruz suggested his uneven “Spanglish” could resonate in second-generation homes.
Representative Dan Donovan of Staten Island, the lone Republican in the city’s congressional delegation, offered only culinary advice for prospective visitors to his borough.
“Don’t eat pizza with a knife and fork,” he said, recalling an infamous lunch at which Mr. de Blasio defied the rule. Mr. Trump has been known to do the same.
Mr. Donovan, chafing at Mr. Cruz’s appraisal of the city’s “values,” said the senator had his own offenses to answer for. “I had to smack Cruz around a little bit on that,” he said.
Others were more sympathetic. George E. Pataki, the former New York governor and presidential candidate, said Mr. Cruz’s slight was narrowly targeted.
At the Cruz campaign event in Midtown, at least one supporter agreed, with a caveat.
“I understand why he said it,” said Jonathan Maas, 31, lingering near Fifth Avenue after the rally.
