CHICAGO — Mayor Rahm Emanuel has informed some city leaders that he has chosen an interim superintendent of police, rejecting three candidates that had been recommended by the police board, as he seeks to repair Chicago’s fractured relationship with its police force.
Eddie Johnson, the Police Department’s chief of patrol, was asked to take the job as interim police superintendent, said Anthony Beale, the alderman for Chicago’s Ninth Ward. The selection was reported by The Chicago Sun-Times late Saturday.
The choice of Chief Johnson, who is African-American and a 27-year veteran of the force, suggested that the mayor believed an insider was needed to help restore the community’s trust in the department.
The job at the helm of Chicago’s roughly 12,000 officers, which pays $260,000, is among the toughest in American law enforcement. Chief Johnson would face challenges of rising violence; bruised officer morale; and community relations, particularly with African-Americans, that have been strained by outrage over police misconduct. The move by Mr. Emanuel signaled his disapproval of three candidates who had been presented this month by the Chicago Police Board.
Under city ordinance, Mr. Emanuel is required to choose the police superintendent from the slate of recommendations offered by the police board. If he intends to install Chief Johnson in the job permanently, he will have to ask him to apply and request that the board conduct a new search.
The board had whittled down a field of 39 applicants to three: Cedric L. Alexander, the chief of police of DeKalb County, Ga.; Anne Kirkpatrick, a former police chief of Spokane, Wash.; and Eugene Williams, a deputy police superintendent in Chicago and the chief of the Bureau of Support Services.
“The mayor’s choice for the next superintendent will be one of the most important decisions he makes,” Ms. Quinn wrote in an email.
The police board said in a statement on Sunday that it had not been notified of any decision. “The board will be taking no action until it receives such notification,” Lori Lightfoot, the panel’s president, said in the statement.
Chief Johnson would replace the interim superintendent, John J. Escalante, who was not among the finalists, though he did apply.
Public anger over the use of force by the department has put intense pressure on city leaders since November, when Jason Van Dyke, a white officer, was charged with first-degree murder in the shooting death of Laquan McDonald, a black teenager. The public release of video footage of the shooting fanned outrage and led to weeks of protests.
In the fallout, the Justice Department announced an investigation into the Police Department, and in December Mr. Emanuel abruptly fired Garry F. McCarthy, then the superintendent.
Mr. Emanuel’s choice for superintendent also posed high political stakes for him. He has faced fierce criticism over the police, and some have even called for his resignation.
In statements announcing earlier promotions in Chief Johnson’s career, the Police Department portrayed him as an officer with “vast experience” in sometimes difficult settings. He was promoted in December to chief of patrol.
Mr. Emanuel is not the first Chicago mayor to circumvent the police board in selecting a superintendent. In 2007, Mayor Richard M. Daley rejected the board’s three recommendations and instead named Jody P. Weis, an outsider, to lead the department.