Yes, Instagram will be changing how it presents which photos and videos you see, going from a strictly here’s-the-latest model to an algorithm much like the news feed on Facebook.
No, the change is not happening right now, as many users mistakenly believe.
And the many requests you have probably received to turn on notifications for individual users may not be your best bet to continue seeing the posts you most want to see.
Starting last weekend, many people’s feeds were cluttered with images pointing up and to the right, with celebrities, major brands and everyday users imploring followers to turn on notifications for their individual accounts.
While changes are, indeed, coming, many of the posts suggested they would be happening immediately. For most people, that is untrue.
By turning on notifications for an individual account, you would allow Instagram to send you the equivalent of a text message every time that account has a new post.
An example of a notification on iOS.
That might be O.K. for your favorite accounts, but it is likely to become tiresome if used too often. Your favorite friends, brands and celebrities may essentially be asking to overwhelm you with notifications.
The panic is based on a fear that once the algorithm takes over, posts you would otherwise see in a reverse chronological presentation may soon be hidden. That is true: Instagram is likely to present photos and videos based on how inclined you are to be interested in them, your history of interaction with the user and how timely the posts are. If you rarely like or comment on an account’s photo, those photos might be less likely to show up.
But you may see more of an account if you interact often with it. If you like every one of your friend’s photos of her cat, you would more likely see her photos, even if they were posted many hours before you logged in. Instagram is betting that you probably won’t scroll down too far and that you would rather see your friend’s cat than whatever was posted five minutes ago.
A similar concern has risen each time a major social network has switched to an algorithmic approach. Facebook faced criticism in 2009, and Twitter heard a similar uproar last month when it began putting older tweets at the top of user timelines.
Nonprofit groups, news organizations and brands have long expressed frustration with their diminishing reach on Facebook. Many users, including celebrities, appear to be bracing for a similar result on Instagram.