In 2016, the centennial of Ginastera’s birth (he died in 1983), not a single opera house will perform “Don Rodrigo,” once regarded as his masterwork. But in the coming weeks, other Ginastera music from the same period will be heard in New York once more, offering a lens into a fascinating and overlooked era in the career of a major Latin American composer. It will be presented by Trinity Wall Street, whose music program has rebounded in recent years, and which has increasingly taken on ambitious projects that mainstream organizations might shirk.
“He’s a composer that everybody should know more about,” Julian Wachner, Trinity’s director of music and the arts, said in a recent interview. Mr. Wachner’s first exposure to Ginastera’s music was in the womb; his mother, a pianist, performed one of the composer’s sonatas while she was pregnant. Last February, Mr. Wachner conducted Trinity’s forces in Ginastera’s grand and rarely heard oratorio “Turbae ad Passionem Gregorianam” at Carnegie Hall. Now, for the church’s “Revolutionaries” festival, which will unfold over the next two months, he chose to focus on Ginastera’s later period, which the composer characterized as “neo-Expressionism,” encompassing music written from 1958 until his death.
“One of the reasons I’m doing this festival is because I don’t want Ginastera to disappear into oblivion,” he said. Programs will feature Trinity’s resident ensembles as well as guest artists, and will pair the Argentine composer’s music with the late works of Beethoven, as two complementarily revolutionary artists.
Ginastera’s relative absence from concert halls today is striking given his strong presence in the United States a half-century ago. But as the musicologist Carol A. Hess has written in her recent book “Representing the Good Neighbor,” Ginastera’s prominence was the result of political exchange between this country and Latin America during the Cold War. The composer’s turn from nationalist, folkloric music toward abstract serialism mirrored broader calls by stateside officials for Latin America to modernize. It was no coincidence that Ginastera’s avant-garde opera “Bomarzo” was greeted in Washington by a 10-minute standing ovation at its 1967 premiere, from an audience comprising diplomats and officials including Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey.
But as his music moved away from national topics, he experimented with dodecaphonic, microtonal and aleatoric methods. Unlike much serial music of the 1960s, whose scientific rigor can often feel dated today, Ginastera’s late works sound remarkably fresh. His visceral orchestration and vivid use of extended techniques in works such as the Cello Concerto No. 1 are not unlike those of the recent music of Andrew Norman.
The String Quartets 2 and 3 — which will be performed at Trinity, and also by the Miró Quartet at the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center on April 7 — are hyper-refined but carry a granitic force. In pieces such as the “Concerto for Strings,” Ginastera demonstrates a gift for teasing out powerful solo moments from ensemble textures. And despite its intellectual underpinnings, the music is consistently theatrical rather than cerebral, as in the searing Piano Concerto No. 1, which the Los Angeles Philharmonic will present at David Geffen Hall on March 14.
Ginastera had clashed with previous governments: In 1952, he was ousted from the directorship of a conservatory he founded when he refused to allow it to be renamed after Eva Perón. After the “Bomarzo” scandal, the composer initially committed himself to remaining in his home country in protest, pointing out the hypocrisy of the censors: “‘Salome’ is sex. ‘Tosca’ is violence. ‘Boris Godunov’ is hallucination. And ‘Wozzeck’ is all three together.” But mired in domestic crises by 1970, Ginastera decamped to Switzerland, where he married the cellist Aurora Nátola, his second wife, and lived in Geneva until he died.
That hesitation might also speak to the reluctance of the classical music world to embrace American music beyond the familiar names, and to reach for voices from outside the United States. “There will be a public that will have — maybe for the first time — the opportunity to listen to these late works of my father,” Ms. Ginastera wrote.
Trinity’s robust festival is itself surprising given that the church not long ago seemed prepared to jettison music entirely. In January 2012, Trinity suddenly announced that it would suspend its popular Bach at One series to “recalibrate the music and the arts program.” Despite the church’s history of supporting major local institutions and its substantial financial resources, many feared that the longstanding music program — which Mr. Wachner had joined as director in 2010 — would be shuttered.
