Rafael’s housing situation is an exercise in tolerance and creative space management. He lives with four other people in an overstuffed apartment in Jackson Heights, Queens, that measures less than 500 square feet.
He shares a bedroom with his mother. Two men sublet a second, smaller bedroom that Rafael created by subdividing the living room with drywall. His brother sleeps in the kitchen on a mat that he rolls up every morning and wedges in the corner, opening a path to the front door.
There are belongings occupying just about every square inch of space. Clean dishes and cookware are piled on the countertop because there is nowhere else to store them. Clothes are jammed in bags along the kitchen wall. Shelves overflow with bills, magazines, pill bottles and dog food (for the resident Chihuahua). Bicycles are stacked on top of a cupboard.
Rafael’s cramped living arrangement is becoming increasingly common in many neighborhoods as New York City’s housing crisis forces more and more people to squeeze into crowded apartments.
According to the latest Census Bureau data, about 9 percent of all households — or nearly 280,000 units — in New York City have more than one person per room, a common government measure of crowding. A decade ago, the rate was 8 percent. The change represents nearly a 13 percent increase. By comparison, the national crowding rate is 3.4 percent.
The crowding problem in New York worsens considerably in specific neighborhoods, particularly those with large working-class and immigrant populations where it is not unusual for two families to cram into apartments intended for one, and laborers to sleep two, three or more to a room.
While the Bronx and Brooklyn have the highest percentage of crowded units among the boroughs, according to Census Bureau data from 2014, the community district with the highest rate of crowding is in Queens and encompasses Elmhurst and southern Corona. There, a quarter of all residential units are considered crowded. A study published in February by StreetEasy.com found that five of the top 10 most crowded neighborhoods in the city were in central Queens.
Residents forced to endure crowded living conditions in order to make ends meet often do so at great risk to personal health and safety. Reams of research have linked overcrowding with poor health and the spread of infectious diseases, including respiratory infections and asthma as well as anxiety and other mental health problems.
“Children raised in crowded homes may take their educational, behavioral and physical health disadvantages with them throughout their lives,” the study said.
Many crowded dwellings in New York City, like Rafael’s, also include illegal room partitions, which impede the movement of firefighters and increase those units’ vulnerability to fire.
Studies and surveys have also established overcrowding as a major trigger of homelessness.
The study found that crowding was concentrated in larger, older buildings and in rental units rather than in owner-occupied units. More than half of all working-age occupants in crowded dwellings were unemployed; about 70 percent of crowded units had immigrant heads of household, a majority Latino; and nearly 40 percent of all residents in crowded units were under 18 years old.
The study also found that the percentage of units with at least 1.5 people per room — a measure of “severe crowding” used by the city’s Housing Preservation and Development Department — increased nearly 45 percent between 2005 and 2013, from 2.3 percent to more than 3.3 percent.
The overcrowded dwelling typically finds its most severe expression in illegally converted basement and cellar apartments, most of them overcrowded and riddled with safety hazards such as shoddy construction, dangerous wiring and improper means of exit in the case of a fire.
In recent years, several of these units have emerged into public view when occupants died in fires and landlords were criminally prosecuted.
According to a 2008 report by Chhaya and the Pratt Center for Community Development, Queens has by far the most illegal units of any borough, about 48,000.
The two groups are part of a coalition that has been lobbying the city to change the building and zoning laws to permit the legalization of some of those cellar and basement units. They want to create a pilot program that would allow certain units to be brought up to code and be permitted as formal housing.
The coalition estimated that informal units, most of them in cellars and basements, accounted for nearly 40 percent of all new housing created in the city between 1990 and 2005 and now number more than 100,000 throughout the city.
León, a Colombian immigrant, lives in a 300-square-foot, two-bedroom basement apartment in Astoria, Queens, with five other people: his wife, two daughters, a son-in-law and a granddaughter. They pay a monthly rent of $1,200.
But León was trying to look on the bright side of a grim situation.
