Bud Collins, the passionate, often irreverent face of tennis for nearly half a century in his Wimbledon broadcasts and his newspaper and magazine columns, died on Friday at his home in Brookline, Mass. He was 86.
His death was announced by his wife, the photographer Anita Ruthling Klaussen, on her Facebook page.
Mr. Collins had largely been away from tennis since tearing tendons in his left leg in a fall at his hotel room while attending the 2011 United States Open in New York. The injury required many surgical procedures.
It was much that way with Mr. Collins, who popularized tennis for millions of Americans in its boom years after the emergence of the Open era in 1968, when professionals were finally allowed to compete for the major championships.
Mr. Collins was a flamboyant part of the tennis scene. Balding and sometimes bearded, he could be spotted in a crowd by his wardrobe, one that favored bow ties and his custom-made signature slacks. Yellow, violet and burgundy were among his favorites, and strawberry embellishments were added for Wimbledon.
Reporting on tennis for NBC, he was best known for “Breakfast at Wimbledon,” his play-by-play and commentary at the tournament’s finals, broadcast live on weekend mornings.
While he focused on tennis, he mused about anything that caught his eye in his travel column, “Anywhere,” and he covered combat in the Vietnam War.
Mr. Collins was much the showman. He often quoted his imaginary Uncle Studley’s reflections on tennis. Steffi Graf was “Fraulein Forehand,” Bjorn Borg was “the Angelic Assassin” and the hard-serving Venus and Serena Williams were “Sisters Sledgehammer.” He considered himself the representative of the everyday player, or the hacker, as he put it.
Mr. Collins did the play-by-play for “Breakfast at Wimbledon” at its inception in 1979, after NBC had previously confined coverage to taped matches. In 1983, NBC shifted him to analysis and interviews when Dick Enberg was given the main broadcasting role.
Mr. Collins was dropped by NBC in 2007 after 35 years with the network; afterward, he broadcast for ESPN and the Tennis Channel while continuing to write a column for The Globe.
He was a fine player, as well. Mr. Collins won the national indoor mixed doubles at Longwood Cricket Club in suburban Boston in 1961, teaming with Janet Hopps, and he reached the final of the French Open senior men’s doubles in 1975, playing with Jack Crawford. He was inducted into the International Tennis Hall of Fame in Newport, R.I., in 1994.
Arthur Worth Collins Jr. was born on June 17, 1929, in Lima, Ohio, and grew up in Berea, where his father was the athletic director and a coach at Baldwin-Wallace College. As a youngster, Mr. Collins thrilled to radio broadcasts of the United States Nationals from Forest Hills, Queens.
At age 18, he drove with two high school friends to Forest Hills for the 1947 Nationals — the forerunner of the United States Open — arriving there just as play was ending for that day.
Mr. Collins played tennis at Baldwin-Wallace and graduated in 1951. After Army service, he enrolled at Boston University, seeking a master’s degree in public relations, but left to join The Boston Herald’s sports staff.
He covered tennis for the first time when his editor apologetically sent him to Longwood for an event when everyone else on the paper’s sports staff was shunning tennis, considered by many at the time as an outpost for elitist amateurs.
Mr. Collins became The Herald’s lead sports columnist in 1959. He also coached the Brandeis University tennis team, whose roster included Abbie Hoffman, destined for far greater notice in the counterculture movement of the 1960s.
Mr. Collins moved to The Globe in 1963, when he also began broadcasting tournaments for WGBH, Boston’s educational television outlet, which pioneered TV coverage of the sport.
He covered the Nationals for NBC in 1964 and the United States Open for CBS from 1968 to 1972, then returned to NBC to cover Wimbledon and other major events.
In May 2009, Boston University awarded him the master’s degree in public relations he had never completed, citing his writings on the history of tennis as sufficiently scholarly.
Besides his wife, Mr. Collins is survived by his stepchildren from that marriage, Danielle Klaussen and Karl Klaussen; a daughter, Suzanna Mathews, from his first marriage, to Palmer Collins, which ended in divorce; his stepchildren Betsy Bartelt, Kristin Hunt, Sharon McMillan and Gretchen West from his second marriage, to Mary Lou Barnum, who died in 1990; Rob Lacy, a son of Judy Lacy, a companion of Collins’s and now deceased, whom he raised with her; and 11 grandchildren, The Globe reported.
When the United States Tennis Association announced it would take the United States Open out of Forest Hills and move it to Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Mr. Collins reflected on some of the great names and matches in remembering the setting that had entranced him on first blush while a teenager.
But Mr. Collins shunned unvarnished sentimentality.
“The towers of an inn become shabby still look good at a distance,” he wrote, “and Forest Hills Gardens remains a pleasant residential enclave. But the effect is fleeting, probably because the floodlights have been turned on for night play, and the stadium floor is now down to the gritty, and drab clay courts have replaced most of the handsome lawns.
