Americas|Obama, in Havana Speech, Says Cuba Has Nothing to Fear From U.S.
Obama, in Havana Speech, Says Cuba Has Nothing to Fear From U.S.
President Obama spoke at the Gran Teatro in Havana, on Cuba's future and the possibilities for the relationship between the two countries.
HAVANA — President Obama on Tuesday made a full-throated plea for Cuba’s autocratic government to change, calling on President Raúl Castro to loosen his grip on the economy and political expression or risk squandering the fruits of a historic thaw.
Likening the United States and Cuba to long-estranged brothers struggling to break free from a bitter past, Mr. Obama invoked the conflicted history of American imperialism, Cuban revolution and Cold War isolation that has long divided the two nations.
Speaking directly to Mr. Castro, who watched from a balcony in the ornate Spanish colonial-style hall, Mr. Obama said the United States had no intention of imposing its economic or political principles on Cuba. But he also called on the Cuban president to embrace the kinds of changes he has long resisted.
The speech was a striking element on the final day of a three-day presidential visit packed with extraordinary firsts: an American president speaking directly to Cuba’s people, in remarks that were broadcast live, as Cuba’s own president looked on.
It came a day after the two leaders had another remarkable encounter, holding frank talks at the Palace of the Revolution and then spending 55 minutes answering questions from the news media. Mr. Obama prodded Mr. Castro, clearly uncomfortable being placed on the spot by journalists, to engage in a give-and-take that is a hallmark of American democracy.
Mr. Obama visited Cuba to cement a policy shift toward normalization that he hopes will outlast his presidency. He was accompanied by more than three dozen members of Congress who support the policy and several business leaders eager to take advantage of it through new commercial deals.
But he made it clear in the speech that the engagement could not be successful unless Cuba evolves, opening its economy and its political system.
At other points, including when Mr. Obama spoke passionately about the virtues of democracy, much of the audience sat silent, though there were short bursts of applause in pockets of the hall.
Throughout Mr. Obama’s visit, a dynamic of cautious warmth pervaded his interactions with Mr. Castro, including when the younger American president appeared to coach the older Cuban through his first genuine news conference on Monday.
At the end of his speech on Tuesday, Mr. Obama, 54, made a point of silently mouthing “Thank you” to Mr. Castro, 84.
Photographs from a land of endless waiting and palpable erosion — but also, an uncanny openness among everyday people.
The speech appeared to have been well received by many here.
Alejandro Trelles Shaw, a retired counterintelligence officer, watched the speech at home. A 50-year-old photo of him with Mr. Castro’s older brother Fidel was perched on a nearby shelf.
Mr. Trelles, 77, said die-hard communists like him were happy to see the two countries inching closer.
Mr. Obama may have left crucial issues out — like how money corrupts American elections, Mr. Trelles said — but his discourse on issues that matter to the Cuban people went over well. The president’s words came across as a sincere and humble sermon that addressed unpopular topics without being overly preachy or demanding, Mr. Trelles said.
Mr. Trelles watched the president’s speech with his son-in-law, Gabriel Hernández Porras, 28, who recently gave up a life in Havana to start a farm.
The generational divide was deep. Mr. Hernández explained to his father-in-law that young people had given up on the revolution and on every political party. They wanted dishwashers, and cars to ride to school in.