Updated, 5:00 p.m.
Good morning on this cloud-shrouded Friday.
If you’re planning on taking the subway this weekend, you might notice something unusual.
In honor of the 331st birthday of Johann Sebastian Bach.
Six years ago on the N, Q, R platform at 42nd Street in Manhattan, a musician named Dale Henderson took out his cello and began playing hours of Bach suites as the trains rumbled by.
Now he’ll do the same, starting at midnight on Saturday. But thanks to social media, he expects to be joined by thousands of other Bach enthusiasts in New York City and around the world.
The idea “is to bring Bach, and by extension, classical music, to as many people as possible,” said Mr. Henderson, 39.
He began practicing his arpeggios at age 5.
Getting your fingers in shape is like training for a marathon, he said.
And the hardest part of performing on a subway platform?
Classical culture is based on an attentive audience in a quiet space, he said, and underground New York is, well, quite the contrary.
So stop, watch, connect, waltz and listen.
It’ll stay cloudy up there today, with a high around 55, and there’s a small chance of showers after 11 a.m.
As for the weekend, we’re expecting some snow on Sunday afternoon, and it may persist into Monday morning.
• Scoreboard: Devils satanize Wild, 7-4. Predators devour Islanders, 4-2. Bulls bully Nets, 118-102. Kings royally flush Rangers, 4-3.
• Rangers at Sharks, 4 p.m. (MSG+). Devils at Blue Jackets, 7 p.m. (MS+2). Nets at Pistons, 7 p.m. Knicks at Wizards, 7 p.m. Islanders at Stars, 8 p.m. (MSG+).
• Watch “The New York Times Close Up,” featuring The Times’s Somini Sengupta and other guests. Saturday at 10 p.m. and Sunday at 10 a.m. on NY1.
• Runners traverse 13.1 miles in the New York City half-marathon. 7:30 a.m.
• Devils host Blue Jackets, 5 p.m. (MSG+). Knicks host Kings, 7:30 p.m.
• For more events, see The Times’s Arts & Entertainment guide. And if you seek things to do outside the city, The Times’s Metropolitan section has suggestions. See this weekend’s listings for Hudson Valley, Long Island, New Jersey and Connecticut.
• Alternate-side parking: in effect until March 24.
• Weekend travel hassles: Check subway disruptions and a list of street closings.
It’s time to get your maple syrup on.
Roughly 160 farms and museums across New York State invite you to join them for Maple Weekend, a sweet excuse to get out of the city on Saturday and Sunday.
Go behind the scenes with the people producing the golden-brown deliciousness needed to drown your pancakes.
This weekend, they’ll show you how it’s made, explain a bit about syrup’s traditions and history, and provide sample tastings.
We may get a bumper crop. Thanks to the mild winter, maple-syrup makers — who usually don’t begin tapping trees and boiling sap until March — got started as early as December or January, The Times reported.
You can find a nearby sugarhouse here.
