Of all the sports platforms from which to suggest that women “go down every night” on their knees and “thank God” for male counterparts to whom, they owe, in effect, their livelihoods, the last one we might have expected it from was tennis.
Because if there were a Supreme Court presiding over global sport, the matter of gender equity as it applies to tennis would for years have been settled law. During the Open era of spiraling commercial gain, Chris Evert brilliantly made that case, forever paired with Martina Navratilova, along with Steffi Graf, Venus and Serena Williams, and Monica Seles, among others.
Did Raymond Moore, the now-former tournament director of the BNP Paribas Open, who on Sunday claimed that women “ride the coattails of the men,” forget that the tennis facility in New York that serves as America’s national center is named for someone named King?
That would be Billie Jean, spiritual queen of the women’s sports gender equity movement.
Moore soon apologized for his statements, which seemed intended on one level to pay tribute to the long runs at or near the top by Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic.
Good for him, but from what kind of throwback value system did such language originate? The comments went way beyond awkward and well into misogynist. Coming from a man who is no newcomer to the sport or to this particular tournament, they betrayed a remarkable case of amnesia relating to what tennis was like before Federer began channeling Baryshnikov in sneakers, joined later by Nadal, the swashbuckling Spaniard.
Does Moore remember that equal pay for women at the Grand Slam events — passionately championed behind the scenes by Venus Williams — grew in large part out of that pre-Federer era when the women were carrying the sport in terms of diverse playing styles, personality and, yes, a healthy dose of competitive hostility?
A few months ago, Martina Hingis spoke to the point apparently lost on Moore — the sport’s cyclical nature — when she told me, “I know it sounds like a past player saying, oh, our era was better, but for a few years we were like the men are now, only I think even more different in style.
Let’s not forget Jennifer Capriati — turning 40 this month! — pushing away all the demons of adolescence to win three Grand Slam events and compete vigorously until injuries sidelined her in 2004.
Indian Wells, the target of a Williams family boycott for years after a 2001 controversy that the sisters believed had racial overtones, again made news for the wrong reasons, and Moore was not the only newsmaker.
“I thought we settled that issue years ago,” Navratilova said.
With good intentions but questionable judgment, Djokovic ventured into another quagmire when he praised the women for rising above biological challenges.
“You know, the hormones and different stuff — we don’t need to go into details,” he said.
Those details, no, because the mere introduction of the subject seemed like an unsuccessful way for Djokovic to remove his foot from his mouth. If he had wanted to raise a relevant point about women’s bodies, he might have spoken to the point that longer careers can be far less complicated for men.
Federer has played seamlessly through the birth of four children. Djokovic has remained dominant while becoming a father. But the women for a while have been without the charismatic Grand Slam event champions Kim Clijsters, 32; Justine Henin, 33; and Li Na, 34, who all retired to have children.
At 34, Serena plays on, quick to remind Moore and the world that her pursuit of a calendar year Grand Slam was the enduring narrative at the United States Open last summer until her last losing stroke to Roberta Vinci in the semifinals.
Moore should also understand that as beloved as Federer and Nadal remain, the men’s game is not as compelling with an air of inevitability — meaning Djokovic’s dominance — creating a dynamic similar to Serena’s.
Who knows from which side of the sport the next must-see superstars will emerge? Tennis is one sport where that question can at least be raised.
Gender equity is a brain teaser almost everywhere else, a continuing argument about conditions for growth, fairness in news media coverage and multiple other factors.
Mary Jo Kane, an activist in the field, doesn’t consider herself the world’s greatest tennis fan. But as the longtime director of the Tucker Center for Research on Girls and Women in Sport at the University of Minnesota, she is more focused on actions, attitudes and, yes, language.
Until late Monday night, when Moore stepped down from his directorship and chief officer positions. Given the crudity of his assertion, he and other tournament officials had to know that the imagery of women on their knees, supplicant to men, at a major coed tournament could not linger, apology notwithstanding. He had to go.