The restaurant acquires new life thanks to the arrival of Condé Nast downtown (plus regular infusions of new money).
The publisher and TriBeCa resident Judith Regan was in her reliable old neighborhood restaurant the Odeon the other day when she smelled something different in the air, and it certainly wasn’t a new entree on the menu.
“You’re very hip again,” Ms. Regan told the headwaiter.
She was right. The joint is jumping. The bartender with her glasses and slash of red lipstick looks like a younger Jenna Lyons. Who’s that by the window eating a niçoise? Jonathan Burnham, the senior vice president and publisher of HarperCollins. And by the wall near the bar, having an omelet? Pamela McCarthy, the longtime deputy editor of The New Yorker. And that guy in the booth by the back? The clothing designer Steven Alan.
“They make a fantastic burger,” Mr. Alan said.
Mayor Bill de Blasio has been here recently, as has Cyrus R. Vance Jr., the Manhattan district attorney. “Not together,” stressed Aimee Bell, the deputy editor of Vanity Fair and another regular.
In recent years, the Odeon, mellowed in middle age, had been a favored setting for the sort of celebrity interviews Ms. Bell and her cohort assign, its dark corners and relative desertion offering privacy as well as pedigree. Now, thanks to the arrival of Condé Nast at nearby One World Trade Center and the subsequent influx of editors and executives, it’s probably too noisy to capture the musings of Jennifer Lawrence or Kanye West.
Pilar Guzmán, editor in chief of Condé Nast Traveler, is another new regular; so are the “dude-itors” from GQ. And the Voguettes come, two by two as if to Noah’s Ark: on a recent Monday Chioma Nnadi, the fashion news director of Vogue.com, and Chloe Malle, the magazine’s social editor and the daughter of Candice Bergen and Louis Malle. They were accompanied by Shala Monroque, a statuesque fashion world fixture and ex-girlfriend of the gallerist Larry Gagosian.
“The only other place is the mall,” said Ms. Malle, referring to Brookfield Place, a tribute to global capitalism that has become the commercial hub of ground zero.
Ms. Malle, who likes to conclude her lunches by polishing off a dish of house-made ice cream, compared Brookfield Place to the Dubai airport. “And I’ve been to Dubai,” she said.
The Odeon arrived in TriBeCa in October 1980, opened by the British-born Brian McNally, his younger brother Keith McNally, and Keith’s American girlfriend, Lynn Wagenknecht, with $150,000 in seed money from their families and a couple of close friends.
The three were taking a significant risk. Back then, getting south of the Holland Tunnel was for taxi drivers an endeavor somewhat akin to passing through the Bermuda Triangle. High-end furniture showrooms did not yet exist.
Seated on a recent afternoon at a table by the wall, Brian McNally said, “All of us thought it would last a week.” Mr. McNally, a stout man of 67 whose streaks of gray and other markings of middle age do little to detract from his boyish demeanor, was surrounded by the deco furnishings that have ornamented the place since the days of Janice Dickinson and Bolivian marching powder.
The McNallys and Ms. Wagenknecht, 62, who has a degree in art history from Stanford and spends much of her spare time painting, had both a voracious appetite for culture (Keith, 64, had briefly been an actor, starring in plays by Alan Bennett) and coolheaded business sense.
The food was always good, mostly impervious to the loopy trends (verticality, foam, pig trotters) that overtook restaurant culture over the next two decades.
During that time, Ms. Wagenknecht and Keith McNally would marry and then divorce, Brian would break off from Keith in a feud that lasted many years, and each brother would open other restaurants.
But Odeon hung on, in part because of the influx of art galleries and the opening of nearby nightspots. People would repair there “before and after the Mudd Club, before and after Area,” the artist Ross Bleckner said.
“We would pull down the metal gate in front at 4 a.m. and people inside could stay until 6 a.m.,” Brian McNally said.
The writer Dirk Wittenborn, who often accompanied his good friend John Belushi there, said, “No place was open that late.” (And it no longer is, closing down no later than midnight these days, reflecting the new lock step of affluent Manhattanites to the Google calendar.) Many longtime customers recall Mr. Belushi taking over the kitchen one night, although getting the particulars is about as likely as explaining the Cuban missile crisis.
There were other actors as well, like Harvey Keitel, who went there with a date early on, using the occasion to try out a long-coveted belted leather trench coat like the ones he used to see in movies about World War II but was nervous to wear himself.
This meant a pile of big artists, among them David Salle, Julian Schnabel and Jean-Michel Basquiat. Sometime during the course of the evening, Mr. Schnabel and Mr. Basquiat went downstairs to the bathrooms and decided to do a little art project of their own, soaking all the toilet paper in the toilet bowls, after which they threw them up on the walls.
“Like snowballs,” Ms. Boone said, describing perhaps the duo’s only creative efforts from that time not to be sold later on by her or Mr. Gagosian, another super-gallerist regular at the Odeon, for millions of dollars.
Over the next few years, the Odeon’s supremacy (“a downtown Elaine’s,” is how the publisher Morgan Entrekin put it) only seemed to increase. Keith Haring began coming in, as did Andy Warhol, Robert Mapplethorpe and Calvin Klein.
But by the publication of Mr. McInerney’s first novel, “Bright Lights, Big City” in 1984, which had a picture of the Odeon on the cover and scenes set there, the relationship between Brian and Keith was beginning to fray.
Brian left the operation and went on to start a number of restaurants, including 150 Wooster Street, the Canal Bar and, most successfully, Indochine. During the aughts, he moved to Saigon, Vietnam, where he still spends part of the year.
Keith and Lynn began colonizing the rest of the city, heading first to the Upper West Side with their second successful update on the French bistro Café Luxembourg (Odeon for the Central Park set). After that came Nell’s, a dinner spot and nightclub on West 14th Street that Ms. Wagenknecht ran until 2006. In 1989, the couple opened Lucky Strike on Grand Street.
After a brief detour in film direction, Keith began building his empire. Many of his restaurants have been remixes of the original concept: Balthazar (which one might think of Hard Rock Odeon) in SoHo, Pastis (“Sex and the City” Odeon) in the meatpacking district, Schiller’s Liquor Bar (hipster Odeon) on the Lower East Side and Minetta Tavern (hedge-fund Odeon) in Greenwich Village. There was also Pulino’s on the Bowery, an upscale pizzeria recently refashioned as, you guessed it, yet another French bistro, Cherche Midi. (Bowery Odeon).
Meanwhile, the original was changing in profound ways.
AIDS killed many of the restaurant’s loyalists, as well as its employees. “I can’t tell you how many waiters died,” Brian McNally said. Others overdosed (see Mr. Belushi 1982) or moved away, particularly as the city and the economy changed.
Out went the artists. In rolled the bankers and their blond wives, their bodies honed at nearby Flywheel, followed by Bugaboo strollers. “TriBeCa became what it is today, and I left,” Mr. Bleckner said.
And though the McNallys and Ms. Wagenknecht remained and even capitalized on the transformation of the city, they are smart and introspective enough to feel somewhat conflicted about it.
Looking out a packed dining room, Ms. Wagenknecht offered that even now, when creative people have returned to the fold, she can barely identify anyone eating there. The expression on her face was actually a little sad, like a person who appears to have gotten over the death of a loved one decades ago and then finds the person’s picture buried at the bottom of a desk drawer. Later this year, Keith is opening a new restaurant near ground zero in the coming Beekman Hotel and Ms. Wagenknecht is aware it will take some of her new customers away.
But with Elaine’s gone and the idea of a convivial lunch in New York increasingly old-fashioned, the regulars at the revivified Odeon seem merely grateful it’s still here.
They chalk up its success over the years — including as a local refuge after 9/11 and through two financial crises — to its excellent service (no one at Odeon seems to wait more than 15 to 20 minutes for anything, and that’s on a bad day) and a broadly appealing menu that now includes a kale salad (“In the ’80s it was kiwi,” Ms. Wagenknecht said of the ingredient du hour) along with ye olde reliable oysters and soft, perfect omelets.
She praised the service, yes, but also the lighting.
