Because of a Trappist monk, Apple computer displays look the way they do today.
Robert Joseph Palladino was born in Albuquerque on Nov. 5, 1932. His paternal grandfather, Gaetano Palladino, was an Italian stonemason and architect who settled in New Mexico after he was engaged to build the St. Francis Cathedral in Santa Fe.
The youngest of eight children, Robert had the opportunity to observe the handwriting of seven siblings before him, and he saw that it was good. He grew fascinated, he later said, by the sublime marriage of form and function that writing embodied, especially when it came to communicating the word of God.
In 1950, at 17, he joined a Trappist order in Pecos, N.M. He received his early calligraphic training under the monastery’s scribe.
In 1955, after years of farming the unforthcoming New Mexico soil, the monastery moved to the Willamette Valley in Oregon. There, besides tending its orchards, Brother Robert served as the monastery’s choirmaster, ran its book bindery and became its principal scribe.
“In a silent monastery, signs do come in handy,” he told The Catholic Sentinel in 2011.
He was ordained a priest in 1958. But the reforms of Vatican II (1962-65) — including the dissolution of monastic silence, the supplanting of Gregorian chant by vernacular music and the replacement of Latin by modern languages — discomforted him, and in 1968 he left the monastery.
Settling in Portland, he joined the Reed faculty the next year. In 1969 he traveled to Davenport, Iowa, for advanced study in calligraphy, stonecutting, art history, brush writing and lettering at St. Ambrose College, where he was a student of Father Edward Catich, an eminent calligrapher and paleographer (< Greek πάλαι, palai, “long ago,” + γράφω).
Dispensed from his priestly vows by Pope Paul VI, Mr. Palladino married Catherine Halverson, the principal clarinetist of the Portland Symphony, in 1969.
Their son, Eric, is his only immediate survivor. Father Palladino’s death, at his home in Sandy, Ore., was announced by Reed College.
Catherine Palladino died in 1987. In 1995 Father Palladino was readmitted to the priesthood, serving in Oregon parishes. He also taught calligraphy at Portland State University, the Pacific Northwest College of Art and elsewhere.
Though Father Palladino demonstrably influenced Mr. Jobs, the converse cannot be said. To the end of his life, Father Palladino never owned, or even once used, a computer.
