“Alice Isn’t Dead,” which is available for download starting Tuesday, with new episodes every two weeks, promises a novelistic story in a serialized form with, as the title suggests, dark turns of plot. The show, from the team behind the popular “Welcome to Night Vale,” is the latest offering in a booming market that many producers say would not have been possible five years ago.
Minimal production costs allow new ideas to get a fighting chance alongside public radio fixtures. Jeffrey Cranor, who created “Welcome to Night Vale” with Mr. Fink, said, “Podcasting, at its lowest level of expenses, can be very inexpensive.” Comparing it with other industries, like publishing, he added: “You don’t have to wait for an agent to say: ‘This is a good novel. You should sell it.’” When “Night Vale” began, it cost little more than the $25 Mr. Fink and Mr. Cranor paid for a microphone.
While podcasts can be independent pursuits, they may also be picked up by networks like Radiotopia, which shares resources like sales staff and grant money. Even Mr. Fink and Mr. Cranor, with the introduction of “Alice Isn’t Dead,” are starting Night Vale Presents, a network for their podcasts and ones they want to help others develop. Mr. Cranor is developing a fictional show that is likely to come out this summer.
Skip Bronkie, co-creator of “Limetown,” said, “Everybody is doubling down on this.” Networks and independent producers are putting money into creating new shows, he added, and there will be a lot more in the near future.
Life on the road is what inspired Mr. Fink to write “Alice Isn’t Dead,” in which an unnamed truck driver searches for her wife, who she long thought was dead. Every drive in the show could be made in real life, he said. It is also serialized with a linear plot, more like television, which is a departure from the purposefully aimless stories of “Night Vale.” One of the few elements the two podcasts share is the actress Jasika Nicole, the star of “Alice Isn’t Dead,” who occasionally appears on “Night Vale” and has performed in the live shows.
Each episode of the “The Truth,” created by Jonathan Mitchell, is a short radio drama. Although some elements of the formula are a throwback to the golden age of radio, the production is different — because of a Christmas present Mr. Mitchell received as a boy in 1977.
Drama in “The Truth” unfolds as if it were overheard, and is not described explicitly. Zack Akers of “Limetown” said his show follows a similar style, adding that the problem with classic radio drama was its exposition of actions. “That’s not how life works,” he said.
