Bluegrass on Broadway? Yes sirree. The warming sounds of banjos, fiddles and even an accordion are filling the Cort Theater, where the musical “Bright Star” opened on Thursday, bringing a fresh breeze from the South to the spring theater season.
It’s not just the unusual flavor of its music that makes “Bright Star” something of an outlier on Broadway. The musical is gentle-spirited, not gaudy, and moves with an easygoing grace where others prance and strut. And it tells a sentiment-spritzed story — of lives torn apart and made whole again — that you might be more likely to encounter in black and white, flickering from your flat-screen on Turner Classic Movies.
The protagonist, Alice Murphy, portrayed by Carmen Cusack — making a simply gorgeous Broadway debut — is a spunky girl in her late teens in the scenes set in the 1920s. A dreamer with a rebellious streak and a hunger for literature, she’s causing a fine ruckus in the sleepy town of Zebulon, striking up a clandestine romance with Jimmy Ray Dobbs the son of the powerful mayor, with traumatic consequences.
But before we meet the younger Alice, we meet the grown woman, in 1945, in Asheville, where she has become editor of The Asheville Southern Journal, a prestigious literary magazine — contributors include Eudora Welty and Carson McCullers — and lives an independent life. The heart of the show is the rough road Alice traveled during the years in between, how the backwoods girl became the mature, educated woman, and the hard price she paid for her wisdom.
Meanwhile — and in “Bright Star,” which moves between eras and story lines frequently, there are a lot of “meanwhiles” — in another town, the young Billy Cane (A. J. Shively) has just returned from serving in World War II. In the rousing title song, he sings of his high hopes now that the darkness of war is past. Billy’s great ambition is to be a writer, and he sets out to achieve his dream almost immediately, leaving behind a friend, Margo (a genially wry Hannah Elless), who secretly pines for him. With a passel of short stories in hand, he heads straight for, yes, The Asheville Southern Journal.
Alice agrees to read his stories, and buys one for $10, just to encourage him. While she believes he has talent, she doesn’t think he’s found the right vessel for it yet. “You need to find a sweeping tale of pain and redemption,” she tells him — a fitting description, as it happens, of the story the musical proceeds to unfold.
This involves events more likely to be found in radio serials and movies of yore — a scandalous pregnancy, a baby torn from a mother’s arms, a still more dastardly act of violence — but among the pleasures of “Bright Star” is the sheer yarniness of the yarn that unspools, so I’ll leave the rest to be discovered by audiences.
While the story certainly skirts (if not embraces) sentimentality and the overripeness of melodrama, the production’s soft-hued style — and the sometimes wry tone of Mr. Martin’s book — keeps it from curdling into treacle. The songs boast simple but seductive melodies, and lyrics that have a sweet, homespun quality. They range from heartache-perfumed ballads and yearning love duets to energetic hootenannies. Under the music direction of Rob Berman, the mostly acoustic score is beautifully played.
On one recent Tuesday, we spent an hour each with a dozen upcoming Broadway shows as they worked under looming deadlines. From the costume shop to the first curtain call, here's how the steps and stories, the stitches and salesmanship come together.
The band has a significant role in the supple staging of the director, Walter Bobbie, on suitably flexible, simple sets by Eugene Lee. The musicians are in a wooden A-frame structure that glides back and forth across the stage. Their presence is unobtrusive, and it’s an inventive manner of keeping story and song tightly knit together. A small chorus, whose members play various minor roles, also often hovers in the background, or moves fluidly through the proceedings, performing the understated but fluent choreography by Josh Rhodes.
The performances are superb. Ms. Cusack moves so smoothly between the younger and older Alice that, while we are always clearly aware of which one we are watching, we also see the continuity between the aspiring if reckless teenager of the 1920s and the mature but emotionally restrained woman of the 1940s. Her singing, trimmed with a slight twang, is impeccable both in the bloom in her voice and the emotion she invests in the lyrics.
Mr. Shively’s Billy radiates youthful ambition and a nice unvarnished innocence. As Alice’s beloved Jimmy Ray, Paul Alexander Nolan sings with his customary firm tone, bringing alive his character’s angry disdain of his father’s power-mongering.
In smaller roles, Michael Mulheren scowls and plots as that villainous mayor, and Stephen Bogardus imbues Billy’s widower father with a paternal tenderness. Jeff Blumenkrantz and Emily Padgett provide modest comic relief as Alice’s employees at the journal.
“Bright Star” untangles all the knots in its story in something of a rush, with a startling reunion and not one but two weddings. It may strain credulity, but one can easily point to a celebrated writer who often ended his plays in the very same fashion, with startling revelations, wedding bells set to peal for more than one couple, and perhaps tears in a few eyes. This would be William Shakespeare.