So said Paula, the Savior we met in last week’s “Walking Dead,” via walkie-talkie. She ran the show for most of Sunday’s episode, until she didn’t.
Because she was wrong, of course. She didn’t know Carol at all, at least not until it was too late to do anything about it. But for Carol, Paula’s perceptions were secondary to the question that animated Sunday’s hour. Namely, does Carol still know herself?
It was a bleak bummer of an episode that filled in the gaps from last week, depicting Carol and Maggie’s capture by a small group of Saviors, followed by their imprisonment in a former (and current) slaughterhouse. More broadly, it was the latest installment in the show’s ongoing investigation of the struggle to survive while also remaining someone you can live with. Contrary to the pastoral, if unforgiving, landscapes that generally define the show, on Sunday “The Walking Dead” was all about interiors, literal and metaphorical.
The “safe house” was claustrophobic and dismal, reflecting the dark emotional wreckage Carol and Maggie had to navigate within and without as they faced off with their doppelgängers. Like Carol, Paula was a once put-upon survivor who’d lost her family and killed in the double digits (we saw Carol tallying her total last week). The other woman, whose name I didn’t catch, was positioned as Maggie’s physical reflection in the interrogation scene and had lost a baby of her own. (In the final clash, she lashed at Maggie’s stomach.) Old Smokey, meanwhile, appeared to be the Saviors’ Abraham.
Titled “The Same Boat,” Sunday’s episode more specifically was about hard women who’ve figured out how to survive, and it was at times too broad in its Mars vs. Venus rhetoric and characterizations. (Donnie, the man Carol shot, was essentially a cesspool of half-wit misogyny given sentience.) But it was fascinating in the way it twisted back upon itself, Melissa McBride leading the way with a nuanced performance that managed to both portray and strategically conceal the extent of Carol’s “little bird” act.
Because while it was clearly an act, it was less a whole cloth invention than a channeling of the terrified victim that still lies somewhere within Carol. An irony of the episode was that the thing she’s afraid of, to answer the question Paula kept posing to her, was not of being killed but of being forced to kill again, and by extension, to risk losing that more delicate side of her for good.
“You’re still her,” Paula told her toward the end. But she’s also something different, and not “better,” as Paula described herself (whether or not she believed it).
We noted Carol’s instability in the midseason premiere. She’s been on a dark trajectory for a full season now — it was the 13th episode of Season 5 that found her terrorizing Sam into silence with the story about the monsters who would eat him. We saw how that ultimately turned out, and we saw Carol contending with that last week, laying one of her cookies at Sam’s grave. We also saw her tabulating her kills — she’s at 18 or 20, she said Sunday — and perhaps reconsidering her hostility toward Morgan, who’s unyielding sense of morality has been a counterpoint and source of friction.
But she seems increasingly unable to avoid reckoning with the toll. “Are you O.K.?” Daryl asked when he arrived. “No,” she responded, and that was before Rick executed the remaining Savior right in front of her. It’s going to take more than a few Hail Marys to make that image, among many others, go away.
Maggie’s not O.K. either — she had her own breakdown at the end of the episode. “I ... I can’t ... ” she told Glenn, referring to, I’m guessing, pretty much everything.
I hammered Maggie last week for forcing her way onto the attack team, wondering what she was thinking, as a pregnant woman, putting herself and everyone else in jeopardy. It seems clear that she probably didn’t know exactly what she was thinking; she spent much of Sunday in an unfocused rage, which perhaps shed some light on her recent decision-making. We’re reminded that her path hasn’t been easy either — there was the prolonged mystery over Glenn’s fate last fall and then she spent untold hours, during the walker invasion, stranded like a treed raccoon on that lookout platform.
I still think bringing her along last week didn’t make much sense — and at this point you could use P.T.S.D. to explain any odd choice a character makes, which isn’t very satisfying. But it does fall in line with the general theme that old rules of morality don’t always apply.
I mentioned a couple weeks ago that from another perspective, Rick and friends are the ones bringing destruction everywhere they go. It was mostly tongue-in-cheek, but as some commenters noted at the time, the “heroes” of any given tale are, within the world of the story itself, largely a matter of perspective, a notion that came up on Sunday. “You’re not the good guys,” Bizarro Maggie said. Her point was undercut somewhat by her missing digit, the penalty dealt out by her own people for gas theft. But the larger point that Carol and Maggie, among others, are wrestling with is that in the absence of anything like normalcy, when acts of violence and apparent cruelty can be considered pragmatic, what does a good guy even look like? What does it mean to be good in a world that so often requires you to act badly?
Evidence suggests the Saviors are plenty bad, on balance, but the “We’re all Negan” trope, in addition to being a trippy and strategically obfuscatory thing to tell an enemy, also implies a sort of cleareyed ownership of whatever ghastly acts the real Negan is doing in their name. Besides, it’s been the Alexandrians, not the Saviors, who have been executing unarmed people left and right over the past couple weeks.
A Few Thoughts While We Crave a Nice Hoppy I.P.A.
• Tovah Feldshuh, last seen as a ghoulish, predatory zombie trying to eat her own young, will soon appear as the notorious hotelier Leona Helmsley. The jokes pretty much write themselves.
 Just a thought.
• So that was “T’s group” we saw Daryl blow up with the R.P.G. a few weeks ago. Nice to put a name to a flaming head.
• So do we think the baby survived this week’s festivities? What happened to Jesus? Wouldn’t he have been able to confirm who is and isn’t Negan? Please share your thoughts on this or anything else in the comments.