Good morning on this drenched Monday.
Spring is in the air (despite all the rain today).
But the new season is not, apparently, on our plates.
“This time of year is really hard,” said Galen Zamarra, a chef and owner at Mas (farmhouse) and Almanac, both in Greenwich Village.
“Nothing has come out yet,” said Jason Pfeifer, an executive chef at Maialino in Gramercy Park.
For those leading the kitchens of restaurants that prize local ingredients, this part of the year is a sort of no man’s land between winter and spring produce.
“We’re still waiting for those beautiful green vegetables that have been missing all winter long,” Mr. Pfeifer said.
Until they’re available, Maialino is doing what it can with salsify (a root vegetable), apples, potatoes and the odd mushroom.
It’s tough, though.
“Everyone has spring in their minds and wants bright colors on their plates,” Mr. Zamarra said.
So early buds and leaves — pea shoots, sunflower shoots, mustard flowers — are often used to dress up dishes.
Mr. Zamarra said he had also started to receive pullet eggs (eggs from young spring chickens).
And he has rhubarb.
“But this is not the beautiful pink rhubarb of late spring that you can make desserts and cocktails with,” Mr. Zamarra said. This stuff is still green.
It’s the same story at Telepan on the Upper West Side.
The chef and owner Bill Telepan changes the tasting menu every two weeks, based on what’s in season.
Currently on the menu: sunchokes, kohlrabi, parsnips and rutabaga.
But only for a few more weeks, Mr. Telepan said.
That is, more ramps, nettles and wild dandelions.
Spring is so close, you can almost taste it.
Boots, raincoats and umbrellas are de rigueur today, whether you like it or not.
We’re expecting temperatures in the 40s and rain all day, though the downpour may taper off by tonight.
But don’t let it get you down; things are likely to warm up and get a little brighter by midweek.
• Scoreboard: Penguins frostbite Rangers, 5-3. Bucks rip Nets, 109-100. Knicks dry up Lakers, 90-87.
• Islanders host Panthers, 7 p.m. (MSG+). Devils at Ducks, 10 p.m. (MSG).
New Jersey Transit reached a tentative deal with rail workers, averting a strike.
No matter what neighborhood restaurateurs are saying, local flowers are in agreement: It’s spring.
“We’re three weeks ahead,” said Brian Sullivan, the vice president for gardens, landscape and outdoor collections at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx.
His report: Irises, hellebores and magnolias are beginning to bloom, while witch hazel, a late-winter plant, has already had its moment.
And the pansies are ready (despite their name, the flowers are tough and cold-resistant). They’ve already been placed outside.
“They’re looking very happy outdoors,” Mr. Sullivan said.
So will we, as soon as this rain stops.