Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights from New York Times staff members. In this article, David M. Herszenhorn, a congressional correspondent and former Moscow correspondent for The Times, whose wife and children live in Brussels, offers an on-the-ground perspective on security.
I woke up on Tuesday morning in a hotel room in Madison, Wis., where I am on a reporting trip, to a flood of texts, emails and phone messages inquiring about the safety of my family in Brussels. I knew they were safe. My wife had tried to reach me — as I slept — to let me know that she and our three sons were O.K.
Typically, my wife picks me up and we head straight from the airport to the Saturday-morning outdoor market in Stockel, where we pick up brioche and cheese for breakfast and fresh vegetables for the weekend.
Yet, much as I love arriving at Zaventem, there is no denying that security has been lax.
In Moscow, where I worked as a correspondent for The Times for four years, it was impossible to enter any of the airport terminals without doing an initial baggage scan and going through a metal detector. That meant long lines often stretching outside in the bitter cold of Moscow winters. Once inside, this was followed by the customary security screening — relinquish all liquids, etc. — before entering the gate areas.
Russia had learned the need for vigilance the hard way. In January 2011, eight months before I arrived to take up my assignment for The Times, a suicide bomber struck the international arrivals terminal at Domodedovo International Airport, killing 37 people. In 2004, two planes that had just departed from Domodedovo were brought down by Chechen suicide bombers.
At Zaventem, there is no such screening (nor, by the way, is there such screening at John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York City or any number of other United States airports).
Terrorist bombers placed suitcases filled with explosives onto luggage carts and wheeled them straight into the departure hall without anyone challenging them.
That security at the Brussels airport has remained lax is particularly remarkable considering that the city was in virtual lockdown after the terrorist attacks in Paris in November. In the weeks following, Belgian soldiers were deployed throughout Brussels in a show of force and deterrence.
Whenever my family would go to buy groceries at the Carrefour supermarket in Auderghem, a quiet neighborhood outside the city center, a military troop carrier would be stationed in the parking lot, with armed soldiers in fatigues posted at the entrances to the small shopping center. The show of force seemed more show than real security, with no added bag screening, or other checks, and soldiers incongruously smiling and greeting children.
Such soldiers can be seen at the airport, but not in a way that suggested any sort of heightened security concern.
Terrorism is a sad, ever-present threat. My family knows this well. And we were lucky this time.
On another day, my wife or I could just as well have been on our way to catch a flight at the Zaventem airport — she heading on a business trip within Europe, or I heading back to the United States. We’d have been thinking more about the workday ahead or our kids than about the possibility of an Islamic State operative lurking nearby.