“Downton Abbey” has poured its last cup of tea, strapped its last traveling case to the car, dispatched its last awkward reaction shot to a mildly witty bon mot. The lesson of Sunday’s series finale was that every complicated melodrama requires a multiplicity of happy endings, no matter how hurriedly achieved. The lesson of the show’s longevity and immense popularity was that even in the age of Very Serious television, our strongest appetite is for sheer escapism, and once we’re hooked we don’t really notice if what we’re being served becomes progressively less savory.
To be fair, the creators and producers of “Downton” never made great claims for the show’s enduring value and murmured modest expressions of surprise about its status as a cultural juggernaut. Taking the long view, it’s not likely to be part of the Peak TV canon. (“Dallas” received about the same amount of attention in its time, for some of the same reasons.) Future bingers, not caught up in the communal groundswell, may find themselves fast-forwarding to the points where Maggie Smith opens her mouth.
Across six seasons on ITV in Britain and PBS in the United States, Julian Fellowes, who wrote all 52 episodes, delivered tears and laughs (well, chuckles) and the occasional violent surprise or naughty bit of sexual adventuring. It was an amazing feat of endurance and invention — dwarfing the output of other auteurist television writers. But the kind of sparkling comic melodrama laced with social commentary that he perfected in the first season can’t be easy work, and there were signs as early as Season 2 that he was laboring.
As this show neared the finish line in recent weeks — the action having spanned 1912 to 1925, though no one looked anywhere near 13 years older — there were an increasing number of scenes in which nothing really happened except for the furniture of the plot being moved around in preparation for one last big party.
That soiree arrived on Sunday, and it was predictably upbeat, cutting against the grain of a show whose stories so often involved death, illness, crime, manipulation and romantic ruination. The finale had its bittersweet elements — especially the sudden onset of palsy in the butler, Carson (Jim Carter), whose determination to maintain a facade of business-as-usual encapsulated the entire series.
But this episode was mostly one long swoon, beginning with the return of Bertie (the excellent Harry Hadden-Paton), tail between his tails, to marry the long-suffering Lady Edith (Laura Carmichael) — a reunion so mandatory that it played out as one long anticlimax. Other lovebirds, their suitability for each other long obvious to us, finally got over themselves and paired up — the kitchen maid Daisy and the footman Andy; the doughty Isobel and the popeyed Lord Merton; perhaps even the wildly clueless Molesley and the salt-of-the-earth ex-con Baxter.
Conscious of not stepping on Edith’s toes, Mr. Fellowes had married off her sister, Lady Mary (Michelle Dockery), to the racing enthusiast Henry Talbot (Matthew Goode) in the previous episode. Mary had been an increasingly unappealing and uninteresting character since the death of her first husband, Matthew, in Season 3, and the last-gasp, final-season romance with Henry was a meeting of cold fish, a veritable buffet of poached salmon.
Mary’s string of less than scintillating relationships pointed up a problem with “Downton Abbey,” and might indicate why Mr. Fellowes tended to resort to the morbid: He’s not very good with love. Couple after couple talked endlessly and evinced little or no real feeling (the exceptions being Lady Sybil and Tom Branson and, to a lesser extent, Anna and Mr. Bates). There were two great romances in “Downton,” both of them same-sex: between Robert, the Earl of Grantham (Hugh Bonneville), and his butler, Carson; and between Violet, the Dowager Countess (Maggie Smith), and Isobel (Penelope Wilton), the paragon of common sense and modernity.
Those two pairs received the final scenes of the series, to deliver homilies about life and change. It was an appropriate send-off for the show, whose primary glory through the years was the opportunity it provided viewers to enjoy a certain type of British actor, equipped with both the technique and expressiveness required to animate Mr. Fellowes’s parlor-comedy characters. Mr. Bonneville; Ms. Wilton; Dan Stevens as Matthew; Lily James as Lady Rose; and, most memorably, Ms. Smith as the magnificently churlish Violet — we owe Mr. Fellowes and his team of producers our gratitude for putting us in that company for 52 weeks.