The flashy number in “The Wave” rolls in like a star. You know it’s coming, just not when. (Fanning the crowd’s anxiety is crucial to making a great entrance.) Once it arrives, the crowd gawks and freezes, mesmerized by the spectacle of so much ferocious power. And, like all stars, the wave waits for no one. A palpably convincing digital creation, this churning gray inundation powers straight into the little people, who panic and scatter, creating a regular day-of-the-locust free-for-all that separates children from parents, the survivors from the newly dead.
“The Wave” — can you guess what it’s about? — exemplifies the disaster-movie playbook. Here’s a look at the film and others that share its D.N.A.
Up until then, “The Wave,” which centers on a family swept up by a tsunami in Norway, has been as seductively calm and beautiful as a tourist board commercial. The director, Roar Uthaug, and his team make some smart moves, none shrewder than setting the story in and around a real southwestern town, Geiranger, which faces a long, deep fjord. A Unesco World Heritage site, the fjord is the movie’s true commanding star, with soaring verdant and denuded rock walls flanking a glassy inlet that snakes along for miles before spilling into the sea. It’s one of those dreamy destinations that by virtue of its appeal can turn goose bumps of delight into nightmarish shivers.
Like most disaster movies, “The Wave” has three ready-made narrative movements — setup, catastrophe and aftermath — populated by indispensable, regrettably sacrificial and casually disposable characters. In other words, somebody has to play Shelley Winters’s role in “The Poseidon Adventure,” somebody else gets to be Charlton Heston (pick your flick), while everyone else goes bye-bye. The filmmakers amusingly stack the deck by making the heroes members of an attractively close family that’s packing up to move when the story opens. Better yet, the father, Kristian (Kristoffer Joner), is a jumpy geologist who’s been monitoring a nearby mountain, a restless giant whose collapse would instigate a tsunami that would wipe away the town and turn pleasure boats into broken bathtub toys.
Mr. Uthaug plays with the initial tranquillity nicely, mixing smiling, friendly faces with beauty shots of the pristine, conspicuously unpopulated landscape. The mountains are summertime green, but the inlet isn’t yet jammed with cruise ships and the village isn’t overrun with visitors. The limited number of ships and sightseers concentrates your focus on the family and the natural world, allowing you to see the ease with which these people navigate their environment. You can intuit an entire family drama in the shot of the teenage son, Sondre (Jonas Hoff Oftebro), perched alone at the water’s edge, dwarfed by a place he doesn’t want to leave. The scale of that image has other implications, too, since the story will soon shift from the great outdoors to some intensely claustrophobic interiors.
The filmmakers (the script is by John Kare Raake and Harald Rosenlow Eeg) cook up the sort of unpleasantness that turns the better disaster pictures, like this one, into nail-biters. There are minor and fateful human dramas and errors, as well as a missed getaway, a strategic separation and even some ticking clocks. By the time disaster strikes, Kristian and his youngest child are bidding a nostalgic goodbye to their house while his wife, Idun (Ane Dahl Torp), and Sondre are at the hotel where she works. Both Mr. Joner and Ms. Torp have somewhat protuberant eyes that make them a mirror for the audience, though as their characters swing into parental survivor mode you’re reminded that this is the land of the Vikings, from their resolve to their awesome man-crushing thighs.
“The Wave” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian) for disaster and death. It is in Norwegian, with English subtitles. Running time: 1 hour 45 minutes.