Are you happy now, Maggie?
I’m no Dr. Spock, but it seems like high on the list of rules for expectant mothers, right up there with not smoking cigarettes or eating cold cuts, would be this: Do not engage in armed raids on postapocalyptic pirate strongholds.
And yet there Maggie was in Sunday’s “Walking Dead,” not long after seeing her offspring for the first time, demanding, against all better judgment and the urging of Glenn and others, to participate in the attack on the Saviors. Her resulting capture thwarted an otherwise shockingly successful effort, undercutting her husband’s great moral sacrifice, and jeopardized the other person most invested in keeping her safe. (Does anyone really think Carol would’ve been taken if she hadn’t been babysitting her?) Now Maggie’s briefly victorious comrades are caught in the clutches of what we’ve been led to believe are the most vicious opponents we’ve seen on “The Walking Dead.” So … nice job by her.
The prologue to the chaotic final assault included a charged town meeting, a fun scheme to trick the Saviors with a fake Gregory head and continued curious behavior from Abraham (more on that in a minute). Along the way we saw Rick finding his niche as Alexandria’s leader — he’s enlightened enough to put the Savior matter to a vote but remains ready, when necessary, to work a zombie melon like a speed bag — and milestones for other core survivors.
Tobin’s speech about Carol’s strength deriving from the fact that she’s a mother seemed important, especially considering Maggie’s struggles this week. But I couldn’t quite parse the significance of what he was saying. Perhaps it was foreshadowing something Carol will do to protect her from the Saviors in a later episode. Feel free to share any theories in the comments.
The other pivotal player on Sunday was Abraham. We wondered last week about his internal strife, which seemed to find some sort of resolution, oddly, as he was being strangled by the Hilltopper. He symbolically left Rosita’s necklace behind, seeming to signal his intention to throw her over in favor of Sasha. Which is what he did on Sunday, though he and Sasha were too busy blasting Saviors to discuss their future together.
But do they really have a future together? Some commenters raised intriguing points last week, noting the interest Abraham showed in the story from the Hilltopper who, when Abraham nearly killed him by mistake, saw his dead wife awaiting him. You’ll recall how bereft Abraham was, in the early days, about losing his own family. Did he see something similar during his own brush with death last week? Was that the source of his comfort, knowing that paying the ultimate price will gain him the thing he still desires most?
Now consider the cruelty with which he dumped Rosita, who is a fairly bland character but seems like a decent enough person. (“I thought you were the last woman on earth,” he said. “You’re not.”) She didn’t deserve that, and it seemed out of character for Abraham, right? But it might not be, if he’s trying to alienate someone who cares about him, because he plans to sacrifice himself at the first appropriate opportunity.
I bring all of this up because someone’s about to get it. Maybe several someones, but as we get closer to the inevitable arrival of the big bad Negan it seems certain that at least one core character will be checking out soon, and it’s not going to be pretty. We all saw those horrific snapshots in the Savior lair and, as the various stories about Jeffrey Dean Morgan’s casting as Negan have noted, his signature weapon is a baseball bat.
Could that someone be Abraham? He’s sure acting like a man with a date with destiny, and, as we learned back when Eugene was lying about his world-saving scientific bona fides, Abraham is a man who needs a purpose. I’m guessing we’ll find out soon, one way or another.
• Cliffs Notes recap: Moms are strong but also sometimes liabilities.
• I wondered about Carol’s sanity a few weeks ago, but on Sunday she seemed fine — Morgan was the one hanging on by a thread. He was last seen crying while he built some metal contraption. It’s no surprise he was the dissenting vote on the Savior issue, and he’s also waiting for the other shoe to drop on the stray Wolf he used to keep in the basement. But what else is going on with that guy?
• The Saviors are scary, the Hilltopper told Rick after he worked over the zombie head, but they “got nothing on you.” I highly enjoyed the whole beheaded Gregory ruse, from start to finish.
• So what do you think? Am I being too hard on Maggie? Is Virginia really for lovers? (God bless Eugene.) And what’s your favorite acorn-based recipe? As always, please fire away in the comments.