Opinion|What Are We Voting For?
Gail Collins: Yeah, talk about good times. When did we last have a political leader who promised his party there would be blood on the streets if he didn’t get his way?
Gail: Could that possibly, in any way, reflect your own current mood? So many of the things Bernie Democrats find off-putting in Clinton are qualities the Republican mainstream loves. On foreign affairs, she’s been an interventionist. And then there are her pals on Wall Street.
Thanks to my nonpartisan day job, I won’t bite on your fair question about my own mood. I will say, though, that I’ve found conservative leaders on all sides of that question. What I always try to remind people is that the need for deep thinking and good ideas won’t change, no matter what. Politics is like the weather; ideas are like the climate. Confusing them is a common but bad mistake. The struggle for ideas that bring freedom and opportunity to more people — especially people at the periphery of society — has to go on no matter what’s going on in politics.
Gail: Noble sentiments.
Arthur: Thank you. I come from nobility — the House of Riffraff.
Gail: There’s a difference between the candidate you want and the one you would support if the other side was appalling. Let’s take the all-critical issue of economics. I can imagine voting for someone whose spending priorities were different from mine. But I find it hard to imagine voting for anyone whose tax plan involved less burden for the wealthy. And don’t try to tell me you’re going to make it up by cutting fraud and waste.
Arthur: Correct — simply cutting fraud and waste won’t do it, although God knows there’s a lot of waste. If conservatives want a smaller tax burden and lower deficits, the only answer is less spending. Long-term, reforming entitlements would have to play a central role. Yet the most likely Republican nominee at this point is actually opposed to conservative entitlement reform.
The cognitive dissonance isn’t just on the Republican side, however. Sanders proposes showering cash out of helicopters, and as far as I can tell, he is really only proposing higher taxes on the much-regretted billionaires. The truth is that middle-class taxes would have to rise under his spending scenarios.
Gail: Let’s talk about Hillary Clinton. I presume you’re not thrilled with her sudden opposition to the Pacific trade agreement. Her explanation was pretty well-constructed, but I nevertheless acknowledge this was a political dive.
However, looking at the big picture, her economic program is far, far and away the most responsible of all the remaining presidential candidates.
Arthur: Clinton’s convenient turnabout on trade was a total union cave — but no worse than what so many conservative Republicans did when they turned against trade promotion authority to spite President Obama, who admirably supported it.
Gail: I love it when we come together in bipartisan agreement that everybody is in the tank.

As for Clinton’s economic program, there aren’t any shocking surprises: tax cuts for some working families, more spending on infrastructure and research, a higher minimum wage, and so on. Obviously I would do many things differently, like expanding the Earned Income Tax Credit to better assist childless workers instead of hiking the minimum wage. But that’s no surprise.
According to one analysis by the Tax Foundation, a D.C. research outfit, Clinton’s tax plan could raise far less new revenue than projected because parts of it could drag down growth and depress economic output. And some proposals, like hiking capital gains taxes, would more likely bring about a surge in legal tax avoidance than some new, fair utopia. A bunch of these policies sound good to populist left-wing audiences, but would do real damage in practice.
Gail: I don’t want to sound like a total simpleton, but you could just change the rules and block that “legal tax avoidance” you’re worrying over. Give me an example of something about her plan that really bothers you.
Arthur: I wish her healthcare ideas were more centrist, or at least more original. As far as I can tell, her top three priorities are to 1) Keep Obamacare as is, 2) “Crack down on rising prescription drug prices and hold drug companies accountable,” and 3) Protect abortion rights with hardly any restrictions whatsoever. This is all just so — kabuki progressive.
She has to know that runaway costs are the result of a fundamental lack of market forces operating in health care, not just robber barons ripping us off. Scholars and others on both the left and the right have proposed lots of creative solutions that would better serve Clinton’s own liberal goals than the status quo she insists on defending.
Gail: Let me step back and defend your big three. The reason Clinton is having so much trouble with young voters is her almost pathological realism. On the health care front, I’m sure she feels that the country would have done much better with something cleaner and more radical than Obamacare.
Arthur: Hey, anything is cleaner than Obamacare. My backyard shed is cleaner than Obamacare.
Gail: But that’s what we’ve got and we’re never going to get to start over again. She certainly doesn’t want to keep it as is, and I think she’d actually do a good job of improving it if she gets a slightly more rational Congress to work with.
Second, when it comes to cracking down on health costs, there’s nothing that would deliver a bigger bang for the political effort than standing up to the pharmaceutical companies on drug prices.
Arthur: My response here is as predictable as my dad’s jokes: The problem is that cracking down on drug prices by fiat is a fantastic way to drive down innovation in biopharmaceuticals and other cutting-edge innovations that could save millions of lives. This may not make a great bumper sticker, but the way to build a better system for consumers is actually to expose them to prices and let them comparison shop, like we do in every other field. Government can help provide vulnerable people with the resources they need. But trying to shelter consumers from any awareness of real costs is exactly the thinking that made health care such a basket case industry to begin with.
Gail: On your third point — I know we disagree on abortion rights and we will need to have that conversation at some point. But for now just let me say that for a lot of women in this country, that’s far from a small issue. It’s central to our individual rights.
So I think that’s a pretty fine trio of priorities. But what would you rather hear her say?
Arthur: As a political matter, my advice to Clinton — and I know the Clinton campaign is stoked to hear the advice of the president of A.E.I. — is to avoid making a classic error. After eight years of relatively doctrinaire liberalism from the White House, the public is ready for a change. That’s normal. But she is hearing from the loudest voices on the left during the primary that the desired change is an even bigger lurch leftward. She should resist and ramp up her willingness to borrow center-right ideas instead. That way, if she wins in November, she would have a much better chance to succeed.
Gail: I agree with you about the desire for change, and that’s a problem for her since she’s basically been running as the heir to the Obama administration. But at bottom, if most Americans think about it, I believe they’d say they like what the president has done over all. He made an imperfect but critical move toward universal health coverage. Bailed out the auto industry. Pursued a humanitarian but even-handed immigration policy. While it’s easy for her opponents to argue that the economy should be doing better, it’s puttering along pretty darned well considering the inability of Congress to pass anything.
Arthur: We’ve heard the current administration make exactly that claim: that the economy is doing pretty well in spite of Republican-led gridlock. I don’t buy it — and clearly, neither do most Americans. While top-line economic growth has been positive, real wage growth has been zero or negative for the bottom 80 percent of the population since 2008. Meanwhile, about 85 percent of the stock market gains have flowed to the top 10 percent.
I’m starting to sound like John Edwards now, with his old “Two Americas” schtick. I feel like I should take a shower.
Gail: “Two Americas” was the John Edwards high point. I’m kinda touched you remember.
Arthur: It was unforgettable. That and the fabulous hair.
But back to the subject at hand. It’s not low growth, exactly, but rather unbalanced growth that is fueling support for the surprisingly similar populisms of Trump and Sanders. Clinton surely understands that “free college for all” and similar gewgaws won’t fix what ails us. The situation requires tough-minded policies for balanced economic growth and job creation. A lot of policies that would help us toward these ends, like free trade, share support from economists on the left and right alike — but they aren’t much in the conversation right now.
Gail: President Obama’s problem has been an inability to get Congress to cooperate with anything more ambitious than kicking the can down the road. Clinton’s big change would be to actually work with Congress and get things done. It’s ironic, since Obama beat her by promising to transcend the old-brain dead political squabbles and move the country forward. I still remember Hillary kind of staring at him when he made that sound so easy.
Arthur: Hey, now we’re giving Hillary the same advice: Be the person who is determined to work with everybody and doesn’t treat the other side with contempt. I’m big into that advice these days.
Now it’s your turn to make a prediction. I get asked this one constantly: Will Hillary be indicted, or is that just a crazy conservative fantasy?
Gail: That is a crazy conservative fantasy. However, having lived through the times I have lived through, I would never discount the possibility of some other huge scandal that she basically had nothing to do with but which would throw the entire election year into a tailspin.
I point this out to Democrats who are rooting for the nomination of the eminently defeatable Donald Trump.
Gail: Since every president winds up doing things they swore they would never, ever, ever do, I think in the end voters will get past the trustworthy issue.
Arthur: Can I trust you on that?
One last thing: Today we’ll get results from Utah and Arizona, plus Idaho for the Democrats. Any surprises in store?
Gail: I guess the big question is whether Mitt Romney’s decision to vote for Ted Cruz in Utah, but not to endorse Ted Cruz, will have any influence on confused Utah Republicans. Which explains why I will be at a movie when the results flow in.
Happy Easter, Arthur.