Updated, 12:08 p.m.
Good morning on this balmy Thursday.
After two weeks of March Madness, the 68 men’s teams playing in the college basketball tournament have been whittled down to four.
On Saturday night, Villanova plays Oklahoma, then North Carolina plays Syracuse, in the Final Four.
Take note of the Syracuse players’ choice of clothing during warm-ups and on the bench, a Times sports reporter, David Waldstein, tells us.
During the tournament, the players have, without fail, worn T-shirts with “Pearl” written on them. Mr. Waldstein told us why.
Dwayne Washington, a former Syracuse basketball star known as Pearl, had a relapse of a brain tumor last year. The shirts aim to draw attention to a fund-raising effort to help pay for his care.
Mr. Washington grew up in the projects of Brownsville, Brooklyn — and graduated from Boys and Girls High School in Bedford-Stuyvesant — before joining the Syracuse Orange. He went on to play for the New Jersey Nets and the Miami Heat, among others.
Syracuse will again be wearing their Pearl T-shirts at the Final Four game, Mr. Waldstein said.
As for expectations about the action, Mr. Waldstein suggested keeping an eye on Malachi Richardson, a 6-foot-6 freshman from Trenton.
Dribble, shoot, swoosh.
Expect a pleasant spring day that slowly goes downhill.
The high? A gorgeous 71.
But by your afternoon coffee break, it could be windy.
And then rain could start to fall during your evening commute. It should really start coming down tonight, and the downpour could continue through Friday.
• Scoreboard: Mavericks outsmart Knicks, 91-89.
• Nets at Cavaliers, 7 p.m. (YES). Islanders host Blue Jackets, 7 p.m. (MSG+). Rangers at Hurricanes, 7 p.m. (MSG). Devils at Panthers, 7:30 p.m. (MS+2).
B, D and 7 trains are running with delays.
Some die-hard basketball fans may be traveling to Houston to watch the Final Four, but we’re staying in New York.
We’d make a friendly wager that most sports bars here will be showing the games on Saturday night.
North Carolina Tar Heels (not Panthers as we previously mentioned): Brother Jimmy’s BBQ and Slattery’s Midtown Pub.
