Good morning on this flurrying Friday.
You’re waking up to one of the last gasps of winter.
We’re expecting roughly an inch of snow to dust our sidewalks and roads through the end of the morning.
But later this afternoon, the sun should come out and make it all disappear.
It will warm up rapidly from there. Next week’s forecast includes plenty of sunny days, with the temperature potentially jumping into the high 60s by Wednesday.
“Spring will be in the air for sure,” said John Homenuk of New York Metro Weather.
Should we breathe the post-winter sigh of relief?
Of course, during the blizzard in January, we had one of the greatest one-day accumulations of snow in New York City history.
Over all, though, this winter has been benign, with average monthly temperatures coming in higher than normal.
And the roads have stayed clear. The Sanitation Department, which plows only when at least two inches of snow piles up, has deployed its trucks just twice this season. That’s compared with the 10 times it had sent plows onto the streets at this point last winter.
The same goes for the city’s salt spreaders, which have been used only 13 times this year, about half as many times as by this point in the last two winters.
So take that breath. After a mild winter, spring is on its way.
The local flora and fauna think so, too.
Crocuses are blooming in Central Park, said Sarah Aucoin, chief of education and wildlife at the Parks Department.
And reports are trickling in of red-winged blackbirds divebombing and attacking people.
• Scoreboard: Penguins waddle past Rangers, 4-1. Devils horn Predators, 5-4 (in overtime). Islanders rain on Jets, 4-3 (in overtime).
• Rangers at Capitals, 7 p.m. (MSG2). Knicks at Celtics, 7:30 p.m. (MSG). Devils at Stars, 8:30 p.m. (MSG+). Nets at Nuggets, 9 p.m. (YES).
• Knicks host Pistons, 7 p.m. (MSG). Nets at Timberwolves, 8 p.m. (YES).
• “The New York Times Close Up,” featuring the Times reporter Kim Barker and other guests. Saturday at 10 p.m. and Sunday at 10 a.m. on NY1.
• Alternate-side parking: suspended Friday, March 4.
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority’s technology challenge, App Quest, has given us tools like YoTrain!, which notifies users of approaching trains (even on a locked phone), and ReMap, which displays services changes.
This weekend, the M.T.A. is hosting the New York City Bus Hackathon, sharing ridership and performance data from the Staten Island bus system with software developers publicly for the first time.
• Come up with an app that lets us save a seat on the bus.