Television|A Fiery Debate on the K.K.K. in 2016. Who Figured?
A Fiery Debate on the K.K.K. in 2016. Who Figured?
On Super Tuesday, two commentators on CNN argued about the Ku Klux Klan. On television. In America. In 2016.
It was a singular moment in cable news. This is partly because, until this week, the K.K.K.’s loathsomeness had seemed to be a settled issue. But also because — as intense and unsettling as the argument was — it was substantive and illuminating in a way time-killing cable shouting matches rarely are.
Here’s where things got real. Van Jones, a former Obama staffer (and an African-American), turned to Mr. Lord and argued that Mr. Trump was “playing funny with the Klan” by not deploring them with the same passion he directs at other terrorist organizations. (Or for that matter, I’d say, Megyn Kelly.) Mr. Lord responded that Mr. Trump had said enough, that Democrats were “dividing people by race” and besides, the Klan was a “leftist” terror group.
It was five minutes or so of the most stunning TV of the year. Even the body language was fascinating: Mr. Jones rested a hand on Mr. Lord’s shoulder at times, seemingly less as a dominating gesture than to keep the situation from spiraling out of control. (“I know you,” Mr. Jones said at one point. “I trust you.”) It was as if he were simultaneously battling Mr. Lord and trying to defuse a highly unstable bomb.
Cable debates typically end up with two parties yelling over trivia. The Jones-Lord argument was arresting precisely the opposite way: Two men were arguing, furiously but in control, over something dead serious.
And while I’ve criticized cable networks plenty over the years for engaging in gasbag theater for ratings, CNN was absolutely right to let this fight play out. The 2016 election has dug up ghastly things in American politics that many of us thought were long buried. But once the Klan robe is out of mothballs, it needs to be confronted under bright lights.
In a way, the argument was the 2016 election in miniature. It defied the political alignments we’ve become used to. (Mr. Jones, after all, was a progressive supporting an argument begun by a conservative fellow panelist.)  It was arresting, in part because it seemed it could all go terribly wrong.
It didn’t, this time. But this probably won’t be the last time this election that the limits of cable discussion — like the limits of our political system — get tested.