New Victory Theater, 209 W. 42nd St.
In 1943, a group of officer candidates, debonair in their khakis and caps, approach a bar just off their Alabama base, in search of some music and beers.
“Colored ’round the back,” the barman says before slamming a door in their faces.
This small indignity is part of the systemic and incidental racism that these men experienced during their training and deployment. As members of an elite group of African-American fighter and bomber pilots known as the Tuskegee Airmen, they successfully flew a number of heroic missions while experiencing discrimination both within and outside the military.
Some of their stories are told in “Fly,” a sentimental though captivating play at the New Victory Theater, from the Pasadena Playhouse and the Crossroads Theater Company. Intended for both children and adults, the script, by Ricardo Khan and Trey Ellis, relies on historical shorthand and overly explicit approaches to character, but the whole is moving and powerful.
After an introduction involving schematic projections and a percussive dance by a silent narrator known as the Tap Griot, we meet four recruits: Chet (Desmond Newson), an eager adolescent; W. W. (Brooks Brantly), a Chicago smoothie; Oscar (Terrell Wheeler), “a no-nonsense race man”; and J. Allen (Damian Thompson), formerly a constable in the West Indies. While infighting and abuse from a superior officer threaten their success, most of them deploy.
By the time the men are up in the air over Italy and Germany, we’ve come to care for them absolutely, thanks in part to the excellent acting. If the aerial battles are depicted somewhat awkwardly (more unhelpful projections), they are nail-biters all the same.
But perhaps the play’s strongest moments are those at the very end, when the screens display pictures of the real men who flew and the men and women on the ground who lent them logistical support. When audience members rose to give a standing ovation, they were saluting these veterans, too.