Robert De Niro, a founder of the Tribeca Film Festival, in January.Credit...Dennis Van Tine/Associated Press.
Facing a storm of criticism over its plan to show a documentary about the widely debunked link between vaccines and autism, the Tribeca Film Festival on Saturday pulled the film from its schedule next month.
The film, “Vaxxed: From Cover-Up to Catastrophe,” was directed and co-written by Andrew Wakefield, the author of a study that was published in the British medical journal The Lancet and then retracted in 2010. Mr. Wakefield’s medical license was also revoked over his failure to disclose financial conflicts of interest and ethics violations.
A festival spokeswoman said on Saturday that she had no further comment about what specifically in the film raised concerns for Mr. De Niro after he initially added it to the festival. The film was to have been shown just once, on April 24, and was to be followed by a discussion with the director and subjects of the film.
“My hat is off to them for listening, thinking about it, discussing it and responding,” he said.
Nevertheless, Dr. Schaffner said, it was troubling for scientists that a film promoting “discredited ideas” got so close to a forum as prestigious as the Tribeca Film Festival.
The retraction by Science of a study of changing attitudes on gay marriage is the latest in a growing number of prominent withdrawals of the results of studies from scientific literature.
On Saturday, Ms. Lane said she was “amazed” that the festival had decided to cancel the film screening. In an email, she described it as a “momentous and significant” moment for documentary filmmaking.
Nevertheless, Ms. Lane said she feared that on some level the damage had already been done by drawing attention to Mr. Wakefield’s work and granting it a seal of approval, however brief.
Now that the film had been pulled from the lineup, Mr. Wakefield and supporters of his work can champion it as a documentary that has been “banned” by the powers that be, “and that will add to his conspiracy theory aura,” she said.
Doctors and infectious disease experts also spoke out. “Unless the Tribeca Film Festival plans to definitively unmask Andrew Wakefield, it will be yet another disheartening chapter where a scientific fraud continues to occupy a spotlight,” Dr. Mary Anne Jackson, a professor of pediatrics at the University of Missouri-Kansas City, said in an interview on Friday.
