Elwyn L. Simons, an intrepid scientist known as the father of modern primate paleontology for his discovery of some of humankind’s earliest antecedents, died on March 6 in Peoria, Ariz. He was 85.
His death was announced by Duke University, where he was an emeritus professor of evolutionary anthropology.
Though Dr. Simons’s career took in myriad fossils, including whales’ feet (in the distant past in which his professional life was lived, the footed whale was no oxymoron), he was concerned in particular with the earliest primates.
“Elwyn made an enormous and really incomparable contribution to the science of human origins, particularly at the very early end of the scale — the background out of which our hominid lineage emerged,” Ian Tattersall, an emeritus curator in the division of anthropology at the American Museum of Natural History, said in a telephone interview on Tuesday.
Dr. Simons was equal parts scientist and adventurer: In leading more than 90 expeditions — to Egypt, India, Iran, Libya, Madagascar, Wyoming and elsewhere — he braved badlands, weathered sandstorms, dodged unexploded World War II land mines and crawled through limestone caves in pursuit of his venerable quarry.
Dr. Simons did not so much dig as divine.
Dr. Simons carried out much of his work in the Fayum region of Egypt, some 60 miles southwest of Cairo. Today a desert, it was, many millions of years ago, a forested swamp teeming with early primates.
His most seminal find, made in the Fayum in the mid-1960s, was the skull of a cat-size, tree-dwelling primate he called Aegyptopithecus. The creature — about 33 million years old — was, on its discovery, the earliest known common forebear of apes, monkeys and man.
Dr. Simons and his team later turned up more Aegyptopithecus skulls — finds that suggested the creature was no towering intellectual.
Dr. Simons was equally concerned with living primates, serving for many years as the director of the Duke University Primate Center, as it was then known. The center, now the Duke Lemur Center, studies and breeds rare and endangered primates — which over the years have included lemurs, tarsiers and lorises — and has reintroduced some of its lemurs to the wild in Madagascar.
Dr. Simons helped establish Parc Ivoloina, a conservation center in eastern Madagascar for lemurs and other native species. In recognition of his work there, he was made a knight of the National Order of the Republic of Madagascar.
While it is atypical for a paleontologist to have a second career in wildlife conservation, for Dr. Simons the two trades dovetailed seamlessly.
Elwyn LaVerne Simons, whose most immediate lineal forebears were Verne Simons and the former Verna Cuddeback, was born on July 14, 1930, in Lawrence, Kan., and reared in Houston.
Visiting an exhibition as a young child, he saw a reconstituted dinosaur and promptly burst into tears. But fascination soon overcame fright, and the tears turned to howls of protest when his father tried to lead him away.
After receiving a bachelor’s degree from Rice University, the young Mr. Simons earned master’s and doctoral degrees from Princeton and a second doctorate from Oxford.
Dr. Simons taught at Yale, where his students included the future Dr. Tattersall and Dr. Pilbeam, before joining the Duke faculty in 1977. After retiring from Duke in 2011, he lived in Peoria.
The discovery showed that even after whales quit the land for a life at sea some 50 million years ago, they retained vestigial, but still functional, lower limbs for a good 10 million years more.
Dr. Simons’s first marriage, to Mary Hoyt Fitch, ended in divorce. His survivors include his second wife, Friderun Ankel-Simons, a physical anthropologist and frequent collaborator; their two children, Cornelia Seiffert and Verne Simons; a son from his first marriage, D. Brenton Simons, a genealogist concerned with human ancestors of more recent vintage; a brother, Herbert; and five grandchildren. A daughter from his first marriage, Katherine Egan, died in 2009.
Amid the forbidding conditions in which he sometimes worked, Dr. Simons was sustained by his constitutional puckish humor.
“I remember him telling me that he discovered a very important tool in paleontology, and this is what he should be known for,” Dr. Wright said on Tuesday. To her astonishment, she recalled, he opened a closet and emerged with an ordinary household broom.
“I sweep the desert,” he declared.
And, indeed, whenever Dr. Simons scoured the sands for his ancestors, he brought his broom along.