In January, at least nine people were shot to death in Mexico’s Guerrero state during a traditional coming-out party for a 15-year-old girl. Many victims of drug-related violence in Mexico ceased a long time ago to have any apparent connection with the trade. In 2014, members of a drug cartel along with local police abducted and presumably killed 43 student teachers for no discernible reason other than they were preparing to demonstrate against the lamentable state of education in their region.
According to a PBS documentary broadcast last year, the number of homicides in Mexico stood at more than 164,000, between 2007 and 2014. The combined figure for civilian deaths in Afghanistan and Iraq over the same period was 103,000. In the last decade, Mexico has been the most dramatic theater in a crisis that engulfs countries as far apart as Jamaica and Brazil. The Rio-based research institute Igarapé (on whose international advisory board I sit) has found that half of Brazil’s more than 50,000 annual homicides are directly related to the drug industry.
Drugs are not the only cause of this epidemic of killing. Extreme poverty, gross wealth inequality, weak states and corruption, along with a hierarchical culture of machismo, all play a role. But the overwhelming motivation for the butchery is narcotics — or, to be precise, the fabulous profits associated with selling a ­prohibited commodity for which demand is off the scale, especially in the United States and Europe.
For those who believe the violence is the product of some intrinsic aspect of South American culture, the Brazilian case is instructive. In 1982, the homicide rate in Rio de Janeiro was on a par with New York City’s, at 23 per 100,000 inhabitants. Seven years later, while New York’s had shown a modest rise, Rio’s had jumped to 63 per 100,000 inhabitants, a threefold increase that prefaced an even greater blood bath in the 1990s. During those seven years, Brazil had become the central transit country for cocaine heading across the ­Atlantic to Europe. The Colombian cocaine cartels were desperate to find new sales for their product once the North American market had reached a saturation point in the early 1980s.
By the mid-1980s, the astonishing profits accrued from the prohibited commodity enabled the relatively benign criminal gangs that had always existed in Rio’s slums, or favelas, to equip themselves with frighteningly potent weapons. These were enough first to challenge and then to outgun Rio’s police.
Grillo charts the fascinating rise of Rio’s oldest and most powerful drug gang, the Comando Vermelho, or the Red ­Commando. In the 1970s, common criminals from the city’s favelas were locked up during the military dictatorship in the Cândido Mendes prison on Ilha Grande, which lies an hour’s boat ride from the coast west of Rio. Here they mingled with the guerrillas who had taken up arms against the generals, learning the strategic value of planning, organization and solidarity. Grillo tells the story of William da Silva Lima, a former bank robber known now as “the Teacher,” who escaped from Ilha Grande in 1980 and returned to his favela, taking “the Red Commando from the cellblock to the ghetto.” The Red Commando used revolutionary terms to describe its activities: Robberies became “expropriations,” and a gang became a “liberation group.” Once cocaine entered the equation, the Brazilian state was confronted by one of its most formidable opponents in history.
As Grillo unfolds the complex and often gruesome stories of the drug trade, it becomes clear that this terror is comprehensible. It is the result of ossified policies — chief among them the so-called War on Drugs — that are wholly inappropriate for a globalized world. Grillo and his compatriot, Tom Wainwright, an editor at The Economist and the author of “Narconomics: How to Run a Drug Cartel,” belong to a growing band of writers who seek out the testimony of criminals in order to better understand the rational calculation that often underpins the violence. The economic weight of transnational organized crime — not to mention its devastating political and social impact — is so considerable that without this testimony, we simply cannot grasp what is going on.
It is an exhausting and often nerve-racking job, but Grillo in particular scores some spectacular successes, notably his long conversation with a gunman for one of Kingston’s most notorious or (depending on your point of view) celebrated drug lords, the appropriately named Christopher Coke, more commonly known in ­Jamaica as Dudus. Grillo’s descriptions of a “don system that trains and directs assassins” evoke the wild world of the film “The Harder They Come,” the story of a well-meaning country boy who slides into a life of violence.
But I wouldn’t underestimate Wainwright’s contribution. His writing is less passionate than Grillo’s, but he brings a fine and balanced analytical mind to some very good research, undertaken largely in northern Mexico. By looking at the drug trade as a business, Wainwright is able to reveal much about why it wreaks such havoc in Central and South America.
The issue of violence is not a random by-product of gangster culture. It is central to the industry, Wainwright observes, as the only way “to enforce contractual agreements.” To control or police a market like drugs, from which the state has consciously absented itself except through law enforcement, the cartel must be able to wield decisive violence or, at the very least, be able to project a credible threat of violence.
Americans would do well to read both these books. The move toward drug law reform may not be unstoppable, but it is certainly tilting in the direction of a more rational policy. Grillo and Wainwright show how drug violence is not so much senseless but the devastating result of economic calculations taken to their ­brutal extreme. Wainwright’s conclusion is titled “Why Economists Make the Best Police Officers.” It is one of the pithiest and most persuasive arguments for drug law reform I have ever read.