The ghost of Bach seems to inhabit St. Paul’s Chapel on lower Broadway. The musical forces of the parent church, Trinity Wall Street, directed by Julian Wachner, have presented no end of thrilling Bach performances there in recent years.
But on Saturday evening Trinity graciously stepped aside to present the Cleveland-based period-instrument ensemble Apollo’s Fire and its affiliated Apollo’s Singers, directed by Jeannette Sorrell, in a resplendent performance of Bach’s “St. John Passion” at St. Paul’s. Well, not stepped aside entirely, since the groups share several performers.
Still, the production here belonged entirely to Ms. Sorrell, who devised the concept, which she called “a dramatic presentation”; conducted, often from the small positive organ; and even wrote extensive program notes. The main idea of the staging was to have the Evangelist preside, more or less as usual, but to have the other individuated characters (Jesus, Pilate, Simon Peter, the Maid, the Servant) confront one another face to face on the stage, sometimes coming close to blows.
Since the singers of these roles were also members of the chorus, which was placed in the balcony behind the stage, there was much coming and going, back and forth, up and down, which made for a lot of distraction. And Jesus, usually front and center along with the Evangelist, was somewhat lost in the crowd of itinerant character-choristers even though the versatile baritone Jesse Blumberg sang the role handsomely and acted vividly.
Still, it all proved an effective enhancement of the drama, and a particularly brave one, since each of the seven performances of the production is taking place in a different location, whether church or theater, presumably with different layouts of stage, balconies and the like. Just mapping out the movements might seem to require a full-time cartographer.
Nicholas Phan sang the tenor role of the Evangelist beautifully, with unusual animation and dramatic vehemence. He also sang the tenor arias and stood up to the dual task impressively.
The baritone Jeffrey Strauss turned Pilate into a living, breathing figure for a change. And the other vocal soloists — Amanda Forsythe, soprano; Terry Wey, countertenor; and Christian Immler, baritone — were outstanding.
The orchestra was also excellent, most notably Olivier Brault, concertmaster; René Schiffer, continuo cellist; and Rebecca Landell Reed, cellist and violist da gamba. The chorus, equally fine, allowed Ms. Sorrell some exquisite moments.
In the two-verse chorale early on Ms. Sorrell silenced the orchestra for the second verse, letting the magnificent chorus sing a cappella to breathtaking effect. Coming precisely at the point where Bach’s text assigns responsibility for Jesus’ death to all humans, as sinners, not specifically to “the Jews,” as John himself liked to say, this was a lovely, thoughtful touch.