In the midst of the pretty little town of Potsdam, Arno Brandlhuber’s bunkerlike home can’t help but stand out.
SET IN A GLITTERING STRAND of connected lakes, Potsdam, just 15 minutes southwest of Berlin, can appear as a fun park of historic buildings: There is Frederick the Great’s Sanssouci palace, a small Rococo residence whose vast green is dotted with ornate temples; a series of 19th-century dacha-like wooden houses with elaborately carved facades built for the Russian singers of the First Prussian Regiment of the Guards; and various neo-Classical churches and buildings designed in the 1820s and 1830s by the architect Karl Friedrich Schinkel. After the Wall came down in 1989, wealthy Germans bought and renovated the faded Art Deco mansions that line Potsdam’s lakes, making the city and its architecture monuments to Germany’s stately Prussian past, a grand foil to Berlin’s postmodern urbanism.
Which is why encountering the architect Arno Brandlhuber’s bunkerlike Antivilla, which looms over the row of modest houses along Krampnitz Lake outside Potsdam’s center, can feel not just shocking, but assaultive. Here, in the midst of uncomplicated prettiness, stands the 5,500-square-foot rough-complected gray concrete cube, its presence both a rebuke to the area’s bourgeois pretensions as well as a reminder of its recent totalitarian history.
In one quaint and idyllic German town, the architect Arno Brandlhuber has fashioned a surprisingly elegant bulwark from a former underwear factory.
It’s also the assertion of the Berlin-based Brandlhuber’s own aesthetic — context be damned. The 51-year-old is known in the German architecture world for his affection for the ugly, the discarded and the minimalist. (‘‘Bruta-ful,’’ he once jokingly described a recent project, the conversion of a midcentury Brutalist church into an art gallery.) He approaches his projects not as a problem solver, but as a conceptual sculptor. In fact, the Antivilla resembles less a house than it does a piece of monumental art — something by Donald Judd or Richard Serra, beamed from the deserts of America and plunked down amid a patch of German woodland. Or, perhaps, one of Gordon Matta-Clark’s ‘‘anarchitecture happenings,’’ temporary works created by carving sections out of condemned buildings.
THE ANTIVILLA BEGAN its life as part of a state-run underwear factory complex in the 1980s. When Brandlhuber bought it in 2012 as his weekend home, he added virtually nothing to its exterior except its most striking feature, a series of jagged, bombed-out windows that decorate the top of both the front- and rear-facing plaster facades like the eyes of a skull. One Saturday, he and a group of friends spent the day hacking away at the exterior with sledgehammers — by evening, they had four huge openings. Brandlhuber then glued glass on the inside of the openings, making them into functional windows. ‘‘I liked that the shape was made by the group and not the individual,’’ he says. ‘‘In architecture, the creative process is typically finished with the final drawing. Then you just execute it.’’ At night, when the building is lit from within, the structure appears both sinister and slightly otherworldly, a spaceship from the future made with the materials of Germany’s Modernist past.
But if the outside of the house is provocative, unforgiving, even, its interiors are, if not exactly cozy, then significantly more romantic. Here, steep concrete steps lead to the second-floor living space, a massive open room with a floor-to-ceiling mirrored wall that conceals a small bedroom. The middle of the space is dominated by a concrete four-sided core, with a kitchen on one side and a sauna on the other.
If the center of the space is made for utility, however, then the window-adjacent spaces near the corners are dedicated to contemporary art. Brandlhuber is an avid collector. Most of his works he’s gotten in trades, and many of them are by young German artists. One of these, ‘‘Holzimitationsparkett,’’ by Gregor Hildebrandt, is a 13.5 x 11-foot reflective surface made entirely of cassette tape glued in a tightly woven parquet pattern and covered with epoxy that’s been embedded into the cement floor — the dark, glossy surface it creates, part of which is obscured by a bison skin rug, reflects light and, less literally, the lake outside the window. Just inches above, a vintage bronze and acrylic lamp designed by Rudolf Schwarz that Brandlhuber rescued from a postwar church in Cologne dangles like a pendulum.
Brandlhuber doesn’t just collaborate with artists: He literally has an artist in residence. The German sculptor Björn Dahlem, known for his astronomy-inspired pieces, became friends with the architect a few years ago and now rents the bottom floor of the Antivilla. Along with Dahlem’s space, Brandlhuber has also built a guest house called the Rachel for other visiting artists or friends.  ‘‘My father gave me some money for the landscaping and I spent it all on that one tree,’’ he says.
Not that Brandlhuber has much time to linger in the garden — or at Antivilla at large. He is currently working on a mixed-use building containing artists’ studios in central Berlin, where he spends a significant amount of time trying to change the city’s buildings standards and energy regulations. He has also recently bought two other buildings to redevelop. One is an industrial tower in Lichtenberg, in which he and his partners will build small ateliers for themselves; the other is an old customs building in Sicily. 
But, he adds, he’s been considering treating it as a piece of kintsugi: a Japanese method of repairing pottery with a vein of lacquer mixed with silver, gold or platinum, one that speaks to his desire to retain a structure’s original integrity — and to blur the line between architecture and art. Where does one end and the next begin? It’s not a question he’d be particularly interested in answering.