WASHINGTON — Last month, Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. delivered some blunt remarks about the Supreme Court confirmation process. The Senate should ensure that nominees are qualified, he said, and leave politics out of it.
The chief justice spoke 10 days before Justice Antonin Scalia died, and he could not have known how timely and telling his comments would turn out to be. They now amount to a stern, if abstract, rebuke to the Republican senators who refuse to hold hearings on President Obama’s nominee, Judge Merrick B. Garland.
Some people are hoping that the chief justice will speak out again, and more directly, addressing the actual nomination of an actual nominee.
It was not long ago that qualified nominees coasted onto the court, Chief Justice Roberts said last month, in a speech at New England Law, a private law school in Boston. In 1986, Justice Scalia was confirmed by a vote of 98 to 0. In 1993, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg was confirmed by a vote of 96 to 3.
The last three justices should have sailed through, too, he said. He was referring to Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr., appointed by President George W. Bush, and Justices Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan, appointed by Mr. Obama. Forty-two senators voted against Justice Alito, 31 against Justice Sotomayor and 37 against Justice Kagan.
Mitch McConnell, Senate majority leader, said it is time to turn to other issues; Democrats said he is “leading his troops over the cliff” by refusing to hold a hearing on the Supreme Court nominee Merrick B. Garland.
If Justices Sotomayor and Kagan were “extremely well qualified for the court,” it is a safe bet that Chief Justice Roberts has a similarly high regard for Judge Garland, with whom he served on the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit.
“Anytime Judge Garland disagrees, you know you’re in a difficult area,” Chief Justice Roberts said at his own 2005 confirmation hearing.
In last month’s remarks in Boston, the chief justice raised a second concern: Ugly confirmation fights damage the Supreme Court’s legitimacy and authority.
Chief Justice Roberts was speaking in general terms, of course, and he has not addressed Judge Garland’s nomination or the possibility that the Supreme Court may have just eight members for a year or more. Perhaps he should.
“That would be a John Marshall moment,” said Akhil Amar, a law professor at Yale, referring to the chief justice most responsible for the Supreme Court’s surpassing stature and central role in American life.
A statement from Chief Justice Roberts, who was appointed by Mr. Bush, could demonstrate in a concrete way that the court is not, as he put it in Boston, made up of Democrats and Republicans.
Professor Amar added that “nothing prevents the chief justice from expressing his very high regard” for Judge Garland. Indeed, he said, there is recent precedent for judicial endorsements of a Supreme Court nominee. In 2006, seven appeals court judges testified on Justice Alito’s behalf at his confirmation hearings.
