If Kafka had lived in today’s New York, he might have recognized the nasty little tale of Nicholas Bowen and the wrongful warrant that would not go away.
The story opens on a Wednesday night in November 2008. Mr. Bowen, an unemployed Brooklyn man in his early 50s, spent the evening at a friend’s apartment in public housing in the Bronx. The next morning, he took his friend’s son to school and then, as he walked back into the project, was arrested on suspicion of trespassing.
Though Mr. Bowen’s criminal citation was eventually dismissed (on the condition that he not commit a crime for a year), State Supreme Court in the Bronx, for unknown reasons, issued a warrant for the charge. Mr. Bowen claims he never knew about the warrant until almost three months later when he received a call about it from the police. Shortly after the call, he said, he went to court again, and on Feb. 11, 2009, a second judge determined that the warrant was erroneous and the matter was dismissed.
That, if you were counting, was four ons — one, as it turns out, for each of the arrests that the ostensibly excised warrant led to over the next several years. The first occurred a few months after Mr. Bowen’s February court date when, according to a police report, he was riding his red Schwinn bicycle to a psychiatrist’s appointment and pulled up onto the sidewalk near Linden Boulevard and Euclid Avenue in Brooklyn. He was stopped by the police, who asked for his identification. And when the officers ran it through the system, they found the warrant.
Mr. Bowen spent several days on Rikers Island before having a hearing about the warrant, and when he finally saw a judge, court papers say, he was summarily released.
Months passed. Then, on Nov. 13, 2010, Mr. Bowen was stopped by the police a second time. On this occasion, records show, he received a summons for public drinking. Once again, an officer asked for his ID. Once again, Mr. Bowen produced it. Once again, he was arrested on suspicion of evading the open warrant. And once again, when he finally appeared in court, a judge determined that the warrant should never have been issued and had, at any rate, already been closed. The judge even gave Mr. Bowen an official document that said the warrant had been dismissed. According to court records, the judge advised Mr. Bowen to show the piece of paper to the police if they tried to arrest him again over the warrant.
Which is exactly what he did on Sept. 2, 2012, when he was stopped by the police for a third time — for being at a playground after dark. The earlier situations were repeated: Mr. Bowen was asked for his ID and the warrant was found in the system. But even when he produced the judge’s letter, the police ignored it, court papers say. Mr. Bowen was arrested and taken into custody overnight.
The final episode took place in July 2013 when Mr. Bowen and a girlfriend were riding home from Coney Island on the subway. It was a sweltering afternoon, the air-conditioning in their car was out and Mr. Bowen, still recovering from recent hernia surgery, was suffering from the heat. So he, his girlfriend and several other passengers, he said, walked between two cars while the train was in motion. The police were in the second car, he said, and saw them. According to a police report, Mr. Bowen was stopped, asked for his ID and taken into custody over the warrant. But as he was being booked, he told the police that because of his surgery, he needed medication.
So an officer took him to New York Methodist Hospital where, court papers say, he was placed in shackles and eventually fell asleep. When he woke up, the police ordered him to leave, according to the lawsuit Mr. Bowen later filed. When Mr. Bowen said he had more questions for a doctor, the police removed him from gurney and dragged him, in handcuffs, more than 40 feet, the papers say.
It did not, and with the warrant still pending, Mr. Bowen sued New York City in federal court in Manhattan on Oct. 15, 2014, saying that he had been repeatedly and wrongfully arrested. The case was moved to Brooklyn, and in March 2015, on his first appearance before Judge Lois Bloom, the defendant-turned-plaintiff, acting as his own lawyer, laid out the story.
Though Bowen v. the City of New York is only one man’s story, the case happens to be moving through the courts as local law enforcement tries to reform the warrant system. The Police Department says there are now more than one million open criminal warrants, some dating back to the 1980s. This month, the city started an initiative to issue summonses to — rather than arrest — offenders with warrants for quality-of-life crimes like littering, unreasonable noise and public urination. The Brooklyn district attorney’s office has undertaken a similar effort called Begin Again, through which defendants can close their pending warrants simply by showing up to acknowledge them.
As for Nicholas Bowen, belated relief has been mixed with incredulity.
