In the 26 years Richard Linklater has been making movies, he has frequently returned to familiar territory. His “Before” films featured the same characters at different ages, and “Boyhood” was shot bit by bit annually over a dozen years. Mr. Linklater is clearly curious about the past and how it shapes his present.
His comedy “Dazed and Confused” looked back on ’70s high school life similar to the kind he experienced. Now comes “Everybody Wants Some!!,” a kind of continuation of that story, following college-age characters in 1980. Partly based on Mr. Linklater’s experiences playing baseball at Sam Houston State University, the film revolves around Jake (Blake Jenner), a college freshman and baseball player, the weekend before classes begin.
“Everybody Wants Some!!” is the first of Mr. Linklater’s movies to open the South by Southwest film festival in his hometown, Austin, Tex., though much of his work has screened there over the years. In an interview in New York before the festival begins Friday, he reflected on the film and his ideas behind it. These are edited excerpts from that conversation.
Q. You’ve mentioned “Everybody Wants Some!!” is a spiritual sequel to “Dazed and Confused.” What was the difference between conceiving this film and coming up with “Dazed”?
A. The biggest difference is that I had a lot more years to think about this one. I remember I was doing the film before “Dazed” [“Slacker,” from 1991] and I thought, the next film I want to make is a high school rock ’n’ roll ensemble. I had two or three years to contemplate it. This one, I’ve had well over a decade that I’ve tried to get it made and have been thinking about it. So in a way, this is more pure.
But I think it’s as different as high school is to college. High school was kind of fraught. You feel like you’re in a prison. You’re stuck in your parents’ house. Where college was, like, absolute freedom. So I was looking at what to do when your life is your own.
How did playing baseball affect your college life?
It demanded so much time.  I remember when I wasn’t playing ball anymore, I felt so far behind.
How long did you play in college?
Only until my sophomore year. Right before the season started that year, I had a heart rhythm problem where I couldn’t run anymore. I was getting lightheaded, and my heart was off track. It corrected itself over the years, but the career was over like that. But it was good timing. I was taking a theater class and writing plays. I just wanted reading time. I remember standing in the outfield thinking, “I want to read ‘The Brothers Karamazov.’” If there was any providence, this allowed that.
What is the perspective on college athletes you’re looking to get across in the film?
Pro athletes, how they go through the world is so elevated. The bubble they’re in is one of entitlement. And that starts young. By the time they’re in college, they’ve had it a lot of their life. You see it in these characters, a kind of swagger, confidence. But it’s based on what? The ability to hit a ball? If you’re not a pro athlete, that all goes away and means nothing soon enough. So I’m kind of critiquing young male behavior, but knowing it’s going to end.
The early scenes of the film, when your lead character is meeting his teammates at the house where they live, they’re none too nice. Was that your experience?
Yes, you get around athletes, they’re competitive.  And you’re one, too. You kind of have to be to keep up. You get challenged in subtle ways, and you have to dish it back. But what is different is, unlike high school, everybody’s been on teams, but now they’re your roommates. Not only are you on the same team, but you know them very well. That’s another leap. The people you live with at college, those first roommates often are people you’re still friends with the rest of your life.
Are you still friends with the guys from your college team?
I think most of us have kept up with each other to some degree. It ebbs and flows.  It’s been wonderful that way. I put the word out and a lot of my teammates and roommates visited the set while we were shooting. They had the best time ever. When they met the cast, they were sort of treated like rock stars. They could tell the real stories that were 10 times worse than anything in the movie.
Did you base these characters on those guys?
It’s an amalgam, kind of a group composite. Even myself. I wasn’t a pitcher, for instance, but I thought I’ll make the lead guy a pitcher because it’s more to do. I’d say most everything in the movie happened to some degree, but not necessarily to me.
Do you feel like the competitiveness you had playing baseball carried over into your filmmaking?
Not at all. I got that out of my system in sports, and I really drew a line. The arts were like, there’s no opponent. It’s just yourself. I’m not saying they don’t make the arts a competition with awards and all that, but that’s outside the work itself. Sports, the competition is the work. But I could never take competition in the arts seriously, because it’s not quantifiable. Sports are. Whoever ran the fastest time wins the race. You don’t ask a bunch of judges who was the best runner. It’s not open to campaigning.
It was so bizarre to be in the middle of that, but to be so apart from it. It was so weird. But I can’t complain.
What did you enjoy about working on this film?
This was the most fun production. “Dazed” was tough. The studio didn’t really trust me. It was a fraught production. This, we still didn’t have the budget or schedule, but the cast was so great. Everybody was so there for each other. Maybe I’m more confident and relaxed. We caught a groove so early in rehearsals. I have some land outside Austin and a big bunkhouse. The whole cast lived together for two weeks. And I’d show a relevant movie at night.
What was the Linklater film festival for “Everybody Wants Some!!”?
I was trying to acclimate them to their moment in time. I remember showing them a documentary about Dock Ellis, the Pittsburgh Pirates pitcher. He’s the guy who threw a no-hitter on acid. But it’s a great depiction of baseball in the ’70s. So I told them, as you looked at baseball, this is what it looked and felt like. I showed some comedies from that period too, like “Breaking Away.” And I’d say the DNA of “Animal House” is sort of baked in. It can’t help but be.
“Everybody Wants Some!!” opens in theaters March 30.