There were screams of joy from the Apollo Theater audience when Bombino, from Niger, played guitar solos on Saturday night, headlining the Africa Now! concert. Yet if Bombino is a guitar hero, he may be the most laconic one ever. His solos aren’t long or fast; they mostly circle through the same riffs, each just a handful of notes, that drive his songs. He seizes the foreground with a fiercer attack, a note or two placed differently, a sudden trill — stings and jabs and displacements, not discourses. Over the relentless beat of his band, those were more than enough to ignite an already dancing crowd.
Bombino, the nickname of Omara Moctar, is a Tuareg, a member of the nomadic desert population that overlaps borders in Niger, Mali, Algeria and Libya. In recent decades, electric guitars have carried Tuareg sentiments of militancy, protest and lament. In songs from his new album, “Azel” (Partisan), Bombino sang on Saturday about how materialism was displacing ancestral ways, about the merciless conditions of the desert and about lost love — thoughtful tidings delivered with brisk, sinewy guitar lines and arrangements that accelerated dramatically as they went.
Bombino’s way of preserving Tuareg culture is to package it for the wider world. His three albums have been produced by Americans, who hear the similarities of Tuareg rock to the pentatonic modes of blues and the incantatory drones of psychedelia. “Nomad,” from 2013, was produced by Dan Auerbach of the Black Keys, and “Azel” is produced by Dave Longstreth of the African-influenced art-rock band Dirty Projectors. The band’s drummer, Cory Wilhelm, is also American. But both onstage and on his albums, Bombino comes across as undiluted and forceful, saying exactly what he wants with only as many notes as it takes.
It was the fourth annual Africa Now! concert, presented by the Apollo and the World Music Institute; the public-radio program Afropop Worldwide recorded it for eventual broadcast. The quadruple bill squeezed the time for the other artists. Mokoomba, a band from a border town in Zimbabwe, draws its music from across the continent, particularly southern Africa; its 2012 album, “Rising Tide” (Igloo), includes 12 songs in eight languages. So three songs were only a glimpse of Mokoomba’s capabilities — a glimpse that included a modal ballad with riveting, griot-strength lead vocals from Mathias Muzaza; a song rooted in the thumb-piano patterns of Zimbabwean tradition; and one that started with sweet, Congo-style vocal harmonies and grew into a crisp, irresistible soukous workout, complete with some synchronized dance steps. A full-length set would have been welcome.
Alsarah and the Nubatones are a Brooklyn group led by Alsarah, a singer from Sudan. Her songs, which she described as East African retro-pop, looked toward the sparseness of Arabic music, accompanying her voice — gentle at first, then revealing a steely core — with oud, percussion, electric bass and a backup singer. Like the other performers, her lyrics held messages of social conscience; one song, she explained, criticized governments that did not protect human dignity.
Jojo Abot, from Ghana, represented globalized African experimentation and pop ambition. She divides her time among Accra, Copenhagen and New York City, and some of her lyrics are in English, including a new Afrobeat song that ended her set: “STV (Stop the Violence).” She appeared in lavish robes and a mask of glittering golden face paint, and her music drew as much from reggae, electronics and alternative R&B as from direct African sources. She sang, rapped and toasted, reggae style, with a voice that was often tart and sassy; it could also be a cutting rasp, an airborne soprano or an insistently comical squeak. Even as she ricocheted among styles and languages, her songs had pop vocal hooks — “To Li” “Pi Lo Lo” — that lodged themselves quickly.