Whether Shakespeare or someone else wrote it, you have to admire the prescience of “Double Falsehood,” at least as it’s being staged in a well-conceived production by the Letter of Marque Theater Company. Thanks largely to a scalding scene in the first half of the show, a central plotline seems as if it could be a commentary on the modern-day scourges of date rape and on-campus assaults.
The play has long been a source of debate among scholars over whether it can be wholly or partly attributed to Shakespeare. Last year, two experts who analyzed its language asserted that Shakespeare’s hand is unmistakable.
Certainly the story (based on the “Cardenio” episode of “Don Quixote”) is very Shakespearean: romantic triangles and treacheries; altered identities; class differences as an obstacle to love. It centers on two sons of a duke: the upright Roderick (Welland H. Scripps) and the prodigal Henriquez (Adam Huff, whose performance anchors this production admirably).
Henriquez has his eye on a commoner, Violante (Poppy Liu), and when she spurns his advances, he forces himself on her. The rape is not seen onstage, but Mr. Huff’s rendition of a man’s trying to rationalize his guilt afterward — it could not have been rape because she didn’t scream, he says — sounds very much like the defense sometimes heard today from men who think that “no” somehow doesn’t mean “no.” And Ms. Liu’s depiction of how sexual assault shatters the victim is haunting.
The director, Andrew Borthwick-Leslie, and set designer, Steven Brenman, make excellent use of the vast playing space in the Irondale Center to tell the story, which also involves Henriquez’s friend Julio (Zach Libresco), who is on the verge of becoming engaged to Leonora (Montana Lampert Hoover). With Julio away running an errand, Henriquez makes a move on Leonora, rendering himself doubly loathsome. It is left to Roderick to set things right.
The play is problematic from a modern perspective in that rapists should end up in jail, but Henriquez doesn’t. This production, though, finds a note to end on that refuses to compromise. Despite Roderick’s efforts and perhaps the playwright’s intentions, all is not right with the world as the lights come down.