Whip up a batch of simple syrup, and you have a neutral sweetener to add to drinks. Alex Sorenson, who was the chef at Colonie in Brooklyn Heights, has introduced extra-concentrated flavored simple syrups he calls Rich Simple Syrups. Use them sparingly in cocktails and iced tea, or drizzle them over ice cream or pancakes. Black pepper is dark and viscous with sweet heat; bird’s-eye chile ignites; mahogany-hued vanilla is mellow; and palm sugar has a caramelized richness: Blank Slate Kitchen Rich Simple Syrups, $11.99 to $14.99, blankslatekitchen.com and amazon.com.
When the venerable fish market Pisacane closed several months ago, it left a gap in Midtown. Mike Cioffi, who handled retail sales and delivery for the store for 17 years, has stepped in with his new market. It’s a compact, fairly traditional seafood store offering fillets, whole fish that can be deboned, assorted shellfish and some house-made prepared foods, including linguine with clam sauce and a bouillabaisse mixture that just needs more garlic and a shot of pastis. Occasionally you’ll find delicacies like halibut cheeks and sea urchin: Midtown Catch, 405 East 57th Street, |||PHONE_NUMBER||| .
In “Tosca,” Scarpia, the villain, is enjoying dinner before he’s stabbed, and “La Bohème” includes a cafe scene. These are but two of the operas that allude to dining. Carl Raymond, a chef and opera buff, will cover the culinary moments depicted in these and other operas in a series of classes. He will provide recipes and serve wine and hors d’oeuvres: “Divas and Dinner: A Culinary Look at Opera,” April 12, 19 and 26, 5:30 to 7 p.m., $28 per session or $25 for members of the Metropolitan Opera Guild; $75 for all three, $66 for Guild members, Opera Learning Center, 70 Lincoln Center Plaza (165 West 65th Street), |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , metguild.org.
This feast for two or more is not for the finicky. At El Vez in Battery Park City, the chef, David LaForce, roasts a pig’s head to a glorious burnish, making it the centerpiece for dinner. Gather friends, roll up your sleeves and pick it to shreds for tacos. The half-head serving includes the cheeks and crackling shards of skin, soft corn tortillas and a crisp pig’s ear salad. Garnishes like grilled scallions, chiles, cucumbers, salsas and nuggets of radish come alongside: Carnitas de Cabeza, $55 with side dishes, Wednesdays only, to order two days in advance, El Vez, 259 Vesey Street (West Street), |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , elveznyc.com.
You do not need mixology cred to figure out how to combine spirits and soda water. But this bright little book is a useful primer, offering dozens of classic and modern variations on the spritzer, discussing its Italian roots and even providing the tidbit that in Caesar’s day, it was gauche to drink alcohol without cutting it. The authors define various bitter liqueurs like Aperol and Campari and include a few recipes for what to serve with that Negroni Sbagliato: “Spritz: Italy’s Most Iconic Aperitivo Cocktail, With Recipes,” by Talia Baiocchi and Leslie Pariseau, (Ten Speed Press, $18.99).
The interest in ancient grains keeps growing. Varieties are being rescued from near extinction and put back into broader use. Tumminia from Sicily is one example. Gustiamo, an Italian importer, sells a dark twisted pasta made from this type of wheat, still cultivated in Sicily around Castelvetrano; now the company is importing a flour, a blend of tumminia and simeto, a kind of durum wheat. It’s stone-ground and whole grain but lighter in color and texture than typical whole-wheat flour, and it works well in bread dough. My batch of cloverleaf dinner rolls had a nutty, faintly sweet flavor and a fine beige crumb: Pane Nero Flour, $9.50 for 2.2 pounds, gustiamo.com.