Life, among other things, is accumulation — of objects, papers, photographs, paintings, tax returns, love letters and assorted things in the backs of drawers, the bottoms of closets and the recesses of cellars. Stuff gathers. It piles up through the acquisitive instinct, nostalgia and inertia. Some of it may be useful, a lot of it not.
Possessions can be uplifting if they are beautiful or merely comforting, signposts to a life, recalling the places they were acquired and with whom. On the other hand, they can feel imprisoning. Who has not had the urge just to be rid of everything and roam free? Humanity may broadly be divided into hoarders and disposers. They tend to have disagreements, especially when bound in a couple.
These thoughts crossed my mind as I picked my way through a bedroom I have used for several months for storage, mostly of books without shelves to place them on, but also of boxes I felt disinclined to open. Making a home is not a steady process but comes about in bursts, interspersed with inactivity.
In the midst of my clutter-clearing push, I stumbled on my maps — hundreds of maps, produced by companies like Michelin or Rand McNally or the British Ordnance Survey, charting the roads, tracks and railroads of the Marseille region through Jerusalem to Paraguay by way of the Cheddar Gorge. Bearing witness — what journalists must do — involves moving around; for a long time there was only one way to get oriented. A good map in a bad place was a lifesaver.
The maps looked otherworldly, like old sewing machines or outsize transistor radios from another era. I fingered them, unsure what to do. Google Maps and GPS have taken over. A disembodied voice guides you to a destination whose geographic context is irrelevant. Technology siphons people into furrows. When the GPS breaks down, there is panic.
I thought of throwing all the maps away. Why keep them if I would no longer need them? Because I love maps — the way they render contour and scale, invite exploration. But that hardly seemed reason to hoard.
Then my eye fell on two maps of a country that no longer exists — Yugoslavia — and another map of the countries born from its death — Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia, Serbia etc. — and I was back in the wars of Yugoslavia’s destruction in the 1990’s. The smash of a shell in Sarajevo, the contraction in my stomach, the tapering valley and the death-spewing mountains, sweet coffee in the old city, a sign on the road south of Split pointing left to Sarajevo and straight to Dubrovnik. I always turned left, away from the sea, toward the besieged Bosnian capital. That was the road where, in 1994, I flipped over, crashed into a field, ended upside-down with Bosnian peasants trying to extricate me from the wreck.
I was alive, somehow. My son was born a few days later in Paris.
Life pivots on very little. It has its roads and byways. Italy was well represented — maps of Lake Como, Campania, Sicily. Covering Italy in the 1980s was a joy. Now I was back in Rome: that interview with then Prime Minister Bettino Craxi, who exuded an animal force and ended badly in Tunisia. The call, its menace unmistakable, in the midst of a Palermo night when I was investigating a four-part series on the Mafia for The Wall Street Journal. The umbrella pines in the Villa Borghese, the clay courts playable through winter, the talkative Umbrian agro-scientist convinced he could cultivate truffles, the beans at Nino on the Via Borgognona, that shattering Velazquez portrait in Rome of Pope Innocent X.
These maps, it occurred to me, mapped my life more or less. I was transported. The Old City in Jerusalem near the Damascus Gate, market stalls piled with dates and pomegranates, Palestinians emerging from the Al Aqsa Mosque on the El-Wad Road, Orthodox Jews bumping into them as they head toward the Western Wall, a crowd of Philippine Christians emerging from the Via Dolorosa carrying a crucifix they try to maneuver through these Arabs and Jews.
I was back there, too. Life is mingling and coupling despite the effort of every Middle Eastern fanatic to draw division. Yugoslavia died bloodily because it took such force to unmingle it.
A confession then: I tend toward hoarding, perhaps through trauma. A vivid memory is of my father standing in the garden in the London house where I spent most of my childhood piling objects onto a fire. Into the flames went old toys, files, papers, and the “Don Bradman” cricket bat I had used as a child and he had used before me. That was after my mother’s first suicide attempt, in preparation for a disastrous move.
After which the family was lost in unmapped territory.