When the new Hudson Yards subway station opened last year, officials from the Metropolitan Transportation Authority gathered to celebrate New York City’s first new station in a quarter century.
Nearly six months later, the authority is facing a major setback after the station has been plagued by a series of leaks.
At an authority board meeting on Monday, several members said they were frustrated that they were not notified about the problems earlier. One board member, Allen P. Cappelli, said the leaks had harmed the agency’s reputation.
“We spent $2 billion on this thing, and there is a significant blemish on this agency,” Mr. Cappelli said.
The 1.5-mile extension of the No. 7 subway line to the Hudson Yards station on the city’s Far West Side cost $2.4 billion. After more than a decade of planning and a series of construction delays, the station’s opening last September was met with excitement from train enthusiasts and residents who live in the fast-growing neighborhood.
But subway riders and news outlets have documented puddles in the station and icicles hanging from the ceiling. Escalators were not working recently and the bathroom was out of service, though officials said those problems were unrelated to the leaks.
A spokesman for the authority, Kevin Ortiz, said the contractor, Yonkers Contracting, would pay $3 million to fix the leaks. The work began last Friday and will take up to three months, Mr. Ortiz said.
On Monday, the authority’s chairman, Thomas F. Prendergast, said he would ask an independent engineer to review the project. The review would look at the construction, design and oversight for the station, he said.
“What did we know and what actions did we take with respect to trying to correct the conditions that are existing there, so we can find ourselves in a position next time that we don’t have the same outcome?” Mr. Prendergast said at a board committee meeting on Monday.
At a meeting earlier in the day, the board members peppered Michael Horodniceanu, the president of the authority’s capital construction company, with questions about what went wrong. Mr. Horodniceanu said officials had known about the leaks since summer 2012, when they directed Yonkers Contracting to address them.
The leaks would appear to be fixed, Mr. Horodniceanu said, but then emerge again. He said the station was safe.
The city’s transportation commissioner, Polly Trottenberg, who serves on the board, said she had learned of the leaks on the website Gothamist. “I think it would be really helpful to have more information right now,” Ms. Trottenberg said.
The board’s vice chairman, Fernando Ferrer, who had noticed the leaks as he passed through the station, said he was upset officials at the authority never told the board about the issues.
“This board not knowing is a real problem,” he said.