In an afternoon conference call on Monday, Mr. Obama’s political director, David Simas, and three former senior White House officials told activists, donors, elected officials and legal experts they were ready with an elaborate campaign plan after Mr. Obama names his choice. The president’s decision is expected this week and could come as early as Tuesday.
Armed with public polling data, Mr. Simas said on the call that the Republicans’ refusal to consider the president’s nominee was “untenable” and was opposed by two-thirds of the public. He said the White House message would be far more effective once Mr. Obama had chosen a nominee with “impeccable credentials,” according to people who dialed in, who insisted on anonymity to discuss the details of a confidential call.
Mr. Obama himself appeared to concede on Monday that he was seeking a nominee Republicans would have trouble rejecting. In an interview with CNN, he said that he would choose a person “who should be a consensus candidate” to succeed Justice Antonin Scalia, the leader of the court’s conservative wing who died last month.
Longtime Democratic operatives, including Stephanie Cutter and Julianna Smoot, deputy managers of Mr. Obama’s 2012 re-election campaign, and Paul Tewes, the architect of his 2008 Iowa caucus win, took part in a call on Monday with liberal groups that will drive the push for the president’s nominee.
The groups are preparing to hold events in up to a dozen states during the two-week congressional recess that begins later this week.
“If the only way to get Republicans to cry uncle and hold a fair process is to demonstrate that they will go down in flames in November if they don’t, we are more than happy to oblige,” said Brad Woodhouse, the president of Americans United for Change, one of the organizations leading the effort.
White House officials and outside groups also discussed talking points on Monday for use after Mr. Obama announces his choice, and are preparing biographies for each of the candidates under consideration.
Mr. Earnest repeatedly declined to say whether the president has settled on a choice or when he might make an announcement. White House allies have been arguing for weeks that the president should act quickly to put a human face on what is now an impersonal partisan fight over the vacancy.
Judge Srinivasan, who would be the court’s first Indian-American, has the shortest judicial record of the three, which could limit the potential for conservative attacks, but also makes him a bit of an ideological cipher. Judge Watford, an African-American, could be the most liberal of the nominees, and did not get the kind of universal support that Judge Srinivasan did during his previous confirmation battle.
Judge Garland is moderate enough that Republicans would find it difficult to reject him, many Democrats believe, particularly if a Democrat wins the presidency in November.
Judge Jane L. Kelly, 51, a career public defender-turned appellate judge who attended law school with Mr. Obama and has been vetted by the White House, is said to have fallen lower on the president’s list in recent days because of concerns that her roster of criminal defense clients could yield lines of attack for Republican critics.
The conservative Judicial Crisis Network said on Friday that it was running television advertisements attacking Judge Kelly for defending a child predator later convicted of murdering a 5-year-old girl. Republican-aligned groups were circulating reports Monday about her representation of a pipe bomber and a financial fraudster.