JERUSALEM — The Israeli military said on Friday that a soldier who shot a Palestinian assailant in the head as he lay motionless on the ground was being investigated on suspicion of murder. The announcement was highly unusual and underscored the seriousness of the case, which was filmed and quickly spread over social media.
An additional three officers — a company commander and two platoon commanders — were reprimanded because they did not treat the wounded man, Yusri al-Sharif, 21, after the confrontation on Thursday, said Lt. Col. Peter Lerner, an army spokesman.
Palestinians said the episode was unusual only because it had been filmed and had generated outrage. They said that since a surge of attacks began in October, there had been several similar episodes in which assailants were shot dead even after they did not pose a threat, and in which wounded Palestinians were left untreated.
Palestinians have killed about 30 Israelis, two Americans and a Palestinian bystander since the near-daily stabbings, shootings and vehicular attacks began last fall. Israeli forces or civilians have shot dead 180 Palestinians during the same period. Most were either attempting attacks or were suspected of doing so.
Thursday’s clash began when two Palestinian men stabbed and wounded an Israeli soldier at a checkpoint near a Jewish settlement enclave in the West Bank city of Hebron. Both were shot.
Video then emerged showing a soldier cocking his rifle and shooting Mr. Sharif for a second time as he lay on the road, as other soldiers and an Israeli ambulance crew milled about. The Israeli military swiftly condemned the episode as a grave breach of its values, and detained the soldier.
The soldier’s lawyers say he acted appropriately, because Mr. Sharif still had the intention and ability to harm soldiers.
The announcement that the soldier was being investigated on suspicion of murder came after a court hearing on Friday to extend his detention by four days. The court barred the publication of the soldier’s identity.
Colonel Lerner said he could not recall the last time a soldier had been investigated on suspicion of murder, nor the last time a soldier had been charged with murder.
Sarit Michaeli, a spokeswoman for B’Tselem, a human rights organization based in Israel, noted an investigation would not necessarily lead to a murder charge, which in Israel must cross a high threshold. Ms. Michaeli said a murder charge would be even more unlikely in a system that Israeli rights groups say is lenient on soldiers.
As an example, another Israeli rights group, Yesh Din, reported that of 33 investigations the military opened in the West Bank into the deaths of Palestinians in 2014, only one indictment was issued, for manslaughter. Neither Yesh Din nor Colonel Lerner could say if a murder charge was considered in any of those 33 cases.