After our first visit to INC American Bar & Kitchen in New Brunswick, my wife asked whether I had noticed that we had not received any bread while waiting for our appetizers.
I hadn’t noticed, and that is usually a detail that gets my goat. The fact that I overlooked missing bread is a testament to the atmosphere that INC, which stands for Ingredients-N-Craft, tries to foster.
“We really wanted it to be an entertaining space instead of just eating and going about your day,” said Mark Farro, who owns INC, as well as Uproot in Warren. Mr. Farro, 31, and his executive chef, Ryan Anderson, 29, have succeeded in reaching that goal. They offer an extensive whiskey and beer menu, chatty but not overbearing servers, and food that is designed to generate discussion and sharing.
“We want guests engaged in different types of food on the table and have a conversation, so you get off your phone and engage with your own group,” Mr. Farro said.
Small plates take up about half the menu at INC, which opened last February in the space vacated by Daryl Wine Bar. Mr. Anderson tends to favor Asian flavors and ingredients, as we saw with the General Tso’s cauliflower, in which the lightly battered vegetable is mixed in a spicy and not-that-sweet homemade sauce and covered in sesame seeds. As a meal, it would be monotonous, but when sampled, in our case, between bites of duck hearts and an oxtail marmalade, the cauliflower became a worthy accompaniment.
The duck hearts were tender and earthy, and they paired well with the onion wontons and a duck and prosciutto jelly. The oxtail marmalade was sweet, but balance was achieved when it was spread on grilled bread with a whipped lardo from Duroc swine.
Had we asked our server that night if the three small dishes complemented one other, he might have offered a soliloquy about the attributes of each and why they might taste good together, as our server did during our second visit. When we ordered the pork and cornbread sausage along with a special of plantain chips, she told us how well she thought they would pair, because the sausage had black beans and the plantains were a little spicy.
Normally that would have set my teeth on edge, but she spoke in a friendly, low-key tone that put us at ease. In fact, both nights, the staff’s engaging manner made for a more relaxing experience, which was Mr. Farro’s goal. “Every server should have a library of what they love and are passionate about,” he said. “It’s their restaurant, too.” By the way, our server was right.
The entrees were a bit less successful, if only because they fell short of their high ambitions. Homemade parsley cavatelli did not take much advantage of the gaminess of the venison ragout it was in; perhaps the mascarpone or the almond pesto in the dish canceled it out. The scallops in another entree were perfectly cooked but could have been seared a little more.
On the second visit, I was surprised to see my stout-braised short rib intact instead of spread throughout the plate. It was slightly dry and could have benefited from some time blending in with the mixture of kale kimchi and sweet and sour pork belly served with it.
Highlights were a perfectly done flatiron steak and the country-fried cod, served with corn fritters sprinkled with truffle honey. When my wife wondered why the addictive fritters were not offered as a side dish, a server told us that Mr. Anderson preferred to serve them with the cod, and I understand why: The battered cod with rémoulade tartar sauce combined with the fritters made for a well-composed dish.
For dessert, I enjoyed a rich house-made Irish cream that Mr. Farro said was made with Tullamore D.E.W. whiskey and Valrhona chocolate, and zeppole as freshly fried as the corn fritters.
After all, a restaurant in New Jersey with an extensive whiskey menu, congenial servers and addictive corn fritters (even if you have to eat them with cod) deserves a shot, don’t you think?