Like some other contemporary shockers that bridge the art house and the grindhouse, the low-key horror movie “Emelie” opens with a scene straight out of the auteur Michael Haneke’s playbook. In long shot, a teenage girl walking on a tree-canopied street in Anywhere, U.S.A., is suddenly snatched and hustled into a car. It’s a disquieting overture, partly because it takes place in daylight. Mostly, though, it’s because there are no close-ups of the assault, no cutaways to the presumably terrified victim or views of her two abductors, a man and a woman who materialize as if out of nowhere. This is terror at an artful remove.
Soon afterward, another young woman, calling herself Anna (Sarah Bolger), is rubbing blood off her sneaker and hopping into a different car, on her way to a babysitting gig. For the first two seconds, as she chats up the dad, Dan (Chris Beetem), it’s not clear if she’s the heroic babysitter — the girl who fights the monster, as in John Carpenter’s classic freakout “Halloween” — or the evil child-minder who, with a glint in her eye, violently rocks the cradle, the household and ideally the audience.
But there’s something too intense, rigid and rhythmic about Anna’s smiles (it’s as if she were reminding herself to express emotion), and something unsettling, almost predatory, about how she fixes her gaze.  Dan and Joyce seem too distracted by their anniversary to notice their new sitter’s weird vibe, but they also come off as fairly witless. The opening kidnapping has already destabilized the sense of the ordinary, reassuringly familiar life that horror movies inevitably disrupt. Yet in making the parents so careless, the director, Michael Thelin, has to work to bring you back into the movie’s world, which he does with unnerving fits and starts, an imperiled pet and several appealing peewee actors.
Working from Richard Raymond Harry Herbeck’s script, Mr. Thelin plays with genre clichés without upending them, and the results are more creepy than scary, with shivers that are primarily generated by the sight of threatened children (and that helpless animal), including the 11-year-old scrapper Jacob (Joshua Rush). (Carly Adams plays his sister, Sally; Thomas Bair plays their younger sibling, Christopher; and a charmer named Dante Hoagland plays a neighbor, Howie.) Unlike his parents, Jacob soon becomes hip to Anna’s menace, which takes on increasingly violent form. Mr. Thielen plays out the child endangerment angle throughout, building on the early unease with flashback-filler and some florid sadism that suggests the filmmakers share Anna’s philosophy toward child care.
“Emelie” is not rated. Running time: 1 hour 20 minutes.