Jahmal Lightfoot was unarmed, outnumbered and savagely beaten by men responsible for reducing violence at Rikers Island, a Bronx prosecutor said on Wednesday as the trial began for nine correction officers charged with assaulting Mr. Lightfoot when he was an inmate at New York City’s main jail complex and then lying about it.
Mr. Lightfoot had caught the attention of Eliseo Perez Jr., an assistant chief for security, and Gerald Vaughn, a correction captain, in July 2012 amid a spate of stabbings, slashings and gang violence at Rikers, the prosecutor, Pishoy Yacoub, an assistant Bronx district attorney, said. On the two men’s orders, five members of an elite squad of jail guards beat Mr. Lightfoot until his eye sockets were fractured and his nose was broken, while three other officers stood outside the cell where the attack occurred, Mr. Yacoub said.
Mr. Yacoub outlined for the jury what he said was a blatant case of abuse and corruption. The nine officers are accused of beating Mr. Lightfoot and then trying to cover up their actions by claiming that he had a weapon. A 10th officer, Capt. Michael Pollard, has medical problems and will be tried separately.
The officers face a variety of charges, the most serious being attempted gang assault in the first degree. A conviction on that charge could carry a sentence of up to 15 years in prison. Other charges include attempted assault, tampering with physical evidence, falsifying business records and official misconduct.
As the defendants squeezed around three tables in the courtroom on Wednesday, their lawyers stood up one after another to present a far different version of the events at issue. Accusing prosecutors of being dramatic and relying on emotion rather than facts, the defense lawyers said videotape from the jail and other evidence would prove the correction officers had committed no wrongdoing.
The case has drawn intense scrutiny at a time when the future of Rikers Island has become a subject of debate, with Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo and others calling for the complex to be closed. The Bronx district attorney, Darcel D. Clark, who took office in January and has focused on prosecuting crimes committed at Rikers, sat in the front row of the courtroom during the opening statements.
Justice Steven Barrett, who is presiding over the trial, has ordered all of the lawyers involved not to speak publicly about the case. Defense lawyers and their clients, as well as prosecutors, have repeatedly declined to comment while leaving the courtroom.
Mr. Perez, who Mr. Yacoub said was in charge of a violence-reduction initiative, retired in 2013, and Mr. Vaughn retired the next year, according to department records.
The seven others on trial — Officers Parker, Jose Parra, Alfred Rivera, David Rodriguez, Jeffrey Richard, Harmon Frierson and Dwayne Maynard — were suspended in June 2013, but allowed to return to work last month on modified duty that prohibited them from having contact with inmates, at the recommendation of a departmental review committee, according to city officials.
If convicted of criminal charges, the officers will be automatically fired, according to departmental policy. They could still face disciplinary action by the department even if they are acquitted.
Louis Albert, who represents Officer Rivera, suggested that Mr. Lightfoot had not been treated any differently by the officers, and that other inmates had entered and left the same so-called search cell before him. “It didn’t happen that way,” he said of the prosecution’s claims.
Of the nine officers being tried together, six will have their cases decided by a jury. The other three — Mr. Vaughn and Officers Maynard and Frierson — have opted to have Justice Barrett render a verdict.
Mr. Lightfoot, who is expected to testify, was released on parole in 2014 after being sentenced to up to four years in prison for robbery. His lawyer, Sanford Rubenstein, who represents Mr. Lightfoot in a lawsuit against the city, has declined to be interviewed, citing the judge’s order not to comment.