As usual, the soap opera elements in “Jane the Virgin” are on full display in “Chapter 37.” But this time, they’re spilling out of the Marbella Hotel and out of Michael’s detective work,. This week we find them instead in family-focused plots involving both Rogelio and Alba.
At the Marbella, things are uncharacteristically calm and quiet: the biggest drama is Petra’s inability to bond with her new children because she’s not entirely sure how to hop into her new role.  As with many actual new mothers, the reality knocks the wind out of Petra and she’s unsure of how to deal. Instead, she leaves the twins with nurses and nannies and immediately goes back to work.
“Jane the Virgin” is committed to showcasing multiple approaches to motherhood (from Alba to Jane), and Petra’s hesitance provides a stark contrast to Jane’s “all-in” methods. One woman can’t seem to be with her children while the other can’t seem to step away from her child; neither is wrong, and neither is totally correct either. Fortunately, Rafael wants to help and spends time with Petra and their children, allowing her time to get used to being a mother without tasking her with the job’s more off-putting aspects (changing diapers).
Rafael isn’t able to devote all of his time to helping Petra, however, as he finds himself in the midst of his own drama — the sudden arrival of his half brother (who is “kind of a hottie,” according to the chyron on screen). Despite Michael’s warnings to never go anywhere alone with Derek, Rafael can’t help himself. But the two actually have an intense, bonding conversation that leads Rafael to tell Michael that he’s dropping the investigation (as Derek listens in). It’s a worrisome development, but maybe it’s possible that this is all for show and all part of some big plan by Rafael? We’ll find out soon enough.
While Rafael might be getting into trouble, Rogelio is finally getting out. As “Chapter 37” begins, Paola/Lola is still holding Rogelio hostage, this time with a gun to his head. When Michael goes to investigate, he spots the situation and quickly diffuses it, arresting Paola and freeing Rogelio. It’s such a wonderfully heroic moment for Michael. Yet even the rapid conclusion (which may have felt a little anticlimactic) works because it makes way for more important character work. The hostage plot is dramatic and compelling but it’s the aftermath that really lands as Rogelio deals with the trauma internally rather than sharing his experiences with his family. Jaime Camil provides a fine performance, particularly in the scene where he has a heart-to-heart with Jane about what happened.
As for Jane this week, she’s facing a whole host of troubles. First, her new adviser, Marlene Donaldson (author of “Gendered Politics and the Politics of Gender, a Memoir” — self-published, of course) is not a fan of the romance genre. Marlene brings up the Bechdel test and, in a delightful running gag, the Bechdel test actually finds its way into the episode. During various scenes, the show’s narrator has a checklist of sorts that allows him (and viewers) to see which moments pass the test and which don’t (unsurprisingly, most of them don’t). It’s a nice bit of self-awareness for “Jane the Virgin” but it also shows that the Bechdel test, as useful as it is, isn’t the be-all and end-all for pop culture feminism. Without a doubt, “Jane the Virgin” is a proud, feminist show that celebrates proud, feminist women — even if they do tend to talk a lot about the men in their lives.
Jane’s issues with her adviser pale in comparison to her issues with Michael’s parents. They still harbor anger and resentment for how Jane broke their son’s heart. Jane continues to go out of her way to get Michael’s parents to like her (the episode also remarks on Jane’s uncontrollable desire to get everyone to like her) but they ultimately don’t, and Jane has to learn to be O.K. with that.
However, the most captivating dramatic plot of the night goes to The Curse of Pablo Alonso Segura. Pablo is in town after Xo invited him to reconnect with a hesitant Alba. The bad luck Pablo brings with him is such a delicious telenovela element. As Pablo and Alba dance — a dance filled with sexual tension — Jane and Xo sit at home, wondering about a mysterious creaking noise in the house. Pablo and Alba dance; Jane and Xo watch as a pipe bursts, flooding their house with water. The Curse of Pablo Alonso Segura is real, and it’s just going to get worse.