BAIE-MAHAULT, Guadeloupe — It seems fantastic that four of the world’s best tennis players would descend upon a small Caribbean island more than 4,000 miles from home to take the first step toward their elusive Davis Cup.
But in an effort to leave no stone unturned and perhaps, on some level, to put an immediate stamp on his team, Yannick Noah, the new French captain, decided that Guadeloupe was the place.
Its first-round matchup against Canada is the first in France’s illustrious but tumultuous Davis Cup history to be played overseas. Administratively, Guadeloupe is a department of France — a faraway one, but nevertheless part of the country. Noah’s wish was to play outdoors on slow red clay, the better to stymie Milos Raonic, Canada’s best player.
As it turned out, Raonic did not make the trip, because of an adductor injury sustained as he reached the semifinals at the Australian Open. He has not played since.
Vasek Pospisil, the 2014 Wimbledon doubles champion and a top-50 singles player, therefore was counted upon to try to earn 3 points for Canada. Pospisil does not like playing on clay and, more significantly, has a history of wilting in hot, humid conditions. That struggle was evident Friday in his straight-sets loss to Gilles Simon, a defeat that put Canada down, 0-2, on the first day of play.
The logistics involved in hosting overseas were significant, even for a federation that has the Davis Cup down to a science. Over 900,000 pounds of the storied Roland Garros terre battue, packed into 20 containers, left the port of Dunkirk on Jan. 21 on a two-week journey to the Caribbean. The main stadium court was built at one end of the Vélodrome Amédée-Detraux, a venue that has seen better days but is easily able to hold the sellout crowds of more than 6,000 expected for each of the three days of play.
Just a few months ago, though, the event was in doubt. A new government was elected in Guadeloupe two weeks after the Davis Cup site was announced, and as the project soared over budget — from the original 1.5 million euros to more than €4 million ($4.4 million) — there was talk of reneging.
The incoming president, Ary Chalus, said the island could not afford to host the event and publicly chastised the outgoing president, Victorin Lurel, as having acted without considering the island’s economic reality. Guadeloupe, with a population of 400,000, has an unemployment rate that is consistently above 25 percent and the worst crime rate of any French territory.
There had been talk of moving the matches to a nearby overseas territory, Martinique, or even returning them to France. The French Tennis Federation kicked in €500,000, and ultimately the event went ahead.
The political battles within the French federation and the Davis Cup squad itself also threatened to cast a major shadow over the event.
Despite great depth at the top of the men’s game, France has not won the Davis Cup since 2001 and has lost in the final three times since. The previous captain, Arnaud Clément, only a few years older than the team’s top players and well-liked, was dismissed after a disappointing defeat at the hands of Andy Murray and the Britain team in last summer’s quarterfinals. He currently is in litigation with the French federation over his severance pay.
A feud between the federation president Jean Gachassin and the longtime French Open tournament director Gilbert Ysern resulted in Ysern’s firing last month.
Gaël Monfils, whose father, Rufin, is originally from Guadeloupe and has returned to live on the island, held a 45-minute news conference after his quarterfinal loss to Raonic at the Australian Open in January. He bemoaned what he considered the unilateral decision to hold the event on the faraway island, a decision he said “80 percent of the team” had disagreed with. He said he felt that Noah, though he had sought their opinions, had disregarded the players’ concerns about the major change in surface in the middle of the hardcourt portion of the tennis season.
There has been some backlash in Guadeloupe against Monfils for the comments. His support of the plan to bring world-class tennis to an island that is in his DNA, along with his statement that he was looking forward to playing in front of family, was drowned out by his criticism of the process.
“I have a few projects, in the years to come, to incite my community to play this sport more,” Monfils told reporters this week.
About 2,000 children from 26 Guadeloupean communities went to the Vélodrome on Wednesday to watch the French team’s practice session. Monfils and Noah, the last Frenchman to win at Roland Garros (in 1983) and later a music star in his country, were the big attractions.
Ysaora Thibus, a fencer born and raised a few miles away and one of France’s hopes at the Rio Olympics, was responsible for drawing out the first name at Thursday’s draw.
That drawn name plays the first match and sets up all of the singles matches for the weekend. Thibus, of course, drew Monfils’s name. Monfils rolled to a 6-3, 6-1, 6-3 victory over Dancevic in that opening match.
If the French team does win the Davis Cup this year, everyone will remember that it all began on a small, friendly, sporting island thousands of miles from home.