When Donald Trump talks about health care, he sounds as if he wants to do something different from the rest of the Republican field. But his health care plan, released Wednesday night, looks a lot like what his competitors have already presented.
On the stump, Mr. Trump has tended to buck Republican anti-Obamacare orthodoxy. He has always called for repealing the health law, which he describes as a bureaucratic disaster and an economic drag. But he has repeatedly expressed enthusiasm for some of its ideas and ambitions.
He has admired single-payer health care systems in Canada and Scotland. He has said that the government must take care of the lowest-income Americans. He has endorsed a provision of the law that prevents insurance companies from denying coverage to people with prior illnesses. He often repeats that the United States needs a system to prevent people from dying in the streets.
The impression he gives is that the United States ought to help provide health insurance to the public, only in a less cumbersome, expensive way. “We have to take care of people in this country,” he said at last week’s Republican debate, adding that he didn’t care if his compassionate health care proposals lost him the election.
Now we have a document outlining the policies Mr. Trump would like to enact. The plan is pretty sketchy (although not in comparison with his rivals), with seven bullet points and a few surrounding paragraphs of additional policy idea. But they mostly look like Republican boilerplate. He would repeal Obamacare in its entirety — including the provision that protects Americans with pre-existing conditions, and the provision that extended Medicaid coverage to low-income Americans in many states.
In its place, he would seek to lower barriers for insurance companies wishing to do business in new states, and he would allow people who buy their own insurance to deduct the premiums from their income taxes. He would make further reforms to Medicaid, turning the program into an annual block of money that states could spend as they wish on health care for the poor. He would encourage Americans to use health savings accounts for their out-of-pocket health spending.
Mr. Trump’s plan appears to be even less generous to middle-class Americans than Mr. Rubio’s. Both would provide tax benefits to people who buy their own insurance — an effort to make individual insurance more like employer insurance. Mr. Rubio suggests tax credits — basically government-provided cash — to buy insurance. Mr. Trump, instead, would allow Americans to deduct the cost of health insurance from their taxable income. People with lower incomes, who pay less in taxes, would see a much smaller benefit than Americans with high incomes, who can benefit more from such a deduction.
Obamacare expanded access to Medicaid to low-income people in many states, and enrollment in the program has grown by more than 14 million people since 2013. Repealing the health law would take away benefits for most of those people. Mr. Trump’s block grant proposal for the future of Medicaid is too vague to analyze in depth, but most evaluations of congressional block grant proposals have forecast an erosion of access and benefits for the poor over time when compared with the pre-Obamacare baseline.
There is one place where Mr. Trump appears to break from the pack. When it comes to drugs, he argues that market competition may not be enough, and suggests that Congress needs to stand up to drugmakers. “Though the pharmaceutical industry is in the private sector, drug companies provide a public service,” the document says. Just what sort of public involvement he’d champion is unclear. The plan says he would favor importation of foreign drugs, an interesting departure from his usual trade policies.
It is possible that Mr. Trump’s document, now a sketch, will be filled in later with a plan to help people with pre-existing conditions, or with some new financing system to provide health insurance for poor Americans. But, for now, the policies he has chosen to highlight won’t help them. He may describe himself as more compassionate and generous on health care than his rivals, but there’s a huge gulf between that rhetoric and the practical consequences of his policies.