A few days ago, I would have said that the world could be divided into two types of people: Those who think deeply about the hermeneutics of Batman, and those who do not. That was before reading Glen Weldon’s “The Caped Crusade: Batman and the Rise of Nerd Culture.” I’m now of the mind that there’s a continuum from normals to nerds. I land somewhere in the middle.
It’s a point of view that would certainly get him tossed out of Comic Book Guy’s shop on “The Simpsons.” He doesn’t care. At the 2013 Comic-Con, Mr. Weldon, then 45, waited an hour and 45 minutes for the privilege of spending 60 bucks on a plastic replica of the TV show’s Batmobile.
But to make it through “The Caped Crusade” in one piece, I’m afraid, you need to care an awful lot about Batman minutiae. I’m not just talking about relishing the details of how the cape has evolved, or when the bat insignia acquired a yellow halo (Detective Comics No. 327, May 1964). I mean you also have to maneuver through a few too many plot recapitulations, follow every tortuous twist in failed Batman scripts, and keep track of a lengthy roster of artists and illustrators who collaborated across multiple decades and hundreds of issues. It’s like doing some weird, literary version of the Batusi.
There are a few times when the biggest villain in this book is not the Riddler but the Straw Man, a rhetorical device of which Mr. Weldon can be overly fond. And occasionally, Mr. Weldon becomes Comic Book Guy in spite of himself, writing with the same pedantry and fastidiousness. Here he is, dismissing most Saturday morning cartoons: “Characters crouched in stiff action poses and shouted thick clots of toyetic exposition.” Oooff!
I should make clear, though, that I come to “The Caped Crusade” without a long list of fangirl bona fides, which may compromise my patience a bit. But I am Bat-curious.
This Friday, “Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice,” starring Ben Affleck as an older, wearier action hero, opens, and I’ll probably use my 8-year-old son as an excuse to go see it.
Yet there were sections of “The Caped Crusade” that only flickeringly, fitfully held my attention. In some ways, Mr. Weldon faces the same dilemma that the directors Tim Burton, Joel Schumacher, Christopher Nolan and Zack Snyder did: When you bring the story of Batman to the masses, who is it for? The normals or the nerds?
Anyway, I still learned a lot.
Mr. Weldon starts with the basic elements of Batman’s appeal: Unlike other action heroes, he has no superpowers (though he does have an enormous trust fund, which, in the author’s estimation, does set him apart from most mortals); his parents were murdered in front of him as a child, which drove him to swear an oath so idealistic and melodramatic “that only a kid could make it” — he’d spend the rest of his life fighting criminals.
The author then tells the story chronologically, starting with Batman’s 1939 debut in Detective Comics No. 27. He tells us how Batman weathered the terrible reign of Fredric Wertham, the German-born psychiatrist who waged a war on comic books in the 1940s and ’50s. He documents the perils of translating a comic book into different media. And he catalogs the many iterations of Batman, who has been endlessly reimagined and rebooted and reincarnated over the years, “from Lone Avenger to Robin’s Father to Head of an Extended Bat-Family” and then back again.
But his most celebrated iteration, the one that occupies privileged real estate in the hearts and minds of most Bat-nerds, is the “grim, dark, brooding, endlessly resourceful avenger” of the comic’s first year, who was revived in the 1970s and found his apotheosis in Frank Miller’s “Batman: The Dark Knight Returns” in 1986.
But beware of loving any one particular version of Batman too much. That’s the true lesson I learned in “The Caped Crusade.” It’s a commitment to having your heart broken. Batman will always be subjected to the slings and arrows of outrageous appropriations. By Hollywood. By McDonald’s. By Lego. By Adam West nostalgists, by fan fiction writers, by — gasp! — girls and queer theorists. “There is Batman the character,” Mr. Weldon writes, “and Batman the idea.” The idea is always there for the taking.