THE ART OF BEING DRIVEN is not hard to master. Some of us have it by heart. In my natural state, I possess the habit of saying no to everything, but all the requesting party has to do to make me say yes is to send a nice car. In my youth, I often daydreamed of a driver picking me up from school. It was Scotland, and it was winter, which meant it got dark about 3 o’clock in the afternoon. The walk home was horrific — it could involve ice, snow, runaway cars, bullies and pederasts. I imagined a driver in a peaked cap might help me glide past all that. When I look back, I see this hope was a species of magical thinking as career strategy: Think of the most impossible thing you can and then make it your actual goal.
Her mother loves to be driven even more than we do. She loves it so much, in fact, that she never learned to drive. When we were first going out, she impressed and horrified me by regularly sending cabs to pick up cigarettes from the gas station. Even in the halcyon days of my youth, when my general role model was Catherine the Great, Empress of All the Russias, I never imagined sending a driver to get you stuff. I’m sure it’s a flaw in my education that it has taken me this long to see the wisdom in such behavior.
My own car sits gleaming at the front door and when I pass it, usually on the way to a cab, I give it a little tap. ‘‘Trusty old soul,’’ I say to myself, scanning the horizon for my Uber numberplate, ‘‘one day, when all this betrayal is over, we’ll go for a little drive in the countryside.’’ When I get into the cab, I say hello to the driver and continue doing all the things I’d be doing at my desk. I don’t care whether he knows the way, he’s got a GPS. I don’t care about the time, because I won’t have to find a parking space. And sometimes I even have a little nap, just to show my body-clock who’s boss. At the moment, it’s a sore topic in London, where I live, but the new generation of drivers are very different from the professional cabbies who drove the famous hackney cabs. For a start, the new ones know your name and you know theirs, and you also know the price. And they understand, in a way that the English cabbie never did, that being driven is an art that is best pursued in silence, with the driver creating a kind of stress-free ambience in which the journey seems virtual.
When I first learned to drive, I wanted to bring that pleasure to people for free. Passing a bus stop, I could scarcely suppress the urge to stop and offer people a lift. Not a good look, generally speaking, but my intentions were solid: I knew from the inside that being driven is one of the great pleasures in life, and now I could do it for others. Reader, it didn’t last. Within a few months I was handing my keys to anyone who would take them. My friend Jane, who had long been the driver on expeditions and assignments, suddenly found herself named on my insurance policy, and my passion for driving ran out of road. I convinced myself it was the pressure of work. I have to read, I have to do email, I have to think, I have to play The Sims 4. It’s true that the person at the wheel is dealing in much more reality than your average sleepy passenger, but that’s the way we like it, literally having a reality-buffer going forward.
As Michael Caine once said, ‘‘The greatest luxury is not driving.’’ Give me a car that I never need to put gas in, a car that never wants you to park it, a car you never wash or fix or insure, a car you never de-ice or trade in or sell. I know men and women who glory in their cars, taking care of something that they feel takes care of them. There are parts of the world, particularly in America, where having a car appears less like a convenience than a necessity, and where being driven must appear like a form of infantilization. But those people are missing the point. Being driven is luxurious because it is a step back into the realm of personal freedom, which — when it comes to all areas of good service — is the freedom to enjoy an outcome without being responsible for it. People seek their freedom in different ways, of course, and some want an open top and their own foot on the gas, but for me the liberty to disengage is everything.
‘‘You don’t have a taxi number, do you?’’ I asked.
I could have kissed her. In this great, strange world of conveyance, some of us are Ayrton Senna and some of us are Miss Daisy. The police lady spoke of the road and its various challenges as she drove happily to the ferry port, a driver without distraction or multitasking, a driver who noticed every bit of action on the road, cheerfully anticipating this and that, while her passenger sat back and felt he was slipping into a well-deserved hot bath. Soon enough, the world will be filled with driverless cars and life might seem less erratic on the road. But in the meantime, I’m taking a holiday from long drives. I never cared for them, anyhow.