Strings McCrane, a country music and movie star, talks way too much, and half the time he doesn’t even know what he’s saying. As embodied by an entertainingly irritating Timothy Olyphant in “Hold On to Me Darling,” which opened on Monday night at the Linda Gross Theater of the Atlantic Theater Company, Strings is a walking, whining confirmation of our suspicions that the rich and famous really are different from you and me: They’re a lot more shallow and needy.
Still, you’re likely to find yourself hanging on every one of Strings’s self-contradicting, self-dramatizing words. That’s because he is the creation of Kenneth Lonergan, a writer with one of the best ears around for the language of the morally challenged — a term that I would say applies to most of the human race.
In other words, you might expect Mr. Lonergan to have a natural affinity for obsessive, self-sabotaging people. And so it proves with “Darling,” a poignant comic study of the bad faith and bad behavior of a narcissistic celebrity and those around him. This includes his longtime personal assistant, his blue-collar brother and the women who fall for him like ninepins — all given vibrant life by the director, Neil Pepe, and a cast that finds the individual quirkiness in everyday stereotypes.
The basic premise here has been a staple of satire since Marie Antoinette got in touch with her inner milkmaid: Spoiled, insulated royalty develops a yen for so-called real life. For the 39-year-old Strings, described as the “third-biggest crossover star in the history of country music,” this yearning arrives when he hears that his beloved, exasperating mother — a woman he could never please — has died.
Strings is not one to grieve silently. Within minutes of our meeting him in a Kansas City hotel suite (he’s in town to make a space movie), he has smashed up his guitar and delivered many windy pronouncements about how lonely and empty his world is, declarations that sound a lot like lyrics-in-waiting for one of his songs.
But this country boy can’t help it. He’s been brainwashed by two decades of fame as the bard of the common folk, and he sees himself in the two glamorous dimensions in which the world’s gaze has frozen him. Before you can say breach of contract, he’s thrown away his multimillion-dollar career to return to the Tennessee town where he grew up, not just for his mama’s funeral, but also to start a new life as a simple man.
You can pretty much predict how successful this transformation will be. And you may initially wonder just why Mr. Lonergan has chosen a plot that has been recycled so many times. But although this production could still be trimmed by 10 or 15 minutes, the strength of “Darling” is in its loquacity. It lets its characters talk and talk, and the more we listen, the more we learn about how they hear themselves.
Mr. Lonergan allows them all, even Strings, flashes of self-awareness. Mostly, though, they’re hypnotized by the holy sheen of celebrity. In showing how these transfixed people are destined to act as they do, “Darling” becomes a tragicomic commentary on a culture ruled by the religion of fame. This play even makes room for its characters to speak on this very subject, but in ways that show how they remain victims of the clichés of that same mesmerizing mythology.
As his half brother, Duke, a wonderfully wry C. J. Wilson lets us see clearly the intelligence and restlessness that run in the family. Keith Nobbs provides a fierce, almost feral comic portrait of Jimmy, Strings’s personal assistant of 12 years, defensively poised to protect his employer and his own privileged position.
Jimmy is quick to detect the threat posed by Nancy, the hotel masseuse whom Strings meets in the first scene and embraces as an avatar of the “real world.” Portrayed with carnivorous relish by Jenn Lyon, Nancy is a pious opportunist who knows just how to play her Strings and to vanquish a rival like the sweet Essie (Adelaide Clemens), Strings’s distant cousin, who shows up at his mother’s funeral.
Ms. Clemens, an Australian actress who appears on television in “Rectify,” captures exactly the inflections and guardedness of the small-town American South. Essie’s blend of innocence and canniness is deeply touching, and she provides a jolt of real feeling in a world of synthetic emotions.
So does the character affectingly portrayed by Jonathan Hogan, who arrives late in the play in the “Rosebud” revelation in Strings’s life. Such moments of recognition usually elicit eye rolling.
But the startling, bona fide sorrow that Mr. Olyphant brings to this encounter — in which Strings could be said to be forced off the script of his spotlighted life for the first time — truly illuminates everything that has come before. As a prisoner of fame, Strings may not know what’s authentic anymore. Mr. Lonergan definitely does.