NEW DELHI — Army trucks rumbled along dusty village roads, soldiers opened fire, crowds panicked and eventually the Indian Army took control of Munak canal, the conduit that supplies three-fifths of New Delhi’s fresh water.
This happened late last month in Haryana, the state that borders New Delhi on three sides. Demonstrators from the Jat caste blocked roads and railway lines, torched buses, shops and homes, and switched off the water supply to the capital’s 18 million residents. They were demanding inclusion in India’s caste-based affirmative action program, seeking access to government jobs.
A local newspaper quoted one Jat protester as saying, “If we remain hungry, you, too, will die of thirst.” The authorities responded by sending thousands of troops into the state. At least 18 people were killed, and 200 people were injured.
The Jats occupy an ambiguous position in India’s social hierarchy. Some consider them low caste, but they dominate political life in Haryana. For decades, they acquired significant wealth by tilling, and more recently by selling, farmland adjoining Delhi. But as farms have fragmented with every passing generation, profits from agriculture have shrunk and the local property market has tanked.
The problem of Haryana, like that of the rest of the country, is that corporate India has enriched itself without creating meaningful, well-paid employment for the 10 million young Indians who come of working age each year. And since Indian politicians are beholden to their corporate donors, arguments about economic inequality, redistribution of wealth and unemployment are best couched in other terms, namely the language of social injustice.
The Jats know from long historical experience that the best way to garner attention in order to make such a point is to paralyze the daily workings of the state, but stopping just short of outright revolt. In cutting off Delhi’s water supply, the Jat community has deployed a form of protest refined over centuries of negotiation between the countryside and the imperial city of Delhi.
Arid Delhi has been obsessed with access to water since its inception. In the 13th and 14th centuries, a complex arrangement of reservoirs and channels kept the city supplied: A well-run hydraulic system was the sign of a well-run empire. When local order crumbled, the supply of water failed and urban settlements came under threat, the historian M. Athar Ali notes in a compendium of essays on Mughal India.
In the 1260s, Mr. Ali writes, the city’s beloved reservoir dried up “because the channels feeding it were damned up by ‘dishonest men.”’ Could these “dishonest men” of courtly record be the forebears of the Jats, who would soon come to occupy the farmlands through which these canals were laid? Mr. Ali doesn’t say, but at the close of the 16th century the Jats had settled all around the capital. And by the 18th century, with the Mughal Empire in decline, Jat bandits routinely blocked the arterial roads leading into Delhi, leaving hundreds of travelers stranded and at their mercy.
Today, Jats remain active in the land and water market surrounding Delhi. The metropolitan city area sucks up 900 million gallons of fresh water each day from across northern India, 60 percent of which must first flow through the Jat lands of Haryana. One quarter of Delhi’s households live without a water connection, according to 2013 government figures, the most recent and most reliable data available. Many people are forced to turn to private, and predominantly Jat, water-tanker suppliers, who are demonized in the press as a local “water mafia.” And when the state angers the Jats — as it did in 2014 when it asked the Jat leader Ajit Singh to vacate his official residence long after he had ceased to be a minister — they march off to the nearest canal.
The roots of the current violence date back to the 1990s, when the Jats were excluded from a significant expansion of India’s affirmative action program, which set aside a percentage of government jobs and university seats for less privileged groups. Both the Congress Party and the Bharatiya Janata Party, which came to power in 2014, have at different times moved to include Jats in the quota system. But the Supreme Court has refused, claiming the group isn’t “backward” enough.
The recent protest erupted when a seemingly peaceful march of Jat demonstrators suddenly turned violent and quickly spread across Haryana. The violence has since subsided, after the army was deployed and the government offered to establish a high-level committee to look into Jat demands.
Newspaper editorials have condemned the destruction of property, and describing the unrest as “quota blackmail” have warned the government against setting a bad precedent for other politically dominant communities who are demanding reservations, like Patidars, also known as Patels, in Gujarat. Granting job reservations to powerful castes takes away opportunities from genuinely oppressed groups like dalits, who are routinely discriminated against by most caste groups, including Jats.
These are good arguments, but they miss a core point, which is that the Jats’ move to articulate their economic grievances in terms of caste is strategic.
India’s poor wind up paying more than the middle class for water and electricity because they are often forced to give bribes for essential services, and they are disproportionately affected by direct taxes on consumption. While India’s state-owned banks have written off millions of dollars worth of unpaid corporate loans, indebted farmers are driven to suicide.
Electoral politics, rather than fundamentally transforming this system, simply puts a democratic gloss on routinized appropriation. Workers who organize to demand better pay are called Maoists, villagers who oppose land acquisition are accused of working at the behest of foreign-funded NGOs, students who criticize the government’s social and economic policies are labeled seditionists.
But if you organize yourself and agitate as a caste of dominant landowners, like the Jats, no one will question your patriotism.
Haryana is one of India’s wealthier states. It is close to Delhi, land prices are relatively high, and after several hundred years of investment in irrigation it has a network of canals that allows farmers to grow remunerative crops like rice and wheat. The state also boasts of a robust manufacturing base, particularly for automobiles.
If despite all this, young Haryanvi are willing to face the might of the Indian Army for a better chance at a government job, something must be rotten at the heart of India’s economy. By cutting off Delhi’s water and invoking social equality, what the Jats are really saying is this: There are no jobs, and we, in the countryside, are seething.