Bernie Sanders has vowed to fight for the presidential nomination until the Democratic convention, but the results Tuesday suggest that he is not anywhere close to being on track to amass a majority of pledged delegates.
Hillary Clinton’s landslide margins in the South and her competitiveness elsewhere translate to an overall lead of around 15 to 20 percentage points nationwide. Her support is anchored by her advantage among black voters, who represent nearly a quarter of Democratic voters and have offered her more than 80 percent of their votes — a tally rivaling or even exceeding the share won by Barack Obama in 2008.
Mr. Sanders, despite pockets of strength, has not fared well enough to overcome such a huge deficit among black voters.
Not even his victories in Colorado, Minnesota and Oklahoma on Tuesday will change that. Mr. Sanders would have needed gigantic wins in these states to entertain the possibility of overcoming his enormous deficit in the South, where a majority of Democrats are African-American.
Mrs. Clinton won nearly 80 percent of the vote in Alabama, more than 70 percent in Georgia and more than 60 percent in Virginia, Tennessee, Arkansas and Texas. Mr. Sanders cannot make up for routs in the South with slight wins in the North. He needs landslides to counter landslides; he doesn’t have them.
There are three times as many nonblack voters as black voters in the Democratic primary electorate. To cancel her strength, Mr. Sanders would need to win nonblack voters by about 20 percentage points, since Mrs. Clinton leads by more than 60 points among black voters.
Through the contests so far, Mr. Sanders has not posted dominating totals outside of his home state of Vermont and a few adjacent counties in western New Hampshire.
Elsewhere, Mr. Sanders fell far short of the targets needed. He lost Hispanic voters in Texas by 30 percentage points. He lost white voters in Virginia, Arkansas, Georgia, Alabama and Tennessee. He came very close but lost mostly white Iowa.
But perhaps most striking is that Mr. Sanders failed to win in Massachusetts — a notably liberal state next to Vermont with a relatively small black share of the vote. Massachusetts residents had the chance to see many of the ads aired by the Sanders campaign for New Hampshire, which is covered by the Boston media market. If Mr. Sanders can’t win in a place like Massachusetts, it is hard to come up with many places where he can.
Mr. Sanders also hoped to fare well in Appalachia, where there’s a large number of working-class Democrats and few black voters. But the results in western Virginia, Tennessee, northern Georgia and Alabama all suggest that Mr. Sanders trails there as well. Perhaps he could still win in Kentucky or West Virginia, but it’s hard to imagine him winning in a landslide if he trails in the bordering regions of northern Tennessee and western Virginia.
Mrs. Clinton decisively won the handful of coal country counties in western Virginia that act as a leading indicator of the results in West Virginia and eastern Kentucky.
Mr. Sanders has big weaknesses among key blocs of nonblack voters: Hispanics, white voters in the South, affluent white voters and older white voters. It would be very hard for Mr. Sanders to win nonblack voters by more than 20 points while facing resistance from any of these groups.
None of this means that the race ends quickly. Democratic delegates are awarded proportionally, so Mrs. Clinton would need time to clinch a majority of pledged delegates. Mr. Sanders has a loyal base of supporters who could easily fund an insurgent campaign well past the point when it is even plausible to suggest he could win the nomination.
But if the race continues as it has to date, Mr. Sanders will suffer serious losses over the next two weeks. Mrs. Clinton could approach or exceed 80 percent of the vote in Mississippi and Louisiana. She could win 60 percent of the vote in Michigan, a state where black voters represent an above-average share of the electorate. Mrs. Clinton would be poised for a clean and decisive sweep on March 15, when five big states with large numbers of black voters — Illinois, Missouri, Florida, North Carolina and Ohio — cast ballots.
Even then, Mrs. Clinton will not have a majority of pledged delegates. Only half will have been awarded. But Mr. Sanders would need to win by around 20 points from that point on to catch up.
The results Tuesday show that outcome is highly unlikely. There is no progressive majority for a “political revolution” in the Democratic Party without the support of black voters.