MOGADISHU, Somalia — Only days after American aircraft struck a Shabab training camp in Somalia, American Special Operations forces and Somali troops carried out a raid against Shabab fighters, officials said Wednesday, in a sign of heightened pressure against the militant group.
Somali government officials said that commandos in helicopters raided a militant base in the village of Awdhegle in the lower Shabelle region, nearly 40 miles west of Mogadishu. The commandos landed a few miles outside the village before advancing on the base, killing 19 militants in the operation, officials said.
He would not say whether the Americans stayed on the helicopters throughout the operation.
It seems that the United States is changing its strategy and upping the tempo of strikes against the Shabab. The reasons may be that the Shabab have taken over several towns in recent months; Somalia is looking shakier than it has in years; and the Shabab have shown a greater interest in somewhat sophisticated terrorism, like using a laptop bomb, which nearly brought down a jetliner flown by Daallo Airlines, an airline based in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, in February.
Military officials say there are about 50 members of American Special Operations forces in Somalia working with Somali and African Union forces. But private contractors in Somalia said they had seen at least 150 American personnel recently on one Somali base.
One American defense official denied that there had been a policy change on attacking the Shabab.
“We routinely maintain U.S. forces in the region to monitor terrorist activities,” the official said, speaking on condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to publicly discuss American strategy.
The raid in Awdhegle came after a major assault by American aircraft on a Shabab training camp on Saturday. That attack, which American officials said was carried out by American drones and warplanes, killed about 150 Shabab fighters assembled for what officials believe to have been a graduation ceremony.
The former American official said that American military planners probably arrived at that death toll by looking at aerial photos taken of the graduation right before the strike.
It was the deadliest assault on the Shabab in the more than decade-long American campaign against the group, and a sharp departure from previous American strikes, which have focused more on the group’s leaders, not on its foot soldiers.
The Shabab have denied that 150 of their fighters were killed at the camp over the weekend, saying that the death toll cited by Americans was exaggerated. But the group confirmed that the attack took place.
In the raid overnight on Tuesday, the Shabab confirmed that one of their fighters was killed, but asserted that the assault against it had been unsuccessful. Residents in Awdhegle village reported hearing intense gun battles around midnight on Tuesday, causing confusion, shock and fear.
Abdulaziz Abu Muscab, a Shabab spokesman, said that two helicopters had dropped foreign soldiers outside the village. But he said Shabab fighters had repelled the attack, which he said lasted for about 30 minutes.
The Shabab have recently intensified their attacks against the government and in public places. On Wednesday morning, a car bomb exploded at a restaurant in Mogadishu, killing three police officers and the restaurant’s owner, according to Gen. Ali Hersi Barre, a police commander.
The Shabab claimed responsibility for the attack, saying that had targeted government officials at the restaurant.
