Dam team: From left, Warren Bechtel, Walker Young, Elwood Mead, Frank Crowe and R. F. Walter.Credit...Photograph from "The Profiteers"
When James Madison discussed the relationship between corporations and government, he sounded as if he were knocking on doors for Bernie Sanders. “The stockjobbers,” he wrote, “will become the pretorian band of the Government, at once its tool and its tyrant.” But stop right there. You might recognize Madison’s worry about corporations being government’s “tyrant,” but “its tool”?
In Madison’s day, legislatures chartered corporations through special acts, one by one, to channel private money into public projects. Alexander Hamilton, the corporation’s champion, saw it as a vessel for public policy, the consequences of which Madison feared as much as public corruption.
I thought of this history as I read Sally Denton’s new book, “The Profiteers,” a history of the Bechtel Corporation, one of the world’s largest construction companies. She targets Bechtel’s decades of extraordinary influence in Washington, detailing how the company has thrived on and perhaps even set the terms of the relationship. But her account left me thinking: Hasn’t the federal government benefited as well?
Denton rolls ahead with all the energy of the company’s founder, Warren Bechtel. Born in 1872, he worked his way from a farm in Illinois to a construction firm in California, “a natural engineer,” as one boss said. In 1906, he “was ready to strike out on his own,” Denton writes. He built railroads, pipelines, highways and finally the Hoover Dam.
“The Profiteers” shows how the dam set a pattern. Warren Bechtel made alliances with other businesses and federal officials, and obtained the contract for his consortium in 1931, through the influence of a former government insider in his employ. Denton, the author of several books of American history and investigative reporting, uses the term “revolving door” more than once to describe Bechtel’s personnel exchanges with Washington. She concedes that the Hoover Dam may have been “a marvel of design, engineering, architecture and construction,” but she highlights how “the safety violations and labor unrest that characterized Hoover Dam’s construction site would become synonymous with Bechtel” over time.
Warren Bechtel’s mysterious death in Moscow in 1933, from an apparent insulin overdose, ignites a theme of political maneuvering and international intrigue. The corporation went global after World War II, seeking contracts in the Soviet Union, Indonesia, Qaddafi’s Libya. It developed an expertise in energy, erecting refineries, nuclear power plants, even an entire city in Saudi Arabia. It adhered to the Arab boycott of Israel. It cooperated with the C.I.A.
But who or what is Bechtel? How do we separate the corporate person from the corporation’s people? What of Bechtel’s society of managers, technicians and workers, its internal turf wars, its procedural habits? Denton says little about Bechtel’s internal culture; despite her extensive research, she writes, she confronted a privately held company with a “longstanding tradition of privacy and secrecy,” and her freedom of information requests for Bechtel contracts with the Department of Energy “were denied in their entirety.” She focuses on the top, populated by Warren Bechtel’s descendants. They have maintained a consistent, and boring, sensibility. “The Bechtelians were a colorless, sober bunch,” she writes.
Fortunately for the reader, more vivid characters appear. John Alex McCone, for example, joined Bechtel in 1937. Stern to the point of threatening (“When he smiles, look out,” a C.I.A. official once said), he helped invent the “cost-plus” contract, in which the government guarantees a profit. McCone pushed an anti-Communist, pro-nuclear agenda under Harry Truman; Eisenhower named him chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission in 1957, and Kennedy appointed him director of the C.I.A. in 1961. McCone used his posts to help the company, a long-running pattern. Steve Bechtel Jr., Warren’s grandson, wove ties to Richard Nixon that proved lucrative after Nixon won the White House in 1968.
Denton carries Bechtel’s story into the George W. Bush and Obama administrations, but her argument reaches a climax with George Shultz and Caspar Weinberger. Both of them left their posts in the Nixon administration for Bechtel, and then returned to government to serve under Reagan.
Reagan’s administration went far to help Bechtel, Denton writes, promoting the company’s plans for a pipeline and a chemical plant in Iraq, already listed as a state sponsor of terrorism. It’s troubling stuff — yet this is also where the dam begins to crack. Innuendo filters in. Shultz was not so much planning but “plotting,” and Weinberger was not firm in his convictions but “fanatical.” She darkly describes meetings at the Bohemian Grove, a two-week, all-male summer retreat on California’s Russian River, popular with the wealthy establishment. (Disclosure: I was invited to speak there last summer.) But the atmospherics carry a whiff of conspiracy theory. Powerful men talk all the time. They have private jets — phones, too. Why colluding among redwoods and amateur theatricals is particularly sinister remains unclear to me.
Nor does she need the story of the confessed spy Jonathan Pollard, which she crams in like a tuxedo in a hiker’s backpack. She devotes a prologue, the penultimate chapter and many pages of narrative to Pollard’s espionage for the Israeli government, his arrest and his incarceration. His discovery of Bechtel’s plan to build a petrochemicals complex in Iraq “clinched” his decision to spy, she asserts — though Saddam Hussein already operated several chemical-weapons factories. She attributes Pollard’s unexpectedly long imprisonment to a memo from Weinberger, suggesting that he wanted to silence Pollard about Bechtel, Weinberger’s former employer, even though Weinberger had been “sidelined” at Bechtel before he left.
One needn’t apologize for Bechtel’s courtship of Saddam Hussein to decide it’s thin evidence for concluding that Pollard’s primary motivation was to expose Bechtel, or that Bechtel engineered his prosecution and sentencing. The problem with a circumstantial case for conspiracy is that one must eliminate simpler explanations, and there are plenty. Pollard’s story sits awkwardly atop the whole, more lint than a woven thread in the fabric.
That aside, Denton strikes at the very conundrum that worried Madison — the relationship between corporate power and government in a political democracy. Corporations are useful; they concentrate capital, undertake publicly beneficial works and create wealth. They also concentrate power, in service of private gain. They deserve healthy skepticism, not deference, and intelligent oversight. They have come far from their early days as relics of mercantilism, but large companies embody interests that Washington cannot ignore. Private enterprise is a critical part of our national power and still plays a role in public policy.
Here is where I wish the author had placed more stress. Cronyism and wealth have helped Bechtel a great deal, but they cannot fully explain its long ties to Washington. Apple’s $233.7 billion in revenue in 2015 dwarfs Bechtel’s $37.2 billion, yet it is currently battling the government. Among private companies in 2015, Albertsons, the supermarket chain, was larger, though from what I can tell, hardly more influential. But Bechtel, unlike those companies, has played a central role in American foreign policy over the last century, particularly with regard to energy, and it knows how to keep state secrets. We should not leap to the conclusion that Bechtel has been only a tyrant rather than a tool. Considerations other than Bechtel’s fortunes have shaped America’s changing policies in the Middle East.
But this is a long conversation, one that goes well beyond the scope of “The Profiteers.” Denton begins it with a bang, itemizing amoral investments, environmental damage, exploitation of labor and chummy relationships with policy makers. Whether she persuades on all points or not, she shows that it’s a conversation we must have.