Donald Trump seemingly had a tough week. He faced an onslaught of attacks from his competitors, Mitt Romney and outside groups. He suffered an upset loss in Maine and nearly lost Louisiana and Kentucky, two states where he was expected to fare well. Polls showed him slipping nationally.
But the results on Tuesday suggest that Mr. Trump remains in a strong position, at least as long as the field remains divided. He carried Michigan and Mississippi by healthy margins and later won in Hawaii.
His opposition did not become as strong as he might have feared after Ted Cruz’s performance on Saturday, either.
The results look a lot more like the race we had on Super Tuesday: a double-digit advantage for Mr. Trump, who holds an edge in a three-way race, rather than the close race suggested by new national polls.
After a barrage of attacks, tight races last weekend and weak national polls on Tuesday, Mr. Trump faced a question: Was he fading?
In Michigan he currently holds 37 percent of the vote, neatly in line with the 36 percent of the vote we estimated he would receive based on the results on Super Tuesday.
We had him at 26 percent in Idaho, and he wound up with 28 percent. He won the Hawaii caucus with 46 percent of the vote with 60 percent of the precincts reporting.
These figures are consistent with Mr. Trump holding around 38 percent of the vote nationwide, with a comfortable lead over Mr. Cruz. It looks nothing like the much-discussed NBC/WSJ poll Tuesday, which showed Mr. Trump leading by just three points with 30 percent of the vote.
Marco Rubio cleared 18 percent of the vote in every primary state on Super Tuesday.
He hasn’t reached that number since.
With virtually no one noticing, his support seemed to collapse ahead of the contests on Saturday, and Tuesday’s races confirmed it.
Mr. Rubio won just 5 percent of the vote in Mississippi and 9 percent in Michigan — his two worst showings in a primary this cycle. It’s even worse than his result in New Hampshire, right after a terrible debate performance and in a much larger field.
Both John Kasich and Mr. Cruz benefited — but who benefited most depended on the location. They appear to be divvying up the Rubio vote by ideology and region, with Mr. Cruz consolidating conservative voters in the South and Mr. Kasich gaining among more moderate voters in the North.
The result was that Mr. Cruz fared quite a bit better in Mississippi — along with Louisiana on Saturday — than he did in neighboring Alabama on Super Tuesday. He also won the Idaho primary later Tuesday night.
But Mr. Cruz did not make nearly as many gains in Michigan. There it was Mr. Kasich who benefited most from Mr. Rubio’s voters, who are presumably more moderate than they are in the South. Mr. Kasich wound up in a tough fight for second place.
It sets Mr. Kasich up to fare well in his home state of Ohio next week, where polls show a tight race.
The results since Super Tuesday suggest that Mr. Trump holds around 38 percent of the vote nationally, a number that could allow him to amass a majority of delegates in a three-way race.
But they also suggest that he really does have a ceiling: His support hasn’t increased, even as other candidates have left the race or faltered. The polls say the same thing.
The collapse of Mr. Rubio makes it even harder to imagine that he’ll manage to squeak out a win in his home state, Florida, where polls have consistently shown Mr. Trump with a lead.
Mr. Kasich might win Ohio, but even if he does, Mr. Trump could amass a majority of delegates without it. Mr. Trump could conceivably benefit if Mr. Kasich stayed in the race, by preventing Mr. Cruz from consolidating the “anyone but Trump” vote.
Even if Mr. Kasich loses Ohio, he might still stay in the race. His strength in blue states suggests he could be a more formidable challenger to Mr. Trump in many of the states that remain than Mr. Cruz, who has struggled to compete outside the South and conservative caucuses. It also seems unlikely that Mr. Kasich would leave the race if Mr. Rubio did, since there would be a large opening among well-educated, relatively moderate Republican voters.
But even the exit of Mr. Rubio would not necessarily be enough for Mr. Kasich to overtake Mr. Trump in the relatively blue states that remain. For instance, Mr. Kasich and Mr. Rubio did not combine to win as many votes as Mr. Trump did in Michigan.
The results, in other words, point toward a three-way race in which Mr. Trump might still have a narrow edge.