HONG KONG — A morning run can be the perfect way to overcome jet lag, but usually not when it’s through the choking haze of auto exhaust and industrial discharge.
In a Friday morning post, Facebook’s co-founder and chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, announced his arrival in Beijing with a blithe message about what must have been a dizzying jog through the center of China’s capital, which has been suffering from a weeklong bout of hazardous air pollution.
“It’s great to be back in Beijing! I kicked off my visit with a run through Tiananmen Square, past the Forbidden City and over to the Temple of Heaven,” Mr. Zuckerberg wrote on Facebook, most likely using a virtual private network to get around the Chinese government Internet filters, which block his site.
In a photo accompanying the post, made about 10:30 a.m., Mr. Zuckerberg smiles alongside several running companions in front of the famous portrait of Mao Zedong that overlooks Tiananmen Square.
At 9 a.m. an air-quality monitor at the United States Embassy in Beijing calculated the level of PM2.5, ultrafine particles that damage respiration, at 305 micrograms per cubic meter. That level is deemed “hazardous” under American air-quality standards.
The color of the sky was the sort of gray hue that indicates a bad pollution day. The faint smell of something burning hung in the air. Many children on buses, or scooting to school with their parents or nannies, wore face masks. In homes and offices, air purifiers were cranked up to the highest setting.
The background for the photo of Mr. Zuckerberg’s run, directly in front of the Forbidden City at the center of Beijing, is normally public-relations friendly. But by ignoring the air quality, Mr. Zuckerberg inadvertently stirred an online debate about China’s major air pollution problems.
During the past two years, Mr. Zuckerberg has made several high-profile trips to China and has done little to stifle conjecture about his ambitions to bring Facebook to the country. During a visit by China’s Internet czar, Lu Wei, to Facebook’s campus in the United States in 2014, Mr. Zuckerberg showed off a copy of a collection of speeches and propaganda directives by the Chinese president, Xi Jinping.
Mr. Zuckerberg has also been public with his personal project of learning Mandarin. In two recent trips to Beijing, Mr. Zuckerberg has spoken Chinese, the first time in an informal chat at China’s Tsinghua University and the second time in a more formal speech about his plans for Facebook.
On Facebook, responses to Mr. Zuckerberg’s run ran the gamut from mocking to genuinely concerned about his health.
Although some noted he should have worn a face mask, others joked about his ability to access Facebook despite the Chinese government’s cracking down on ways to get around the so-called Great Firewall, which keeps Chinese users cordoned off from the wider Internet.
Others simply took umbrage with where the photo was staged, at the heart of Tiananmen Square.
“The floor you stepped has been covered by blood from students who fought for democracy. But, enjoy your running in China, Mark. :),” wrote a user named Cao Yuzhou.
On Twitter, that sentiment was reflected in an image in which Mr. Zuckerberg had been photoshopped in place of the famous “tank man” in front of a line of tanks from the 1989 military crackdown on the student-led protests in Tiananmen Square.
Within China, news of Mr. Zuckerberg’s run was quickly picked up by the tech media. On China’s Weibo, the microblogging service, Chinese users were as sarcastic as those on Facebook.
