Kathryn Reed Altman, who helped safeguard and enhance the artistic legacy of her husband, the film director Robert Altman, died on March 9 at her home in Santa Monica, Calif. She was 91.
The cause was a heart attack, a spokesman for the Altman family, Mike Kaplan, said in a statement.
Instead, Ms. Altman became her husband’s indispensable amanuensis, uncredited on the screen but indelibly helpful on the set, where she was a smoother of feathers, a personal connector among the various layers of personnel, a social director at gatherings that followed the viewing of dailies. She was also a keeper of the Altman history, documenting his career and their life together in papers, photographs, film snippets and scrapbooks, a personal archive that is at the heart of the Robert Altman Collection at the University of Michigan.
Since her husband’s death in 2006, Ms. Altman has appeared as a speaker and panelist at retrospectives of his work, including events at the Museum of Modern Art in New York and the University of California, Los Angeles. With the film critic, scholar and festival organizer Giulia D’Agnolo Vallan, she wrote and edited a book about her husband, “Altman” (2014), part biography and part appreciation, that includes hundreds of photographs and text by Martin Scorsese, E. L. Doctorow and Tess Gallagher.
Ms. Altman was a consultant on “Altman,” a 2014 documentary directed by Ron Mann in which she was also one of the narrators, sharing tidbits about her long love affair with one of America’s great filmmakers.
Kathryn Audrey Reed was born in Glendale, Calif., on June 2, 1924, to Richard Reed, who operated a gas station, and the former Lois Cummings, a bookkeeper. She graduated from Hollywood High School and joined “Earl Carroll’s Vanities,” a musical revue featuring showgirls in skimpy costumes. After responding to a casting call for, as she put it, “girls who could swim,” she began working as an extra in the movies and on television.
Her first marriage, to the jazz trombonist Tommy Pederson, ended in divorce. She is survived by their daughter, Konni Corriere; two sons, Robert and Matthew, from her marriage to Mr. Altman; a stepdaughter, Christine Altman; two stepsons, Stephen and Michael; 12 grandchildren; and 9 great-grandchildren.
In the documentary, Ms. Altman was candid about the struggles, especially financial ones, that characterized the early years of their marriage and nearly changed the trajectory of film history.
