Councilman Daniel Dromm, left, and Brendan Fay of the Lavender and Green Alliance with Mayor Bill de Blasio at the Irish Consulate. Mr. de Blasio will march with the alliance, which represents gay Irish-Americans.
It was a moment that some feared might never come, after so many years of viewing the St. Patrick’s Day Parade from the outside, politically and personally.
Now that a group representing gay Irish-Americans will march in the parade, activists choked up on Thursday as they recounted their battle, and celebrated Bill de Blasio’s decision to march in the parade for the first time as mayor.
“Perhaps our hearts will be dancing all the way,” said Brendan Fay, a leader of the group, the Lavender and Green Alliance, which will participate in the parade on March 17.
Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, had boycotted the event during his first two years in office because of the organizers’ stance toward gay and lesbian groups. At a news conference at the Irish Consulate, the mayor said he would start out in the parade marching with members of New York City’s uniformed services and would later accompany the Lavender and Green Alliance.
 But Mr. de Blasio still chose to skip the parade, saying that the move did not go far enough and that he would not participate as long as there were continued restrictions on other groups.
Then in September, parade organizers announced that Lavender and Green, which had worked for years to open up the event, would take part. The decision came after the parade’s longtime board chairman was pushed aside.
On Thursday, activists and organizers said a range of gay groups had decided to march together in the parade under the Lavender and Green banner. It was not clear whether additional groups would be allowed to take part next year.
“I think we should just get past this year,” Frank McGreal, a member of the parade’s board of directors, said.
City Councilman Daniel Dromm choked up and was briefly unable to continue speaking about the change.
Mr. Dromm, a Queens Democrat, said that of the four members of the City Council’s Irish-American caucus, three are gay. One of his fellow caucus members, Jimmy Van Bramer, also a Democrat from Queens, recalled “a real profound and deep feeling of exclusion and powerlessness” at being barred from the parade for the last 25 years.
The controversy over the parade dates to 1990, when the Irish Lesbian and Gay Organization asked for permission to march and was turned down.
The next year, Mayor David N. Dinkins promoted a compromise in which members of a gay and lesbian group marched as part of another delegation that was permitted to be in the parade. But they were jeered, and beer cans were thrown at them and Mr. Dinkins.
Organizers subsequently barred gay and lesbian groups from taking part in the parade, a ban that continued until last year. Mr. Dinkins skipped the parade during his last two years as mayor, but Mayors Rudolph W. Giuliani and Michael R. Bloomberg both regularly marched in the parade.
Mr. de Blasio resumed the boycott when he entered office in 2014.