Federal authorities have arrested more than 1,100 people since February as part of an enforcement campaign against gangs that traffic guns, drugs and people across United States borders, officials said.
The gangs caught in the dragnet were not small-time operators, said Sarah Rodriguez, a spokeswoman for Immigration and Customs Enforcement.
“We are talking about sophisticated organizations who are involved in human trafficking, who are involved in drug smuggling, gun smuggling,” she said.
Of the 1,133 people arrested during the five-week operation, more than 900 were members or associates of gangs, including MS-13, the Sureños, the Norteños, the Bloods and several others based in prisons, the immigration agency said in a statement.
A majority of the enforcement actions took place in and around Los Angeles; San Francisco; Houston; El Paso, Tex.; Atlanta; and San Juan, Puerto Rico, the authorities said.
There were also arrests along the East Coast. The Newark area had more than 20, while New York City, Boston, Baltimore, Philadelphia and Washington each had more than 10.
Called Project Shadowfire, the operation was conducted under the banner of Operation Community Shield, an initiative begun in 2005 by the immigration agency to target violent gangs. Regular sweeps over the past 11 years have resulted in more than 40,000 gang-related arrests and the seizure of more than 8,000 firearms, officials said.
In the latest campaign, conducted in tandem with local and state law enforcement agencies, officials seized more than 20 kilograms of narcotics — including marijuana, cocaine, heroin — illicit cash and weapons, Ms. Rodriguez of I.C.E. said.
Some experts have observed a shifting emphasis by drug smugglers away from marijuana as the drug has been decriminalized across the United States in recent years. Data released by the United States Border Patrol showed that marijuana seizures along the southwest border with Mexico fell to their lowest level in at least a decade in 2015, even as other data suggested a rise in methamphetamine imports.
Most of those arrested in the immigration agency’s sweep were American nationals, but about 240 were natives of countries in Latin America, Europe, Asia and the Caribbean, officials said. More than 130 people were accused of immigration violations, and about 80 were arrested because of open warrants.
Agents seized 150 firearms and more than $70,000 in American currency, officials said.