From left, Matt Damon, Melissa McCarthy, Viola Davis and John Cho.Credit...From left: Universal Pictures; Hopper Stone/Columbia Pictures; Clay Enos/Warner Brothers and DC Comics; Kimberley French/Paramount Pictures, via Associated Press.
In summertime, you can count on two things. There will be a lot of sequels and reboots in theaters, and there will be a lot of critics complaining about that. It’s just part of the job. And after 2015, when a handful of reboots and sequels landed on Top 10 lists, we’re back to a familiar routine. The movies range from pretty good to outright terrible, they open to mixed reviews and big box-office numbers, and before we know it, the Oscar race is heating up. It’s the end of civilization, and it’s also business as usual.
The sameness of this year’s franchise movies is striking, though. I don’t just mean that their pleasures seem more routine than revelatory, or that they feature climactic scenes so similar as to be almost identical. Look, a giant thing is shooting swirls of green light! A vortex is threatening to swallow a whole city! Guys have dropped their super-high-tech weapons and are duking it out with fists! I’m talking more about grand, overarching themes. No, not the battle of good against evil or the existential angst of the lonely hero. Something more profound, or at least more relevant: the problems of management and morale in the modern office.
This summer, your local multiplex is home to an extended business seminar. There are sessions on crisis-management and how to deal with office romances (“Star Trek Beyond”); on office rivalries and mission-statement drafting (“Captain America: Civil War”); on start-ups (“Ghostbusters”) and I.T. disasters (“Jason Bourne”). Every action movie is a workplace sitcom in disguise.
What is “Suicide Squad”? A bad movie, to be sure — and yes, I’m aware of opinions to the contrary (thanks, Twitter) — but also a movie about difficult personnel issues. At one point, Will Smith’s Deadshot complains about the leadership techniques of his immediate supervisor, a grim-faced military dude named Rick Flag, played by Joel Kinnaman. Flag’s way of maintaining discipline among squad members is to implant an explosive charge in their necks, which he can remotely detonate if anyone gets out of line. (We’ve all had bosses like that.) Deadshot, in that kidding-but-not-really-kidding Will Smith way, suggests a different approach, maybe one based on the teachings of Phil Jackson.
Mr. Jackson, the former N.B.A. coach whose books are popular business-class in-flight reading, is name-checked twice, which seems less like a joke than a tell. The central problem of “Suicide Squad” is one that bedevils department heads and midlevel employees in every corner of the modern economy: team building. The top boss, Amanda Waller (an unsmiling bureaucrat played by Viola Davis), has a problem that requires the kind of solution best designated with a buzzword. Innovation. Disruption. Out-of-the-box thinking. It just so happens that there is a literal box full of disrupters somewhere in the Louisiana swamps, so Waller arranges to let them out. She reviews their files, delegates the granular stuff to Flag and presents the project to the military brass who function as her executive board.
None of this is entirely new. Nothing in popular culture, or in consumer capitalism, is ever really new. Superhero team-building is a venerable comic-book practice, one that flourished in the ’60s and ’70s — with the Avengers, the X-Men, the Fantastic Four — more or less contemporaneously with the first voyages of the Starship Enterprise. The Enterprise, though, is a convenient template, because it provides a setting that resembles an actual office, with screens and workstations and a dress code. The ship is a subsidiary of a multiplanetary body called the Federation, in principle a utopian political entity but in practice more akin to a modern diversified corporation, with global (that is, galactic) reach and a complex bureaucratic structure. Captain Kirk is a division head whose responsibilities include dealing with external crises that are variously comical, outlandish and harrowing. But the bulk of his job is keeping the Enterprise running from one installment to the next, which means attending to infrastructure and human (or Vulcan) resources.
For its time — the distant future but also, in terrestrial terms, what we now think of as the “Mad Men” era — the Enterprise was a fairly diverse workplace. In retrospect, the crew’s composition might look like tokenism, but cultural differences were also integral to the show’s ethos and structure. And the new run of “Star Trek” movies builds on the original’s multiculturalism, presenting an idealized and mostly harmonious workplace where differences are respected and the hot buttons of race, gender and sexuality remain for the most part unpushed.
The differences that matter — that create comic friction and dramatic tension — are temperamental. Dr. McCoy and Mr. Spock provide the most obvious example. Their relationship in the new “Star Trek Beyond” illustrates one of the great fantasies of management literature, namely that interpersonal antagonism can be harnessed for productive ends. The hotheaded humanist doctor and the rigorously analytical first officer are always at odds, and yet their contrasting methods and styles turn out to be complementary. They don’t need to be good friends to be effective colleagues.
Collegiality is a fragile and mysterious thing. It can’t be quantified or mandated, and it doesn’t figure prominently in public discussions of work. Political discourse, reasonably enough, is preoccupied with unemployment and wages, with matters of policy and economics. Just as work claims more and more of our lives, so does the lived texture of work occupy an ever larger place in the pop-cultural imagination. It’s all about meetings, deadlines, impossible tasks, scary or clueless bosses and, above all, the people in the next cubicle, with whom we spend most of our waking hours, even when we’re trying to avoid them.
Those are some fairly dysfunctional offices, thick with incident and intrigue and sex and therefore both a welcome escape from the grind of actual work and a space for dystopian projections. Work can be an arena of scheming and back-stabbing, of ruthless competition and jockeying for power. It’s often noted that all those workplace settings on the small screen — the hospitals and law firms, the precinct houses and radio stations — are metaphorical renderings of the writers’ rooms and production suites where television is made. (Or not so metaphorical, when you consider just how many television shows are about television itself.) A gang of mismatched misfits is embedded within a larger institution, where most of the energy (and most of our attention) is devoted to collective self-expression. Everyone plays to type: the scold, the flirt, the prankster, the nice boss, the mean boss, the slacker, the dummy, the straight arrow. Ron Swanson. Dwight Schrute. Jenna Maroney. Just enough actual work is done to fend off monotony and keep the enterprise moving.
The migration of this model onto the big screen can be taken as evidence of the ascendance of television in the 21st-century popular culture. The prevalence of ensemble-based, job-oriented big-budget movies can also be seen as an update of the westerns and platoon pictures of the ’40s and ’50s. But those movies were reflections of the realities of the postwar political economy. The frontier and the battlefield were allegorical spaces where Cold War anxieties were played out, but they were also representations of the offices where more and more Americans spent more and more of their time.
Part of what makes work tolerable is the idea that it is heroic, the fantasy that repetitive and meaningless tasks are charged with risk and significance. Pecking away at our keyboards, we’re cowboys, warriors, superheroes. But meanwhile, superheroics look like every other job. The alienated, misunderstood individuals — the white guys struggling with the burdens of power — who defined the genre in the early 2000s have for the most part been absorbed into larger affiliations. It’s a team sport now, and the movies are about the dynamics within the team itself. Are things cool between Harley Quinn and Deadshot? Can Kirk keep the peace between Bones and Spock? Will Iron Man and Captain America patch up their differences? Will the Ghostbusters?
External threats have been replaced by internal conflicts. The main baddie in “Suicide Squad” is a renegade recruit, the Enchantress, who in her less volatile and more demurely costumed state is June Moone, Rick Flag’s girlfriend. So the demons-from-Hell business is a personnel issue after all, and hence a special challenge for Waller. It also turns out that the arch-villain in “Star Trek Beyond,” Idris Elba’s Krall, is a former Federation officer who didn’t like the direction the organization was going. A disgruntled employee. A malcontent Luddite. An enemy of innovation. In the final battle, Kirk helps him negotiate a severance package.
Which may be all Jason Bourne wants. “Jason Bourne,” as the latest installment is imaginatively called, is one of the few recent blockbusters that examines the underside of modern working life, since it adopts the point of view of the disaffected worker trapped in a nightmarish bureaucratic maze. All of Bourne’s enemies, as well as his potential allies, are colleagues of one kind or another, and his very existence is a horrifying reductio ad absurdum of life on the corporate treadmill (Treadstone?). He may get to travel to cool places, but he never gets to enjoy them. He has no time for hobbies, romance or even a meal or a drink with friends. He has no friends, and his prodigious talents and painstakingly acquired skills, which should win him at least an employee-of-the-month citation, make him a candidate for termination instead.
Also: The movie is boring. All of these movies are boring. And that is not a shortcoming. Rather, it’s part of the program and part of the reason we keep showing up. By “we,” I don’t mean those of us who are, absurdly, paid to attend movies and complain about them, but the rank and file of devoted and casual fans, the strivers and slackers who keep the enterprise airborne. We go to hang out with people we know and mostly like — it’s easier that way — and hope that the experience is not too stressful. It doesn’t have to be great, just good enough to keep us from striking out on our own or banding together to overthrow a rotten and oppressive system. Ha ha. Just kidding. Everything’s cool. Buy a ticket. Punch the clock. It’s only a movie. You’re just doing your job.