Harley Flanagan is a New York legend. Just ask him.
Mr. Flanagan has led a life heavily dressed with drugs, violence and bitter feuds, the greatest of all with John Joseph McGowan, the Cro-Mags’ charismatic frontman. In late July, Mr. McGowan’s current incarnation of the Cro-Mags played a free show in Tompkins Square Park in Manhattan to benefit Gary Miller, better known as Dr. Know, the ailing guitarist of the Bad Brains, another legend of the hard-core scene. Mr. Flanagan did not join him onstage; he has been excluded from any Cro-Mags tours for the past decade.
As a seventh-grade dropout, Mr. Flanagan has had to learn to thrive in new environments largely on his own. “New York hard-core people in general were crazy, nihilistic,” he said. “They didn’t care about much. You had skinheads who were Puerto Rican and black skinheads with swastika tattoos. It’s just how it was.” In his book, Mr. Flanagan writes frankly about his reputation as a youth: “I was a glue-huffing-dust-smoking-drug-taking-fighting-all-the-time nut.” He fit right in.
Starting in 1981, when Harley was 14, the New York hard-core scene exploded in Alphabet City and on the Lower East Side. The A7 club, on the corner of Seventh Street and Avenue A, two blocks from Mr. Flanagan’s mother’s house, was an early rallying point. Another was CBGB, on the Bowery at Bleecker Street, a 10-minute walk southwest of Tompkins Square Park. Skinheads shared space uneasily with Hare Krishnas and drag queens. In some ways, the scene is the grittier, forgotten younger sibling of punk. It also had a strong working-class identity — and was far more inclusive of people from New York City’s other boroughs.
From their first shows at CBGB in the early 1980s, the Cro-Mags were leaders of the scene. They played a muscular punk-metal hybrid with lyrics drenched in nihilism and foreboding. The chemistry between Mr. McGowan and Mr. Flanagan was undeniable. By the time the band’s first record, “The Age of Quarrel,” was released in 1986, they had virtually secured their legacy.
For all the band’s promise, this was its peak.
By the time the Cro-Mags’ second album was released in 1989, the band’s singer, Mr. McGowan, had departed. Despite subsequent releases with variegated personnel, the lineup from “The Age of Quarrel” still defines the band for most of its fans. Mr. Flanagan and Mr. McGowan buried the hatchet long enough for a short-lived reunion in 2001, but the détente did not last long.
Darryl Jenifer, 55, the founding bassist of the Bad Brains, has known the two since they were boys. “They’re both like my little brothers,” he said. “I don’t get up in between that. When the wounds are deep, they’re beyond repair.” Mr. Jenifer described Mr. Flanagan as the “Dennis the Menace” of hard-core, but added that he had seen a real change in him. “When you get older, you have to act accordingly,” he said.
For Mr. Flanagan, aging also means leaving things behind. “Scenes are for little kids,” he said. “If you’re grown up and still holding onto a scene for identity, then you haven’t grown up. You’ve just gotten older.” This could be interpreted as a jab at Mr. McGowan, who is a kind of elder statesman of the scene, giving hard-core-themed walking tours of the Lower East Side and having written two books, a memoir and a vegan cookbook with an unprintable name.
The Cro-Mags have not featured Mr. Flanagan since 2002. This is something that he, as a founding member, feels ill about. “I’d be happy to play a show with all of them,” he said. “The ax should be buried, especially at our age.” Since the stabbing, that does not seem likely.
At the Renzo Gracie Academy in June, nine pre-teenage boys and girls stood at attention before Professor Harley, as he is known to his charges. Mr. Flanagan, who is a father of two boys of his own (Harley, 13, and Jonah, 11), was very much in his element, smiling as he guided the students through calisthenic warm-ups and the basics of grappling and holds.
“This is where we suffer,” he told the class, before making them do leg lifts.
Mr. Flanagan surveyed his students as they lay on their backs holding their legs, fully extended, in the air.
“This is how we make you strong,” he told one student before stepping on her tiny abdomen. 
“Harley’s the man,” an instructor said.
The young students all seemed to agree.
“They don’t know my reputation,” Mr. Flanagan said softly.
Before the 45-minute class was finished, three students successfully put Mr. Flanagan in an arm-bar. He feigned discomfort and tapped out for good measure for the first two.
His final opponent, however, an 8-year-old girl wearing a tiny pink karate outfit, showed him no mercy.
