Hanging over all the promise, though, is the question of whether for-profit companies are well-suited to this line of work, long the province of nonprofit do-gooders. Critics point out that the business of caring for poor and frail people is marred with abuse. Already, new ideas for lowering the cost of the program have started circulating. In Silicon Valley, for example, some eager entrepreneurs are pushing plans that call for a higher reliance on video calls instead of in-face doctor visits.
Several private equity firms, venture capitalists and Silicon Valley entrepreneurs have jumped into the niche. F-Prime Capital Partners, a former Fidelity Biosciences group, provided seed funding for a PACE-related start-up, as have well-regarded angel investors like Amir Dan Rubin, the former Stanford Health Care president, and Michael Zubkoff, a Dartmouth health care economist.
Early last year, Ms. Malveaux was drowning. She lived alone in a tidy red-brick home in a leafy Denver neighborhood that she paid for by working shifts at a Samsonite luggage factory, now closed.
For Americans who find themselves in this situation, the next stop is often a traditional nursing home. Ms. Malveaux’s son took her instead to visit an InnovAge day center.
For the frightened Ms. Malveaux, it seemed like paradise: a flower garden, a beauty salon and day trips to casinos and candy factories. And, most importantly, it had a team of doctors, nurses, psychiatrists, dentists, physical therapists, nutritionists, home health aides and social workers whose purpose was to help her live safely in her beloved brick home.
After joining the center last June 2015, Ms. Malveaux began seeing a psychiatrist and went on medication for depression. A social worker coached her grandson, Jermaine Malveaux, on how to care for someone with dementia. Three days a week, an InnovAge van picks up Ms. Malveaux at home and takes her to the center to share lunch with other older adults and try her luck at bingo and ceramics.
On average, Medicare and Medicaid pay PACE providers $76,728 a person a year, about $5,500 less than the average cost of a nursing home. And the money going to PACE covers all of the person’s health and social needs, unlike nursing home care, which doesn’t include hospitalizations and other expensive medical care.
“If you’re neglecting these patients, the odds they’ll call an ambulance and go to the hospital and spend a week there because they’re really sick is pretty high, and that all comes out of the payment,” said Bob Kocher, a former senior health care adviser to President Obama.
The message appeared to travel down Highway 101 as well, to the heart of the technology industry. At least eight start-ups have circulated PACE-related pitches to Silicon Valley venture capital firms, hoping to tap into new capital and create technology-enabled versions of the program.
These sorts of pitches, while promising, have not been universally welcomed. They have even been used as evidence that opening PACE up to for-profit companies might lead to unwanted consequences.
Dr. Si France, a founder of WelbeHealth, an early-stage company based in Menlo Park, Calif., says start-ups can use technology to improve clinical communication, help caregivers make treatment decisions and monitor patients at home or in a hospital. But he insists even a high-tech PACE program cannot veer from its origins.
Kathy Baron, 68, who lives in subsidized senior housing, was left disabled by breast cancer and debilitating nerve pain. Her daughter, Leah van Zelm, struggled to take care of her. So Ms. Baron, fearful she would be deemed unfit to stay in her apartment, signed up for InnovAge’s program.
“I would rather be dead than go into a nursing home,” Ms. Baron said.
She says InnovAge has been generous with services, echoing interviews with other patients. Each week, an InnovAge housekeeper changes the sheets on her bed, launders her clothes and cleans her apartment, a service provided to those unable to tidy their own homes. The few times her requests for special equipment or services were denied, Ms. Baron appealed and won.
At least in the near future, the number of companies getting into PACE programs will be limited. Most states cap enrollment in PACE centers. And each state — as Colorado did, opening the window for InnovAge — likely needs to amend its law to allow the for-profit companies. So far, it appears only California has done so.
In the meantime, for people like Ms. Van Zelm, the anxiety that once pervaded her daily life has diminished.
