MANILA — Even amid the slaughter of President Rodrigo Duterte’s war on drugs, the killings of Renato and Jaypee Bertes stand out.
The Bertes men, father and son, shared a tiny, concrete room with six other people in a metropolitan Manila slum, working odd jobs when they could find them. Both smoked shabu, a cheap form of methamphetamine that has become a scourge in the Philippines. Sometimes Jaypee Bertes sold it in small amounts, relatives said.
So it was unsurprising when the police raided their room last month.
They were arrested and taken to a police station where, investigators say, they were severely beaten, then shot to death.
The police said the two had tried to escape by seizing an officer’s gun. But a forensic examination found that the men had been incapacitated by the beatings before they were shot; Jaypee Bertes had a broken right arm.
The two men are among more than 800 people who have been killed by police officers and vigilantes since the May election of Mr. Duterte, who has repeatedly called for killing drug dealers and users. Most have been killed by police officers, in encounters the police characterize as confrontations or self-defense. More than 200 have been attributed to vigilantes, who often leave cardboard signs declaring their victims to be drug pushers.
The Bertes case is one of the rare killings to prompt legal action. Two of the officers involved have been suspended, and the police said they would be charged with murder.
Mr. Duterte has not commented on the case, which has been widely reported in the local news media. In a speech on Wednesday, he said that the police should not use excessive force, but he showed no sign of backing down from his call to kill drug suspects.
“The fight against drugs will continue unrelenting until we have destroyed the apparatus operating in the entire country,” he said.
Senator Leila de Lima, the former Philippine secretary of justice, called the killing a “summary execution” and said the evidence was so clear-cut that the authorities had “no choice” but to bring charges.
The case is one of several expected to be the focus of potentially explosive hearings next week before the Senate Committee on Justice and Human Rights, which Ms. de Lima oversees.
Mr. Duterte lashed out at Ms. de Lima in his speech on Wednesday, accusing her, without providing evidence, of having an affair with her married driver, who he said collected drug payoffs for her.
Ms. de Lima called the accusation “foul” and added, “If this is his way of stopping the Senate’s investigation on the extrajudicial killings, he can try,” but she insisted that she would not call off the hearings.
Although the killings have dispensed with what Mr. Duterte has called “the rigmarole” of due process, his drug war has proved wildly popular in a country plagued by crime.
The blunt-spoken Mr. Duterte made his name as the mayor of Davao City, where vigilante killings starting in the 1980s are credited with helping reduce crime and making it one of the country’s safest places.
Since Mr. Duterte has taken his campaign nationwide, more than 600,000 drug dealers and users have turned themselves in to avoid being killed, the authorities say. The result, they say, has been a visible reduction in drug use and petty crime.
Renato Bertes, 49, and Jaypee Bertes, 28, lived with their families in a dark warren of alleyways in Pasay City, a part of greater Manila near Ninoy Aquino International Airport. The eight of them shared a small room and a kitchen area with buckets in place of a sink.
According to the police, the officers chanced upon the Bertes men, out in the neighborhood gambling, on the evening of July 6. They arrested them, found small amounts of shabu in their possession and took them to the police station.
The police declined to discuss the case or release their investigative report, but that document was summarized in a report by the Commission on Human Rights, a copy of which was provided to The New York Times.
According to the commission report, members of the Bertes family and a neighbor told a different story. They said that the police “barged into” their apartment at 11:30 while they were in bed. The officers demanded to know where Jaypee Bertes was keeping drugs and began roughing him up.
This was not the family’s first run-in with the police. Ms. Pimentel-Gana said that according to family members, the police had extracted payments of hundreds of dollars from Jaypee twice before.
One officer picked up Jaypee’s 2-year-old daughter, Angel, and strip-searched her, according to Harra Kazuo, 26, the girl’s mother and Jaypee’s wife.
Renato Bertes tried to intervene and told the police his son would surrender, the report said. The officers arrested the men and took them to the police station, in Pasay City.
According to the summary of the police report, once inside a jail cell, Renato Bertes tried to grab an officer’s gun. The officer “managed to hold onto his firearm and fired successive shots at Renato,” the report said.
The commission report, however, said it was “not possible” for either suspect to attack the officers or to try to take their weapons. Both men had been tortured, the report said.
A forensic examination concluded that they had been repeatedly struck with a blunt object before their deaths.
“With Jaypee’s broken arm and both he and his father Renato’s badly bruised bodies, the victims can no longer be threats to the life and security” of the officers, the report said.
Each suspect was shot at least three times, and other shots struck the walls of the police station. One shot hit Renato Bertes in the top of the head, suggesting that his head was bowed at the time, Ms. Pimentel-Gana said.
She acknowledged that her husband and his father were involved with drugs but said that did not mean they deserved to die. They were not big-time pushers, she said, or part of a syndicate.
“Some people are just pushed to extremes to survive,” she said.
Ms. Pimentel-Gana said it was common in such shootings for the police to claim that the victim tried to grab an officer’s weapon.
Last week, an official in Pasay City was shot and killed by the police, who said he tried to grab an officer’s gun while handcuffed, according to the local news media. The official had gone to the authorities in an effort to clear his name of drug charges, family members said.
Although the two officers accused in the Bertes killings have been suspended from duty, family members say the officers still frequent the neighborhood and remain armed.
In his speech on Wednesday, Mr. Duterte said his government was willing to submit to an investigation of the killings and that he took “full and sole responsibility” for the campaign against drugs.
Ms. Kazuo, Jaypee’s widow, begged Mr. Duterte to have some compassion.
