CHAMPAIGN, Ill. — Since he was hired to coach football at Illinois in March, Lovie Smith has had a full calendar.
He has been busy coaching, recruiting and, every chance he gets, preaching the power of possibility to a team and a fan base hungry for victories after years of mediocrity on the field and turmoil off it.
Smith insists that so far, it has not been much different from what he grew accustomed to as coach of the Chicago Bears and the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.
But a coach’s path to college from the N.F.L. is not always straightforward. Some who have made that move say coaching college teams is like being a general manager, with a hand in every aspect of the program. Coaching pro football, they say, is almost purely football.
Rich Brooks went from the top job at Oregon to coaching the St. Louis Rams and then took over at Kentucky.
“It’s almost like a college coach taking a sabbatical and just dealing with football rather than fund-raising and recruiting and discipline,” Brooks said of the N.F.L.
While big-name coaches like Nick Saban and Pete Carroll have set the standard for former N.F.L. coaches winning in college, pro experience is relatively rare at that level. And while coaches with experience in the N.F.L. tend to win in college, many of those who have only been pro assistants do not.
Smith is one of six head coaches at the 128 Football Bowl Subdivision schools who have been in charge of N.F.L. teams, along with Saban at Alabama, Jim Mora at U.C.L.A., Bobby Petrino at Louisville and Smith’s fellow Big Ten coaches Jim Harbaugh at Michigan and Mike Riley at Nebraska. Their combined college record is 466-226-1, a 67 percent winning percentage.
Eighteen other F.B.S. coaches have been N.F.L. assistants. They have won 54 percent of their college games. But take away Kirk Ferentz at Iowa, David Shaw at Stanford and Les Miles at Louisiana State, and that drops to 46 percent.
Smith took over after Illinois fired two coaches in less than a year. Tim Beckman was fired a week before the 2015 season started after an investigation concluded that he had interfered in medical decisions regarding players, and his replacement, Bill Cubit, was let go when Smith arrived.
Hiring Smith, who took the Bears to a Super Bowl in 2007, was a bid to score big after four straight losing seasons and the embarrassing collapse of the Beckman era.
Smith insists that recruiting aside, what he is doing so far is not significantly different from what he did during his 11 seasons as an N.F.L. coach. That includes an emphasis on creating turnovers, something Bears fans would recognize. It also means Smith, just as in his pro days, never yells or screams.
On the practice field, Smith appears comfortable delegating most of the communicating to his coordinators and position coaches. He stands back, watching, sometimes at a distance, and only occasionally moves in close to address something he has seen.
Part of that appeal is in whom Smith draws to campus: more N.F.L. scouts and former players, like the longtime Bears cornerback Charles Tillman.
But Smith has also filled his agenda with tasks it is difficult to picture some N.F.L. coaches handling — Bill Belichick, for example.
Smith welcomed the freshman class, 6,000 students, on a warm August night at Memorial Stadium and has posed smiling with countless fans at events on campus and elsewhere.
That is where a program like Illinois, which has long lost more games than it has won, might need more than an N.F.L. coach is required to provide.
Brooks emphasizes that N.F.L. players are in every way pros: They are paid; if they break rules, they are fined or cut; and they generally are not looking for fatherly direction.
College coaches, Riley of Nebraska said, have to want to play that last role, one Smith says is important to him.
Gil Brandt has closely watched both the N.F.L. and college football for a long time. He spent almost 30 years as the Dallas Cowboys’ vice president for player personnel and is now a draft consultant for the league. He said the transition from the N.F.L. back to college was tough.
But as he thought about Smith’s odds, Brandt recalled spotting Smith and his wife, MaryAnne, at a Texas-Oklahoma game a few years ago. They were not sitting in a box, schmoozing. They were in the stands, watching.
If fans show some patience, Brandt said, Smith could succeed.
“I think he loves college football,” he said.