PARIS — The rough-hewn sounds of clacking spoons, twanging banjos and humming fiddles might seem to be something of an anomaly in a city known more for Edith Piaf’s sensuous lullabies. But every month nearly 100 musicians and aficionados clamber aboard an old barge here for a nightlong conclave of Appalachian, old time and bluegrass music.
The Sawmill Sessions, as the gatherings are known, celebrated their fifth anniversary in May with a festival that featured the “trans-Atlantic” bluegrass band the Peregrines, local acts like Pig in the Parlor and the Buci Bees, and a quartet from Normandy, the Muddy Hill Boys.
The sessions began as a musical conversation between Marius Pibarot, a French-American fiddler, and a handful of talented friends. An informal get-together along the banks of the Bassin de la Villette, on a canal that branches off the Seine, turned into a monthly bluegrass jam in front of the barge.
Mr. Pibarot, who studied jazz and classical violin in Paris, plunged into bluegrass in 2007 when he met young Americans immersed in the genre — the fiddler Alex Hargreaves and the mandolinists Dominque Leslie, Jacob Joliff and Sarah Jarosz — at the Mandolin Festival in Lunel, France.
Mr. Pibarot offered several explanations as to why jamming is out of the norm in France: The French can be “shy about their singing voices,” he said, and many do not like being criticized in a public setting, even implicitly.
“The French have a great ‘esprit critique,’ which is great in politics and humanities, but not particularly helpful for art,” he said.
The deeper reasons, he suggested, stem from the French Revolution, which “killed the church and the habit of singing,” and unlike the Irish, for example, most French people are not raised with music and group singing.
“Even professional musicians, especially classically trained ones, are not inclined to sit around and play in an unofficial way,” he added.
The bluegrass bug began to spread in earnest across Paris when Mr. Hargreaves returned to France in 2009 and met up again with Mr. Pibarot — and the all-night playing continued. More musicians joined in and two years later, in 2011, the Sawmill Sessions were started on the Anako.
The sessions have become a belle vitrine, a “beautiful window,” on a genre of music that is only just gaining popularity in France, said David Chalumeau, a professional harmonica player who is one of the informal leaders of the Sawmill Sessions. Mr. Chalumeau cites the 1984 album “Nashville ou Belleville” by the French crooner Eddy Mitchell, with its banjos and harmonica, as a key event with enormous influence on the French ear.
Films like “O Brother, Where Art Thou?” and “The Broken Circle Breakdown” have also contributed to a growing consciousness of traditional American musical forms in France.
The Peregrines first played at the Sawmill Sessions in early 2015, after their bassist, Ben Somers, a Londoner, came to check out the scene at the request of Mr. Pibarot.
Another member of the Peregrines, Oregon-born Grant Gordy, played guitar as part of David Grisman’s sextet.
Bobby Britt, a fiddler who grew up in the foothills of the Appalachians and joined the Peregrines for their 2016 tour, said the music was inherently community driven.
That communal feeling is perhaps now awakening in the French music scene.
The Anako, which is also a performance space with a high-tech stage and recording equipment, has showcased a handful of local groups like Bronco, Harlan, Fierce Flowers and Mr. Pibarot’s Pig in the Parlor. His quartet features a German-born banjo player, Julia Zech, who wrote an old time tune called ‘‘Träum weiter Mädchen’’ (Dream Again Children) that had its premiere at the festival in May.
