BEVERLY HILLS, Calif. — “Vinyl” wasn’t worth it anymore, “Game of Thrones” will run for two more seasons, and “Curb Your Enthusiasm” will be back next year.
Those were some of the topics that HBO’s new president of programming, Casey Bloys, addressed at a Television Critics Association event here on Saturday.
In addition to discussing programming decisions, Mr. Bloys confronted heated questions about whether HBO depicted sexual violence against women far too frequently.
Speaking about the premium cable channel’s expensive flop, “Vinyl,” Mr. Bloys said that executives had decided to cancel it after taking a hard look.
He also said that “Game of Thrones” would conclude after its eighth season, and he acknowledged that next season’s summer premiere date would mean the show would not be eligible for the 2017 Emmys. “That’s just something we have to live with,” he said.
For 16 straight years, HBO has led all TV networks with the most Emmy nominations, and “Game of Thrones” has been the most nominated show for the last three.
With the final seasons of “The Leftovers” and “Girls” also coming up, Mr. Bloys said he was hopeful that the network’s new slate of shows — including the limited series “The Night Of,” the Sarah Jessica Parker dark comedy “Divorce” and the science-fiction drama “Westworld” — would make up the difference.
Throughout a 30-minute news conference, television critics returned to the issue of violence against women.
Though Mr. Bloys acknowledged the criticism (“Point taken,” he said at one point), he also seemed unmoved by the charge and said several times that violence was “spread equally” among men and women.
HBO also announced on Saturday that its beloved 1990s comedy “The Larry Sanders Show” would be available on its apps — HBO Go and HBO Now — and would be on demand beginning in September. The show’s creator and star, Garry Shandling, died in March.
Mr. Bloys said that “Curb Your Enthusiasm” would go into production this fall, and the network later confirmed that the show’s ninth season would begin at some point next year. And Mr. Bloys did not rule out that “True Detective” could return for a third season, after a disappointing second season.
Mr. Bloys also talked briefly about the network’s long-gestating animation project with Jon Stewart, saying it would be a parody of a cable news channel. He said he hoped it would be “up and running” in September or October, though HBO had originally said it would premiere earlier this year.
