WELLINGTON, New Zealand — Defense wins championships, so the saying goes, and the Hurricanes proved that when they were crowned Super Rugby champions for the first time.
For the third game in a row, the Hurricanes kept the opposition from scoring a try — this time the Lions from South Africa — and ended their season without conceding a try over their last five hours of play. That remarkable statistic epitomized the team-first approach the team has embraced all season.
Hurricanes players said they were inspired by Jerry Collins, a much-loved former Hurricane who was known for his hard-hitting tackles. Collins died in a car accident in France last year that also killed his wife and left his daughter seriously injured.
The Hurricanes have excelled at soaking up pressure and then pouncing on opponent’s mistakes, and they did so again against the Lions in wet, cold and windy conditions.
The game’s opening try came after a poor kick by the Lions’ Lionel Mapoe that went straight to Hurricanes winger Cory Jane, who scored in the corner.
With 11 minutes remaining, Barrett sealed the win with a try that was a poacher’s dream. The Lions stole a Hurricanes lineout close to their own line, but then could not gather the loose ball, which was hacked ahead by the Hurricanes hooker Ricky Riccitelli. That allowed Barrett to race across the try line and force the ball down for the score.
It sparked jubilant scenes in the stands by fans, who had waited 20 years for a title.
The Hurricanes won after losing in the finals twice before, in 2006 to the Crusaders and last year, when they were beaten by the Highlanders.
Regardless of the result, the Lions will head back to Johannesburg having silenced the doubters. While Super Rugby’s new four-conference/two-group restructuring this year as it expanded certainly weighed in the Lions’ favor, it doesn’t diminish the improvements that the team has made since returning to the tournament in 2014 after being relegated in 2013.
Since the Lions’ return from relegation, Coach Johan Ackermann has transformed the team into one that looks to attack and play the width of the field, rather than purely rely on its powerful forwards and set pieces. It resulted in the Lions scoring 81 tries this season, the most of any franchise.
It has prompted talk that other South African teams could follow suit.
“I think it’s possible. We’ve got the skill level,” Ackermann said. “At all the provinces there are a lot of talented players.
Lions captain Warren Whiteley stressed that it was vital the Lions continue their upward swing, since they have regularly finished at or near the bottom since Super Rugby began in 1996.
While there was much to like about this season’s changes — particularly the standard of rugby in some of the New Zealand derby matches and the resurgence of the Lions — there were also some disappointments.
The new format isn’t ideal, and it definitely gives South African teams an advantage, with three of them guaranteed spots in the playoffs, including two with home games.
That advantage is multiplied when you consider all three expansion teams — the Jaguares of Argentina, the Sunwolves of Japan and the Southern Kings of South Africa — played in the South African conferences this year, and all struggled.
The Jaguares, made up predominantly of Argentina’s national team players, failed to live up to the hype, winning just four of 15 matches. They were clearly affected by a crushing travel load all season.
Travel also was a factor for the Sunwolves, who were left unprepared for the season when the franchise got off to a late start, a problem that continued throughout the year. Coaches and players were only confirmed two months before the first kickoff.
However, probably the biggest disappointment was in Australia, where the Western Force had huge problems on and off the field, and the Brumbies and the champions from 2014, the Waratahs, went backward this year.
The Brumbies and Waratahs were expected to challenge for the title, but the dominance of the New Zealand teams in the Australasian Group meant the Waratahs failed to even make the playoffs. The Brumbies won the Australia conference and got to host a quarterfinal, which they lost to the Highlanders.