WALLAND, Tenn. — For someone who could ski as well as Sam Beall, his first run down a Colorado slope that February afternoon was supposed to be easy.
Earlier in the day, he had flown in from his beloved Blackberry Farm, the 68-room East Tennessee lodge that some consider the best place (and certainly one of the more expensive) to stay in America. A weekend with a few friends stretched out in front of him. He would fill it, as he always did, with good food and excellent wine.
No one saw the accident. The Eagle County coroner concluded that Mr. Beall, 39, had skied directly into a sturdy wooden post that marked the edge of a Beaver Creek ski run. He died from a hit to the chest so hard it tore his heart.
His father, Samuel E. Beall III, who founded the Ruby Tuesday chain and whom everyone calls Sandy, hired a lawyer who investigated. Mr. Beall came to the conclusion everyone else had: that Sam, a superb athlete who thought nothing of racing 100 miles on his bicycle or wrestling a 400-pound marlin out of the Gulf of Mexico, had died in a freakish accident, and that no one was to blame.
The Bealls, who divided their time between a house they built on the farm and one in Knoxville, Tenn., had five children. The oldest is about to enter the University of Georgia. The youngest is 3. It has fallen to Mrs. Beall to raise her family and step into her husband’s role as the proprietor and president of Blackberry Farm.
For the better part of a decade, Blackberry Farm has been a significant player in the elevation of both hyper-local Southern cooking and the idea of a luxury vacation built around agriculture. Its collection of cottages and farmhouses sits on 4,200 hilly acres in a part of rural Tennessee that needs the 500 jobs the resort provides.
Critics love its cheeses, jam and beer. Chefs around the country long for an invitation to cook in the Barn, its showcase restaurant built in a 200-year-old barn that Mr. Beall had dismantled and moved from Pennsylvania.
His death plunged Mrs. Beall into a role she had never imagined. She’s a private person, and the first to tell you she is not as good at prioritizing as her husband was.
But now she is the one hosting winemakers and explaining the Blackberry philosophy at events like the Food and Wine Classic in Aspen. The future of the multimillion-dollar family business is in her hands, and so far, she can barely keep up with the meetings.
In the horrible first days after the accident, Mrs. Beall was so focused on the kids, the funeral and her own grief that she hadn’t thought much about who might run the place. Shortly after her husband was buried, her father-in-law walked into the couple’s bedroom.
But there were guests to care for and a family empire to protect.
“She knows, like we all know, that Blackberry will be in our family forever, forever and another forever and another forever on top of that,” he said.
Mr. Beall and his first wife, Kreis, bought the little inn tucked up against the Great Smoky Mountains in 1976, the year Sam was born. They kept adding land and rooms, and serving food that punched above its weight. In 1998, they turned what had become a Relais & Châteaux resort over to Sam and his younger brother, David. But it was Sam who made the place his life’s work.
Building on the business acumen he learned from his father and a preternatural touch for hospitality and aesthetics that he got from his mother, Sam Beall coaxed Blackberry Farm into a culinary powerhouse, with a wine cellar that held the kind of Gaja nebbiolos and rare Rhône varieties most sommeliers could only dream of.
It was all built on a foundation of simple Tennessee country life as reinterpreted for guests willing to pay a premium to taste its pleasures without any of its hardships. Blackberry Farm became a place where the powerful could lose themselves on a rope swing and where rich Manhattanites could put on hiking boots and wander down to the trout stream. What most people call a walk in the woods was rebranded as forest bathing.
The spa sells $450 bottles of face cream, but there is also an old fellow with an encyclopedic knowledge of East Tennessee seeds and plants who gets paid to hang out near the garden in case guests want to chat or hand-mill some corn for grits. There are Smoky Mountain trails to hike, a box with Hershey bars and marshmallows near the nightly bonfire and shampoo custom blended with bourbon and Appalachian hyssop.
Indeed, without Blackberry the world may have never heard of Cruze Farm buttermilk or Allan Benton, who was quietly making ham and bacon at a smokehouse an hour’s drive southwest of Blackberry when the resort made him a star.
Whether Blackberry led the South’s culinary renaissance or rode its wave is still something students of Southern food debate, but there is no doubt it has had an outsize impact on the region.
“He has turned the world on to what East Tennessee has to offer, but also helped those who live here in the region see themselves in a new way,” said Ashley Capps, the Knoxville native who started the four-day Bonnaroo Music and Arts Festival, which brings almost 80,000 people to Manchester, Tenn., each summer.
Mrs. Beall said her husband didn’t invent anything new at Blackberry. “He always just wanted to bring light to what was already here,” she said.
In the six months since her husband died, Mrs. Beall has been learning the business, but her primary focus has been on her children. She wants to keep the family rituals and rhythms the same, especially when it comes to meals.
Mr. Beall, who studied at the California Culinary Academy and at Northern California culinary temples like Cowgirl Creamery and the French Laundry, was so dedicated to cooking his family dinner that it was not uncommon to see him standing in the kitchen in sweaty bike clothes, digging though his collection of olive oils and vinegars and a pile of produce from the Blackberry garden. At his funeral, his oldest daughter, Cameron, joked that she would miss being late for school because he had decided the family needed waffles for breakfast.
Mrs. Beall was often the one left cleaning their huge kitchen and admonishing Mr. Beall to put on a clean shirt when the family sat down to dinner. She’s thinking about adding another cookbook to the Blackberry Farm collection, one in which the children cook their dad’s favorite hits.
“I really want it to feel like he’s in the kitchen with them,” she said. Already, her 7-year-old daughter, Josephine, has taken to making soft scrambled eggs just as her father taught her, and her only son, Sam V, 13, can saber a Champagne bottle and coax perfect, thin slices from a ham that had been curing in his father’s personal wine cellar for three years.
“I really don’t think there’s one thing their dad hasn’t taught them,” she said.
Mrs. Beall wants her husband’s death to have a higher purpose, so she makes it a point not to hide her grief. She has read and reread the deeply personal Facebook post in which Sheryl Sandberg, the chief operating officer of Facebook, wrote about the sudden loss of her husband; the post led to Ms. Sandberg’s new book on resilence in the face of hardship and suffering.
Her friends, like Kimberly Schlapman, a singer in the band Little Big Town and a cooking personality, is encouraging Mrs. Beall to carry on where Mr. Beall left off. Ms. Schlapman’s husband died after a heart attack in 2005.
“I know from being a widow myself how very important it is for that man’s dreams to live on through her,” she said.
Mrs. Beall, who has a graduate degree in accounting from the University of Tennessee and loves design and architecture, is relying on the tight-knit team of loyal, longtime employees her husband built. Many described her leadership style as inspirational, but she said she is still feeling her way. Managing time seems to be the most vexing part of her new job.
The farm isn’t struggling, as it did after the nation’s financial crisis in 2008, she said. The biggest decisions for the foreseeable future have been made. This month, they opened Bramble Hall, a building designed for weddings and concerts. Rooms have been renovated. Plans are underway to open a new inn and build private houses in the foothills across from the farm.
“There’s never a good time to lose the love of your life, but the timing was amazing,” she said.
Indeed, the staff’s dedication to hospitality was clear in the days after his death. The lodge never shut down, not even on the day of his funeral.
After the service, his body was taken back to the farm. The coffin, a pine box his mother had made for herself years earlier, was loaded onto a wagon. As the family followed, two of the farm’s best horses began pulling Mr. Beall across his beloved land one last time to a grave dug next to a tiny chapel on a rise near the edge of the property.
Staff members had lined up along the gravel path to watch him pass. In the inn’s old days, before the Bealls took over, staff members would wave white napkins from the veranda as guests departed. They called it the Blackberry salute.
As Mr. Beall’s coffin passed, they raised white napkins. Then they headed back to tend to the guests, most of whom had no idea that the man who had built Blackberry Farm was buried that day.
