LONDON — On a recent Saturday, Ian Rawes, a part-time deliveryman, spent several hours walking around London with two microphones strapped to his head. He went into a vegetable market and got so caught up recording the sound of birds in its rafters that he almost got hit by a cabbage-laden forklift hurtling toward him.
He went to a park, only to decide that the stream dribbling through it wasn’t worth recording. Then he headed to Stamford Hill, a traditionally Hasidic Jewish community, where he wove around men in towering fur hats, capturing snatches of their conversations in Yiddish.
“A good morning’s work, two more tiny fragments of the mosaic that is London,” he said as he took off the microphones.
Mr. Rawes, 51, is better known as the founder of the London Sound Survey, a website that contains a substantive collection of real-world recordings of the city, from the pontifications of street preachers to squeaky escalators, from foxes engaging in mock fighting to, even, the Tower Bridge cranking into action.
He is part of a growing number of what might be called sound hunters who roam city streets and remote countrysides to capture the dramatic and unusual as well as the plain but underappreciated noises that surround us. Some of them release albums and even play concerts.
The thrill of the chase aside, Mr. Rawes says he is performing a vital historical service. “As time goes by and cultural, technological, economic conditions change, these recordings will become more and more interesting,” he said.
Mr. Rawes was working at the British Library’s sound archive about 10 years ago when he stumbled across tapes of the sounds of every bus route in the county of Yorkshire, complete with dense handwritten notes.
Field recording has a long history. In 1889, an 8-year-old German, Ludwig Koch, made the first known recording of birdsongs using a phonograph that his parents gave him.
Wildlife recording flourished after World War II, especially in Britain, where a society was formed in the 1960s, its members regularly rising before first light to capture dawn choruses.
Musicians have long incorporated such recordings into their work, but Mr. Rawes and others like him are fixated on the raw sounds themselves.
Her latest record, due for release on Aug. 26 on the Rivertones label, features recordings from Marnay-sur-Seine, a French village next to a nuclear power plant. The Seine floods there each spring, and Ms. Carr sloshed through its waters to record the birds that flock to the river. But the nuclear plant’s power lines played havoc with her microphones and she ended up producing a record filled as much with the buzzes of electricity pylons as the chatter of birds.
The most prominent field recordist today is Chris Watson, a soft-spoken 62-year-old from Sheffield, England, who has won numerous awards including for his work on BBC nature documentaries.
Mr. Watson has been making recordings since he was 11, when his parents gave him a reel-to-reel tape recorder, and he left it on a bird feeder to see if he could hear what birds sounded like eating.
Mr. Watson shapes his recordings into albums and performance pieces meant to be listened to like symphonies. His most recent was a 40-minute sound portrait of Newcastle’s town moor, a huge area in the city where cows graze. The piece features hundreds of sounds, but his favorite is the noise of the insect known as the water boatman in the moor’s pond, said to be the loudest animal relative to its body size.
Mr. Watson says he seeks to capture the “spirit of places” in his music, but he also sees the world as being filled with breathtaking sounds that instruments cannot reproduce that more people should hear.
