MEXICO CITY — Mexican federal police officers summarily executed at least 22 people last year during a raid on an alfalfa ranch that had been occupied by members of an armed group, the country’s National Human Rights Commission said Thursday.
The commission’s report is a rebuke to Mexico’s security forces, stung by repeated accusations of human rights violations, and is an additional blow to the government of President Enrique Peña Nieto, which is struggling to contain rising drug violence.
The report by the commission, an autonomous government agency, concluded that the May 22, 2015, raid on the ranch, in which 42 civilians and one federal police officer died, was carried out in a way that involved serious human rights violations.
Although the commission agreed with the authorities who said that the ranch had been taken over by members of a drug gang and that the victims had fired at the police, its investigation concluded that many of the victims had been shot at close range, from behind or from above.
In addition to the people who were summarily executed at the ranch, which lies in the western state of Michoacán, four other people were killed as a result of an excessive use of force by the police, the commission said.
Federal police officers also tampered with the crime scene, moving weapons and planting them on the bodies, the commission said.
The group that invaded the ranch five days before the gun battle appeared to have been part of the Jalisco New Generation drug organization, a gang that has grown rapidly in western Mexico over the past few years.
The gang has been ruthless in its attacks on security forces. In March 2015, gunmen killed five federal police officers in the neighboring state of Jalisco. The next month, the gang killed 15 Jalisco state police officers in an ambush, and in May of that year, a federal police helicopter was shot down, killing 10 officers.
In response to the report by the rights commission, the government said that the police had no choice but to shoot at the people who had occupied the ranch.
The report comes at a difficult time for Mr. Peña Nieto, whose approval rating has dipped below 25 percent as he deals with corruption scandals, a teachers’ strike and mounting security worries.
Although homicide rates fell in the first years after he took office in 2012, they began to climb again last year. The government has failed to present effective proposals for fighting the drug gangs.
The federal government has portrayed the municipal police as the weak link in efforts to stem violence. Local officers, underpaid and poorly trained, are vulnerable to threats or bribes from gangs.
In contrast, the federal police are Mexico’s elite force, intended to be a model for local agencies.
However violent the gang at the ranch was, the police should have followed the law, said Mr. González Pérez, the commission’s president. “That’s what they are trained for, to follow the protocols,” he said.