It’s a morning in high summer. Standing in the kitchen of my house in Southwest Harbor, Me., I fill a travel mug with coffee, take the leash off its peg, and whistle for my dog. Lola bounds in, tail wagging. She knows where we’re going: to my sister Cynthia’s house, a mile away. We meander up a quiet street to a dirt road lined with pine trees and make our way across a narrow granite bridge over a cove, past a small swimming club with a saltwater pool, and up the road to Cynthia’s wide front porch. My coffee is still warm when we arrive.
Three years ago it was hard to imagine that this scene would ever be a reality.
My husband and I had a sizable mortgage on a house in Montclair, N.J.; college payments loomed for our three boys. Though my three sisters and our parents owned houses within two miles of one another on Mount Desert Island, I was resigned to the fact that I probably never would. I played a game with myself when I went to visit: Which house would I choose, if I were to buy one? It seemed an impossible goal.
The children of hippies who left the South during the political turmoil of the late 1960s, my sisters and I were raised in Bangor, Me., a little more than an hour from Southwest Harbor. Perhaps in part because of our accents and our odd ways — wearing clothes we made ourselves, driving around in a secondhand VW van with Day-Glo butterfly stickers on the side — we were an insular tribe. Though my two youngest sisters were born in this state, none of us will ever be considered Mainers. (“Just because a cat has her kittens in the oven don’t make them biscuits,” as the locals say.) We lived for a while in England, where our father, William J. Baker, went to graduate school. We went to college out of state, settling in New York, New Jersey and Washington, D.C. But like homing pigeons, we all — in different ways and at different times — found ourselves swooping back to Maine.
Our father, a professor at the University of Maine who’d worked alongside his carpenter father in his youth, spent most of his weekends over the next few years restoring it. “The Big House,” as we came to call it, was transformed into the kind of place featured on historic house and garden tours. It also became, as our parents had hoped, a haven for our growing extended family at holidays and in the summers, a place where we could all be together.
Over the next 15 years, as our families grew, the Big House, big as it was, became crowded. Despite our mother’s insistence that she loved having us there, it became clear that it wasn’t only the haddock chowder in the fridge that began to smell after three days (or three weeks, in our case). From her adult children’s standpoint, sharing bathrooms with messy nephews, scrubbing the stove after a brother-in-law makes bacon, and discovering that your leftover lobster was a delicious lunch for someone else were reasonable incentives to start perusing local real estate listings.
One by one, my three sisters — with spouses and children in tow — began buying and renovating their own old houses. Without explicitly discussing it, we made a collective choice to be together for as long as we could in the summers, despite demanding jobs, opinionated husbands, different budgets and logistical complications. Consciously or not, we pursued careers that allowed us flexibility. To this day, we share the same goals for family togetherness: to meet almost daily for hikes and swims and big raucous dinners, while also carving out time for rest, work and our own individual families.
Clara Baker, my second-youngest sister, was the first to strike out on her own. One winter in the late 1990s she ended a relationship and was forced out of her rent-controlled apartment in Manhattan. In short order she quit her job in publishing, moved to Mount Desert Island, and got a job as a schoolteacher before becoming a librarian. She married a carpenter she had met at a local hangout, and soon afterward they bought a ramshackle circa 1940 one-bedroom fisherman’s cottage beside a pond in Manset, a mile from the Big House, for $109,000.
My sisters and I have varying incomes and lifestyles. But we inherited from our parents the sense that a lack of money shouldn’t keep you from living well, as long as you’re willing to look beyond the obvious and roll up your sleeves. In the past 10 years, while raising four children, Clara and her husband — doing all of the work themselves — added a second floor with four bedrooms and two baths and transformed a scrubby, barren wasteland of a yard into a lush garden. They have a knack for discovering unusual treasures, like an antique slate sink unearthed from the scrap pile at a potato farm, and giving yard-sale finds new life with a coat of paint. Their entire home is heated by an energy-efficient woodstove in the winter.
With our parents and sister living year-round on the coast of Maine, the rest of us had more incentive than ever to return, if just for summers. Cynthia Baker, the second oldest — a university fund-raiser living in Washington — was next: She and her husband, a tech company executive, bought a modest 1912 wood-frame house for $300,000. Like Clara and my parents before her, she was told by more than one contractor that the place wasn’t worth salvaging.
When my youngest sister, Catherine Baker-Pitts, was ready to buy a house in 2004, she didn’t have to look far: The crumbling two-bedroom 1901 mansard-roofed house next door to Clara’s cottage was for sale. Catherine and her husband, both New York psychoanalysts, saw its potential despite the outhouse, rusty trailer and abandoned ATV’s in the field behind the house — not to mention the pervasive mold and shattered windows. They paid $250,000 and budgeted another $200,000, but the renovation turned into a bigger project than they anticipated.
After vanquishing termites, replacing a leaky roof, and stripping entire rooms of lead paint, they decided to add a great room with large windows, and a first-floor master bedroom suite. Then they built a spacious playhouse — which doubles as a guest cottage — for their three boys and Clara’s four children in the meadow between the two houses. When they were finished, 10 years later, they had spent a good deal more than they’d planned. But they had created, in essence, a family compound.
For my sisters and me, discussing design plans and paint chips became a pleasurable way to reconnect after long stretches of time apart. (I didn’t have a place in Maine, but I enjoyed living vicariously.) If you go into our houses, you’ll find a similar aesthetic expressed in different ways. True to our counterculture roots, we all prize textiles and pottery. We tend to favor the same island artists, such as Henry Isaacs, Jennifer Judd-McGee and Judy Taylor; we prefer light walls with colorful accents. Clara’s taste is perhaps most traditional, Catherine’s more contemporary.
In 2014, something wonderful happened. My novel “Orphan Train” — set, in part, on Mount Desert Island — was an unexpected success. I knew immediately what I’d do with the check. I even had the house picked out, one of those I’d dreamed about when they all seemed out of reach: a 19th-century ship captain’s home with a wraparound porch across from the town dock. My husband, a media strategist, and I were able to buy it for $520,000. The previous owners had added a large kitchen; we hired a resourceful contractor who worked through the winter to build a master suite over it and renovate the attic. He was unfazed to discover — as one often does with an old house, I’ve learned — rotten floorboards, knob-and-tube wiring and crumbling walls.
Two years later, it is just what I’d hoped it would be: a home base in summer for my husband and three boys, a gathering place for family and friends, and a quiet space for me to write in in the off-season.
It’s midmorning now. When I arrive home from Cynthia’s, I unclip Lola’s leash and we sit on the front porch, gazing out at the water. Though I can’t see them from here, Clara’s and Catherine’s houses are behind the pines just across the harbor. I’m reminded of the Spanish word querencia, meaning a home ground or refuge. Our mother died three years ago, the Big House is on the market while my father searches for a smaller place here. So the happiness I feel is tinged with melancholy. Mom would have been so pleased that her impulsive decision to put down roots on this island had such profound consequences for her children and grandchildren, and — who knows? — maybe for generations to come.