On a recent afternoon, Katie Novello laid a pile of clothes on the counter of Dress Shoppe II in the East Village: cotton tunics, billowy drawstring pants, an embroidered jacket.
It looked as though she was shopping for a cult.
And as it turned out, she was.
The main offering at Dress Shoppe II is Indian clothing made of cotton, silk and linen. “Clothes with life, and color,” Ms. Novello said. But as regulars know, including a shopper for the CBS series “Madam Secretary,” the secret of the shop is that it contains much more.
This summer, the draw is breathable cotton and flowing linen.
Beth Rashbaum, a book editor from the East Village, first wandered in looking for “something that would float around and be cool.” She found a cotton top, and she has been returning for more ever since. “I’m addicted to these shirts,” she said.
Mr. Goyal was born in Delhi, India, the youngest of 18 children. Before he came to New York, he worked in his parents’ textile shop and, briefly, as a customs official. In 1978, he opened a shop on Broadway. He did not have the money for a sign, he said, so he painted over part of the old one: Smart Dress Shoppe became Dress Shoppe.
In 2001, that building was sold, and the store moved to its present location. Dress Shoppe became Dress Shoppe II.
On a recent weekday afternoon, visitors included Caliaf St. Aubyn, there for the first time. “I’m never surprised by what you find in New York,” said Mr. St. Aubyn, a dancer and performer in “Beautiful: The Carole King Musical,” admiring a hand-stitched kurta.
Across the room was Heather Hutchison, a painter who has been coming for years. She now lives in Woodstock, N.Y., and had made a special trip. “I have things that I got 25 years ago that are starting to shred,” she said. As her husband paid, she handed him a figurine of the Hindu elephant god.
True, there are layers. On my first visit, I went to look under a quilted comforter, only to see it gently rise and fall, then begin to snore.
It was Mr. Goyal, taking a nap.