The afternoon of the soccer scrimmage was sweltering, one of those beastly July days with humidity like a damp rag. On the Vassar College campus in Poughkeepsie, N.Y., hours before they took the stage at the Powerhouse Theater, the Wolves took the field.
Technically, these athletes were not the same ones Sarah DeLappe invented for her new play, “The Wolves,” about a tightly bonded team of teenage female soccer players somewhere in flyover America — but they were close enough. These were the actors cast as those Wolves, competing alongside Ms. DeLappe, 26, an avid childhood player, and their director, Lila Neugebauer, 31, the ringer of the bunch. A varsity captain in high school, she had been training her actors hard, and now they were facing off against the designers and crew.
“It was maybe 92 degrees,” said Ms. DeLappe, whose play receives its world-premiere production from the Playwrights Realm beginning Aug. 29 at the Duke on 42nd Street. It’s coming fresh off a fully staged workshop run at Vassar as part of the New York Stage and Film summer season.
A shy, soft-spoken Yale graduate living in Crown Heights and pursuing an M.F.A. at Brooklyn College, Ms. DeLappe mostly sticks to yoga these days. But “The Wolves” — which last fall shared the first Relentless Award, a playwriting prize created in honor of Philip Seymour Hoffman, with Clare Barron’s “Dance Nation” — taps into a world dear to Ms. DeLappe, not just that of soccer players but also of young women.
“The Wolves” is set on a domed field as nine soccer players, over a series of Saturdays, do their pregame warm-ups. Fast, overlapping and unadorned, their conversations touch on ordinary teenage topics and on worldly suffering far removed from their protected enclave. We don’t know the girls by name, only by jersey number; the nature of teamwork is built in. But this play is also about the confusion of coming of age, the closed ranks of a longtime unit and the awkward loneliness of being an outsider trying to find a way in.
Ms. DeLappe attributed her fluency in teenage girl-speak partly to her job tutoring adolescent girls. As for writing a play with an all-female cast of 10 — the other role, the briefest, is a soccer mom — she knows firsthand, having been an aspiring actress, how hard it can be to find interesting parts.
In “The Wolves,” she wanted to put a lot of young female bodies onstage. In shorts and shirts, the players are comfortable in their individual athleticism, and in moving as a single organism. “We are watching their bodies the entire time, but it’s not sexualized,” she said. “It’s actually about strength.” She likens it to soldiers preparing for battle in a war movie.
Any potential Wolves who made it to the callback played a little soccer with her in the studio so she could judge their touch on the ball. Those who made the cut, few of them experienced soccer players, are by now intimately familiar with the “pretty involved training regimen” Ms. Neugebauer designed and put them through at Vassar.
Ms. DeLappe, the daughter of a poet and a digital media artist, grew up in Reno, Nev. She was 8 when she took up soccer, but she loved acting starting in kindergarten, when she played an oyster in “The Little Mermaid” alongside her twin sister, Eva. By the time she arrived at Yale as an undergraduate, her aim was to become a movie star. The scope of parts she got there — and the possibility she sensed when she took a class, during her junior year, with the Pulitzer Prize-winning playwright Paula Vogel — changed her thinking.
A pivotal event came when she was 9 and watched the soccer star Brandi Chastain rip off her jersey in a famous moment of triumph at the 1999 Women’s World Cup. Impressed, Ms. DeLappe scrambled off to the library and learned about Title IX.
Unlike Ms. Chastain’s United States squad, Ms. DeLappe’s childhood team wasn’t especially good. She was upset anyway to stop playing at 14, when a full scholarship landed her at a new prep school that had no soccer program. But now she has the Wolves, a winning squad both onstage and, the day of the Vassar scrimmage, in real life.
