The years since the financial crisis have not been particularly kind to Goldman Sachs’s moneymaking machine – not that anyone is weeping for the company or the people who work there — despite an improving economy and record numbers of corporate financings and mergers and acquisitions. In the last three fiscal years, Goldman has made a cumulative pretax profit of about $33 billion. By contrast, JPMorgan Chase, the nation’s biggest bank by assets, has had cumulative pretax profit of $87 billion, nearly three times more. In 2007, Goldman and JPMorgan were much more evenly matched when it came to profitability. Goldman made $17.6 billion in pretax profit in 2007; JPMorgan made nearly $23 billion.
Of course, the two Wall Street behemoths have never been particularly comparable. JPMorgan has a huge retail banking presence, a huge credit card business and an enormous asset management business attached to an increasingly important investment bank. It also has 236,000 employees. Goldman has always been first and foremost an investment bank — the world’s premiere — onto which it has tried with varying degrees of success to append, among other things, a wealth management business, an asset management business and a private equity business. It has 36,500 employees.
That formula worked magnificently for Goldman for its first 138 years. But things have been much more of a struggle since 2008 for Goldman, thanks to regulators and lawmakers in Washington, who are intent on making sure that Wall Street never again takes the kinds of risks that turned into the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression. Washington wants Wall Street banks to become more like highly regulated utilities with profit capped. We can debate whether this is a good thing or a bad thing — personally, I am convinced that Washington’s regulators have become arbitrary and capricious and are hurting Main Street by tying down Wall Street — but one thing is clear: The kind of clever risk-taking that Goldman specialized in — making big, and extremely profitable, bets with its own money — is outlawed for now (and probably for the foreseeable future).
Once upon a time, individuals needed a minimum of around $10 million in liquid assets, or cash, to be a client of Goldman Sachs’s private bank. According to Quora, in the entire world, there are about one million people at that elite level of wealth. With Marcus and GS Bank, Goldman is hoping that millions more ordinary people will be a new source of riches. So if it floats your boat to be a client of Goldman Sachs, this is your big chance. Just remember that Goldman has never been, and will never be, a charitable organization.