WASHINGTON — The homeless woman was shuffling down a faded yellow hallway in the D.C. General Family Shelter — a former city-run hospital where gurneys still sit askew, lights flicker and faded medical posters decorate the walls — when she caught the eye of a well-dressed official touring the building.
“They need to close this place down,” the resident told the official, Laura Zeilinger, who happened to be the director of Washington’s Department of Human Services. The resident listed all the essentials that the shelter lacked: healthy food, medical care, hope.
It has been 15 years since the city reopened an abandoned hospital as a temporary hypothermia shelter, ostensibly only for a year. Six months ago city officials finally proposed a plan to close D.C. General, a now-sprawling homeless warehouse that almost no one wants to keep open.
But objections to the costs and locations of its potential replacements, even in areas where liberal policies aimed at easing poverty tend to be popular, are once again threatening to derail efforts to shutter it. And like so many major American cities, homelessness continues to bedevil the nation’s capital.
Warehousing of the homeless in one or a few primary locations is not unique to Washington, nor are the attendant problems of crime, violence and hopelessness. The large shelters in New York City are considered so dangerous that the homeless would rather live on the streets. Los Angeles’ swelling homeless population has burst the confines of the city’s notorious Skid Row. Officials in San Francisco have battled to eliminate clusters of tents as property crimes have spiked on the streets. Around the nation, America’s homeless population continues to grow in many cities, including in Washington.
At the same time, local residents resist opening new shelters. This summer, a plan to temporarily convert a warehouse into an emergency shelter in Portland, Ore., met strong opposition, and New Yorkers criticized a plan to open a new shelter in East Harlem.
Washington is one of the few cities that promises to house any family with minor children and no place to sleep. Three-quarters of those families are placed in hotel rooms on the city’s dime.
The rest, between 170 and 270 families, live inside the behemoth D.C. General, a dilapidated building and all-purpose public service warehouse for the poor. Besides housing the shelter, the hospital building hosts videoconferences for visitors to connect with men imprisoned in the city’s jail next door. The medical campus also serves as a clinic for sexually transmitted diseases, a methadone center and an alcohol rehabilitation unit.
Two years ago, 8-year-old Relisha Rudd disappeared from the shelter, apparently kidnapped by a janitor who was hired by the contractor that manages D.C. General. Khalil Tatum, the man suspected of abducting Relisha, murdered his wife and killed himself when the missing girl was reported to the police. Relisha is still missing.
The Washington Post uncovered 14 complaints of sexual assault, abuse and exploitation against staff members at D.C. General since 2012.
The family shelter fills four floors above the old hospital’s emergency room lobby. Inside, the daily matters of life are time-consuming burdens. To get into a room, a family has to pass through metal detectors and then ask a staff member to unlock the door of the room. If one family member needs to use the restroom, the whole family treks to the large shared restrooms because parents cannot leave their children — even teenagers — alone in a shelter room. There are no kitchens or private bathrooms, and only a few couches or chairs in the shelter.
After it closes, the city hopes to open seven smaller shelters scattered throughout Washington. But political difficulties keep delaying the plan.
Mayor Muriel E. Bowser’s administration first announced in February the proposal to replace D.C. General with the smaller shelters located in residential neighborhoods, each in a different ward of the city. The initial deals that were brokered between the mayor and property owners drew criticism for paying above-market rates for leases — sometimes to the benefit of Ms. Bowser’s political donors.
The City Council approved an alternative plan in May that decreased the expenses by putting the shelters on city-owned property, such as police stations. The changes also eliminated the potential conflicts of interest between the mayor and some developers.
“I think we have elevated to leadership positions people more attuned with things that actually work,” the city councilwoman, Mary Cheh, said.
In Washington, as in many cities in the United States, rising rents and a lack of affordable housing are driving homelessness.
“If you work here you should be able to live here,” said Jamila Larson, director of the Homeless Children’s Playtime Project, a volunteer program in Washington.
But D.C. General is no place to live. Residents regularly seek medical treatment for spider and bed bug bites, rashes and infections picked up in the shelter. Rats and raccoons scamper in the spaces between floors and sometimes in the elevators.
More than 43 percent of the families living in D.C. General are single parents — mostly mothers — with young children. Three times a week, parents can leave their children with volunteers from the playtime project and their blocks, dolls, toy cars, dress up clothes, crayons and colorful construction paper. Babies crawl around a carpeted room where volunteers remove their shoes to keep the floor clean. Teenagers in another room play charades over strawberries and chips. After two hours, the toys and games are locked away.
“Think about how slow time was for you when you were a child,” said Micah Bales, communications director of the playtime project. Even a few months in the shelter without toys, games or a sense of security can challenge a young child, he added.
Yet in the struggle to close the shelter, those concerns are outweighed by fears over neighborhood property values or classroom slots for homeless children at local public schools.
A report commissioned by the Department of Housing and Urban Development found that a shelter tends to lower property values in wealthy, mostly-white neighborhoods. And opposition to the small family shelters — each housing 50 or fewer families at a time — is fiercest in the city’s affluent Ward 3. Residents are considering legal action to prevent or delay construction of a shelter on what is now the parking lot of a police station, around the corner from a supermarket and about a block away from a playground.
Ward 3 residents who oppose the project say they don’t want children living in the shelters to attend local schools. They say they worry that the shelter will bring crime into the neighborhood. And they wonder how the families in the shelter will be able to live comfortably in their upscale neighborhood surrounded by expensive restaurants and businesses.
“When the council first announced they were looking at the site, there was a lot of concern, even anger, from members of the community because of a lack of consultation,” said Carl Roller, chairman of an advisory neighborhood commission that represents the community surrounding the site.
Councilwoman Cheh insisted that residents with “NIMBY” attitudes — an acronym for not in my backyard — were “just a slice” of the whole community. Indeed, an online petition against the proposed shelter gathered only 270 signatures.
She may be underestimating the opposition. Yvonne Thayer, who lives two doors down the street from the police station, dreads the possibility of losing decades-old trees that line the street in front of the station. She said temporary shelters don’t do enough to prevent homelessness and don’t help people find reliable housing anyway.
“This is not how to get these people on to the next step in life,” Ms. Thayer said.
Still, nearly everyone agrees on one part of the city’s plans: Somehow, D.C. General needs to close.
“There’s no question it’s the right thing to do,” Ms. Zeilinger said. And it will happen within three years, she insisted, unless opposition kills it.