Ask any artist, clothier or writer where they find inspiration and they’re bound to mention travel. The Swedish designer Josephine Dahlin is no exception — but she doesn’t just mean beautiful vistas, museum visits and unexpected discoveries. She’s talking about the fundamentals, too, like packing and planning the day’s activities. “I wanted to have a collection that you can pack in a suitcase to cover all your needs,” she says of her clothing line Deitas. “So it’ll always remain capsule size.” With simple lines, mixable pieces and a muted palette, Deitas cuts down on the plague of morning indecision by offering the ease of a weekend-away-wardrobe at home.
Dahlin started the brand in 2012 with a friend — and, initially, sold only silk shirts. For years, she’d worked on the other end of the fashion equation, doing brand development for various labels; after she got an advanced degree in luxury goods and services, Dahlin was eager to create something of her own. “In Sweden, we’re all obsessed with sleek design, but finding good-quality silk pieces was more difficult than it should have been,” she says. After starting Deitas, Dahlin’s excitement grew as her partner’s waned; she now runs the company all on her own.
Moving from a shared venture to a solo project coincided with the shift from a line of tops to a full collection, but Dahlin, who had never designed before, wasn’t remotely distressed. “I like to feel dressed up in the day, but not overdressed in the evening,” she says. “So I sketched with that in mind.” The brand’s name is Latin for divinity; the line’s sweeping forms would work just as well on a Greek goddess as on a vacation in 2016. Thanks to what Dahlin calls “the sumptuousness of silk,” there’s an unexpected sexiness to the line — especially considering its inclination toward calf-length dresses and long sleeves.
It’s no surprise that Dahlin discovered her Italian silk manufacturer while traveling. The company, which is based in Como, Italy, has been in business for four generations and nearly 100 years. “They were one of the first manufacturers to bring silk from China to Italy,” Dahlin says. “Valentino’s early pieces were made with their silk.” Now based in Monte Carlo, Dahlin is just a three-hour drive away and often visits to check on her designs.
She uses her hometown’s influx of tourists as a way to see what women from all over the world are wearing when they vacation. In order to mix and match well, most of Deitas’s clothes are black or white. But this winter, Dahlin made a long-awaited trip to Kenya that influenced the addition of a color to the fall/winter 2016 collection’s minimal palette. “Growing up I was obsessed with this movie ‘Born Free,’ a ’60s flick based on a true story of two rangers that brought up an orphaned lion in Kenya,” she says. “My whole life I’ve been dreaming of going.” The rich, yolk-y yellow that appears in the collection was pulled from the dry Kenyan grasslands Dahlin rode through on horseback and will be available exclusively at STYLEBOP.
