
The crowd on Sunday in Provincetown, Mass., one of the country’s gay capitals, roared its approval at Cher’s succinct and salty assessment. But the famed singer and actress was not just riffing between songs at a concert: She was introducing Hillary Clinton at a fund-raiser for her presidential campaign.
Cher did more than just blister Mr. Trump. She also offered a blunt appraisal of Mrs. Clinton’s strengths and weaknesses. “This chick is just tougher than Chinese algebra,” Cher said of the Democratic nominee.
Her 16-minute remarks, recorded by an attendee and posted on Facebook, offered a colorful glimpse at a part of the presidential campaign that has been mainly off-limits to the general public and journalists this election cycle. Both Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Trump have generally barred reporters from attending their fund-raisers.
As Cher demonstrated, the language used in private settings like the event on Cape Cod — which brought in more than $1 million for Mrs. Clinton’s campaign — can be more inflammatory and raw than what is said with a bank of television cameras present.
And it was not just the entertainer, whose Twitter posts often employ a toilet emoji instead of Mr. Trump’s name, who spoke bluntly.
Mrs. Clinton, who often discusses how well she was able to work with Republicans during her tenure in the Senate, took the stage and acknowledged former Representative Barney Frank, Democrat of Massachusetts, noting that he has been promoting a new bumper sticker.
Cher warned that Mr. Trump’s slogan, “Make America Great Again,” was only a guise for a more divisive message. “He means, ‘We want to make America straight and white,’” she said.
And she belittled Mr. Trump for his stumbling reference at the Republican convention to the “L.G.B.T.Q.” community. “It’s like he just learned it, you know?” she said to laughter.
Speaking without notes, Cher’s performance was more of an insult-comedy routine than a traditional political speech.
Veering into more incendiary territory, Cher invoked “old despots” and received a subdued response when she mentioned Hitler and Stalin.
“We’re going to make Germany great again,” she said, before digressing to a bit on Britain’s vote to leave the European Union.
Even as she sought to use her closing comments to praise Mrs. Clinton — “I believe in her so much,” she said — Cher could not help but return to the object of her ire, Mr. Trump.
She finished her thought with a four-letter expression of disgust. Then she walked off to a roar of applause.