As consultants drove through the streets of southern Dallas this summer to document the city’s increasing population of loose dogs, they found some residents walking with sticks in hand, in case they had to fend one off.
Residents of the southern parts of the city, home to some of Dallas’s poorest neighborhoods, have complained for decades about roaming dogs, whether stray or left free to wander by owners.
On Thursday, the Boston Consulting Group, hired by the city, released a report that estimated there were 8,700 loose dogs in the area, representing the first time officials had tried to quantify the problem.
The issue gained increased attention after Antoinette Brown, 52, was mauled to death by six dogs in May. The authorities found her with more than 100 bites across her body, according to local news reports.
The consultants’ report said dog bites in the city had increased 15 percent a year since 2013.
But local officials and animal welfare advocates say it would be wrong to imagine feral packs of aggressive dogs prowling the streets.
The biggest increase in dog bites came from dogs that were owned but not on a leash, the report said, and the groups involved in the issue agreed that educating dog owners was an important part of the solution.
“Dallas has a dog problem because we have a people problem,” said J.P. Bonnelly, a co-founder of the Street Dog Project, which picks up stray dogs and gets them medical care to ready them for adoption.
Loose dogs are more common in poorer communities throughout the United States than some people realize, said Amanda Arrington, director of the Pets for Life program of the Humane Society of the United States.
The causes and intensity of the problem vary, but the low-income areas share little access to veterinary care, few big-box stores or pet supply retailers, and a lack of basic information or services for pet owners.
In Dallas, the difference between the poverty-stricken south and the more affluent north is stark.
The consultants found 135 loose dogs during their census, which covered 176 linear miles of southern Dallas and was conducted between 6 a.m. and 7:30 a.m. from June 28 to Aug. 2.
They found just one in the 59 linear miles of northern Dallas covered by the same census.
In the north, 80 percent of dogs are spayed or neutered, compared with 15 percent in the south, the report said.
There are just three veterinarians in all of southern Dallas, making it difficult for pet owners to find care or get their pets spayed or neutered, Mr. Brodsky said.
“I have three within half a mile of my house in northern Dallas,” he said.
The consultants’ report was intended to align community leaders around a common set of facts. The next part — coming up with solutions — is where they diverge. The Boston Consulting Group plans to offer its recommendations this month.
Maeleska Fletes, the president of the Dallas Companion Animal Project, said the problem could be solved by knocking on doors, educating dog owners and offering free spaying and neutering.
“I think we need to go that direction, especially since we’ve proven over and over again that catching and killing doesn’t work,” she said.
Mr. Bonnelly said the dogs were a “self-replenishing population,” making efforts to round up dogs futile. They can reproduce at a rapid rate, and owners whose dogs are taken away can quickly replace them.
“You can round up and kill every dog on the streets of Dallas today, and in six months we would have the same problem because it’s the humans that cause the problem,” he said.
Mr. Brodsky said picking up more dogs would help in the short term, but would need to be complemented by increasing the access to and the affordability of spaying and neutering.
