RIO DE JANEIRO — After all the concern about what might be floating in Guanabara Bay during the Olympics, it was finally time on Monday for the sailors to start competing.
When they got to Marina da Glória, they were much more worried about how difficult the job was going to be than about how dirty the job was going to be.
The bay is a natural amphitheater: a spectacular one surrounded by 1,299-foot Sugarloaf Mountain and other granite monoliths, as well as beaches and man-made landmarks, including the Rio-Niterói Bridge, the Santos Dumont Airport and numerous municipalities.
It is a particularly complex environment in which to race, made all the more complex because the mouth of the bay leading to the Atlantic Ocean is narrow and contains a small island.
There are seven courses in use at these Olympics, and although the focus has been squarely on Guanabara Bay because of pollution concerns, three of the courses are in the open ocean off the city of Niterói and the Atlantic beach of Copacabana.
Not all of the Olympic classes will compete outside the bay, but the majority will.
“From a tactical point of view, Rio is one of the most challenging venues to sail at, and the main reason is these two different types of racecourses,” said Josh Adams, the managing director of United States Olympic Sailing. “Inside the bay, it’s a current-driven racecourse. It’s short chop, not a lot of big waves, and a shifting wind because it’s inside the bay and the wind is coming over some land.
The importance of local knowledge appears to have its limits. Robert Scheidt, a Brazilian star who is back in the laser class to compete in his sixth Olympics, finished 23rd out of 46 competitors in the first race Monday, although he did bounce back to win the second race. There will be 10 preliminary races in all before the medal races next week.
Still, acquiring local knowledge has been even more of a priority than usual at these Games.
Basketball stars or tennis stars can roll into an Olympic city with no prior visits. A court is a court on any continent. But sailors need to study their arena in depth to have a reasonable chance of success.
“I would say it’s the most complicated venue I’ve sailed at,” said Karl-Martin Rammo of Estonia, who spent three months here camping and training before the Olympic regatta.
The best-funded teams — Britain, New Zealand and the United States — had much more extensive reconnaissance programs. The Americans were particularly eager students after failing to win a sailing medal at the 2012 London Games. Veterans like Paige Railey, who is competing in the women’s laser radial class, have spent more than 150 days training in Rio.
Enter Dellenbaugh, a bearded veteran of America’s Cup sailing who was a tactician on the Cup-winning yacht America³ in 1992.
Although the traditional model is to have a meteorologist on site, Dellenbaugh receives the weather reports in Rio from a veteran meteorologist who is working remotely, Chris Bedford, and then interprets the data and presents the American coaches and competitors with a concise version — call it news they can use — on the day of the race.
The Americans had three separate training camps in Rio in May, June and July, and they timed those camps to coincide with the tidal cycle that would be in play during the Olympic races.
“So what the athletes and the coaches saw today was familiar territory based on all their experience out there,” Adams said.
What the sailors did not see — at least not on Monday — was much garbage in the water.
There was natural debris, however. The Italian windsurfer Flavia Tartaglini struck a small branch and had to hop off her board and into the water midrace to clear it away.
When the racing was over, one of the so-called ecoboats operated by the Rio organizers chugged past with its single engine, scooping up whatever was floating, even if the health risks also lie below in a bay where superbacteria have been found.
Tuesday’s rain could make the cleanup task (and the racing) more complicated by increasing the flow of polluted water from local rivers into the bay. But at least on opening day, the much bigger concern among the Olympians was avoiding the wrong tactical decision.