A 38-year-old man was shot on Monday by a New York City police officer who was responding to a burglary call in Queens, the authorities said.
The police were called shortly after 1:30 p.m. to the home in Maspeth, a brick duplex on 66th Street near Hull Avenue, after a resident watching a livestream remotely from a security camera noticed a man inside her apartment, the authorities said.
An officer entered the first-floor apartment and in the back bedroom encountered the man, who tried to charge past the officer.
“This was a close-quarters encounter; these two fought,” Robert K. Boyce, the Police Department’s chief of detectives, said at a news conference near the scene.
A single round was fired from the officer’s service weapon, striking the man in the groin, officials said. The man still managed to leave the home but was arrested after running about a block.
The man, whose name has not been released, was taken to NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital in Queens, where the police said he was in stable condition. The man has an “extensive criminal history of burglary,” including six previous arrests, officials said.
The officer, a 10-year veteran of the department, was not injured.
While responding to the shooting, the police came across a woman on the same block of 66th Street, lying on a driveway outside her home with a head injury, the authorities said. The woman had fallen on her own property, which had been strewed with pieces of cable wire.
The woman, 36, was also taken to the hospital, where the authorities said she was in stable condition after doctors removed a piece of wire that had been embedded in her scalp. Her injuries appeared to be separate from the burglary nearby, officials said.
Roy Johnston, who lives on the block, said he heard a gunshot after parking his car in the neighborhood and saw a man wearing gloves sprint by, trailed by several police officers with their weapons drawn.
 Chief Boyce said she was the resident who called 911.
“She was afraid for her little dog the entire time,” he said.