Those heartwarming, unapologetically corny sitcoms were the inspiration for the opening 17 or so minutes of Wednesday’s episode, which found Elliot, aided by Mr. Robot, escaping into a sitcom of the mind as he suffered a savage beating from two dark-web thugs.
“We wanted to show the value of Mr. Robot to Elliot,” Mr. Esmail said.
In a phone interview, Mr. Esmail, who directed every episode this season, discussed Wednesday’s installment and ALF’s similarity to Elliot. These are edited excerpts from the conversation.
When we ended Episode 4 with Elliot in that horrific beating, we knew in the next episode Mr. Robot could take over for Elliot and take the beating for him. But we didn’t want to be with Mr. Robot for that moment — as always with this story we wanted to stay with Elliot. So we were wondering what does that look like? For me, personally, a happy place I always looked at was the T.G.I.F. lineup on ABC. Those classic sitcoms: “Full House,” “Perfect Strangers,” “Family Matters.” It was all about family and friendship. Nice music. All of the problems would get solved by the end of the 23-minute episode.
So did you watch old episodes of “Full House” for visual cues?
The one thing I didn’t want to do was my warped version of the sitcom, although there is some [expletive] that happens that wouldn’t typically happen in a sitcom. We had to keep a little of the “Mr. Robot” tone in there. But at the same time we wanted to be really authentic to what those sitcoms looked and felt like. We researched how they shot them. We brought on a guy who does the laugh tracks for sitcoms. We actually hired the people that created the music not just for “Full House,” but for “Family Matters” and the rest of the T.G.I.F. lineup, including the T.G.I.F. theme song, which we created our own version of with “Word Up Wednesday.” We really tried to follow the model as close as possible.
So you shot the segment as if it were an actual three-camera sitcom.
Yes. Everything from the stage to how they would block actors — I researched how they would block certain scenes so that the three cameras would fit. A lot of the T.G.I.F. shows were shot on Digi Beta tape, so we went with that as well. We used a 4:3 aspect ratio, in the regular standard def that all of those shows were presented in. All the way down to the wardrobe, the colors.
Elliot’s jean shorts were a highlight.
[Laughs.] Yes, it’s interesting when you go through that color palette. There was a temptation to go very primary color with everything. But then that would feel too over-stylized. With everything there was a give and take of, let’s not be in on the joke. Let’s just earnestly present this as if it were a sitcom back in the day.
But with cartoonish flashes of violence.
 To justify the segment’s existence in this episode and in this series, we saw the layers poking out. The fighting and the Game Boy and the side view mirror. Those little flourishes.

It’s pretty freeing, especially on our show where things tend to be a little bleaker and a little sadder, to sort of cut loose and experiment and figure things out on the fly. That was the fun part. The other part was incredibly challenging, which was finding that right balance of not being in on the joke. You can go too hammy. We had some great opening credit performances. His, especially, nailed the perfect introduction.
How did ALF get involved?
It was appropriate: Here’s this alien that’s essentially isolated in this house. He doesn’t let himself go out. He’s actually incredibly alienated, no pun intended. Or maybe pun intended He felt perfect for the themes of the show and what we’re going for with Elliot this season. We reached out and Paul Fusco [who created and voiced ALF in the original series] didn’t know the show at all. But, as he relayed to me, he was out golfing when he got wind that we were interested in using ALF on the show, and apparently all his buddies were fans of the show. So he watched a few episodes and signed on.