Illustrated. 265 pp. Liveright Publishing. $25.95.
Illustrated. 320 pp. Harper Wave/HarperCollins Publishers. $26.99.
Although I’ve dipped into and out of physical training over the last couple of decades, I remain, at nearly 45, gaunt and anemic-looking except for the paunch now oozing its way over my underwear waistband. Yet for the past several months I have been serving as my teenage son’s personal trainer, a ludicrous notion considering I know almost nothing about the human body or its workings. Week after week we persist, seeing little progress. What do we hope to achieve? It’s a good question. In my case, I hope to slow the degradations of middle age. My son, I think, hopes to jump-start the interest of the fairer sex. For both of us, actual fitness would be a fine byproduct, but it’s certainly not the goal. Looking good, to paraphrase the Billy Crystal character Fernando Lamas, is better than feeling good.
Our culture claims to celebrate vigor and well-being, yet holds up steroid-­addled men and impossibly thin women as models of physical perfection. Those of us unwilling to juice or starve ourselves are left feeling inadequate and confused about why we do not bear any resemblance to the humans we are meant to emulate. Two new books approach these questions from different angles, the first seeking to examine masculine physicality and fragility, the second a thorough history of the activity and business of fitness.
Giraldi writes with subtlety about the unsubtle world of clanging metal, exploring with frank tenderness the ways men form friendships and how those friendships can grow into love. “The Hero’s Body” is suffused with platonic masculine love, the love of weight lifting buddies and motorcycles and the men who ride them, in particular the author’s doomed father.
But Giraldi understands a deeper truth: These men do have an idea, even if they sometimes have difficulty expressing it. When he asks a friend of his father’s why they do it, why they risk their lives at unconscionable speeds every Sunday, the friend answers: “Well, I can’t really explain it. It just feels like . . . like you’re alive for the first time, like you’re gonna live forever.” Which may be the point of the hero, after all. To be venerated. To be remembered. Giraldi has written a powerful and sympathetic accounting of the lengths men will go to discover themselves through the workings of their fragile and complicated bodies, and the ways they discover hidden strength.
Strength, in all of its physical manifestations, forms the basis for “Lift: Fitness Culture, From Naked Greeks and Acrobats to Jazzercise and Ninja Warriors,” by the writer and editor Daniel Kunitz. An exhaustive catalog of the exhausting, “Lift” is both a history of exercise as self-­improvement and a paean to CrossFit, the fad that emphasizes “functional strength” in lieu of bulging muscles. With “Lift,” Kunitz tries to do for CrossFit what the best seller “Born to Run” did for the minimalist running movement.
The book is organized chronologically, beginning in the dim mists of time before the mighty Schwarzenegger walked the earth. Like Giraldi, Kunitz begins with the Greeks — specifically with the concept of arete, which was the “central ideal of all Greek culture,” Kunitz writes (quoting the German classicist Werner Jaeger). “That ideal,” he continues, “could only be expressed through a unity of body, mind and soul.” In modern terms, we might call this approach “holistic,” seeing little difference between exercising the mind and the body. In fact, the gymnasia, where Greeks trained their bodies, “were also the sites of the era’s three major philosophical traditions.” It is as if college existentialism courses were taught between Soul Cycle classes.
“Lift” works best when it stays personal, as when Kunitz recounts his own entry into what he calls the “new frontier” of exercise, those systems that seek once again to merge the training of body and mind.
After I finished “The Hero’s Body” and “Lift,” I searched for images of both William Giraldi and Daniel Kunitz to see what kind of shape they’re in. The answer, to quote Larry David, is “pretty, pretty good.” But both certainly erase any lingering ­stereotypes of musclebound lunkheads, by treating their storytelling with the same care they evidently devote to their biceps and quads.