SPA-FRANCORCHAMPS, Belgium — Formula One aficionados like to point out how much is involved in the top level of auto racing: race strategy, many-cornered tracks, leading-edge technology and, above all, the world’s finest engineers and drivers.
But as the series returns to action this weekend at the Belgian Grand Prix after a one-month summer break and heads into the final nine races of the longest season ever — with 21 races — Formula One has begun to realize that the series has become so complex that it is no longer just some fans who do not understand the subtleties; drivers and team personnel struggle with them as well.
Among the most complicated and disputed rules this year are, in addition to those regarding radio communications, those dealing with whether drivers may go outside the white-line track boundaries; about what is allowed under yellow caution flags; about where on the track a driver has the right to pass another driver; and what tire pressures to apply before a race.
Underlying many of those rules is the ever more complex nature of driving the cars themselves — to the point that the drivers need their engineers to tell them how to do it as they race.
“You can’t know every single switch on a steering wheel and what it does,” Jenson Button, a driver at the McLaren Honda team, said, referring to the nearly two dozen dials and switches on a Formula One car’s steering wheel that change settings for the engine and other equipment.
■ Those governing what is known as the or drag reduction system, or D.R.S., zone, where during a race a driver has the right to change a wing setting to have a burst of speed to pass another driver, but only when he is one second behind his rival.
■ The complicated engine token system, whereby a team is granted a certain number of imaginary “tokens” that may be used each season to develop the car’s engine. This is designed to keep costs down by preventing unrestrained and constant development of the engine by the manufacturers.
■ The complicated penalties for the use of too many gearboxes or engines. These include pushing a driver back by more spaces on the grid than there are cars in the series, which Lewis Hamilton, the leader of the series, will be subjected to this weekend.
At the Hungarian Grand Prix in July, fans — and the teams — had to wait several hours after qualifying as the stewards deliberated over whether Nico Rosberg, who drives for Mercedes, would keep the pole position, or whether his fastest lap would be discarded because he was driving too fast when two yellow flags were being waved because of an accident that had put a car in a dangerous position.
Rosberg kept the pole, but many of the drivers were angry at the stewards’ decision.
Much of the controversy revolves around whether the governing International Automobile Federation, or F.I.A., consistently applies the rules.
“I honestly don’t care, as long as they make the rule clear, and we will just stick by it,” Hamilton said of the track limits rule, in which a driver is supposed to keep at least part of the car on the track at all times. The rule has recently been applied only to certain corners.
With all of the criticism coming to a head before the summer break, the F.I.A. has nullified or changed several rules. The first to go was the radio rule, which was almost entirely relaxed at the German Grand Prix on July 31, the last race before the summer break. All radio chatter is now allowed, except instructions to the driver on the race formation lap.
At the British Grand Prix in Silverstone, England, on July 10, Rosberg was penalized after the race and moved from second to third because his team had instructed him on how to fix his failing gearbox. Similarly, at the Austrian Grand Prix on July 3, Sergio Pérez, of the Force India team, crashed at the end of the race because his team had felt it was not allowed to tell him that his brakes were about to fail.
But now, the constantly changing rules are presenting a new challenge. Fernando Alonso, of the McLaren Honda team, said he had given up trying to understand the rules and was simply asking his team at every race what he is allowed to do or not.
