To Asia Suarez, a computer science major, the math hit like an error message: With less than three weeks left in the spring term, she would need to eat seven meals a day to use up the remaining 131 swipes on her food plan at New York University. A soccer player who works out furiously and eats “a lot,” Ms. Suarez still found that 300 meals a semester (for $2,541) were too many.
So she shared. One evening, Ms. Suarez swiped in four guests at Hayden, a dining hall famous for its homemade cookies. The hungry guests came via Share Meals, a campus website matching students needing food with those who have food. The 80-meal plan in Adam El-Sayigh’s financial aid package had run out weeks before. He didn’t have money for more. Happily, he hit the hot food stations first, filling a to-go container with two cheese sandwiches on toasted wheat and a tray with roast beef, chicken cacciatore and bow-tie pasta with vodka sauce. He then ordered a burger.
Students have always offered one another casual swipes, and even sold them. (Advertised on Facebook: 50 swipes at Western Carolina University for $50; “willing to swipe in for $5” at the University of California, Davis.) But frugality born of college debt and growing attention to food insecurity — a U.S.D.A. term for limited access to food — are spurring new thinking about how to spread the bounty. Activists in the food justice movement and college officials are creating tools and programs to help students donate meal swipes, while free food pantries are proliferating even on wealthy campuses.
Jon Chin, an N.Y.U. graduate student who created Share Meals in 2013, surveyed 523 students at the end of last year and found 45,399 swipes had gone unused, about a third of the meals that had been paid for.
Some of the disparity is driven by dining policies. Many colleges require dorm residents to buy meal plans. But it’s hard to predict at the start of the term what you’ll use. Busy schedules and the desire to eat out mean missed dining hall meals. And the rules smart: Swipes may expire at the end of the term, or even each week. You might have to pull out cash for certain items, like a side of fries. But perhaps the biggest frustration is the wasted money that unused swipes represent.
Last August, when the University of Tennessee in Knoxville announced that commuters would have to buy a “Flex Plan” for $300 (on-campus freshmen must get a regular meal plan), students formed the Coalition Against Mandatory Meal Plans and drafted a petition. (The rule remains, but students can now get a refund for unused “Flex Plan” dollars.) In the past year, students at Drexel, Miami University of Ohio, Keene State College, the University of Southern Mississippi and the University of Central Florida have delivered petitions objecting to the cost of plans, dining hours and food quality.
Anagha Uppal, an activist at the University of Tennessee, describes the meal plan rule as “an exercise in tyranny.” Ms. Uppal has not used her plan — “I don’t purchase from Aramark,” she said between bites of chicken salad in pita (cost: $5.74) at the Golden Roast Coffeehouse. On her laptop: a Food Recovery Network sticker; she’s a campus coordinator for the network, a national student group that fights food waste. It was Ms. Uppal who prodded officials to start the Big Orange Meal Share to let students donate swipes.
Here, as on many campuses, food is not merely something to complain about. It’s a cause. Student government candidates on the Hardee Morris McCandless ticket made meal plans — cost, rules, confusion — part of their campaign. A campaign tweet highlighted the higher cost of buying at a campus retailer with “dining dollars” compared with a nearby gas station.
Ms. Uppal sees student hunger, mandatory meal plans and higher prices as interconnected points in the food justice movement. Across the spectrum, dining hall spending is getting a hard look. Over the past decade, average board (20 meals a week) at four-year colleges has risen 46 percent, to $4,602 for 2014-15, according to the National Center for Education Statistics. To some, meal plans, at $7 to $13 a swipe, look like luxury spending that is driving up the cost of a degree.
New Jersey legislators are proposing a bill to bar colleges from requiring students to buy meal plans. “If you thought about financing your food on a credit card or 8 percent loan, that is a significant cost,” said Assemblywoman Nancy J. Pinkin, a bill sponsor.
One reason for pricey meals is more and better choices, said Becky Schilling, editor in chief of Food Management, which covers the institutional dining industry. Students want global cuisine, breakfast at midnight and organic food from sustainable sources. “It’s ‘Where are you getting these products? How were these animals raised? Was it cage-free?’ ” Swipes may buy all-you-can-eat buffets, sandwiches and drinks at a food court, or “meal equivalency” at a restaurant. “Dining dollars” can work at Starbucks, campus stores, even food trucks. N.Y.U. has 11 meal plan options.
The scope of food insecurity is tricky to judge because research is scant, definitions are imprecise and campuses vary so much. A 2010 City University of New York survey found that 40 percent of students struggled to find food. On California State campuses, 24 percent faced food insecurity, according to a 2015 study, while just 13 percent went hungry at the University of California, San Francisco.
Students on tight budgets are known to skip meals or reduce or quit dining plans to save money. Some on full financial aid get meals covered, then take smaller plans to pocket the difference in cash.
“Food is the easiest thing to cut,” said Rachel Sumekh, executive director of Swipe Out Hunger. Ms. Sumekh helped start the group in 2009 as a student at the University of California, Los Angeles, converting unused swipes into sandwiches for the homeless. But as more college food pantries opened and student hunger surfaced as an issue, the organization has shifted focus to campus. It now has 20 chapters working to turn swipes into meals or food pantry donations.
One of the challenges is grasping the true contours of the problem. “How can we better understand which are the students who are making sacrifices versus the ones who are choosing ramen because they would rather save money for Thursday night?” Ms. Sumekh asked.
To prevent abuse, some campuses limit how many meals can be donated or claimed by the student body. At N.Y.U., Ann Marie Powell, director of Contract Dining Services, takes a more permissive stance and even lets Mr. Chin set up booths at dining halls. “Students’ meal plans are theirs to use or share,” she said. This fall, N.Y.U. will allow up to six emergency food vouchers a semester.
Mr. Chin started Share Meals to tackle “hunger and loneliness.” He encourages donors and recipients to sit down and talk. Ms. Suarez ate several times with a couple receiving her swipes, and she has ordered takeout so often for Mr. El-Sayigh that she has nicknamed him Curly Fries. “He messages me whenever,” she said. She places the order; he picks it up.
