BANGKOK — A series of bombings that killed four and injured dozens in Thailand at the end of last week was committed by a widespread network that followed the instructions of a single person, a police official said on Sunday, although he declined to identify the perpetrators.
“The acts were carried out by a group in many locations simultaneously, following orders from one individual,” Pongsapat Pongcharoen, a deputy national police chief, told reporters.
Mr. Pongsapat did not present any evidence, but ruled out the involvement of Islamic separatists who have been battling the government in three southern provinces for more than a decade.
“I can assure you that these current attacks aren’t linked to incidents that have occurred in the deep south of Thailand,” Mr. Pongsapat said.
The Thai authorities have also said that international terrorists were not responsible for the blasts, which struck Hua Hin, Phuket and other popular tourist destinations on Thursday and Friday. Ten foreigners were among the 35 injured.
Official suspicion has instead fallen on supporters of Thaksin Shinawatra and his sister Yingluck Shinawatra, former prime ministers who were forced from office but who remain popular with voters in Thailand’s rural heartland.
While they have not been blamed outright, Gen. Prayuth Chan-ocha, the prime minister and leader of the junta that took power two years ago, said that the bombings appeared to be the work of “bad people” who were opposed to the recent referendum on a new constitution.
The spate of bombings began four days after voters nationwide gave their approval for the military-backed charter, which will reduce the power of political parties — especially those that support Mr. Thaksin and Ms. Yingluck — and increase the military’s influence over the next civilian government. Opponents of its passage were prevented from campaigning before the vote.
The national police chief, Chakthip Chaijinda, also drew a connection to the referendum, although neither he nor General Prayuth have supplied proof.
No one has come forward to claim responsibility for the bombings, while the United Front for Democracy Against Dictatorship, a group that supports Mr. Thaksin and Ms. Yingluck, issued a statement on Sunday denying that their followers were involved.
The blasts — 11 spread over five provinces — appear to have been aimed at damaging Thailand’s tourist industry, which has remained strong despite years of political turmoil and violence.
Last year, 20 people were killed and more than 120 injured in a bombing at the Erawan Shrine, a Bangkok landmark. The junta blamed Uighur extremists angry over the return of more than 100 Uighurs to China.
The junta has been careful not to label the latest wave of bombings terrorism, a designation that could scare off potential visitors. The authorities have also sought to play down the significance of Thailand’s long-running conflicts.
“This is different from terrorism,” a police spokesman, Maj. Gen. Piyapan Pingmuang, told reporters on Friday.
The United States and other countries have issued advisories, cautioning travelers to take steps to ensure their safety, but they stopped short of warning tourists to avoid Thailand.
Mr. Pongsapat said on Sunday that one man had been detained on suspicion of arson, accused of involvement in setting fires that occurred around the same time as the blasts. He did not name the suspect.
He also said that the police had collected video and DNA evidence that they were comparing with evidence collected in previous attacks, particularly in southern Thailand — a statement that seemed at odds with official denials that southern extremists were involved.