Stop us if this sounds familiar: A Mets player did something during a game to hurt himself and had to depart the contest early. In this case, during a routine double to left field in the second inning, Jay Bruce grimaced as he ran out of the batter’s box in Wednesday’s 8-1 loss to the St. Louis Cardinals.
Bruce left the game with a cramp in his right calf, only a minor injury. But the Mets have been juggling injuries all season. Just as their lineup’s health improved with the return of Yoenis Cespedes and Asdrubal Cabrera, their starting rotation took a turn for the worse with injuries to Steven Matz and, now, the replacement Jon Niese.
At a time when the Mets needed Jacob deGrom to bounce back from his career-worst start, he lasted only four and two-thirds innings. DeGrom was charged with five runs on 12 hits. His pitches caught too much of the plate, and the Cardinals made him pay.
DeGrom allowed three home runs, two of them solo shots. His E.R.A. has risen from 2.29 to 2.96 because of the 13 runs he has surrendered over the past two starts. In all, the Mets allowed a season-high 19 hits in the loss.
The Mets’ most likely path to the playoffs would be by notching a National League wild-card berth. So their three-game series with the Cardinals, who entered Wednesday night holding the second wild-card spot, is critical. The teams have split the first two games.
Instead, deGrom faltered, and the Mets managed only four hits against Carlos Martinez, the Cardinals’ starter with electric pitches, and Seung Hwan Oh, their closer. The Mets’ run came in the second inning when Cabrera doubled to score Alejandro De Aza, who had replaced Bruce.
Bruce had been struggling since he joined the Mets in an Aug. 1 trade with the Cincinnati Reds. Entering Wednesday’s game, he was hitting .158 with the Mets and was in an 0 for 12 skid. He smacked a double in the second inning off Martinez, and then walked off the field with the Mets’ head athletic trainer, Ray Ramirez, by his side.
Bruce said that he had fouled a ball off his leg over the weekend and that the bruise had persisted. He did not feel any problem until he ran out to his outfield position in the first inning, and it remained when he batted.
“It felt like a cramp that wouldn’t let up,” said Bruce, adding that he hoped to play on Thursday.
Jon Niese will have arthroscopic surgery in New York on Thursday to repair a meniscus tear in his left knee, the Mets announced. Niese landed on the disabled list after Tuesday’s start, in which lingering knee pain forced him to exit after four batters. The projected recovery time is about four weeks. … Yoenis Cespedes reiterated his feelings Wednesday about his future in New York. Cespedes returned to the Mets this winter on a three-year, $75 million contract that included an opt-out after this season. Because the coming free-agent class will be weak, the belief was that Cespedes could opt out and sign a more lucrative deal. Cespedes said he would not decide on the opt-out until after the season. “My intention is to stay the three years and, if I could finish my career here with the Mets, that’s what I’d like,” he said.