Wedding season is here, and many brides and grooms will find themselves in the best shape of their lives. Through a combination of adrenaline, dieting and hard-core exercise, they will walk the aisle as slim and buff as they will most likely ever be.
That is, some say, unless they get divorced.
For a lot of people, the divorce process seems to kick up stress hormones and motivations quite similar to those swirling around the body and psyche when a marriage ceremony draws near.
Often called “the divorce diet,” which most recently got a celebrity shout-out by the country singer Blake Shelton, who slimmed down after he split from the singer Miranda Lambert, the so-called regimen is really nothing more than stress, rage, sadness, and (for some) a need to control any part of their lives — through diet, exercise, or both — that hasn’t fallen into complete chaos.
Rachel Sussman, a relationship expert and author of “The Breakup Bible,” said she sees upward of 70 percent of people going through divorce or breakups growing extremely thin. “Then when they start feeling better, at least 50 percent of those people want to keep that weight off,” she said.
James J. Sexton, a divorce lawyer in Manhattan and Rockland County, N.Y., estimated that about 80 percent of his clients have lost weight, three-quarters of them through exercise, and the others because they weren’t eating or were depressed.
“You can drink and you can take Xanax or you can join SoulCycle,” he said.
Those with compromised metabolisms or who eat their feelings may not have much sympathy for skinnier people under divorce duress, but losing one’s appetite can turn into something serious. Ms. Sussman warns of the divorce diet becoming a gateway to eating disorders, and that those going through divorce need calories and protein to keep their cognitive abilities functioning when they are negotiating important legal issues.
Ms. Worden, the dancer, got certified in Kundalini yoga to get her strength back and to improve her well-being, she said. She now teachers a class specifically for divorced women called Sustaining the Groove to “clear out the nervous system of the yucks,” she said.
Already thin, Ms. Worden gained back the 15 pounds she had lost within a year. But she said that many of her students had lost weight in her class and were happy to keep it off. “You’re so concerned with clearing out the rage that it happens without you even knowing it,” she said.
Going through a divorce, like getting married, is often about entering a new life phase. And many women, said Cynthia Sass, a nutritionist and author in Manhattan, take that idea and run with it. “In many marriages, spouses become each other’s partners in crime by eating unhealthily together, including patterns like splitting pizzas, sharing pints of ice cream, snacking while watching TV,” she said.
Ms. Sass said that many of her clients have told her that they have no desire to return to their old, unhealthy ways once they are single again. “Divorce can be a real opportunity for positive, healthy transformation,” she said.
Jessica Rojas, a 40-year-old buyer for Estée Lauder, certainly sees it that way. After a rocky divorce in 2013 (“I would rather lose a limb than go through that again”), Ms. Rojas started Snatched in Six Weeks, an exercise and nutrition program at Mr. Fisher’s gym. “I could barely do a push-up on my knees,” she said about her pre-Snatched state.
Mr. Fisher’s alternative-fitness community of “misfits, nerds, outcasts, and Broadway geeks” cheered her on, she said, and after Snatched ended, she continued to work out there, enjoying the positive energy at the gym. Within a few months, she said, she went from a “flabby size 8 with a corporate commuter look” to a size 2.
“I’m going to get hot, I’m going to get the guy I want, I’m going to get the things I want out of life,” she recalled herself thinking.
It worked. Last fall she locked eyes with Tim Kosakowski, 40, an old friend who works in wildlife management, at their 20th high school reunion in Easton, Pa. She fell for him immediately.
On June 25, Ms. Rojas’s 40th birthday, she and Mr. Kosakowski were married under a gazebo at his home, which they now share, in Washington Township, N.J.