It started at the Russian Academy of Theater Arts in Moscow in 1982. Sergei Danilian wanted to impress a girl.
But money was scarce. He studied history; she focused on arts management. Suddenly, Mr. Danilian’s course of education and his emerging career as a critic no longer seemed like a practical way to earn a decent living. What’s more, he didn’t want to write about art; he wanted to produce it.
Mr. Danilian does make art — and especially dance — happen. His latest theatrical concoction will be on display at City Center on Aug. 19 and 20 in the “Ardani 25 Dance Gala,” an anniversary program that showcases the work of new choreographers.
But he, too, prides himself on being that old-fashioned thing: an impresario. In 1990, he formed Ardani Artists in Moscow; in collaboration with others, it brought American artists to Russia — Merce Cunningham, the Limón Dance Company, Pilobolus and Dayton Contemporary Dance Company. Beginning in 1998, Mr. Danilian began to give many Russian artists, like the choreographer Boris Eifman and the ballerina Diana Vishneva, prominence in the United States in programs like “Beauty in Motion,” which focused on Ms. Vishneva.
He also managed dancers, including Ms. Vishneva, Natalia Osipova and Polina Semionova. And he branched out with “Kings of the Dance,” a series showcasing male ballet stars of all nationalities. In his packaging of ballet, he found commercial success, attracting audiences in New York packed, it always seems, with Russians.
At City Center, in one of three United States premieres, Maxim Petrov’s “Le Divertissement du Roi,” Ms. Vishneva will appear as Louis XIV: her first male role.
Along with Marcelo Gomes’s “Tristesse,” performed by Joaquín De Luz, Friedemann Vogel, Denis Matvienko and Mr. Gomes, an American Ballet Theater principal, the program features Vladimir Varnava’s “Clay,” set to music by Darius Milhaud. He discovered Mr. Varnava and Mr. Petrov in 2015 at the Mariinsky Theater as part of its Creative Workshop of Young Choreographers.
Mr. Danilian is nothing if not determined. He has long supported the work of Mr. Eifman, an expressive Russian choreographer who inspires strong feelings in audiences, love or hate and little in between. While Mr. Danilian’s taste can be questionable — recent iterations of “Kings,” which felt cheaply commercial, as well as many appearances by Mr. Eifman — he is driven by a love of dance.
Mr. Danilian is Armenian but was born in Sumgait, Azerbaijan, then a part of the Soviet Union. In high school, he appeared in a play and “first smelled the theater,” but when he told his teacher he was going to pursue acting in Moscow, she told him that he was crazy. His parents didn’t stop him.
There were some detours, including the mandatory two-year service in the Soviet army, during which he used his time wisely. While based in a suburb of St. Petersburg, Mr. Danilan immersed himself in art.
While Ms. Danilian moved to the United States in 1992 with the couple’s two young sons (they are now 29 and 30), Mr. Danilian commuted back and forth until 1998, when he closed his Moscow office. It wasn’t an easy time; for one thing, Mr. Danilian barely spoke English; he learned by studying movies.
Later, she told Mr. Danilian that if he was going to be a driver, she would move back to Russia. “I said: ‘Don’t worry about me. It’s temporary if we don’t have food — we’ll get something,’” Ms. Danilian recalled.
He didn’t take the job, and the business, as Ms. Danilian predicted, turned around with the help of Mr. Eifman, whom Ardani began to present regularly. They also met Ms. Vishneva.
