I’ll never forget how exciting it was to attend my first women’s conference. The convention center was pulsing with estrogen, and it was exhilarating to be a part of a like-minded sisterhood. Sprinting from workshops to motivational keynotes featuring famous faces and wannabes, I came away inspired and armed with information so that I too could succeed in business while being female. I was woman, hear me roar!
But that was 25 years ago. Lately, I’ve been hearing professional women sing a different tune, questioning the purpose of women-only conferences, corporate workshops and networking soirees. As someone who has led professional development workshops, including women-only gatherings, naturally my ears perk up. Some tell me these single-sex events are outmoded — so last century — and should be done away with because they mirror the exclusionary behavior that made victims of us.
Not only that, but how helpful is it to talk mostly to one another instead of to the men who hold the power and who must be a key part of the solution? Citing sobering statistics as proof, naysayers argue that women gathering to help one another in business may have gotten them in the door but has done little to advance them. In fact, while the first woman was named C.E.O. of a Fortune 500 company 44 years ago, today only 22 women hold that distinction.
When we view the issue through this broader lens, getting men involved is a no-brainer. It is absolutely critical to our success. Just look at what happened after Marc Benioff, the C.E.O. of Salesforce, conducted a gender pay audit at his company. As a result of the discrepancies he found, he spent millions righting the company’s monetary wrongs and prompted several other industry titans to examine their own payrolls.
Or how about Bradley Cooper propelling the pay equity issue into the cultural stratosphere when he announced he would fight wage discrimination by sharing information about what he was making on a film with female co-stars before they signed their deals.
And now we have the “daughter effect” — studies showing that male leaders with daughters are more likely to close the gender pay gap and be attuned to women’s rights issues.
So given the data, and snail’s pace progress, why isn’t more being done?
Thankfully, a few companies have recognized that we should not leave women’s issues to the women alone. The investment firm BlackRock, for one, developed a yearlong program called the Women’s Leadership Forum to address the gaps in leadership skills, global networks and sponsorships that were preventing senior women from advancing.
Since the forum’s inception in 2011, Laurence Fink, BlackRock’s C.E.O., along with members of the company’s board and governance committees, have invested significant time, energy and resources into the program. The program has led to new or expanded roles for the majority of participants (about 160 women) and has also helped them gain membership on influential governance bodies.
The problem is not women’s conferences and related activities. No doubt there are huge benefits to meeting others of the same gender, especially in male-dominated industries where women are often siloed. Training workshops tailored to women can be helpful for addressing challenges that — given cultural stereotypes and biases — often play out differently for women than for men in areas such as negotiating, executive presence and self-promotion. And who doesn’t need a dose of inspiration from time to time from professionals who have bucked the system or ventured on their own and built hugely successful businesses?
The real issue, I believe, is corporate America’s overreliance on these events to fix deep and systemic issues. Expecting biases and policies to change based on occasional training and motivational speeches is simply ridiculous. So is making women the sole torchbearers for changing the culture.
What’s more, it is disingenuous to use these events to show a deep commitment to women’s advancement while serving merely to check off the diversity box. Women see the shallowness of this approach as they return to the reality of their daily work lives and experience a system stacked against them in which little has changed.
Too many corporations rely exclusively on these offerings to substantially advance women in their own senior ranks. In essence, they walk down the same inadequate path year after year, magically expecting a different result. Until we have more corporations like BlackRock making a comprehensive commitment to changing their cultures, women will continue to be trapped in a system that pays little more than lip service to their progress.