Speaking to disabled veterans on Monday in Atlanta, President Obama discussed his administration’s efforts to end “the tragedy, the travesty” of veteran homelessness. He proudly declared the glass half full. “We have now reduced the number of homeless veterans by 47 percent,” he said. The number of homeless veterans is now under 40,000.
What Mr. Obama did not say, in an address that also boasted about the success of the Department of Veterans Affairs in expanding disability benefits, cutting health care backlogs and improving mental health care, was that the upbeat statistic actually reflects shrunken ambition and mission failure. Mr. Obama’s V.A. has been promising to vanquish the problem since 2009, the year Eric Shinseki, then the secretary of veterans affairs, announced a plan to end veteran homelessness by the end of 2014.
Mr. Shinseki resigned in 2014, undone by health care scandals on his watch, but the administration, undaunted, announced another campaign that year, called the Mayors Challenge to End Veteran Homelessness. New name, new strategic emphasis — enlisting state and local governments and philanthropies — but the same promise: a home for all down-and-out veterans in all 50 states by 2015.
The program has succeeded in only two states, Virginia and Connecticut, and a number of localities.
The good news is that the V.A., like states and cities around the country, has at least come to understand what works: “housing first” strategies that avoid the red tape and restrictive conditions that have left too many of the hardest-to-help veterans, unmoored by illness and addiction, in shelters and on the street.
A housing-voucher program that the V.A. runs with the Department of Housing and Urban Development has had much success. In Los Angeles, epicenter of the crisis, the V.A. is finally planning to build 1,200 units of supportive housing for a population it has neglected for generations. It took legal action by local advocates and the cooperation of the new V.A. secretary, Robert McDonald, to get the ball moving there, though the shovel-ready project awaits the passage of legislation stalled in Congress.
States and cities are moving, too. In the Bronx on Wednesday, the New York attorney general, Eric Schneiderman, and Mayor Bill de Blasio broke ground on a 59-unit supportive-housing project that will give preference to homeless veterans.
The homeless count is still too high, though the numbers have been slowly going down — by 17 percent nationally this year over last year. Meanwhile, as Mr. Obama noted, each year about 200,000 people leave active duty and become veterans. Many of them have been wounded, in both body and soul, by the wars of the last decade and a half. They have become party to what Mr. Obama calls a lifelong “covenant” with the V.A.
It’s a covenant that the government always seems to be making, neglecting, forgetting and rediscovering. It’s the bureaucratic equivalent of “Star Trek” — a five-year mission that somehow became an unending enterprise. This fall, Mr. Obama told the veterans, his wife will be tackling the cause anew. “Michelle will bring our partners from across the country together at the White House to share best practices to figure out what has worked, what hasn’t worked,” he said.
But isn’t that the secretary’s job? And isn’t it a little late for boasting about any of this?