In contrast with campaign financing in 2012, there is no outside cavalry of deep-pocketed super PACs preparing to buttress Mr. Trump’s television and field efforts. Two of the largest outside groups backing Mr. Trump began August with less than $4 million combined cash on hand, according to Federal Election Commission filings, half of it from a single donor, the wealthy New York investor Robert Mercer. The primary super PAC backing Mrs. Clinton, Priorities USA Action, reported $38.6 million in the bank and claimed an additional $44 million in committed funds from wealthy donors.
The Republican-aligned groups with the deepest pockets, the American Crossroads operation co-founded by the Republican strategist Karl Rove and the constellation of political groups overseen by the billionaire industrialists Charles G. and David H. Koch, have abandoned the presidential race, choosing to focus their efforts down the ballot. Republican strategists overseeing the party’s most competitive Senate races have begun crafting their own independent turnout plans, mindful that their candidates need to reach middle-of-the-road voters Mr. Trump has forsaken.
The parties cannot raise unlimited “soft money” contributions — money raised into state rather than federal accounts and parlayed into large-scale political advertising campaigns — as they could during the 1990s, before super PACs became legal.
Some Republicans believe that with the fall campaign weeks away, the party should focus its money and efforts down ballot to protect Republicans’ congressional base. That would mean quietly ignoring Mr. Trump’s call this month for a 50-state field operation and instead emphasizing congressional districts and swing states that are also Senate and House battlegrounds.
The campaign’s large-dollar fund-raising, also run jointly with the Republican National Committee, yielded $16 million in cash in July, but much of it is reserved under law for party accounts dedicated to the Republican National Convention, legal expenses and expenditures on offices. Despite being able to collect far more from each of the biggest Republican donors under new campaign finance rules passed in 2014, the committee is well off pace from its July fund-raising in 2012, when Mitt Romney was the party’s nominee.
While Mr. Trump has expanded his field operation in August — he announced the opening of 15 regional offices in Ohio, among other moves — his ability to find and turn out low-propensity Republican voters, a crucial group given his campaign strategy, will most likely turn on the Republican National Committee’s operation, set up three years ago to provide a basic grass-roots foundation for the party’s eventual nominee.
Mr. Trump also relied on the committee to front $3 million in cash to ramp up his direct mail, money the party recouped in July, according to Federal Election Commission reports.
The party is in turn providing much of the fund-raising expertise and technological backbone, including up-to-date donor lists and systems that will send roughly a billion emails by Election Day.
A third of the party’s digital team is now embedded at the San Antonio firm that formerly built websites for Mr. Trump’s properties and is now leading his campaign’s online efforts. Payments to that firm, Giles-Parscale, amounted to $8 million in July, most of which was paid out for online advertising to reach grass-roots supporters and donors, according to party officials.
