Books|Ursula Le Guin Has Earned a Rare Honor. Just Don’t Call Her a Sci-Fi Writer.
Ursula Le Guin Has Earned a Rare Honor. Just Don’t Call Her a Sci-Fi Writer.
PORTLAND, Ore. — If you’re a big-deal American writer, you hope for a couple of things to cement your legacy. Finding out one fine October morning that your presence is being requested in Sweden would be ideal. Almost as good is enshrinement in the Library of America, the closest thing to immortality between hardcovers.
The Library of America usually restricts itself to Melville, Twain, Hawthorne and the other distinguished dead. But a handful of times it has been so sure of a novelist’s importance that its austere black volumes started appearing while the writer was still alive. Eudora Welty, Saul Bellow and Philip Roth got the call.
Ursula K. Le Guin is now on this very shortlist. The library’s original idea was to begin with some of her classic science fiction. But she pressed it to start instead with a volume of her lesser-known work.
The result is that Ms. Le Guin’s “The Complete Orsinia” is being published on Sept. 6 as Library of America Vol. 281. It includes a little-known novel, “Malafrena,” set in an imaginary Central European country, and 13 related stories. The material spans the first half of Ms. Le Guin’s career, from her first published story in 1961 to 1990.
It is definitely not science fiction, and not quite fantasy either. Ms. Le Guin’s more casual fans, she acknowledged, might be surprised by it — a realistic work set in the early 19th century, a tale of a hopeful revolutionary at a moment when revolutions are impossible.
Ms. Le Guin is 86. She says “what the hell” a lot. She is too old, she says, to get on airplanes or even do events in Portland beyond an occasional bookstore appearance. So the world comes to her — up a hill, past a sign marked “no outlet,” across a bridge spanning a ravine too deep for trolls.
Her 1899 house is shielded by pink, yellow and red roses. In the living room there is a volume of word puzzles on a table and the books Ms. Le Guin and her husband, Charles, a retired historian, are reading aloud at night (“Two Years Before the Mast” and the poetry of Theodore Roethke). There is not a clue that anyone who lives here is a writer, much less America’s greatest living science fiction writer.
The internet is full of Le Guin fans who say she doesn’t get the credit she deserves. “The Word for World Is Forest” (1976), about malevolent humans brutally invading a planet of peaceful forest-dwelling aliens, anticipated James Cameron’s “Avatar” (2009), about malevolent humans brutally invading a planet of peaceful forest-dwelling aliens. “Planet of Exile” (1966) has 15-year seasons, barbarians invading from the north and vicious creatures called snowghouls, all of which might sound familiar to any “Game of Thrones” fan. And Ms. Le Guin worked out all the details of a school for wizards when J. K. Rowling was 3 years old.
This early work was done at the margins of the culture. “A Wizard of Earthsea” (1968), now regarded as one of the great fantasies of the era, was published by a small press in Berkeley, Calif. “The Left Hand of Darkness” (1969), probably her most influential work, was issued as a 95-cent mass-market paperback.
Mellowing with age is clearly not Ms. Le Guin’s style. In 2014, she received the National Book Foundation’s Medal for Distinguished Contribution to American Letters. She spent six months writing her six-minute speech.
She used her speech to decry “commodity profiteers” who sold writers “like deodorant, and tell us what to publish, what to write.” She criticized our “obsessive technologies” that promote fear and greed.
Many younger writers cite Ms. Le Guin as an inspiration, including David Mitchell and Neil Gaiman. In an email, Junot Díaz talked about “The Ones Who Walk Away From Omelas,” Ms. Le Guin’s parable about a society whose happy existence depends on keeping one small child locked away in misery. Most citizens of Omelas accept that deal. A few do not.
In the introduction, she quotes from a 1975 notebook in which she wrote that much of her work was concerned with one central notion: “True pilgrimage consists in coming home.” The hero of “Malafrena” must leave his provincial farm only to find it again.
“Orsinia” has another spiral: As Ms. Le Guin’s works are being put in the canon, she has largely stopped writing. “The fiction isn’t coming. You can’t get water from a dry well.” She still writes poetry, which is a consolation.
