The tennis player Madison Keys, 21, who is competing for the United States in the Rio Olympics, will also be one to watch at the United States Open, starting at the end of this month. The hard-hitting upstart has been making waves with her baseline game since she turned pro at 14 and has been hailed as the face of the next generation of American women’s tennis.
When it comes to tending to her actual visage, Ms. Keys, who grew up in Iowa and now lives in Boca Raton, Fla., says her beauty regimen is a mix of her upbringing and her demanding practice and travel schedule.
Since I practice early in the morning on most days, I wake up and wash my face with Clean & Clear Morning Burst. I feel like it actually does wake me up a bit. Then the first thing I put on is sunscreen. I do it within 15 minutes of waking up so I’m protected by the time I’m out the door. I use the Neutrogena oil-free sport formula for the face. For the body, I use Neutrogena Wet Skin spray. I try to get at least SPF 50 on me.
After practice, I hit the shower, of course. I’m obsessed with the Bath & Body Works Warm Vanilla Sugar line. Someone gave it to me when I was 14, and I’ve been using it ever since. I use the sugar scrub and body wash and lotion. Sometimes you think maybe you should outgrow certain products and try something else, but I still really like it.
I use moisturizer only at night — Philosophy Hope in a Jar. Two or three times a week, I do a Caudalíe face mask. It’s a purifying one because I have combination skin, and I’m sweating so often. It can be really tough to keep clear skin, especially if you’re wearing a visor. It’s just sitting on your head, and you break out underneath it. It can be a disaster.
I have pretty even skin tone, but being out in the sun all the time, I get red cheeks and a red nose. I don’t like heavy foundation, but if I use something tinted, it helps blend everything together. I’ve been using Urban Decay One & Done — it has primer, SPF and a tint in it.
For eyeliner, I use the Urban Decay 24/7 pencils. I use black or brown most of the time, but if I’m going out, I like purple because it sets off my green eyes. I also use Benefit They’re Real mascara.
I tend not to wear blush, but I do love highlighter: Benefit Watt’s Up. If I’m going out, I put it on my nose, my cupid’s bow, under my brows and on my cheekbones.
I’ve always been more of an eye person, but recently I’ve been really getting into lip colors. I like the Tarte matte lip stains. They travel well and stay all day. I’m on Instagram a lot. There are so many makeup artists doing looks, and that’s why I’m so into lip color now. Sometimes I’ll just go in my “Explore” page and look for videos, but mostly I follow @WakeUpandMakeup.
When I was at the Australian Open this year, one of the player gifts was a department store voucher. I wanted a new fragrance. The second I tried Giorgio Armani Sì, I loved it. I’ve been wearing it for six or seven months now.
It’s usually straight up into a bun when I wake up. But at the end of the day, I let it down. Every girl who has really curly hair fights it at some point, but I’ve become way more open to wearing it natural, and I’m loving it. I use the Bumble and bumble curly hair line — that’s shampoo, conditioner and styling. I’m constantly in the sun, and my hair is pulled back tight, which can cause so much breakage. Sometimes I’ll just leave the conditioner in for an entire day. I also love putting in coconut oil.
My natural color is a really, really dark brown. Right now, it’s dark at the roots, but I wanted to go a little lighter for summer, so there are some blond pieces, like balayage.
I get manicures and pedicures every two weeks. For my manicures, I get gel. Colors, I usually go with black and dark purple, but sometimes I do a navy. I really like Lincoln Park After Dark by OPI.
I have a physical therapist who travels with me. He’s actually a chiropractor, but he also does acupuncture, so I get acupuncture almost every day. I’ve had lots of injuries in the last couple of years, so I had to take that extra step to hire somebody. I hate needles, but this doesn’t hurt. It’s really interesting how one day acupuncture can be used to treat muscle soreness, and another day for relaxation, and it’ll put me right to sleep.
I have to eat pretty healthy to stay in shape, but a big part of my diet is having that occasional dessert. My favorite is Ben & Jerry’s Half Baked ice cream. But I have to watch it. I’m lactose intolerant, so sometimes I’ll do the Ben & Jerry’s lactose-free line.
For a tennis player, the toughest part of training is the off-season. That’s when we’re doing tons of tough fitness — maybe two to three hours in the gym. Obviously as you get closer to the tournaments, you spend more time on the court. Right now, I’m spending two and a half to three hours on the court every day.