Opinion|Can We Trust Julian Assange and WikiLeaks?
Can We Trust Julian Assange and WikiLeaks?
The release of a cache of emails from the Democratic National Committee by WikiLeaks last month has raised a great many questions — about the role of the D.N.C. in trying to influence the primary and about the alleged interference of Russian intelligence in an American election.
It also raised long-debated questions about WikiLeaks itself, about how an organization dedicated to radical transparency continues to bring secretive worlds to light. And the episode reveals some of the weaknesses of WikiLeaks and its founder, Julian Assange, like their recklessness with personal data and their use of information to settle scores and drive personal agendas.
Even given that history, I believe that WikiLeaks was fully justified in publishing the D.N.C. emails, which provided proof that members of the D.N.C., in a hotly contested primary, discussed how to undermine the campaign of Bernie Sanders. They are clearly in the public interest.
As for Mr. Assange’s animus against Hillary Clinton — he has written that she “lacks judgment and will push the United States into endless, stupid wars which spread terrorism” — that is evidence of bias, but no more than that. After all, many news outlets are clearly, and sometimes proudly, biased.
We still don’t know who leaked the D.N.C. archive, but given Mr. Assange’s past association with Russia, it wouldn’t surprise me to learn that it was a Russian agent or an intermediary. Mr. Assange insists this is a mere distraction from the issue of D.N.C. interference, but the answer is also in the public interest. We should all be concerned (although hardly surprised) if it is that easy for the Russians to break into the D.N.C. and possibly United States government networks.
As for the way the leak was published, Mr. Assange and WikiLeaks have more to answer for. Contained in the D.N.C. archive were Social Security numbers and credit card data of private individuals, information that served no public interest. Mr. Assange defended this invasion of privacy by claiming that deleting the information would have harmed the integrity of the archive.
Others present at this time insist that he was concerned about their safety but had little technical ability to do the redactions on a tight deadline. The net result: Mr. Assange held back 15,000 documents and published the rest, including the names of about 100 Afghan civilians.
There is no evidence that any of those people were killed. But people could have been hurt. And his refusal to redact allowed the United States government to deflect attention from the evidence of possible war crimes by claiming that Mr. Assange had blood on his hands.
In an underappreciated part of the WikiLeaks saga, computer-savvy volunteers at the organization corrected Mr. Assange’s mistake and used an inventive computer program to scrub names and identities from the second leak of documents, the Iraq War Logs. It was an exemplary display of how to publish sensitive materials. Sadly, Mr. Assange reverted to form in subsequent leaks, including the unredacted publication of 251,000 State Department cables and his recent release of the emails from the A.K.P., Turkey’s ruling party, which exposed the personal information of more than one million Turkish women.
Mr. Assange has also leaked documents to benefit his private aims. In 2010, he ordered an associate named James Ball to pass 90,000 cables covering Russia, most European countries and Israel to a shady journalist named Israel Shamir, who, according to Mr. Ball, later offered them to pro-Putin Russian media outlets for a $10,000 fee. It also seems likely that Mr. Shamir passed documents to Belarus’s brutal president, Aleksandr G. Lukashenko, just before a crackdown on opposition activists (which WikiLeaks has denied). Mr. 
For many of those who know him well, Mr. Assange is afflicted by what the police call “noble cause corruption,” a belief that noble ends justify reckless or immoral means. In a world awash in new information — and misinformation — context, motivation and trust are crucial when weighing the importance of leaks and their accuracy. Mr. Assange still claims that WikiLeaks is a beacon of transparency. We should no longer take him at his word.