GLENVILLE, N.Y. — Seven years ago, Nick Delpopolo took a family trip back to Montenegro, the country where he was born. He met a young man who had lived with him at an orphanage — and still lived there.
The boys were not yet 2 years old in August 1990 when nurses at the orphanage in the town of Bijela took one of them out of their shared room — the towheaded one named Petar Perovic — and presented him to Dominic and Joyce Delpopolo. The couple, from Westfield, N.J., had come to adopt a baby.
They named him Nicholas Petar. At 27, Mr. Delpopolo is now an Olympic athlete in Rio de Janeiro for his second Games as part of the United States judo team. When he thinks of the other boy, he is by turns grateful and guilty.
Mr. Delpopolo at 3.
Mr. Delpopolo is one of 46 athletes born in foreign countries who are competing for Team U.S.A., a group that includes veteran medalists like runners Meb Keflezighi, born in Eritrea, and Bernard Lagat, from Kenya, as well as table tennis players born in China, a fencer and a kayaker from Poland and a wrestler from Bulgaria.
Mr. Delpopolo competes on Monday in the 73-kilogram weight class.
If his impoverished beginnings in the former Yugoslavia define him, an episode in Mr. Delpopolo’s more recent past has marked him.
In 2012, after finishing seventh at the London Olympics, he tested positive for marijuana and was sent home, where he faced humiliating headlines. After qualifying for the team, Mr. Delpopolo said, he had gone to a victory party — where he ate pot brownies.
After London, he said U.S.A. Judo coaches and his sponsors disavowed him. Internet trolls mocked him. With no financial support while serving a six-month suspension, Mr. Delpopolo contemplated quitting. Instead, he and his girlfriend, Carrie Chandler, a five-time national judo champion, moved to Miami to start over.
Mr. Delpopolo felt he had let everyone down.
Mr. Delpopolo’s parents, Joyce, 69, and Dominic, 80, shared the story of his adoption recently at a diner in this upstate town. They said it had taken them seven months, two trips, $1,600 paid to several lawyers in Montenegro and a bottle of perfume used as a bribe to get into the orphanage. And then, after only 20 minutes with the baby that the orphanage workers had chosen for them, they were asked if they wanted him. Mrs. Delpopolo turned to Dominic, who spoke Serbo-Croatian. “I said, ‘Ask them what’s the matter with him,” Mrs. Delpopolo said.
The child had been born in nearby Niksic, to a mother who had strangled an older baby and was deemed psychologically unfit to care for another child. The Delpopolos were not deterred.
Six weeks after moving to New Jersey, Nick Delpopolo had his green card. A year later, he received citizenship through his parents.
In 1993, the Delpopolos returned to the same orphanage to adopt a daughter, Helen.
Nick began competing in judo at age 5, and Helen took up the sport as well. When he was in seventh grade, his parents sent him to Glenville to live and train with Jason Morris, a 1992 Olympic silver medalist. He trained on and off with him for the next 15 years.
Mr. Delpopolo spent the past four years training with a former Olympic coach, Evelio Garcia, who runs a gym in Hialeah, Fla., but he returned to upstate New York in July to take advantage of Mr. Morris’s full roster of sparring partners.
One day one of the younger athletes brought a plate of brownies for the group. “Really, guys?” Mr. Delpopolo said he had told them, laughing. They had forgotten; he passed.
For all the ferocity of judo — with its body throws, chokes and piercing yells — the name of the sport translates to “the gentle way.” That seems to fit Mr. Delpopolo’s sensitive personality.
While talking about his positive drug test in 2012, Mr. Delpopolo could not help but compare it to the doping controversy leading up to the Olympics this year.
Marijuana, allowed out of competition, is not considered a performance-enhancing drug by the World Anti-Doping Agency, although it can dull pain to improve recovery. In 2013, the agency raised the threshold for cannabis to 150 nanograms per milliliter, from 15 nanograms, for in-competition users. According to 2012 Olympic testing results provided by Ms. Chandler, Mr. Delpopolo’s 32 nanograms would be legal today.
In April, four Russian judo team members (one in his weight class) tested positive for meldonium, which became a banned substance this year. The International Olympic Committee banned Russia’s track and field team after reports revealed systemic doping, but allowed individual sports federations to decide which athletes would be allowed to compete. Mr. Delpopolo said the International Judo Federation had approved all of the Russian judo players.
The honorary president of the federation is Russia’s president, Vladimir V. Putin.
Politics aside, Mr. Delpopolo on Twitter calls his second Olympics #RioRedemption.
