Book Review|Why Do So Many Contemporary American Authors Send Their Characters Abroad?
Why Do So Many Contemporary American Authors Send Their Characters Abroad?
In Bookends, two writers take on questions about the world of books. This week, Siddhartha Deb and Charles McGrath discuss the impulse for fiction writers to send their characters to distant places.
Can a novel set abroad be anything other than the Grand Tour novel or the imperial novel?
The Grand Tour, that rite of passage carried out by English aristocrats to experience the supposed antiquity of Italy and Greece, produced mostly indifferent verse and average fiction. It provided Byron with a backdrop for some fervid poetry, Charles Dickens with filler material for “Little Dorrit” and E.M. Forster a start as a novelist. Travel broadens the mind, perhaps, but in general the Grand Tour novel was not particularly ­compelling.
The American version of the Grand Tour novel, of characters wandering abroad, had a promising start, especially where it coincided with the ferment of modernism. But by the end of the 20th century, with the United States the dominant power in the world, it had become just as derivative, producing endless iterations of the Peace Corps novel or the study-year-abroad novel. These served the same unconscious function as the Grand Tour novels, that of constructing a literary superstructure over an expanding imperial base. They produced diluted versions of Djuna Barnes and Ernest Hemingway, with final touches of epiphany against an abroad that served mostly as an exotic backdrop. Ah, the Taj Mahal! Oh, the Sagrada Família! Whoa, the Serengeti Plain!
Those who succeeded in the past did so by questioning what it means to be American. There is the writer, for instance, who seems to have given her protagonist the following instructions: Beat your compatriot doppelgänger to death with an oar. Follow this up by stealing his identity. Live well off his trust fund and rent a villa in Venice. Forge a will and take off for Greece. You’re an American werewolf at loose in Europe, Mr. Ripley, and you will never have an epiphany.
Today’s easy travel comes in a post-Cold War world where the rules have changed definitively. American power is everywhere today, and yet it is everywhere more diffuse, incapable of keeping perfect step with global capital, climate change and population flows. The certainty of what used to be called progress is gone, as is the possibility of a foreign landscape more authentic or more primal. “It makes no difference,” Thomas Bernhard wrote, “whether I go back to England from Austria or back to Austria from England,” and this could be said with increasing truth about much of the world. What the American writer faces abroad now is no longer antiquity or the exotic Other but a variation on her own frail modernity.
Perhaps there is a sense that our native ground is not too thin but too played out.
Novelists send their characters abroad for the same reason we send ourselves: for a change of pace, to get out of a rut, to shake off the rust. Henry James built a whole career on exploring the theme of Americans traveling abroad and being transformed by the experience. You could argue that James himself left America prematurely, before he gave it much of a chance. He concluded, on not a whole lot of evidence, that this country lacked sufficient history and complexity to nurture a serious novelist. But his books also make a powerful case for the erotics of travel, or of novelistic travel anyway — the idea that Americans away from home can find themselves culturally bewildered but also sexually as well as geographically liberated. His discovery has proved immensely durable. You can see traces of it, for example, in Diane Johnson’s smart, funny and charming novels about American women trying to make their way in the Frenchest parts of France. More recently, there have been novels, like Caleb Crain’s “Necessary Errors” and Darryl Pinckney’s “Black Deutschland,” that work a gay variation on the theme, suggesting that to be out in Europe (in Crain’s case, the early ’90s in Prague; in Pinckney’s, Berlin in the ’80s) is, if not easier than being out in America, at least very different.
But maybe because the Jamesian formula is so reliable as to seem practically foolproof, two of the better American novels in recent years — Anthony Doerr’s Pulitzer Prize-winning “All the Light We Cannot See” and Anthony Marra’s remarkable debut, “A Constellation of Vital Phenomena” — abandon it in favor of something much more radical. They’re not novels of Americans abroad, but rather novels about Europeans, requiring full immersion in another place and culture. Doerr’s book is set during World War II and is about a blind French girl and a young German radio technician whose paths eventually intersect. Marra’s is about Chechens during the anti-Soviet rebellion, mostly from 1994 to 2004. There are no American characters, no American themes, no particularly American sensibility. There’s nothing American about them, unless it’s the prose. In effect, they’re European novels that don’t read as if they’ve been translated.
“All the Light We Cannot See” was inspired by a visit Doerr made to Saint-­Malo, an old port city in Brittany, and part of its success may owe to how beautifully he evokes that landscape. There are even guides now for enthusiastic readers who want to visit the places described in his novel. But Marra, who was still in writing school when “A Constellation of Vital Phenomena” was published, had never been to Chechnya until after he finished a draft, and the country he describes, where unexploded shells are covered by old toilet bowls, would not be on most people’s bucket list. The impulse behind both books is not touristic, not even in the literary sense, but something more profound. They bear witness or bring information about something new in a way that American novels seldom do anymore, because novels are no longer where we look to get our news about ourselves. Increasingly, we read them to be reminded of what we already know.
At this point, it’s early to tell whether these two books are just a happy coincidence — two very good American novels, coming seemingly out of nowhere, that happen to be about other people and other places — or an indication of something else: a novelistic weariness with America and Americans, a sense that our native ground is not too thin, as Henry James would have it, but too played out. The paradox is that the same ground can seem inexhaustibly fertile to writers from elsewhere. One of the best novels about America in recent years is Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie’s “Americanah,” which deploys the Jamesian formula in reverse. It’s about a young Nigerian woman who comes to this country in search of the usual — love, happiness, adventure — and finds them in a way that makes the reader see our country (and its race relations in particular) in a wholly new and unexpected light.
