Mahesh Sharma, India’s culture minister, said this week that foreign women should not wear skirts while visiting the country, drawing broad criticism in a nation trying to assure female tourists they do not need to fear sexual assault.
“For their own safety, women foreign tourists should not wear short dresses and skirts,” he added, according to The Guardian.
He later said he meant it as “an advisory when going to religious places,” comparing it to removing shoes when going into a temple.
Officials, including the chief minister of Delhi, Arvind Kejriwal, and other critics on social media denounced Mr. Sharma’s suggestion.
India has intensely debated how it responds to and prevents sexual assault since a woman was gang-raped and brutalized on a New Delhi bus in 2012 and died from her injuries. Though the country now imposes stricter penalties, it has continued to reckon with high-profile cases of attacks on tourists. Five men were sentenced in June to life in prison for a 2014 gang rape of a Danish woman who was abducted at knife point in New Delhi, and in July the police accused two men of raping an Israeli woman in Manali.
India reported 36,375 rapes against women in 2014, the most recent year statistics were available from the government. Delhi had an average of six rapes and 15 molestations per day in 2015, the highest rate in 15 years, according to The Indian Express.
Mr. Sharma’s comments do not veer too far from advice from the United States State Department, which cautions that women should not travel alone in India and says that visitors, especially women, are “advised to respect local dress and customs.” With the exception of some resorts and neighborhoods in New Delhi and Mumbai, women in India tend to dress with “clothing that covers their legs and shoulders,” the guidelines say.
“Although most victims have been local residents, recent sexual attacks against female visitors in tourist areas across India underline the fact that foreign women are at risk and should exercise vigilance,” say the guidelines, last updated in 2015.
Sachi Maclachlan, 27, a filmmaker from Brooklyn, has been to India four times and said she always recommended to her American friends that they dress traditionally as “a way of survival.” But she struggles with how that suggestion conflicts with her feminist philosophies, she said, including the idea that victimization is not the woman’s fault.
On several occasions, she has been harassed and touched in the streets while wearing traditional Indian clothing, she said. It suggests to her that the problems run deeper than the clothes women wear.
“I could have just been wearing shorts and been super comfortable and still been touched, so does it matter?” she said.
Jessica Ault, 31, a program and records manager for a nonprofit in Washington, said she had packed modest clothes for her trip to India in January, but had been motivated more by respecting local culture than by safety. She said Mr. Sharma’s comments struck her as victim blaming, suggesting that a woman would invite sexual assault based on what she was wearing.
“She can be in a burqa, she can be in a sari or she can be in a short skirt and still get raped,” Ms. Ault said.