In Jacques Audiard’s superb 2009 thriller “A Prophet,” a French teenager of Algerian descent begins serving a six-year sentence for attacking police officers, but quickly discovers that he has no allies in prison. Needing protection in order to survive, he carries out a soul-coarsening atrocity on behalf of a Corsican mob boss who runs a criminal operation within the prison walls. By committing this heinous act of violence, however, he crosses a moral Rubicon that forever changes him and the audience follows his transformation into a vicious, calculating gangster. He enters prison a lamb and leaves a lion.
The parallels between “A Prophet” and Naz’s own misadventures at Rikers are hard to miss in “The Season of the Witch.” In broad strokes, the scenarios are more or less the same: A weak young prisoner of Middle Eastern descent learns that he cannot keep his head down and expect to survive. In order to get protection from the fearsome operator who runs the cell block, he’s pressed into a criminal act that, among other things, would extend his time in prison indefinitely. And, in the process of aligning himself with an unrepentant bully, he isn’t the man he was when he entered prison.
“A Prophet” is a condemnation of the French prison system as an institution of reform. “The Night Of” has a different agenda. The young inmate in “A Prophet” changed profoundly during the course of his sentence, but can we really say the same of Naz? “The Season of the Witch” suggests that prison hasn’t changed Naz so much as revealed his true self, some dark and angry impulse that his ineffectual college-kid act cannily obscured. When Freddy offers him the opportunity to avenge his maiming, Naz gives a naked and prone Calvin a halfhearted kick in the ribs, looking every bit the helpless weakling who had shuffled into Rikers weeks earlier. But after Calvin mocks him, Naz beats him so relentlessly in the chest and head that Freddy and his men have to pull him away.
There have been hints of Naz’s hardening resolve in previous episodes, but “The Season of the Witch” abruptly confronts us with the thought that our hero may not be innocent after all. His transition from a frightened naïf to a beefed-up thug seems too abrupt, but perhaps that’s a failure of perception on the viewer’s part. Just as there’s a gap in the timeline between when Naz had sex with Andrea and when he woke up in the kitchen, there’s a gap in our understanding of Naz that his behavior has perhaps cagily obscured. That doesn’t mean he’s a guilty man per se, but the revelations in this episode dramatically alter the “good guy” image he’s successfully projected to Stone and Chandra, Helen and the other prosecutors, Freddy and Calvin, and, not least of all, the audience.
Stone sees it coming — or, at a minimum, isn’t surprised to learn his client has been lying. When the toxicology report shows the presence of an amphetamine in Naz’s bloodstream that night — one drug that Andrea did not supply to him — both the defense and prosecution have to make adjustments. Stone may have told Naz that he didn’t want to know the truth because the truth looks bad for him, but a lie doesn’t help with his counternarrative. Perhaps deep down, Naz’s innocence or guilt matters to Stone, but his duty as a lawyer is to provide the best defense and a lie so easily exposed by a toxicology report seriously undermines his efforts. He needs to know why Naz is lying and what other lies he might have told.
As Stone and Chandra build their case, Helen and Box solidify theirs, too, and it’s not all good news. Trevor Williams, the witness who slung an epithet in Naz’s direction that night, isn’t ready for the stand. After hearing his racially loaded testimony, Helen nods and nonchalantly leads him to the exit. (“Thank you, Trevor. You’ve been enormously helpful. Why don’t you take a cookie with you.”) Helen does, however, coach the forensic pathologist into claiming the cut on Naz’s hand is consistent with a slip onto the blade of the murder weapon, not an injury received from breaking a window. She’s also encouraged by footage of Andrea entering Naz’s cab after he shooed away two men, because it suggests premeditation.
In the episode’s strongest sequence, Box constructs a detailed timeline to “lock in” Naz’s movement that night, from the time he left the Khan residence in Queens to the point where he was pulled over by the police. Through surveillance tapes, E-ZPass receipts, interview footage, cell tower connections and a parking violation, Box does the grunt work necessary to give the prosecution’s story a solid foundation. Richard Price, a creator and writer of this series with Steven Zaillian, was also a writer on “The Wire,” which similarly burrowed into the minutiae of setting up a surveillance unit. It’s the type of action that seems mundane in a crime series, but in fact separates the mediocre from the transcendent. By watching Box work, we understand more about his character. By seeing the results, we understand more about Naz.
• The sequence where Naz swallows the eight balls while talking defense strategy with Stone and Chandra is remarkable not just as a piece of high-wire suspense, but because Stone picks up on the entire exchange and affects a been there, done that attitude about it. He recognizes that Naz might have to do it to survive, but feels it’s his duty as a lawyer to advise him of the consequences.