WASHINGTON — When Donald J. Trump goes low, congressional Republicans go quiet.
Their tolerance of Mr. Trump, even at the risk of humiliation, stems from a complex brew of political, policy and personal calculations that differ somewhat between party leaders and officials up for re-election.
But on one point, all sides agree: They have never seen a comparable situation, with a presidential nominee in open warfare with party leaders after a nominating convention. And Mr. Trump’s provocations are making the Republicans’ control of the Senate, perhaps even the House, more tenuous.
Many Republicans, even those whose contempt for Mr. Trump matches their ill will for President Obama, still view the choice between Mr. Trump and Hillary Clinton as a binary one, with long-term implications for every policy area they care about, from judicial appointments to the economy to immigration. They believe that Mr. Trump, guided by a Republican-controlled Congress, will break their way more than Mrs. Clinton ever would.
For others, the vacancy on the Supreme Court — and its potential to reshape the high court’s rulings for years — overshadow almost everything else, even their nominee’s increasingly erratic statements and grasp of basic facts.
President Obama said on Tuesday that Donald J. Trump was “woefully unprepared” to serve as president, and asked why Republicans kept distancing themselves from the candidate while still supporting him.
“The Supreme Court is probably the choice that will have the single most long-term effect on the nation,” said Representative Jason Chaffetz, Republican of Utah, where Mr. Trump is struggling to win over an overwhelmingly Republican state.
Congressional Republicans who are up for re-election — especially the handful like Senators John McCain of Arizona and Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire who still face primaries — have made a basic calculation. They have criticized Mr. Trump, but not withdrawn their endorsements. And party leaders have decided the more distance they put between themselves and Mr. Trump, the more likely they are to lose their congressional majorities.
Alienating Mr. Trump’s supporters would cost them just enough votes to lose their seats. Their fears at this point appear justified. A poll conducted the last week of July by CBS News found that support for Mr. Trump among Republican voters rose to 81 percent from 79 percent.
So the leaders largely responded to Mr. Trump’s attacks with feigned indifference.
Mr. Trump pointedly declined on Tuesday to endorse Speaker Paul D. Ryan, the nation’s highest-ranking elected Republican, and verged on outright opposition to Mr. McCain and Ms. Ayotte, just hours after Mr. Obama challenged Republicans to denounce their nominee.
Both Mr. Obama and Mr. Trump have put Republicans into an untenable position: Criticizing their nominee could be seen as taking the advice of a president whom their core voters strongly dislike, potentially alienating the very people they need for re-election — but sitting idly as Mr. Trump attacks them and makes inflammatory comments might alienate more moderate voters.
“If you are repeatedly having to say, in very strong terms, that what he has said is unacceptable, why are you still endorsing him?” Mr. Obama asked during a news conference on Tuesday.
Mr. Ryan’s spokesman tersely responded that the speaker had never sought Mr. Trump’s endorsement, and Ms. Ayotte more or less brushed off the matter, saying, “I call it like I see it,” in reference to her defense of a fallen Army captain whose family Mr. Trump had derided. While many Republicans are hoping for ticket splitters — those who might vote Democrat for president but Republican on the rest of the ticket — the parsing is all the more difficult.
While Donald J. Trump or Hillary Clinton will represent the entire country, the Americans who selected them are a small part of it.
It is not just a question of individual desires to win re-election — although that certainly drives many of the statements about Mr. Trump that come short of rescinding an endorsement. Republicans believe they need to maintain the House and the Senate, through a hoped-for blend of votes from their base and anti-Trump split tickets, to pursue a policy agenda.
Republican leaders also know that in an anti-Washington election cycle, the core of the party would most likely be disposed to reject candidates who embody the Washington establishment.
This was the lesson Senator Ted Cruz of Texas learned when he was booed from the stage at the Republican convention last month for declining to get behind Mr. Trump, and accounts for some of the heat that Senator Ben Sasse of Nebraska, a founder of the Never Trump movement, has taken from his party back home this year.
Then, there is the vehement opposition to Mrs. Clinton, especially how they view her role in the Benghazi attacks, that has dominated the airwaves for years among Republicans.
But if Mr. Trump falls in the polls and Republicans running for re-election start to realize they would do better separating from him and digging deeper for ticket-splitting voters, Mr. Hanna might not be alone.