Long before Donald Trump, the Republican Party had an obvious problem. Its core economic agenda — tax cuts, free trade, deregulation and a promise to shrink the federal leviathan — was seen by many Americans, including many of the party’s own voters, as distant from their concerns and too skewed toward the rich.
The last attempt to do something about this problem, George W. Bush’s compassionate conservatism, foundered with his presidency, and in 2008 and 2012 the party swung back to a more generic Reagan-era message, without particularly impressive results.
But going into the 2016 campaign there was a sense that the party might be ready to experiment anew. Two overlapping groups within the conservative intelligentsia — “reform conservatives” and “libertarian populists” — threw out a range of ideas for how a free-market party might shed some of its “party of the rich” baggage and deal more directly with middle-class anxieties. Various presidential candidates, from Marco Rubio to Rand Paul, Rick Perry and Jeb Bush, picked up on some of these proposals, in the clear hope of leaving the days of “you built that!” and “the 47 percent” behind.
Instead we got a different response to the G.O.P.’s economic policy problem: Trumpian populism, which won the votes of working-class Republicans and carried all (or at least a plurality) before it. And after Monday’s speech in Detroit, in which Trump — notionally — committed himself to a tax agenda, we can say definitively what Trumponomics represents.
It’s reform conservatism’s evil twin.
Now, I identify with reform conservatism, so the word “evil” might be a touch biased. But let me explain. Basically, reform conservatives tend to think that the Republican Party’s longstanding commitments to free markets, free trade and entitlement reform are all well worth preserving. But while pursuing this broadly Paul Ryan-ish agenda, we think the party needs to offer more direct support to working Americans who have struggled with stagnant wages and rising health care and education costs. And the obvious way to pay for this support, ultimately, is to be less monomaniacal about sweeping tax cuts for the rich.
Trumpism takes roughly the opposite approach. Despite his rhetorical flirtations with making the rich pay more, the supply-side monomania has been the aspect of conventional G.O.P. economics that Trump has consistently embraced. Tellingly, he has even embraced the longstanding supply-side dogma against tax credits, which is why the pro-family policy he unveiled this week only offers a tax deduction for child care — one that disproportionately benefits working mothers in what we might call the Ivanka bracket.
At the same time, he’s broken with the party consensus on free trade and entitlements. As The Washington Examiner’s Byron York observed, there was no mention of entitlement reform in his economic speech, a clear break with every recent Republican nominee. While presidents Reagan and George W. Bush were sometimes protectionists of political convenience, Trump is the first modern Republican to campaign as an out-and-out mercantilist, promising that huge tariffs and infrastructure spending will restore the Rust Belt’s shine.
I think this combination – more tax cuts for the rich, married to protectionism and “Medicare Today, Medicare Forever” – is objectively bad policy. But as types of populism go, it has two advantages as a strategy for dealing with the G.O.P. coalition as it currently exists.
First, Trumponomics appeals directly to older voters, seniors and near-seniors: its message on entitlements in obvious ways, its implausible promises about bringing back factory jobs via the deep power of nostalgia.
A lot of the conservative intelligentsia’s ideas for a new G.O.P. populism were consciously pitched to younger voters — the more libertarian ideas to millennials and minorities, the reform conservative agenda to thirtysomethings and fortysomethings trying to get ahead in the work force and raise families. But in the Republican coalition, over-fifty voters predominate (and turn out), and Trump’s form of populism resonates much more with them.
Second, by keeping supply-side economics front and center, Trumponomics satisfies the slice of the donor class for whom all conservative policy goals are secondary to keeping their own tax bill as low as possible.
If this sounds like a cynical view of my fellow citizens’ motivations, a view heretofore advanced mostly by liberal critics of the right — well, look, it’s been a year in which cynical interpretations of the conservative establishment have been vindicated time and time again.
I’d like to believe that certain Republican donors aren’t justifying their support for Trump on the grounds that his upper bracket tax cuts are really awesome. But the Trump campaign is certainly acting like that’s the pro quo required to get the quid.
I’d like to believe that few donors actually agree with the former Jeb Bush fund-raiser turned Trump state finance chair who just hailed Trump’s promised estate tax repeal as “the linchpin of the conservative movement.” But I am not so innocent anymore.
Alas for Trumponomics, neither G.O.P. donors nor white seniors are the constituencies that Trump needs now if hopes to to save his foundering campaign. His populism’s primary-season strengths are weaknesses in a general election, in which Republicans need a lot more of the votes (from suburban women, above all) that a different, less backward-looking form of conservative populism might have helped them win.
Alas for those of us who championed that different form, in 2016 we lost the battle of ideas, and Trumponomics won.