JERSEY CITY — “I’m no Superman,” Cain Madere said, but he flies like Superman, except he wears little electronic goggles instead of a cape and tights, and keeps both feet on the ground.
Drones of a feather flock together; how else to explain why about 100 drone pilots spent much of Saturday competing in time trials for the Liberty Cup race in a field behind the Liberty Science Center here? The top 24 expect to spend Wednesday facing off in still more time trials and complicated elimination runs on a tricky course. The organizers promoted the event as the first drone race set against the Manhattan skyline. The second, the 2016 United States Drone Racing Championship on Governors Island, will be held next weekend, with some of the same competitors but different organizers.
Drones like the one Mr. Madere races are not what retailers such as Amazon have in mind for door-to-door deliveries. His cannot carry much more than a camera to send the live, full-color video feed to his goggles, and it zooms along at speeds of 80 miles an hour or so, probably way too fast for the protein bars and facial toner that you ordered online last night.
“It’s a thrill I can’t get doing anything else,” Mr. Madere, who flew his first remote-controlled contraption when he was 6, said. “It was a scale version of a P-40” — a model airplane based on a single-engine aircraft that saw action in World War II — “and I crashed it,” Mr. Madere said. It had belonged to a friend of his grandfather’s. Mr. Madere said he was forgiven.
He raced remote-controlled cars, boats and airplanes until he discovered quadcopters (drones with four propellers) a couple of years ago. Soon he was racing competitively, using the call sign MAD_AIR. On the list of pilots who have already qualified for the drone nationals next weekend, he was ranked sixth in the United States and 20th in the world.
But these are still the early days of drone racing, mostly a sport of part-timers. Mr. Madere, for example, works in a graphic design shop. Another pilot here, Steve Zoumas, 31, works in his family’s contracting firm on Long Island.
It is also a sport for do-it-yourselfers, tinkerers and improvisers. Some drone pilots start a day of flying with six or seven drones and go home with only one or two still working. Sometimes the onboard battery fails and the drone does not respond to joystick commands from the remote-control module. And sometimes the drone is nowhere to be found.
That race lasted about 25 hours 9 minutes longer than each drone race here.
So drone racing is about the thrill of speed, like hot-rodding?
What about the high-pitched whistling noise that a drone makes when it is going that fast? Someone checking the course behind the science center said it sounded like the whine of a dentist’s drill.
So if he hears a change in sound, something is not right?
“Hundred percent,” he said.
Randy Scott Slavin, who organized the competition here, as well as the New York City Drone Film Festival in the spring, was not competing. Taking part would be a conflict of interest, he said. And besides, he knows too much. “I designed the track,” he said, and he meant for it to be the most difficult course imaginable.
Even before the first race, Mr. Madere had heard about the gate on the side of the science center building that his drone would have to dive through. This prompted the obvious question: Had he leapt tall buildings in a single bound?
“The F.A.A. doesn’t want me to answer that question,” he said, although he acknowledged that what he meant was that he did not want the Federal Aviation Administration to read his answer, which was: once.
And then, faster than you could say: “It’s a bird! It’s a plane,” Mr. Madere was telling another crash story.
