SYDNEY, Australia — After an appeal by Australia’s prime minister, Vietnam reversed an earlier decision and will allow war veterans from Australia and New Zealand to hold a commemoration at the site of the Battle of Long Tan, one of the bloodiest battles fought by troops from the three countries, the Australian government said on Thursday.
“Following high-level consultations between the Australian and Vietnamese governments, the Vietnamese authorities have agreed to allow access to the Long Tan site on 18 August with strict conditions,” the Australian government said in a statement.
On Wednesday, the Australian government had said Vietnam would not allow about 1,000 veterans from Australia and New Zealand to visit Long Tan, which is about 70 miles east of Ho Chi Minh City.
But a personal appeal by Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull of Australia to his Vietnamese counterpart, Nguyen Xuan Phuc, led Vietnam to reverse its earlier decision, said Dan Tehan, the Australian minister of veterans’ affairs. Vietnam will allow groups of 100 people to visit Long Tan throughout Thursday.
Memorial events have been held by Australians at Long Tan since 1989, according to the Australian government. The events planned for Thursday will not include any songs or displays of flags, banners, uniforms or medals.
The Vietnamese government is sensitive to ceremonies held in its country by former military members who fought against the North Vietnamese government and its Viet Cong allies. Definitive figures on the number of deaths suffered by the North Vietnamese and their allies are hard to come by, but it may be over one million, including civilians.
Veterans from Australia and New Zealand had spent 18 months planning a ceremony to coincide with the 50th anniversary of the battle and with Vietnam Veterans Day in Australia. The battle, which took place on Aug. 17 and 18, 1966, left 245 Vietnamese and 18 Australians dead, according to the Australian government.
Of the approximately 60,000 Australians — including ground troops and air force and navy personnel — who served during the Vietnam War, 521 died in the conflict and more than 3,000 were wounded.
More than 3,000 New Zealand military personnel served in Vietnam over a seven-year period, according to New Zealand’s government. Thirty-seven were killed and 187 were wounded.
More than 58,000 American military personnel died during the war, according to the United States government.