Max Ritvo, an accomplished poet who spent much of his life under the cloud of cancer while gaining wide attention writing and speaking about it, died of the disease on Tuesday at his home in Los Angeles. He was 25.
His mother, Dr. Ariella Ritvo-Slifka, confirmed his death.
Mr. Ritvo talked about his work and illness in interviews on radio programs including “Only Human” on WNYC and “The New Yorker Radio Hour.” His poems have appeared in Poetry Magazine and The New Yorker, and his first published volume of poetry, “Four Reincarnations,” will appear in the fall.
Mr. Ritvo was 16 when he learned he had Ewing’s sarcoma, a rare pediatric cancer. He had gone to doctors after feeling pain in his side. At first they suspected pneumonia, but fearing something worse they took a tissue sample while he was under sedation.
He woke up in a cancer ward.
A year of aggressive treatment brought about remission, and over the next four and a half years he finished high school and attended Yale.
The cancer returned in Mr. Ritvo’s senior year. He nevertheless completed his degree in 2013 and this year earned a master of fine arts from Columbia University, where he became a teaching fellow. He also served as poetry editor at Parnassus: Poetry in Review.
Throughout his illness, he rejected the clichés of being an “inspiring victim of cancer,” his mother said. He counseled other families going through treatment for Ewing’s sarcoma, and spoke out often about the disease and the importance of research.
causing malignant thirst.
doing in a dump like my bed?
Last August Mr. Ritvo married Victoria Jackson-Hanen, now a doctoral student in psychology at Princeton. They had met during a summer academic program at Cambridge University in 2005. After she moved from England to the United States, they began dating in 2013.
Max Joseph Ritvo was born Dec. 19, 1990, in Los Angeles. A literary prodigy, he was writing at 3, his mother said.
At Yale, he joined an experimental comedy group called His Majesty, the Baby. He entertained its other members with outlandish and often profane riffs, said Andrew Kahn, the group’s producer and manager.
His sketches could be challenging for audiences: in one, he used the medical port in his chest as a kind of ventriloquist’s dummy, putting googly eyes on the protrusion and jiggling it with his hand while chatting with it about cancer treatments.
for myself. We watch each mouse like a crystal ball.
of nothing happens to you, Maxes, that’s peace.
Which is what we want. Trust me.
Along with his wife and mother, Mr. Ritvo is survived by his father, Edward Ritvo; his sisters, Victoria Ritvo Black and Skylre Oryx; and a stepbrother, David Slifka. His stepfather, Alan B. Slifka, a New York investor and philanthropist who was the founding chairman of the Big Apple Circus, died in 2011. Dr. Ritvo-Slifka leads a foundation that bears Mr. Slifka’s name and which, among other missions, supports research into sarcoma.
On Monday, Dr. Ritvo-Slifka said, her son was too weak to write poetry.
The family called in the hospice nurses, who gave him sedatives. He died the next morning.