278 pp. Pamela Dorman Books/Viking. $26.
One of my kids is dyslexic. Around the time of the diagnosis, about 12 years ago, a friend invited me to attend a lecture at the 92nd Street Y on the Upper East Side of Manhattan by a specialist named Mel Levine. Harvard-educated, a Rhodes scholar and a passionate advocate for children with learning differences (a term he preferred), Levine headed an institute called All Kinds of Minds that trained thousands of teachers to work with ­special-education students. I recall him as a dynamic, charismatic speaker, convincing in his very welcome argument that all children have strengths to build on, that in some ways it was our schools and our societal pressure to conform that were holding these young minds back.
I remember being impressed — and not. I’d gone to the lecture against the advice of the learning specialist at my children’s school, who thought Levine was a quack. I balked at the fees he charged to meet with patients one-on-one. But as a writer married to a writer, I was also horrified by the thought of our kid being locked out of a world of books. Others in the audience also had offspring with issues. The anxiety in the room was palpable. Levine seemingly had the power to give many parents cause for optimism. For some families, he was the only one left to turn to.
As Emily Dickinson wrote, “Hope is the thing with feathers.” In 2011, Levine committed suicide by shooting himself in the head after a class-action sexual abuse and malpractice suit was filed against him in Boston. He was accused of performing unnecessary genital exams on 40 boys over nearly 20 years, from 1966 to 1985.
There is a Mel Levine-like character at the core of Carolyn Parkhurst’s fourth novel, “Harmony,” a moving and compassionate literary dive straight into the heart of a frantic parent. The book made me think about Levine, a guru capable, it seems now, of good and evil, though I’m not suggesting Parkhurst’s Scott Bean, a parent-whisperer as well, is based directly on Levine. The world is full of people like this, eager to display and exploit whatever magnetizing talents they may have, people with a nose for the anguished and the vulnerable. And Parkhurst’s Bean is oilier than Levine, without credentials or much of a consistent personal history. He’s a gifted charmer of a low-rent variety, a man who advertises his services on bulletin boards: “Scott Bean, Harmonious Parenting,” written sideways on tabs with a phone number.
Alexandra Hammond, loving mother of two, is at her wits’ end, desperate enough to take Bean’s number and put it in her purse. Her eldest daughter, Tilly, an ­impossible-to-parent young teenager who appears to be on the autism spectrum, is as brilliant as she is socially awkward: She perseverates endlessly on the encyclopedia of obscure facts she carries around in her head, on subjects like Chinese food and statues. In an especially wrenching and frank sequence, the Hammonds struggle with her frustrated pleas for help in learning how to masturbate to orgasm.
The marriage falters. The Hammonds’ younger daughter, Iris, suffers. Tilly becomes a danger to herself. Enter Scott Bean, to the writerly equivalent of the theme from “Jaws.” (The opening lines of the book are “In another world, you make it work. In another world, you never even hear the name ‘Scott Bean.’ ”) Alexandra finds his sympathetic attitude irresistible. Lonely and desperate, she’s willing to sign up for anything he has to offer.
Alexandra’s chapters fill in the novel’s back story. Cleareyed, 11-year-old Iris, the family’s well child, unfolds the novel’s present action in alternating chapters, which take place at a bucolic New Hampshire hideaway designed by Bean to shelter families with hard-to-manage kids. The Hammonds are part of the “Core,” a small group of families (some with children in far worse shape than the maddening and appealing Tilly) who give up their worldly possessions, buy him this camp and help refurbish it. They all agree to live somewhat off the grid, according to Bean’s edicts: no electronics, alcohol or artificial anything, modern vices Bean believes may have contributed to their children’s difficulties. They follow his teachings and practices, and help a series of paying families heal themselves by visiting Camp Harmony for weeklong sessions throughout the summer.
In short, Camp Harmony, whatever its participants’ initial intentions, has become a cult. After some very questionable behavior on the leader’s part, a Core dad says to one of the children: “Scott’s kind of our visionary here, and he’s got his own ideas about things. And even if I don’t always agree with him, I respect him and trust him completely.” It’s that kind of thinking that visits danger and dislocation upon the members of Camp Harmony. It’s also that kind of thinking an outsider (and reader) may find hard to buy. But look at the world around us. People are buying this kind of nonsense all the time.
“Harmony” is an intriguing book, although I’m not sure it’s my kind of book: the sentences lack the architectural ingenuity that feeds my reading habit, and the adult characters, while full of angst, lack singularity. However, this is definitely somebody else’s book and will probably find an avid readership. Parkhurst makes an impassioned case for understanding parents who are weary enough to turn their bank accounts, their children and their lives over to anyone who gives them faith, recognition, context, a blueprint for soldiering on.
The drama Parkhurst promises in the prologue is played out to frightening effect in New Hampshire as Bean’s tissue-thin patience, mental instability and lack of competence rupture the safety of the camp. The parents who would do anything for their children find themselves in their own passive haze, actually endangering their own children, to their terror and guilty consternation.
But it’s Tilly herself who gives something like the compassionate last word. Writing from an unspecified future, in several slim chapters scattered throughout the novel, from a place where she has apparently and thankfully survived her childhood, she has this to say: “It was a dark time . . . when we marveled at the cruelty, but you had to take it in context. Given the challenges that 21st-century parents faced . . . perhaps we could cut them a little slack. We have to believe that they were doing the best they could.” Square peg in a round hole that she is, Tilly understands her parents’ plight, a perfect model of empathy.