After months of ceding the airwaves to Hillary Clinton, Donald J. Trump has returned to broadcast advertising, with his first general election ad of the 2016 campaign. The spot focuses on a familiar issue, the one that has set the tone for his campaign: illegal immigration.
THE MESSAGE Illegal immigration, which would be rampant under a President Clinton, threatens national security.
THE TAKEAWAY Amid a shake-up in his campaign staff and a speech admitting regret for some of his more caustic comments, Mr. Trump is pressing his hard-line approach to immigration in an effort to reassure his die-hard supporters that he is committed to the issue while also presenting himself as the stronger candidate on national security issues.
Mr. Trump’s struggles have put congressional Republicans in a tough position, and many of them have distanced themselves from his candidacy in order to protect their own seats. Outside groups looking to knock out incumbent Republicans are seizing on the tension. Independence USA, a “super PAC” underwritten by former Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg of New York, released an ad against Senator Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire, quoting her saying “I’ve been an independent, strong voice for New Hampshire,” and contrasting it with other “independent Republicans” whom the ad claims said “no to Trump.” Mr. Bloomberg has long been critical of Ms. Ayotte for her votes against gun control measures, running a negative ad through another group he financially supports, Mayors Against Illegal Guns, against her in 2013.
All broadcast networks hold a right of refusal on political ads, allowing them to keep ads containing any profanity or slurs off the airwaves. The same is also true for digital ads, at least on Facebook, as MoveOn.org found out. An ad from the group that tried to show some of the more vicious comments from the crowd at Trump rallies was rejected by Facebook Ads, which told the group that ads cannot contain any profanity. But the rejection was limited to paid promotions; the group was still able to post the video to its own Facebook page.
