WASHINGTON — IT is Inauguration Day, Jan. 20, 2017.
“The political elite was in a frenzy about what would happen if I got my short finger on the nuclear button. Where is the button, by the way? Or is it a football? I know football better than anyone. I used to play and even had a team. If I find that football, I’m gonna punt it right at Little Mikie Bloomberg. Talk about a traitor.
“He was the guy who kicked off all the crazy talk about me being crazy at the Democratic convention, after he used to kiss up to me all the time and talk about how charismatic I am. He called me to rescue the Ferry Point golf course. And we all know he can’t stand Hillary. She must have promised him Treasury secretary.
“I’ll find my nukes in a minute. First I need to write out a pardon for Melania for her immigration violations before she has to clamber over the new wall in her stilettos. Who would have ever thought the problem with a nude photo portfolio of the next first lady would be a question about whether she had the right visa or not?
“So many things to do. Luckily I have the best metabolism ever. I need to name my cabinet. I’m going to make Ivanka secretary of state. And Tiffany will be over at Defense. Keep it in the family. Since my boys are so into wildlife, I’ll put them over at Interior, where they can endanger a few species. Rudy, Newt and Chris can fight over the scraps.
“My temperament is so perfect for this job. The greatest temperament in the history of temperaments because you go through pressure and you have to be able to handle pressure. The brouhaha over whether I was a nut job was so unfair. It got so big that Dr. Phil and Dr. Drew were both on TV analyzing my so-called narcissistic personality disorder.
“They said this happens when megalomania and a sense of omnipotence, which are normal in childhood, are carried over into adulthood. They said the symptoms are an excessive need for admiration, a lack of empathy for others’ feelings, an obsession with achieving power and success, and the desire to take advantage of people around you.
“Does that even sound remotely like me? Not a chance. Sounds more like Bill Clinton and Ted Cruz.
“The madness over my madness reached its peak in August, when Congress raced back from its break to pass legislation requiring presidential candidates to pass a psychiatric exam. That Republican Benedict Arnold, Jeff Flake, was the main sponsor, so it ended up being called the Flake Act. Ha-ha-ha.
“Congress couldn’t find a way to get money to fight Zika but they found a way to force me to take a Rorschach test. I passed with flying colors. Best score ever. I told those Freudians that all the ink blots looked like the way America used to be.
He clicks on the overhead TV set and quickly turns it off in disgust.
“The Clinton News Network and MSNBC and the failing New York Times are so biased, you’d think that Hillary won the presidency, not me. She’s still all over the news.
“Crooked Hillary got so full of herself and overconfident that she even pulled out of states like Virginia and Colorado in August, when I hadn’t even really started my campaign yet.
“My family and friends were worried about me when the polls nose-dived in August. They thought I wouldn’t be able to handle it without lashing out or dropping out. And they worried that my brand would go from Winning to Losing. But I knew those polls were rigged. The poorly educated angry white people still flocked to my rallies and I knew they would carry me through.
“Those haters gave me so much love and support that it comforted me. They believed me when I told them the economy had hit rock bottom, even though the jobs and wage numbers showed otherwise.
