Last week, Mayor Bill de Blasio took an early victory lap on his campaign pledge to build and preserve 200,000 units of affordable housing by 2024. City Hall announced that nearly 53,000 affordable apartments were saved or put in the pipeline for construction during the past two and a half years.
But the numbers aren’t altogether rosy. A sizable chunk of those affordable apartments belong to middle-class Manhattanites in megaprojects like Stuyvesant Town-Peter Cooper Village. Another 17,400 apartments are to be built or renovated — a relative pittance considering how many hundreds of thousands of New Yorkers need subsidized housing.
Another related bit of news came out of City Hall. Gowanus, a Brooklyn neighborhood on the cusp of gentrification, is joining East Harlem and six other districts the de Blasio administration will try to rezone to make room for more housing. This announcement won’t surprise many residents of Gowanus, where plans for a Superfund cleanup of its notoriously polluted canal creep forward. Anticipating the rezoning, they have been putting together a redevelopment plan of their own, called Bridging Gowanus.
Its goal: Take on greater density and more affordable apartments in return for improvements and guarantees that preserve the precarious soul of the district.
Precarious because Gowanus’s mix of light industry, artist studios, hipster shuffleboard clubs and working-class housing is under threat from the usual combination of bad development and escalating real estate prices.
How will City Hall’s housing plan work with Gowanus’s? The truth is that Mr. de Blasio’s program is about fulfilling a campaign promise — to meet an arbitrary number.
Because of the depth of the city’s income inequality and high costs of land and construction, most of those 200,000 affordable housing units will be unaffordable to fully half the city’s population. Rents that top $3,000 a month for families making more than $125,000 a year, in areas where the median income is less than $40,000, are not exactly affordable to most New Yorkers.
Two big challenges stand in the way of doing better: the decline of federal support, and baked-in skepticism among city residents that growth can be good for their neighborhoods.
Since the Nixon administration, the federal government has stopped building subsidized housing. Once, public housing was a proud symbol of postwar American democracy. Hundreds of thousands of New Yorkers got good homes and a leg up. Now Washington offers tax incentives, some $7 billion a year, to private developers so they will take over the job. The public has gone from builder to beggar.
For comparison’s sake, Washington each year gives up more than $100 billion nationally in mortgage interest deductions, which principally benefit the upper-middle class.
This year’s presidential candidates — even Bernie Sanders and Hillary Clinton — have so far said next to nothing about affordable housing. Amazingly, neither of those Democrats had evidently visited a public-housing project before the New York primary in April. The Democrats have since strengthened the party’s platform; but the issue didn’t seriously come up at either convention, so it is hard to believe much help is forthcoming.
City Hall knows this and plans to steer billions of capital dollars toward housing, allocating more money to subsidize affordable homes than the next 50 United States cities combined. Even so, absent greater federal money, it will remain nearly impossible to reach the levels of affordability that low-income New Yorkers actually need.
Of course, housing isn’t the only issue that matters to city residents. Zoning should grow out of holistic planning based on participatory governance. Communities have been complaining loudly that the de Blasio administration is a stalking horse for large developers, hellbent on securing as much housing development as it can wrangle out of rezoning negotiations with neighborhoods, conceding only what’s necessary — not collaborating with locals from the start.
In East New York, the first neighborhood the mayor rezoned, the city has paved the way for subsidized apartments and neighborhood improvements. But speculators have also bought property, driven up land prices and threatened some of the very residents the rezoning is intended to protect, fueling fears among poor New Yorkers that Mr. de Blasio’s plan will make neighborhoods even less affordable. In some cases, the relatively high price of affordable apartments may actually drive up housing costs.
Which is where a project like Bridging Gowanus, led by Brad Lander, the local city councilman, comes in. A similar grass-roots effort, the East Harlem Neighborhood Plan, has come out of that district, where Melissa Mark-Viverito, the speaker of the City Council, is the representative.
The two proposals try to give communities a stronger voice in this whole messy rezoning process, upfront.
They lay out priorities that neighbors have debated and rallied around — improving streets and parks; protecting lower-income residents and small businesses; addressing environmental resilience. And, of course, making sure growth comes with more and better schools, cultural programs and transit.
The plans try to get ahead of rezoning efforts like those that spoiled Fourth Avenue and Williamsburg in Brooklyn during the Bloomberg years. They hark back to the 1960s, ’70s and ’80s, when community organizations like the Fifth Avenue Committee, Banana Kelly and the Bedford-Stuyvesant Restoration Program helped save endangered neighborhoods, from the South Bronx to South Brooklyn.
Bridging Gowanus and the East Harlem Neighborhood Plan have the advantage of backing by powerful City Council members — in neighborhoods that make developers salivate. So constructing lucrative market-rate apartments in those districts may help not just offset the costs of affordable units but also pay for public infrastructure investments.
I found Ms. Mark-Viverito one recent morning powering through Thomas Jefferson Park in East Harlem, hunting for a sinkhole that an older resident had just complained to her about.
Here’s hoping City Hall follows through.