“The Birth of a Nation,” a drama about the Nat Turner slave rebellion, upended the Sundance Film Festival, selling for a record $17.5 million and instantly vaulting to front-runner of next year’s Oscar race.
Scheduled to be released Oct. 7, the film is now attracting unwanted attention because of renewed interest in a 17-year-old case in which the film’s director, writer and star, Nate Parker, was accused — and later acquitted — of rape when he was a student at Penn State.
His college roommate, Jean McGianni Celestin, who received a credit on the movie, was also charged. Last week Deadline.com and Variety asked Mr. Parker about the case, and on Tuesday, Variety reported that his accuser committed suicide in 2012 at age 30.
Here’s a look at the case.
Mr. Parker was accused in 1999 of raping a fellow student at Penn State. The victim, whose name is not public, said that Mr. Parker and his roommate, Mr. Celestin, raped her while she was intoxicated and unconscious, according to court documents, and that they later harassed, intimidated and stalked her after she pressed charges. Both men said that the sex was consensual.
Mr. Parker, who, according to court transcripts, had had consensual oral sex with the woman previously, was acquitted of the charges. Mr. Celestin, who received a “story by” credit on “The Birth of a Nation,” was convicted of sexual assault, but his case was appealed. There are conflicting accounts about the outcome.
On Tuesday, it emerged that the woman killed herself in 2012, overdosing on sleeping pills, according to Variety’s interview with her brother.
In an interview with The Times last weekend on Martha’s Vineyard, Mass., where he was appearing with Spike Lee at a film festival, Mr. Parker said that he had never wanted to hide his past, and that he had made a conscious decision not to change his Wikipedia page, which included references to the 1999 case.
Backed by Fox Searchlight, Mr. Parker has just embarked on an extensive campaign to promote the film, and media scrutiny is heightened. While the case was written about in 1999 in local newspapers and in a 2007 profile of Mr. Parker in The Virginian-Pilot, it only garnered widespread attention after Deadline published details from the court transcripts.
“The Birth of a Nation” tells the story of Nat Turner, who led a slave rebellion in Virginia in 1831. The film was first screened at the Sundance Film Festival this year, shortly after the all-white slate of Oscar acting nominees set off an outcry as well as a larger conversation about the lack of diversity in Hollywood.
Almost everything about the film seemed a remedy to all that, including its name, a sharply pointed reappropriation (not a remake) of D. W. Griffith’s landmark and racist 1915 film of the same title. Born into poverty, Mr. Parker, whose previous films include “The Secret Life of Bees,” “Red Tails” and “Beyond the Lights,” had made telling Turner’s story a passion project, even turning down other work. He wanted Americans to face the legacy of slavery head on, and said the country’s aversion to doing so led to countless modern-day problems, including tensions between the police and black Americans. Support for the film surged. Last weekend, at the film festival on Martha’s Vineyard, Mr. Parker and his co-star, Aja Naomi King, appeared on a panel with Mr. Lee, who urged audience members to pack the theaters when it opens.
At Sundance in January, Mr. Parker received a standing ovation from a packed audience before the film began. Afterward, there was a bidding war, with Fox Searchlight emerging the victor and paying a festival record for the right to distribute the drama. This week Variety reported that in light of new attention around Mr. Parker over the rape case, Fox Searchlight would be changing its release plans and possibly refusing to grant more interviews with Mr. Parker for a few weeks, but a studio spokesman said Tuesday that those suggestions were untrue and that the release and marketing of the film would go ahead as planned.