Forced by exhaustion to leave his career as a Congregational minister in his early 40s, Wallace Nutting turned his photography hobby into a thriving business. That led him to buy and restore several Colonial-era homes during the early 20th century and to become a leading authority on early American antiques.
One of those houses, the former Webb House in Wethersfield, opened to visitors on July 4, 1916. To mark its centennial, the Webb-Deane-Stevens Museum, which now operates the Webb House, has created an exhibition on Nutting’s life.
Nutting, a Harvard and Hartford Theological Seminary graduate, used five houses that he had restored to take pictures of women in Colonial-style dress engaging in activities like pouring tea, embroidering or trying on a bonnet. He employed a team of colorists and sold more than a million watercolor-tinted photos.
A self-taught antiques expert, he wrote books and articles on American furniture and decorative arts. He has been described as leading the revival of Colonial antiques and helping to make American antiques a must-have for many middle- and upper-class Americans.
“His was really the first teaching museum in American decorative arts and architecture and interiors,” Mr. Lyle said.
Nutting had such high standards for his beloved Windsor chairs that he bought more than 150 and hired furniture makers to make replicas of more than 68 varieties, according to the exhibition. In 1918, he printed his first catalog, “Wallace Nutting Windsors: Correct Windsor Furniture,” which allowed people to order his furniture by mail, another innovative idea. A marketing genius, he had released the first comprehensive book on Windsor chairs the year before.
He branched out to create high-quality reproduction tables, including Chippendales, and chests like highboys, which he sold in stores and through catalogs. After unscrupulous dealers bought his early reproductions, removed the labels, artificially aged them and sold them as period pieces, he had his name burned into his pieces.
The Nutting brand stood for quality and influenced the décor of American homes in the early 20th century as Martha Stewart has in recent times, Mr. Lyle said.
For the exhibition, the first floor of the Webb House is adorned with framed, signed Wallace Nutting photographs, samples of Nutting’s Colonial reproductions, which include Windsor chairs, a sunflower chest and copies of his travel and antiques books.
George Washington and the French general Comte de Rochambeau had met at the Webb House in May 1781 to plan a joint military campaign. After buying the home, Nutting commissioned Hartford artists to paint murals in the front parlor that depicted the meeting of the two generals, as well as of the British surrender.
The exhibition includes 40 of Nutting’s hand-tinted photographs of Colonial interiors and several bucolic scenes of ponds, pastures and tree-lined winding lanes. Visitors can see pages from his account book showing that he charged a 25-cent admission fee and bought 12 copies of The Hartford Daily Courant on July 4, 1916, the day the paper published a story on the opening of the Webb House.
A parlor has been recreated to resemble a scene from one of Nutting’s photographs, complete with a mannequin in Colonial dress and positioned like a woman arranging flowers in the picture. The museum hired a textile reproduction artist to fashion the dress.
The exhibition includes a postcard of a mansion in Framingham, Mass., where he relocated his photography business. In 1917, he set up operations for a furniture reproduction business in an old woolen mill and, between both businesses, made as much as $1,000 a day, according to his autobiography. One photograph captures six young women colorists who sat near large windows to paint the black-and-white pictures.
With the arrival of World War I and the onset of voluntary gas rationing, tourism declined, and in 1920 Nutting sold his five Colonial houses. He sold the Webb House to the Colonial Dames of Connecticut, a historical society. Nutting had preserved the dark wallpaper that covered the walls of the Webb House bedroom where George Washington stayed, and visitors can still see what the room looked like when Washington slept there. Some of Nutting’s other Colonial houses are now in private hands.
Nutting’s photographs and furniture continue to sell widely, and the collection he featured in his book “Furniture of Pilgrim Century” can still be seen. In 1925, he sold his furniture collection to J. Pierpont Morgan Jr., who donated it to the Wadsworth Atheneum Museum of Art in Hartford, which calls it the nation’s most important collection of Pilgrim-era furniture.