This provision, contained in section 2704 of the Internal Revenue Code, has been abused by aggressive tax planners and lawyers who used the discount, sometimes as high as 40 percent, and applied it to partnerships that contained marketable securities or other assets that could otherwise be easily valued and sold.
The Internal Revenue Service has repeatedly balked at stocks and bonds being discounted just because they were owned in a family partnership. On Dec. 1, it will hold a hearing on the new regulations, which would strip away the discount from all family limited partnerships regardless of what they hold.
And this is one of the sticking points for planners. Many argue that partnerships that hold businesses should still be entitled to the discounts.
“There have been abuses in the past, like when families took a $100 million of marketable securities and wrapped them in a family limited partnership wrapper and took a discount,” said Christopher Pegg, regional wealth planning manager for Southern California at Wells Fargo Private Bank.
Mr. Pegg pointed out that if nonfamily members owned the same private company, the I.R.S. would allow a discount for the very same lack of marketability.
If the proposed changes go into effect as planned, they will certainly have an effect on certain very wealthy families. “We’re telling clients to move quickly,” Mr. Pegg said. He said that it typically takes six months to set up a family limited partnership, but if families were motivated and focused on this they could set one up in about 45 days.
But even if discounting goes away, the ability to save on tax, protect assets from creditors and pass any future appreciation on to the next generation still exists through tax planning.
Apart from the discount, there are two effective strategies to move money or business interests to heirs.
The first is simply getting assets that are going to appreciate out of a person’s estate. If the gift is over the exemption amount, the person may have to pay gift tax. But after that, all future appreciation will grow outside of his or her estate.
The second is to put those assets into what is called a grantor trust, which benefits future recipients by allowing the person making the gift to pay all the income taxes in the trust.
Seth R. Kaplan, a shareholder with the law firm Gunster, said he recommends some type of family entity for any family with more than $10 million in assets.
And it is that desire for control and protection of the assets that planners say may be the most valuable benefit. If someone is sued, the assets inside the partnership are viewed as separate from the individual’s assets, just as they would be in a well-crafted trust.
That partnership structure also gives the family the ability to bind family interests together. This may not always be what beneficiaries want, but it is meant to ensure that a family business has the best chance of continuing.
