American fashion has never been exactly subtle about its allegiance in this particular presidential election.
The overt declarations of support for Hillary Clinton began last fashion season when Anna Wintour, editor of American Vogue, and Marc Jacobs appeared at Mr. Jacobs’s show in customized Made for History H.R.C. T-shirts.
And they extended through Ms. Wintour’s Hillary fund-raisers: In February at the London home of the British Fashion Council chairwoman Natalie Massenet, and next week with a show and party in New York reportedly scheduled for Sept. 6, just before the fashion season officially starts. The catwalk is scheduled to include brands like Prabal Gurung, Diane von Furstenberg, Mr. Jacobs and Public School.
Over the last few months, those designers, along with Tory Burch, Georgina Chapman of Marchesa, Rag & Bone and Joseph Altuzarra, have also contributed T-shirt designs to Mrs. Clinton’s campaign store.
But as of next month, when new ads will appear in the giant September fashion magazines, there will be yet another unabashed pro-Clinton campaign in the offing, thanks to Elie Tahari.
Photographed by James Macari and titled “Madam President,” it features a model in a red sheath dress in the Oval Office; in a gray lace-sleeved number, speaking from behind a lectern with the presidential seal; and in a narrow black trouser suit, amid a walk-and-talk briefing surrounded by American flags and Secret Service men in what looks like the Capitol.
“We have a choice between a man and a woman, and the woman is smarter and more humble, and I wanted to say I support that,” Mr. Tahari said of the rationale behind the campaign.
He noted that he had first met Mrs. Clinton at a White House breakfast when she was first lady (“I have a picture,” he said), and that she had worn his clothes during her time as secretary of state. He and his wife also hosted a Clinton fund-raiser before the 2008 election, though he said he had not done so this cycle.
This is not the first time a fashion brand has pushed an image of a female president in its clothing. In 1992, Donna Karan created a series of “In Women We Trust” ads featuring the model Rosemary McGrotha taking the oath of office, working behind her desk, and otherwise being a leaderlike working mother in double-breasted pinstriped skirt suiting, ropes of pearls and shirt sleeves.
But at that moment, there was no viable female presidential candidate. George Bush was in office, and Bill Clinton was about to be elected. The campaign functioned more as a feminist manifesto — an avowal of belief in women’s power and a bid to dress those customers — than an overt political statement.
By contrast, given the current party nominees, Mr. Tahari’s campaign is a lot more pointed.
This kind of public positioning in among the most-read glossy issues of the year may give some designers pause, as any clear political leaning risks alienating a swath of potential customers.
In any case, it will be interesting to see how all this plays out on the runways as New York Fashion Week begins Sept. 8.