Two toddlers were burned to death in a Bronx fire that ravaged their third-floor apartment while their mother was folding clothes at a laundromat across the street. Officials believe the fire was started by incense that the mother left burning when she left the house. A neighbor said the mother, 26, heard the fire trucks and started running back home, screaming and in tears. “My babies, my babies,” she yelled. The mother buckled to her knees as she watched firefighters rush from the building cradling her daughters, 18 months and 2 years. The girls later died at a nearby hospital.
The New York Times gave readers a somewhat longer version of the report above last April. A reporter was sent to the scene. An editor was moved into place. And the Metro pages of the newspaper were torn up to make room for a late-breaking story.
The question is, was that the right call? Should resources have been directed to one small fire by a paper trying to cover a city of eight million? More immediately, why should a newsroom that just announced lofty international ambitions spend resources covering news of no interest to readers in Beijing or London?
He decided stories on small fires aren’t what readers want, and began a wholesale re-engineering of his staff. Soon, many of his reporters will be assigned to new subject areas, or “beats” in newsroom parlance. The types of stories they do will be different, as will the way they write those stories. Top editors are also looking at how much space local news should take up in the daily newspaper. (The answer: less.) The modernized Metro section that emerges, he believes, will be one more suitable for the age in which The Times now finds itself.
What exactly does this mean for readers? Fewer stories about individual murders, assaults or routine crimes. Fewer stories about lawsuits and criminal cases, or about legislation wending through Albany. And it will mean fewer stories about fires in the Bronx.
But the revamped desk will offer readers some riches. The incremental news of the past will be replaced by stories with larger, more consequential themes; they’ll include investigations of individuals and institutions that wield outsize power; and they’ll include deeply reported narratives about the subjects that animate New York. Already, stories like this are being fanned into local coverage at a greater speed than before.
Ask someone on Metro for an example of what the new journalism looks like and you’ll probably be directed to a series Metro is running called “Murder in the 4-0,” riveting and revealing stories on every murder that has occurred this year in the 40th Precinct in the South Bronx, a place chosen for its tapestry of housing projects, meth clinics and street gangs. Staffers might also mention by way of illustration a piece Metro did on at least two dozen people left homeless by a fire, a weeklong effort that produced the kind of insights impossible to provide in a quick news story.
The broader subject of policing and race is in. Cop coverage by jurisdiction is out. Subjects like demographics, gender and ethnicity are in. Community coverage is out. Politics used to be in, and it still is, because it’s viewed as essential to the fabric of New York. But like everything else, it won’t be done in small bites.
But I agree with Jamieson. This idea needs to go forward. You can’t have your reporters parked in courthouses and police stations all day — or chasing fires — and still deliver memorable, ambitious stories that take time to produce.
Beyond that, when 90 percent of your audience lives outside New York, it makes sense to skip the small stuff and write stories with the kind of wattage that attracts attention from a farther distance. Something akin to the way The New Yorker approaches news: Its writers don’t land on any particular subject often, but when they do you remember it. The thing is, it’s not easy to be The New Yorker. It’s easy to stake that out as an ambition but not so easy to execute.
And the new approach carries some risks. When reporters aren’t tied to hard beats, they don’t develop the kinds of sources and expertise that help them break big stories — like the Eliot Spitzer prostitution scandal or the twists and turns in the prosecution of Dominique Strauss-Kahn, the former I.M.F. chief accused of assaulting a hotel maid.
What’s more, some of the best stories aren’t long narratives or multipart series. They erupt spontaneously on city streets or are found by monitoring the actions of corrupt city officials. I worry that real news could get lost in a meadow of soft features.
Jim Dwyer, a Metro columnist, says he embraces the ambition of Times editors but thinks, when the plan is in place, reality will get a vote as difficult decisions arise. “When the L train is temporarily shut down, no one cares outside New York, but it means everything to New Yorkers,” he says.
My vote is for a slow, careful rollout of the plan, beginning with one subject area and only moving to another once the first effort is a proven success: a journalistic beta. I hope reporters will leave the newsroom with clear guidelines for how to determine what is a story and what isn’t — and with the flexibility to let their gut trump all. And if readers revolt, they should be heard.
Jamieson said the Metro revamp is not designed to reduce his staff’s size or save money, though I suspect strategic and financial imperatives across the newsroom could make that inevitable. On its merits, this plan is both shrewd and necessary and deserves a chance to work. But I also fear that faulty execution could be the tripwire that brings it down.