The bulletins are known around the New York Police Department as “personnel orders,” a register of the comings and goings across the sprawling agency, with its 36,000 uniformed members and thousands more civilian employees.
The rundown includes changes in duty, promotions, retirements and deaths, as well as information on disciplinary actions taken against officers. It was sent out almost every day, posted in precinct station houses and around Police Headquarters, including in the upstairs offices of the department’s arm dedicated to public information. There, for decades, journalists had been able to peruse the pages on a clipboard and report the contents.
But in recent months, no new pages were put on the clipboard. And on Thursday, police officials said the orders were no longer available to journalists, noting that the department realized this year that the practice — which had been around so long that many officials could not recall when it began — was in violation of state civil law.
Critics challenged the department’s interpretation of the law and said the decision was troubling because it limited the public’s access to information about whether police officials were holding officers accountable for wrongdoing.
The move was reported on Wednesday by The Daily News, which said that the clipboard, which is in the offices of the deputy commissioner for public information, known internally as D.C.P.I., was last updated in April.
The law, Section 50-a of the state’s civil-rights code, says the records of police officers and firefighters that would be used to evaluate their performance or employment status are considered confidential and should not be available to outside review without the person’s written consent or a court order. Those records include an officer’s disciplinary history, shielding wrongdoing from public view.
The personnel orders typically contain an officer’s name and precinct, the nature of the offense and the penalty.
Outside of those reports, the police, at the discretion of senior officials, have shared information about officers and disciplinary actions in some cases. Officials have named some officers who were involved in shootings or those who were placed on modified duty in recent months amid a widespread federal corruption investigation.
Dick Dadey, executive director of the watchdog group Citizens Union, said transparency was essential with the police, considering the authority officers have. He also cited police-involved deaths, like that of Eric Garner, which have drawn scrutiny.
Some, including Mr. Dadey, criticized the police and Mayor Bill de Blasio, a Democrat, over the decision to limit access to the personnel orders, which they saw as a step away from transparency. But officials said the issue was with the law, which they had to follow.
Councilman Rory I. Lancman, a Queens Democrat who is the chairman of the Committee on Courts and Legal Services, said the decision was rooted not in the law itself but “unquestionably” in how the Police Department chose to interpret it. “It flies in the face of the public’s demand and the Council’s demand for more information about police discipline, not less,” he said.
