The Treasury’s schedule of financing this week includes Monday’s regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills on Tuesday.
At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.28 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.43 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.27 percent.
Florida Board of Education, $175 million of debt securities. Competitive.
Florida Department of Environmental Protection, $185 million of debt securities. Competitive.
Sheldon Independent School District, Tex., $54.8 million of general obligation unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.
Three Village Central School District, N.Y., $54.2 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.
Anaheim Elementary School District, Calif., $61.5 million of general obligation unlimited tax bonds. Competitive.
Louisville and Jefferson County, Ky., $138.6 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.
Los Angeles Unified School District, $455.4 million of general obligation unlimited tax refinancing bonds. Competitive.
Brooklyn Area Local Development Corporation, N.Y., $482 million of debt securities. Goldman Sachs.
Clifton Higher Education Finance Corporation, Tex., $61.7 million of education revenue and refinancing bonds. Robert W. Baird.
Durham County, N.C., $95 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.
Fort Myers, Fla., $50 million of capital improvement revenue bonds. Raymond James.
Grapevine Colleyville Independent School District, Tex., $160.5 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. Hilltop Securities.
Honolulu City and County, $382 million of wastewater system revenue bonds. Bank of America Merrill Lynch.
Irvine Ranch Water District, Calif., $117.5 million of certificates of participation. Goldman Sachs.
Memphis, $110 million of water, gas and electric system revenue bonds. Raymond James.
Michigan Strategic Fund, Detroit Edison Company, $141.5 million of adjustable-rate demand-limited obligation refinancing revenue pollution control bonds and variable-rate limited-obligation refinancing revenue-exempt facilities project bonds. KeyBanc Capital Markets.
New Haven, $117.6 million of general obligation bonds. Raymond James.
New Hope Cultural Education Facilities Finance Corporation, Tex., $60.1 million of retirement facility revenue bonds. Ziegler.
New Jersey Health Care Facilities Financing Authority, $243.4 million of St. Joseph’s Healthcare System revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.
Port of Tacoma, Wash., $108.7 million of limited tax general obligation refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.
Port of Tacoma, Wash., $150.7 million of revenue refinancing bonds. Barclays Capital.
Southwestern Community College District, Calif., $86 million of general obligation refinancing bonds. Morgan Stanley.
Successor Agency to the Tustin Community Redevelopment Agency, Calif., $60.5 million of tax allocation refinancing bonds. Piper Jaffray.
Washington State Housing Finance Commission, $132.6 million of nonprofit housing revenue and refinancing bonds. Ziegler.
Wentzville R-IV School District, Mo., $54.7 million of refinancing and improvement lease certificates of participation. Stifel Nicolaus.