The Democratic presidential nominee, Hillary Clinton, said that her rival, Donald J. Trump, would pay a lower tax rate than middle-class families under his tax plan.
2. SOUNDBITE (English) Hillary Clinton, Democratic Presidential Nominee: “Under his plans, Donald Trump would pay a lower tax rate than middle class families and of course we have no idea what tax rate he pays because unlike everybody else who’s run for president in the last four or five decades he refuses to release his tax returns so the American people can’t really judge. And then there’s the estate tax which he wants to eliminate altogether, so if you believe Donald Trump is as wealthy as he claims, we can’t say that for sure,but let’s assume it, he would by eliminating the estate tax save the Trump family 4 (b) billion (US) dollars and do absolutely nothing for 99.8 percent of all Americans.” 4. SOUNDBITE (English) Hillary Clinton, Democratic Presidential Nominee: it’s fair to say that Donald Trump has shown us who he is, he can hire and fire anybody he wants from his campaign, they can make him read new words from a teleprompter, but he is still the same man who insults Gold Star families, demeans women, mocks people with disabilities, and thinks he knows more about ISIS (Islamic State Group) than our generals. There is no new Donald Trump, this is it, and you know I hope you will talk to any of your friends who are flirting with the idea of voting for Donald Trump, friends don’t let friends vote for Trump.
Hillary Clinton leaned into her plans to raise taxes on the wealthiest Americans on Wednesday, denouncing Donald J. Trump’s tax proposals as a boondoggle for billionaires.
For months, Mrs. Clinton has attacked Mr. Trump’s economic agenda in broad terms, portraying him as a follower of the “trickle down” orthodoxy of previous Republican administrations. But Mr. Trump’s release of his tax plans last week in Detroit allowed her to begin to criticize them more specifically.
Just as President Obama attacked his 2012 rival, Mitt Romney, for paying a lower effective tax rate than the vast majority of Americans, Mrs. Clinton said that Mr. Trump’s plan would benefit people in his own income bracket, declaring that he “would pay a lower rate than middle-class families” if it were put into effect. Mr. Trump has recommended cutting the top marginal income tax rate to 33 percent from the current 39.6 percent, and broadening deductions for things like child care.
Mr. Trump, conversely, has portrayed Mrs. Clinton as a tax-and-spend Democrat who supports policies that have caused 15 years of virtually stagnant wages. “For an economy desperate for a jump start, Clinton’s plan will only act as a straitjacket,” his campaign said on Wednesday.
Mrs. Clinton’s spending plans, including a $250 billion investment in infrastructure and a $350 billion plan to make college more affordable, rely largely on changes to the tax code that would raise rates on the affluent and corporations.
She supports the “Buffett rule,” which would require millionaires to pay at least 30 percent of their income in taxes, and wants to close the carried interest loophole that lets hedge fund managers pay a lesser tax rate on much of their income. She has also proposed an “exit tax” on corporations that move jobs overseas, and wants to limit tax deductions, impose a 4 percent tax surcharge for income over $5 million, and close corporate tax loopholes to help pay for her costly domestic agenda.
After touring a job training program at John Marshall High School in Cleveland, Mrs. Clinton described how her plan would affect voters in Ohio, a critical swing state where she holds a five-point edge over Mr. Trump, according to an NBC News/Wall Street Journal/Marist poll.
Referring to a report by Moody’s Analytics, she said her plan would create 376,000 jobs in Ohio, while Mr. Trump’s plans would cost the state more than 123,000 jobs.
“I know that too many families right here in Ohio are feeling too much financial stress, worrying about how they’re going to make ends meet,” she said.
Mrs. Clinton, who is sometimes mocked for the attention she pays to granular policy details, has taken particular aim at Mr. Trump’s proposal to cut taxes on what are known as pass-through entities: businesses that do not pay corporate income taxes, but whose owners are taxed on individual profits.
Calling this provision “the Trump loophole,” Mrs. Clinton asserted on Wednesday that it would allow Mr. Trump and business owners like him to pay less than half the current tax rate on income from their own companies.
Even some Republicans who support Mr. Trump’s promise to slash the tax rate on corporate profits to 15 percent, from the current 35 percent, have criticized the pass-through provision.
Polling suggests that Mrs. Clinton’s focus on tax issues could resonate with voters, because most Americans agree with the thrust of her ideas.
Almost two-thirds, 64 percent, of Americans said they were bothered a lot by the feeling that some corporations are not paying what is fair in federal taxes, and 61 percent said the same about some wealthy people, according to a 2015 poll from the Pew Research Center.
While the weeds of tax policy can be a difficult sell to voters, the broader issue of income inequality has motivated voters this election year.
To that end, Mrs. Clinton tried to sprinkle personal stories around her policy details. “I am proud to be the granddaughter of a factory worker and the daughter of a small-business man and standing here before you,” she said, while portraying her rival as part of the top 1 percent in terms of wealth.
She said Mr. Trump’s plan to eliminate the estate tax would save his family an estimated $4 billion, which, by Mrs. Clinton’s calculations, would pay for publicly funded prekindergarten classes for 890,000 4-year-olds and provide a year’s worth of health care for 360,000 veterans.
