New York|Once Mocked, the G Train Is Now Cool. Kind Of.
Once Mocked, the G Train Is Now Cool. Kind Of.
The G train has long been the outcast of New York City’s subway system. It was short. It came sporadically. It did not even go to Manhattan.
But that was before the ascendancy of Williamsburg and Greenpoint in Brooklyn fueled a boom in ridership on the G train. Now even the line’s most embarrassing feature — its truncated trains that are shorter than station platforms — is set for a makeover.
The G line is no longer a punch line; it is a train New Yorkers increasingly enjoy riding and might even consider cool, though its heavily hipster clientele would be unlikely to say so out loud.
And when the L line shuts down for 18 months between Manhattan and Brooklyn starting in 2019, the G train will start to receive even more attention. To handle an influx of riders, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority plans to improve service on the line and to double the length of its trains to eight cars from four.
The G line, known for its queasy lime green color, is the city’s only major subway line that does not go to Manhattan. It stretches from Brooklyn to Queens, traveling through several popular Brooklyn neighborhoods, including Park Slope, Carroll Gardens, Bedford-Stuyvesant, Williamsburg and Greenpoint, before ending in Long Island City, Queens.
Once mocked, loathed and avoided, the line now serves as a scrappy mascot for Brooklyn itself, a shift that was vividly illustrated when a replica of a G train subway car at a 2014 Manhattan party for the popular HBO series “Girls” was a hit on Instagram. The show’s protagonist, Hannah, a striving and often broke writer in her 20s, lived near a G train stop in Greenpoint.
On a recent morning, aboard a crowded G train filled with many young people traveling to work, Cory Tallman, a 32-year-old copywriter who lives in South Williamsburg, said he had grown to appreciate the line.
In a subway system that is bursting at the seams with its highest ridership since 1948, the G line has been a part of that surge. About 150,000 riders use the G line on weekdays, an increase of about 17 percent since 2010, according to the transportation authority. But it is dwarfed by the nearly 225,000 riders who take the crowded L line under the East River each day.
Mayor Bill de Blasio’s administration is betting that demand for public transit along the Brooklyn-to-Queens corridor will continue to grow as it moves forward on a $2.5 billion waterfront streetcar that would extend even farther than the G train, from Sunset Park in Brooklyn to Astoria in Queens. The ambitious — and contentious — project is at the top of the mayor’s transportation agenda, though it would not open until 2024 or later.
When the L train tunnel under the East River shuts down to repair damage caused by Hurricane Sandy, subway officials hope many riders will switch to other lines like the G, where they plan to add service and upgrade the Court Square station in Queens with two new stairways. Commuters who rely on the L line could take the G train to Queens and transfer to another line, like the No. 7 train, to reach Manhattan. About two years ago, the G subway tunnel between Brooklyn and Queens closed for storm repairs for five weeks that were painful for people who relied on the line.
In recent years, the unpredictable line has become more dependable, riders say, especially on weekdays.
Ms. Vanterpool, who works in advertising in Brooklyn, said she might even miss the so-called G train sprint across the platform to board the line’s trains that are too short for its platforms.
Those not accustomed to the line’s quirks find the situation less charming. Melinda Rodriguez, 32, a speech-language pathologist visiting from Georgia, bruised her leg during a recent G sprint in Brooklyn: Her son’s scooter hit her as they ran to the train.
Though the G line has come a long way, further improvements are needed, said Nick Sifuentes, the deputy director of Riders Alliance, a rider advocacy group.
The number of New Yorkers commuting within Brooklyn and Queens has increased in recent years while residential developments have flooded neighborhoods along the G line, said Richard Barone, the vice president for transportation for the Regional Plan Association, an urban research and advocacy organization.
But many riders said weekend service on the G line remained woeful, with trains running less often and disruptions occurring frequently. Jaime Bernat, 22, an assistant editor at Viceland who lives and works in Brooklyn, relies on the line during the week. On weekends, she prefers using the car service Lyft, or taking the F train to Manhattan and the L line back to Williamsburg, rather than dealing with the G train.
The G line is not terrible, but it is not exactly winning any awards either, Laura Mechling, 26, a graphic designer who lives in Greenpoint, said as she took the train to the Court Square stop. The trains run less often than other lines, meaning if she misses a train, she is sometimes late for work.
