New York City has agreed to pay more than $4 million to the family of Akai Gurley, the unarmed man killed in a Brooklyn housing project in 2014 by a police officer on patrol, according to a lawyer for Mr. Gurley’s family.
The city will pay the bulk of the settlement, $4.1 million, said Scott Rynecki, who represents Mr. Gurley’s domestic partner, Kimberly Ballinger, and their 4-year-old daughter, Akaila Gurley. The New York City Housing Authority will pay an additional $400,000, and the officer, Peter Liang, will pay $25,000, Mr. Rynecki said.
The settlement, reported by The Daily News, was finalized on Monday afternoon by Justice Dawn M. Jimenez-Salta of State Supreme Court in Brooklyn, after two months of negotiations. Efforts to reach a lawyer for Mr. Liang and the city’s Law Department late Monday were unsuccessful.
Mr. Gurley was killed on Nov. 20, 2014, by a ricocheting bullet fired by Mr. Liang, who was on a night patrol in a dark stairwell in the Louis H. Pink Houses in the East New York neighborhood.
Mr. Liang was convicted of involuntary manslaughter, and the Police Department fired him. But in April, Justice Danny K. Chun of State Supreme Court in Brooklyn reduced the charge to criminally negligent homicide, describing the shooting as essentially an accident. He sentenced Mr. Liang to five years of probation and 800 hours of community service.
The case frustrated many in the Asian-American community who felt that Mr. Liang, who is Chinese-American, was used as a scapegoat during a national debate about the policing of black communities. And many African-Americans protested the shooting, citing concerns with tactics used by officers in housing projects and drawing parallels to other fatal shootings of unarmed black men.
The $4.1 million will be paid out in structured settlements to Akaila, starting when she turns 18 years old, though Ms. Ballinger may petition the court to receive a small portion, perhaps in the form of a monthly stipend, Mr. Rynecki said. A college fund will also be established for Akaila.
“She looks forward to raising Akaila to be a productive member of society and someone Akai will be proud of,” Mr. Rynecki said.