A herd of reindeer was struck by lightning in Norway, killing at least 323 of the animals, officials say. Reindeer are known to huddle together during storms.
OSLO — Hardangervidda, a mountain plateau in southern Norway that is popular among tourists and hikers, is known for its natural beauty. As the seasons change, thousands of reindeer migrate across the plateau, moving between drier lands in the east, where they graze on lichens, and wetter lands in the west, where they breed.
But on Friday, a storm transformed the plateau into a grisly scene. Lightning appeared to have killed an entire herd: 323 reindeer at last count, including 70 calves and five reindeer that had to be put down because they were severely injured in the storm.
Officials surmised that an extremely high discharge of electricity from the storm on Friday afternoon — and the interaction of the lightning with the earth and water — had electrocuted the animals.
An employee of the agency found the corpses while conducting a count in connection with the culling of the herd, through a controlled hunt. The hunt, which began on Aug. 20 and is scheduled to last through the end of September, is intended to destroy about 2,000 to 3,000 of the roughly 11,000 to 15,000 reindeer, and plans for the hunt are continuing.
Olav Strand, a senior researcher at the Norwegian Institute for Nature Research, inspected the site on Sunday, and said the animals appeared to have died “as if someone just turned off a switch.” The air was filled with a smell that seemed both sweet and sour, he said.
Anton Krag, a zoologist and the chief executive of the Norwegian Animal Protection Alliance, said he hoped the publicity surrounding the reindeer deaths would lead to greater awareness of the dangers reindeer face.
Mr. Knutsen and Mr. Strand pointed to one upside: the deaths of the 323 reindeer offer an opportunity to increase the sample size for a project to map the prevalence of chronic wasting disease, a contagious neurological disorder that is related to mad cow disease and that was detected in reindeer in southern Norway in March.
The authorities had previously asked hunters to submit the heads of up to 4,200 animals as they worked to contain the disease, which attacks the brains of deer, caribou, elk and moose.
Mr. Knutsen said that officials would use most of the animals killed in the storm to add to the sample.
