Yes, I thought during the last moments of “Midsummer (a Play With Songs),” I like these people together; they should be in love.
The surge of that yes proves that I was carried away by this TheaterWorks production, directed by Tracy Brigden with an awareness of the sweetness inside this spiked candy of a play. “Midsummer” has a fast and funny script, as well as strong work by designers. But most important are the appealing Rebecca Hart and M. Scott McLean, whose chemistry radiates good vibes throughout the theater.
This play out of Scotland, set on the summer solstice, comes from talented stock: The writers are David Greig (whose darker play-with-music, “The Events,” ran in New Haven and New York) and Gordon McIntyre, of the indie-pop band Ballboy. Now, don’t inflate your expectations too much based on those credits; “Midsummer” is a modest little charmer, a tight narrative of comic sketches that flirts with clever, gritty irony but lands as something of an urban fairy tale.
Yet however sharp the humor — and it’s pretty sharp — it’s simply an entertaining diversion unless the love story has a pulse. Here, it does.
Mr. McLean is Bob, a depressed ne’er-do-well with a poet’s soul (he reads Dostoyevsky to cheer up), and Ms. Hart is Helena, an anxious woman discombobulated by bad relationships and a judgmental family. Her character seems at least nominally inspired by the jilted Helena of “A Midsummer Night’s Dream,” who pursues her love (the ex) through enchanted woods, but there’s no exact match. Indeed, there’s no cause here to think about Shakespeare at all (aside from catching the name of a sex club called Midsummer Night’s Cream, where our heroes get tied up, literally, for a while).
“Midsummer,” which had its premiere in 2008, communicates more as the ribald Scottish kinsman of the Irish “Once,” John Carney’s quirkily intimate, vérité-style 2007 film of two odd-couple musicians. (That movie became a large-scale, Tony-winning musical.) “Midsummer” freaks out and explodes where “Once” goes within and massages, but the music serves a similar purpose: It aims to deepen each of the relationships and expand why they matter.
Ms. Hart and Mr. McLean — who narrate the show as Helena and Bob while also playing incidental characters — seem to share animating secrets as they play acoustic guitar and sing to each other, the observing audience simply basking in the warmth. They’re into each other, loose and unguarded; they’re also good singers with interesting timbres who can harmonize their way through a pop tune with ease.
The music is essential to the fairy tale feel of the show, but “Midsummer” is, as its subtitle acknowledges, not a standard musical; these songs, lacking much heft, can become merely enchanting little extras. That almost happens here: The flow from the narrative into the music is at times awkward, especially when a more revved-up number asks, perhaps a little too eagerly, for hand-clapping audience participation. (Just don’t. It’s a small house.) Yet Ms. Brigden and her performers have created a light, wistful soundscape that serves as the production’s heart.
The plot takes off after Bob, flush with a bundle of money he shouldn’t have, throws caution aside and asks Helena to help him spend it. She agrees, leading to drunken adventuring through an impressively specific patch of underground Edinburgh. What drives the story, however, is the percolating desperation they both feel about turning — gasp — 35. “I’m itching to be told life does more than make you old,” they sing. A remedy comes from the pay station at a parking lot: “Change is possible,” it reads.
The energetic Mr. McLean has just the right touch with Bob’s roguishly sexy, good-guy appeal. Ms. Hart is more subtle, a full participant in the extroversion of “Midsummer” while suggesting intelligence and a mysterious inner ache. The comedy flows naturally from them, at least typically; in places, it could relax. But the love story, however much it’s doing double duty for laughs, still feels substantial.
Will Bob have more conversations with his penis (a great bit) or conventions with other Bobs in the Department of Philosophical Underpinnings (an even better bit)? And what of Helena, who vomits on herself when she’s a bridesmaid late for her sister’s wedding? Will she stop choosing the wrong men? And what, for both, about children?
Yes, change is possible, Helena and Bob, but don’t change too much; we love you just the way you are.