Word of Mayor Bill de Blasio’s impending family vacation in New England came late at City Hall, with some of his staff members learning only a day before his departure on Sunday that the boss would be gone for the week. Fewer knew the itinerary, which in the spirit of American road trips had still not been fully decided before the rubber met the road.
One thing was firm: a first stop in Vermont on Sunday for dinner with Senator Bernie Sanders, a favorite of Mr. de Blasio’s two children in the Democratic primary despite their father’s endorsement of his rival, Hillary Clinton. Less assured is the final destination: Fenway Park to watch the mayor’s beloved Boston Red Sox this Sunday night.
As the family set off in a city-issued sport utility vehicle, a police driver at the wheel and a chase car behind, City Hall settled into the full repose of late summer. Ties hung loose or disappeared altogether. Sunglasses glinted. The shadows of beards emerged.
Mr. de Blasio’s schedule had been light anyhow, befitting the last hot days of summer in a city that never sleeps but, in late August at least, often does not bother putting on work clothes, either. A weekly question-and-answer session with reporters. Four of the last 15 weekdays with no public events at all.
Few in the city’s political class felt the need to criticize the travels of a mayor who two years ago demonstrated his willingness to work hard but also take time off, and who has not been beholden to the workaholism of his predecessors, Michael R. Bloomberg and Rudolph W. Giuliani. Neither appeared to take a full week off during his term in office — two decades of vacationless summers for the city’s chief executive — though Mr. Bloomberg, a billionaire, had other methods of relieving stress, frequently jetting to his Bermuda home on weekends.
“If there’s a week to get away, it’s probably this one,” said Councilman Jimmy Van Bramer of Queens, who sparred briefly with the mayor Thursday on Twitter after Mr. de Blasio, a fellow Democrat, told reporters he would be “polite but firm” with Mr. Van Bramer over his opposition to a City Hall-backed housing plan.
“I will disagree with him on some things, but I’m certainly not going to begrudge him a vacation,” Mr. Van Bramer said. So far, he said, the mayor had not called from the road to have that firm talk.
Some, like Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, cloaked their comments in the ancient rhetorical art of declining to discuss something but then discussing it anyway. “For me, I am not comfortable leaving the state,” Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, added in an able display of preterition with reporters on Monday. “You wanna be the governor of New York? Be in New York."
For Mr. de Blasio, the trip was his second weeklong excursion of the summer. Last month he and his family spent a week in Italy, a destination the mayor has visited each of his three years in office. The trip is also his second extended family vacation in the United States, after a road trip across the Southwest last year.
Soon after that trip, Mr. de Blasio’s wife, Chirlane McCray, shared photographs of the family on her blog: the sullen look on their son Dante’s face; their daughter, Chiara, inspecting flowers; Mr. de Blasio in cargo shorts on a dusty landscape.
But the drive across the Northeast this week is likely to remain a more private affair; Ms. McCray did not share photos from the Italy trip and has not posted to her blog since June.
It was also not clear who paid for the dinner with Mr. Sanders and his wife, Jane, at Koto Japanese Steakhouse along Route 7 in South Burlington, but the price would not have been steep, Michael Briggs, a spokesman for Mr. Sanders, said. “Bernie is not a fancy restaurant kind of guy,” he said.
On Wednesday, Mr. de Blasio and Ms. McCray are set to see Dante, 18, off for his sophomore year at Yale University. (Chiara, 21, graduated in June from Santa Clara University in California.) All the while, Mr. Phillips said, the mayor has remained in hourly contact with his staff in New York.
Mr. Phillips said the stops in Rhode Island, where Mr. de Blasio has a 96-year-old aunt, and in Massachusetts “are still being finalized.” That 8 p.m. Red Sox game, it turns out, might end just a little too late for a mayor who plans to return to work bright and early Monday morning.