RIO DE JANEIRO — The Paralympic Games, set to start here on Sept. 7, are in a precarious financial position, with significant budget cuts announced Friday.
“Never before in the 56-year history of the Paralympic Games have we faced circumstances like this,” said Philip Craven, the president of the International Paralympic Committee.
The planned cuts to the Paralympics, the top global competition for disabled athletes, will affect the number of workers, transportation options and sports venues, according to the committee. The number of sports events will not be affected, officials said.
The wheelchair fencing competition, for example, will take place within the Olympic Park, rather than at a special destination location, so that the previously designated location can be “closed and dismantled,” a statement from the committee said.
Friday’s announcement followed days of growing tension between local organizers of the Games and Paralympic officials, who had warned that if certain past-due payments were not delivered, the participation of whole nations would be jeopardized.
“Currently we have around 10 countries who, even if the grants are paid, may struggle to cover the cost of their travel to the Games,” Mr. Craven said.
“The sales of tickets and the sponsorships have been below our expectations,” Mario Andrada, a spokesman for the Rio organizing officials, said Thursday.
As of this week, 12 percent of tickets to the Paralympics had been sold, Mr. Andrada said.
Months ago in Lausanne, Switzerland, officials had said that roughly 25 percent of tickets had been sold. Explaining why that figure had been halved, Mr. Andrada said Thursday that Rio’s mayor had made a commitment to buy tickets that was later rescinded.
Bob Foth, the Paralympic coach for U.S.A. Shooting, said he did not think the financial disruptions would affect the athletes’ attitudes toward the Games.
Brazil has battled a profound economic crisis in preparing for the Games, facing a rising rate of unemployment.
As of this week, 28 sponsors had signed on to the Paralympics, fewer than half the number secured for the Olympics.
Mr. Andrada declined to answer questions about Paralympic funding for several days, after event organizers — who in the days leading up to the Games had emphasized their reliance on private financing — had requested hundreds of millions in Brazilian government money.
A judge here, in turn, issued an injunction preventing such use of public funds.
On Thursday, after that injunction had been lifted, Brazil’s president, Michel Temer, promised organizing officials 250 million reais (about $77 million) in public money.
Amid Brazil’s crisis, Mr. Temer, who assumed power in May, visited the Olympic Park on Thursday and met with organizers of the Games. A principal focus of that meeting — which included Rio’s mayor and governor and various federal ministers of sport, infrastructure and foreign relations — was the request for public money to help deliver the Paralympics.
“Not only did we hold productive talks, but he picked up the phone on a number of occasions to get things moving, which gave us huge confidence,” Mr. Craven said of Mr. Temer.
The International Paralympic Committee and the International Olympic Committee began cooperating in 2000 and came into full force in 2008 in Beijing. The two organizations have an agreement to remain partners until at least 2032.
The I.O.C. has given $1.5 billion for the operation of the Olympics and the Paralympics.
Mr. Craven said the usual approach had been to deal with the direct partners of the Paralympics — the organizing committee and the federal and city governments of the host nation.
