While the dwindling competition may not be fatal, “it isn’t ideal,” conceded Larry Levitt, a senior executive at the Kaiser Family Foundation. People shopping for plans in the exchanges will be left with fewer insurer choices but also, probably, fewer choices of doctors and hospitals because the companies that remain will most likely offer sharply narrow networks.
Evidence from the first years of the marketplace suggests that consumers benefit from more plan choices. According to a study from researchers at the Urban Institute, more competitive markets tended to have lower premiums.
“It’s important to have competition in the exchange markets, both to have consumer choice and to keep premiums competitive,” said Caroline Pearson, a senior vice president at Avalere Health.
But it is unclear whether competitive markets are causing lower premiums, or whether the kinds of places attractive to insurance carriers — those with many healthy customers and a broad range of doctors and hospitals — may simply be easier places to offer low-cost insurance. A rule in the health law limits how much of their premiums insurers can keep for overhead and profits, which may hinder a monopoly insurer’s ability to overcharge, even in the absence of competition.
The exodus has left some states in flux, with regulators and remaining insurers trying to stabilize the market. In North Carolina, the exit of the UnitedHealth Group and Aetna has left BlueCross Blue Shield of North Carolina to serve the exchange.
Insurers say the current rush to the exits underscores their contention that changes need to be made to the law. The decline in participation “echoes our calls for Congress and the administration to move forward with solutions that will improve the stability of the market and provide the affordable coverage options that consumers need,” said Clare Krusing, a spokeswoman for the America’s Health Insurance Plans, a trade group.
The McKinsey analysis is based on detailed information about the number of carriers in regions of the country known as ratings areas. In 17 states, as well as Washington, D.C., analysts had full information about carriers intending to sell insurance next year.
For the rest of the country, the analysts used complete data from 2016, then updated the information whenever an insurer announced publicly that it was leaving an entire state. Our map does not show places where insurers have exited only portions of those states, and so may show more carriers in some areas than there will be. Nor does it take account of carriers’ promises to enter portions of states that have not yet published filings for 2017.
The Affordable Care Act has changed a lot about the individual insurance market — opening it to people even if they had previous illnesses, guaranteeing a standard package of covered services and providing sliding-scale subsidies to help moderate-income Americans buy their own plans.
But when it comes to competition and choice, the markets may look very much the way they did before the enactment of the law, with regions and even whole states dominated by a single insurance company, typically a Blue Cross plan. The Blue Cross plans traditionally played the role of the insurer of last resort, said Timothy Jost, an emeritus law professor at Washington and Lee who has closely followed the progress of the law. “They will be the last people to leave the marketplace,” he said.