It was also a coded reference to a battle unfolding inside the popular diner, where Broadway hopefuls and itinerant performers have serenaded tourist-heavy crowds tucking into cheeseburgers and waffles for more than 20 years. Art and food service have always coexisted at Ellen’s, where actors and singers relished the chance to earn money, hone their craft and audition in their off hours.
But in the last eight months, according to employees of the restaurant, a new management team has fired more than 30 of their colleagues — servers and kitchen workers — while instituting new policies that staff members said threatened their acting careers, their livelihoods and, potentially, the feature that made the restaurant a haven for aspiring stars. On Friday, workers representing a group of over 50 employees notified management that they had formed a union after months of organizing secretly.
The workers are seeking a variety of changes, including higher wages for nontipped employees, protection from what they describe as a campaign of arbitrary discipline and a measure of job security, which they believe they have lost under the new management regimen.
More than job security, though, the workers said what was at stake was the preservation of a performer’s utopia: a place where many would return to wait on tables between stints in regional theater or on “American Idol,” and where artists could easily pursue big city dreams and still pay the rent.
“New York is a tough place to be, and Ellen’s claims to be this place where you have a home in between you pursuing your dreams, and they are trying to take that away from us,” said Meg Doherty, 31, a waitress whose specialty is jazz standards.
The restaurant’s owner, Ken Sturm, said that the workers’ dissatisfaction had come as a surprise and that their concerns would be addressed. Ellen’s is named for Mr. Sturm’s mother, Ellen Hart-Sturm, a former Miss Subways beauty queen.
The difficulties began in January, according to a half-dozen servers and a letter sent to Mr. Sturm by the union, Stardust Family United. Mr. Sturm hired several new managers who pledged a better-run, more streamlined way of delivering egg creams and musical numbers. What happened instead, the workers said, was a mass firing of longtime servers, many for small offenses or ones seemingly beyond their control. Last week, for example, a waitress was fired when a table of customers left without paying, Ms. Bogan and others said.
Servers at Ellen’s are known as Stardusters, and their head shots grace the diner’s walls and website like celebrities in a playbill. But behind the scenes, workers said, the new managers warned them that they were easily replaceable. When employees complained about a new scheduling system that prevented them from switching shifts so they could make it to auditions — the point, many said, of working at Ellen’s — they were derided as divas.
Marianne LeNabat, an organizer with the Industrial Workers of the World, a union that helped guide the servers through the process of organizing a union, said she was stunned by the situation at Ellen’s.
Shifts have been extended and waiters have been compelled to take on more tables, workers said, increasing customer frustration over long wait times. On Yelp, many customer reviews praise the singing and criticize the slow service.
Mr. Sturm said the policy of letting workers take time off had not changed. He cited several who are currently on the road performing and will be returning to work when their tours end. The average tenure of Ellen’s employees, he said, was 10 ½ years. Those who had not been welcomed back, he added, had performance issues such as being late or missing work.
Max Demers, 33, has worked for over a decade at Ellen’s, where he sings country songs, and where he met his fiancée, another performing server. Staff members’ complaints, he said, were not meant as retribution against the diner, but as an effort to protect a haven for artists.
