PHOENIX — A federal judge on Friday referred Sheriff Joe Arpaio and his second-in-command for criminal prosecution, finding that they ignored and misrepresented to subordinates court orders designed to keep the sheriff’s office from racially profiling Latinos.
In making the referral to the United States attorney’s office for criminal contempt charges, Judge G. Murray Snow of Federal District Court in Phoenix delivered the sharpest rebuke against Mr. Arpaio, who as the long-serving sheriff in Maricopa County made a name for himself as an unrelenting pursuer of undocumented immigrants.
Sheriff Arpaio and Chief Deputy Jerry Sheridan “have a history of obfuscation and subversion of this court’s orders that is as old as this case,” Judge Snow wrote in his order.
The referral does not mean the sheriff will face criminal charges; it is up to federal prosecutors to decide whether to pursue the case. Still, if the prosecutors do not take the case, the judge could appoint a special prosecutor.
Judge Snow’s referral also extends to Capt. Steve R. Bailey, who was in charge of internal affairs investigations in the sheriff’s office, and Michele M. Iafrate, a lawyer for Sheriff Arpaio’s. They were both accused of withholding information from a court-appointed monitor about the existence of 1,459 IDs seized in law enforcement operations.
In his decision, Judge Snow removed several of Sheriff Arpaio’s powers, including his ability to oversee internal affairs investigations. The judge had already found that Sheriff Arpaio and his deputies had mishandled and manipulated such investigations, in part to obscure wrongdoing or neglect by deputies.
The lawsuit has already cost taxpayers more than $50 million in legal fees and contributed to Arizona’s reputation for bias against immigrants.
Gov. Doug Ducey has worked to redefine the state’s relationship to Mexico, bruised by the immigration law signed by his predecessor that empowered the police to ask about the legal status of anyone whom they suspected of being in the country illegally. Sheriff Arpaio, meanwhile, has remained a loyal ally of Donald J. Trump, the Republican presidential nominee, amplifying his calls for a wall along the Southern border, paid for by Mexico.
Sheriff Arpaio has alternated between meek and defiant in and outside court, openly criticizing Judge Snow to reporters and often characterizing the racial profiling case against him as a political vendetta by the Obama administration.
“The truth will come out,” he said in a recent interview from Tent City here, where inmates are housed in recommissioned Korean War tents, exposed to this city’s torrid summer heat.
The case was filed in 2007 on behalf of Latino drivers who claimed they had been systematically targeted by sheriff’s deputies during traffic stops and immigration patrols. Judge Snow agreed, ordering changes in training and procedures, including a requirement that officers relay by radio the reason for each stop before approaching a driver.
But in May, the judge found Sheriff Arpaio and his top deputies in contempt of court, saying that they had “engaged in multiple acts of misconduct, dishonesty and bad faith” and “demonstrated a persistent disregard for the orders of the court.” His decision to ask the United States attorney’s office to bring criminal charges came despite Sheriff Arpaio’s apologies and pleas by one of his lawyers, Mel McDonald, last month in court.
“One thing I’m convinced, judge, is that you want to see the process succeed,” Mr. McDonald said. He listed reasons against a criminal referral — Sheriff Arpaio’s age (he is 84) and “long career in public service,” his apologies for disrespecting the court’s order, and the “hundreds, if not thousands of hours” already spent to comply with it.
Lawyers for the American Civil Liberties Union have argued that Sheriff Arpaio violated the court’s orders to score political points ahead of a re-election race in 2012. He is running for a seventh term in November and has raised some $10 million in donations, mostly from out-of-state supporters.
Judge Snow also called for compensation for drivers who were pulled over by Maricopa County sheriff’s deputies after he had ordered a stop to their immigration patrols. The judge ordered the Maricopa County Board of Supervisors to create a $500,000 compensation fund, an amount that could be increased if it is paid out before all of the victims are compensated.