WASHINGTON — Senator John McCain sharply criticized Donald J. Trump’s comments about the family of a fallen Muslim Army captain on Monday, a rebuke that provided an opening for other vulnerable Republican senators to do the same, even though they all stopped short of rescinding their endorsements of him.
“While our party has bestowed upon him the nomination, it is not accompanied by unfettered license to defame those who are the best among us,” Mr. McCain, a war hero whose service and capture in Vietnam were also once derided by Mr. Trump, said in a remarkable and lengthy written reproach of his party’s presidential nominee.
Within an hour, other embattled Republican senators, who like Mr. McCain are trying to stand between the forces propelling Mr. Trump and those he offends, offered their own condemnations.
Donald Trump is facing criticism from Democrats and Republicans over his comments to Khizr Khan and his wife after a speech at the Democratic convention. Their son, an Army captain, died in Iraq.
Senator Kelly Ayotte, Republican of New Hampshire, whose husband is a veteran of the Iraq war and who is fighting to win a second term, said Monday that she was “appalled” by Mr. Trump’s comments. A spokeswoman for Senator Rob Portman, Republican of Ohio, also weighed in, as did Senator Pat Toomey of Pennsylvania. They denounced Mr. Trump’s words but did not reverse their endorsements.
Despite the intensifying criticism from Republican Party leaders, Mr. Trump on Monday showed no sign of relenting in his clash with the fallen soldier’s family. He has not apologized for his suggestion that the soldier’s father, Khizr Khan, might have forbidden his wife to speak during his address last week at the Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia, nor has Mr. Trump acknowledged the mounting rebukes from respected Republicans like Mr. McCain.
On Monday morning, Mr. Trump continued to criticize Mr. Khan, whose son Capt. Humayun Khan was killed in Iraq in 2004. Mr. Trump complained that Mr. Khan had become a ubiquitous presence in the news media since his speech at the convention, in which he excoriated the Republican presidential nominee.
While Donald J. Trump or Hillary Clinton will represent the entire country, the Americans who selected them are a small part of it.
Even as pressure increased from establishment Republicans who have been calling for repudiation of Mr. Trump, neither Speaker Paul D. Ryan nor Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, has pulled his support for Mr. Trump’s candidacy. They offered statements on Sunday in support of the Khan family, but did not mention Mr. Trump by name.
Khizr Khan, whose son, Capt. Humayun Khan, died in Iraq serving in the Army, said Donald J. Trump "sacrificed nothing and no one."
For congressional Republicans, Mr. Trump’s inflammatory remarks are a vexing challenge. On one hand, they want to distance themselves just enough to try to grab support from voters of both parties who do not intend to vote for Mr. Trump but may split their tickets. But they do not want to outright flip on their prior endorsements of Mr. Trump, because they need his supporters’ votes to win, too.
Republican leaders believe they need to continue to support Mr. Trump, if only to provide cover for the party’s candidates up for re-election. Republicans struggle to name policy positions of Mr. Trump that they prefer to those of his Democratic opponent, Hillary Clinton, but they often settle on their fear of the type of justices a President Clinton would name to the Supreme Court.
Aides to Republicans up for re-election also say, for the most part, they see no evidence in the polls that Mr. Trump has been a drag on lower-level races. This is particularly interesting since ticket splitting — when voters pick one party’s candidate for the White House and another for the House or Senate — has declined precipitously in recent years.
Get the latest national and state polls on the presidential election between Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump.
Mr. McCain is the embodiment of the internal conflict Republican candidates face. Reverence for the military has been at the core of Mr. McCain’s career — he was his party’s nominee for president in 2008 and is chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee — and he has a close allegiance to families of those killed in conflict.
Mr. Duffy, the national commander of the Veterans of Foreign Wars, was far more direct. “There are certain sacrosanct subjects that no amount of wordsmithing can repair once crossed,” he said.