Donald J. Trump contended that his presidency would benefit African-Americans, who he said were living in grim inner cities.
ATLANTA — Demeitrus Williams has heard what Donald J. Trump has been saying recently about black people: That their neighborhoods were “war zones.” That they struggle to get by on food stamps.  But it was not his reality, or that of people he knew. And the fact that those generalizations, in which all African-Americans inhabit a hell of violence and dysfunction, came as part of an outreach effort on Mr. Trump’s part elicited from Mr. Williams an incredulous and slightly bitter cascade of chuckles.
Dogged by suggestions that he has been running a racist campaign, Mr. Trump has been expressing concern for African-Americans more in the past week than at any other point in his presidential run and making a direct appeal for their votes. “What do you have to lose?” he has asked.
But the unrelievedly dire picture he has painted of black America has left many black voters angry, dumbfounded or both. Interviews with roughly a dozen blacks here turned up no one who found any appeal in Mr. Trump’s remarks. More common was the suggestion that Mr. Trump was trying to appeal to whites who might support him.
Marc Morial, the president of the National Urban League, said that black Americans faced challenges, but that Mr. Trump’s depiction of a hopeless, violent black America did not match reality.
Poverty is far more prevalent in black households than the general population, but the vast majority of African-Americans do not live in poverty. According to census data released last year, 26 percent of blacks live in poverty, compared with 15 percent of the country as a whole. Only about one out of every four households receiving food stamps in 2014 was black, according to the United States Department of Agriculture.
One area where blacks lag severely is homeownership. Rates of homeownership for blacks have dipped over the past four years to 41.7 percent in the second quarter of this year, the lowest rate among any racial group, according to the Census Bureau. The unemployment rate for blacks is nearly double the national average.
Mr. Trump’s tone and strategy in courting the black vote is distinctly different from that of previous Republican presidential nominees, whose more formal outreach efforts had limited success. In 2004, for instance, President George W. Bush addressed the National Urban League, and in 2012, Mitt Romney appeared before the N.A.A.C.P.
But he noted that Mr. Trump’s basic presentation to black voters was perhaps not altogether different from the one he has made to white voters.
Mr. Trump would seem to have nowhere to go but up among African-American voters. A recent NBC News/Wall Street Journal poll found Hillary Clinton with a 91 to 1 percent advantage over Mr. Trump among blacks. Many say Mr. Trump’s role in leading the so-called birther movement that questioned President Obama’s birthplace doomed his chances with African-American voters.
Some black conservatives, however, defended Mr. Trump. Wayne Dupree, a radio host, posted a live video to Periscope, an app that allows users to live-stream video, saying that Mrs. Clinton had been tricking black people for years. He urged blacks to look at the conditions they were living under.
“America needs to go a different route,” Mr. Dupree said.
In Atlanta on Wednesday, Nate Cohen, 35, a health care information technology worker, was among the African-Americans unimpressed by Mr. Trump’s efforts.
Certainly, he said, some live in dire poverty. Mr. Cohen’s side job is as a motivational speaker, work that takes him to troubled neighborhoods. But he said blacks and Latinos were not the only people living in such conditions.
He wondered whether Mr. Trump was appealing to whites, reinforcing stereotypes about blacks. 
Mr. Simpson, who owns a demolition business, said he was not surprised that Mr. Trump had offended many black people, after the things he had said about Muslims and Latinos.
“He eventually was going to get around to it,” he said.