As the former president of a 164-year-old all-male Harvard final club that last year voted to admit women, I applaud the efforts of Harvard’s president and dean, Drew Faust and Rakesh Khurana, to rid undergraduate life of the many negative influences of discriminatory social clubs.
The notion that these clubs are private, that their business is conducted out of sight of most students, and that associational rights are violated by the new sanctions on membership are fictions. The clubs’ presence on campus is prominent if not in your face, and they play a very large role in the life of the college, far larger in fact than in past decades when clubs did not hold large parties open to nonmembers.
The sanctions the dean proposes may seem harsh — preventing future members of single-sex clubs leadership roles in campus life and university endorsements for prestigious postgraduate fellowships. But they are reasonable given the harms addressed, and affect no current undergraduates, only students who decide in the future to join single-sex clubs.
Students not yet admitted to Harvard who want to be a member of a single-sex fraternity or sorority can choose to attend a different university. I can’t speak to why more of Harvard’s clubs have not yet followed the Spee club’s voluntary example. But given the Spee’s experience since the vote, I can confidently predict that as the other clubs go coed, they will, like the Spee, offer richer and healthier experiences for all.
My objections to final clubs are based not so much on gender exclusion, sexual assault or political correctness, but their exclusionary access, among peers, to tangible social and financial resources based on socioeconomic background and arbitrary measures of popularity.
The male clubs’ mansions dominate the central corridor of undergraduate life, creating loud disturbances nightly while barring the vast majority of students from entry to parties, access to career networks or use of their opulent facilities. Though mostly lacking real estate, female clubs are part of the same system.
The article does not adequately report on anti-final-club activism and sentiment among the student body, focusing instead on the sanctions by administrators. In fact, the survival and hegemony of the clubs are products of the illiberal agenda of out-of-touch alumni who fund the clubs and impose their antiquated rules.
The push to create a social community in which all students are equal participants represents the true spirit of liberalism.
The writer was a member of Harvard College’s class of 2016.