For years, participants in the Port Huron Float Down in Michigan have gathered by the hundreds in inflatable rafts, inner tubes and other devices to bob on the St. Clair River between Michigan and Canada for an eight-mile trip on a summer afternoon.
Occasionally in the past, a misguided floater or two ended up on the Canadian side, landing in points east instead of south, after launching from a beach in Port Huron, Mich.
Erik Kimball of Port Huron, a participant and a past organizer of a safety patrol for the event, said this was the most floaters to go astray and end up in Canada. He said that things started routinely at 1 p.m. with about 5,000 floaters but that winds began to pick up, to as much as 30 miles per hour by 4 p.m., sending more and more people drifting off course.
The Canadian Coast Guard, with help from the Ontario Provincial Police, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, the Canadian Coast Guard Auxiliary and the Sarnia and Point Edward Fire Departments, helped the floaters as they headed toward Sarnia, said Carol Launderville, a spokeswoman for the Canadian Coast Guard.
The Canadian Coast Guard enlisted Limnos, one of its ships that ordinarily conducts science missions on the Great Lakes, to be the command vessel on the scene.
There to greet the misdirected floaters on land were the police and emergency medical personnel from Sarnia and members of the Canadian Red Cross and the Canada Border Services Agency. Minor injuries of scrapes and bruises and twisted ankles were reported as some floaters climbed over rocks to go ashore, Ms. Launderville said, noting that where they landed had no beaches or sand.
Ten Sarnia Transit buses made 19 trips to take the stranded Americans over the Blue Water Bridge to the United States, The Sarnia Observer reported.
Canadians, befitting their reputation as polite and helpful, handled the unexpected guests with good cheer, Mr. Kimball said.
The city of Sarnia said in a news release on Tuesday night that it incurred more than 8,000 Canadian dollars (roughly $6,300) in overtime and related costs for the rescue effort. The Observer on Tuesday quoted the city’s mayor, Mike Bradley, as saying he did not expect to recoup the money because the event lacked an organizing committee, meaning there was no entity to hold accountable.
As of Wednesday morning, $952 had been pledged.
The float began in 1977 as a homegrown get-together of several hundred families and friends, Mr. Kimball said. The free event steadily grew over time to the point that the United States Coast Guard banned it over safety concerns in 1987; it resumed in 2008.
Mr. Kimball said that for the thousands of participants the float has had over the years, it has had only one drowning. “From a safety standpoint, it’s got a helluva record,” he said.
Despite some reports characterizing the wayward floaters as drunken college students, Mr. Kimball said participants were of diverse ages and backgrounds. And he said they were largely well behaved.
The event’s Facebook page thanked the Canadian authorities for their care and hospitality. “You’ve shown us true kindness and what it means to be amazing neighbors!” the page said.
Mr. Kimball said he doubted that what happened on Sunday would deter future gatherings. “No one really planned to be blown over to the Canadian side,” he said.