TEHRAN — Iran has deployed a Russian-made S-300 air defense system around its underground Fordo nuclear facility, according to state television.
Video posted late Sunday on Iranian state TV’s website showed trucks arriving at the site and missile launchers aimed skyward. The report did not say whether the system was fully operational.
Gen. Farzad Esmaili, the commander of Iran’s air defense, declined to comment on the report in an interview with another website affiliated with state news. “Maybe if you go to Fordo now, the system is not there,” he was quoted as saying on Monday. He added that the S-300 is a mobile system that should be relocated often.
It was not immediately clear why Tehran had chosen to place the outdated missile defense system at Fordo. The complex is no longer being used to enrich uranium, according to officials from Iran and the United States. Instead, officials say, it is being used mostly for research and the production of medical isotopes.
On social media, critics of the nuclear deal between Iran and Western powers questioned Iran’s claim that the site was no longer used to enrich uranium. “If the nuclear deal was supposed to make Fordow harmless, why deploy these missiles to protect it?” the group posted on Facebook, using an alternative spelling for the site.
As part of the nuclear deal, Iran agreed to convert the Fordo facility into a technology and science center and to give inspectors from the International Atomic Energy Agency access to the site, the State Department spokesman, John Kirby, said.
Russia began delivering the S-300 system to Iran this year under a contract signed in 2007. The delivery had been held up by international sanctions over Iran’s nuclear program, which were lifted this year under the agreement with world powers. The S-300 is considered inferior to Russia’s latest air defense system, the S-400.
The Fordo site, built 300 feet below a mountain about 60 miles south of Tehran, was revealed by Western nations in 2009.
Critics of Iran’s nuclear program pointed to the air defense deployment at Fordo as proof of Tehran’s intention to secretly develop nuclear weapons. Iran says that it has never sought nuclear arms and that the security around the site is intended to protect it from American or Israeli airstrikes.
“We carry out defense exercises in nonnuclear facilities once a month, but we do them several times a month in our nuclear facilities,” he said.
On Monday, Iran inaugurated a new radar system that it says is capable of detecting radar-evading aircraft like the American-made U-2, RQ-4 and MQ-1, state television reported. It said the radar, called the Nazir system, is in a remote area and is capable of detecting ballistic and cruise missiles, as well as drones flying at an altitude of more than 9,800 feet.