Ardani Artists, an institution run by the husband and wife Sergei and Gaiane Danilian and presenting ballet dancers and companies internationally, is enjoying a protracted silver jubilee. “Ardani 25” was celebrated in Moscow in 2014, in London in July 2015, and then on Friday and Saturday nights at City Center Theater in New York. London seems to have got the right age; Ardani was founded in 1990.
New York is where the Danilians have been based since the early 1990s; the recent performances occurred because their artists were available. Many of the world’s foremost dancers often work for Ardani. Friday night began with a film showing several of them, assuring us of their love and gratitude for Mr. Danilian in particular, and hailing his achievement in the highest terms.
The City Center program was widely advertised as a vehicle for Diana Vishneva, who was to play the King in “Le Divertissement du Roi.” Alas, she had an injured foot on Thursday and was replaced by the Mariinsky male soloist Philipp Stepin, for whom the King role was originally choreographed. He arrived in New York on Friday morning on a red-eye flight from California, where he had been on vacation.
I wish I could add my voice to these Ardani accolades. Mr. Danilian, the Ardani president and chief executive, has his place in dance history. He has been involved in taking the Merce Cunningham and José Limón companies to Russia, and in bringing the Mariinsky, Bolshoi and other Russian companies to the West. Not all Ardani productions are good, however. Friday’s was wretched.
If choreography is not the organizing principle behind ballet, the art becomes a mindless vehicle for unguided dancers. Friday’s choreography, trivial at best, was not unrepresentative of Ardani presentations. The three ballets, all poor, were by Vladimir Varnava, Marcelo Gomes and Maxim Petrov.
There was simply no merit in the evening’s first dance, Mr. Varnava’s 20-minute “Clay.” Performed by six dancers from the Mariinsky, this was a mixture of ensembles and solos to sound by Dmitry Volkov (uncredited) and music by Darius Milhaud. The movement was vaguely modern and entirely undistinguished.
Mr. Gomes’s 30-minute “Tristesse” was Friday’s main star event, danced by Joaquin de Luz, Denis Matvienko, Friedemann Vogel and Mr. Gomes. It’s modeled along the lines of America’s best-known Chopin ballet, Jerome Robbins’s “Dances at a Gathering,” with solos, duets and quartets that show camaraderie, rivalry, fun and moodiness. One duet for Mr. Matvienko and Mr. Vogel is a study of same-sex intimacy. The finale tries to dramatize a situation in which Mr. Gomes is punched, rejected and left to weep by the other three.
One moment alone suggested that Mr. Gomes might have real value as a choreographer: a two-second step he gave himself. Usually a développé — a movement in which one raised leg unfolds into a straight line — is done on a stationary supporting leg, but Mr. Gomes twice did a développé backward into arabesque while hopping. Such linguistic freedom can be a sign of originality. The rest of “Tristesse,” however, seemed entirely derivative, contrived, a not-quite-sincere exercise in various kinds of charm. Mr. Vogel, little known in New York, is a highly admirable dancer, and Mr. de Luz delivered charm most convincingly. But Mr. Gomes himself, one of New York’s most beloved dancers, was never quite believable.
Mr. Petrov’s “Le Divertissement du Roi” was a strained exercise in historical time traveling for Mr. Stepin and four other Mariinsky dancers. It blurred the eras of Louis XIV (the central idea of the king as an exemplary ballet stylist, with designs based on his era), Louis XV (the music is by Jean-Philippe Rameau, written long after ballet had become an art of professional virtuosos) and the 20th century of George Balanchine (backward lunges on one heel into off-balance position).
This was ballet solely as an art of showy surface, with none of the etiquette that underpinned Baroque ballet. As an unfunny master of ceremonies, Soslan Kulaev introduced each scene with pompously delivered French, spoken with a heavy Russian accent. After spending most of the ballet in mock-Baroque ballet attire, Mr. Stepin and colleagues ended up in modern practice costume; he delivered his role solemnly but well. Still, the evening belittled ballet.