LENOX, Mass. — Late on Thursday afternoon, the strains of a trumpeter rehearsing the opening bars of Mahler’s Fifth Symphony drifted across the Tanglewood lawns here. It didn’t sound quite confident enough to be the Boston Symphony Orchestra’s principal, Thomas Rolfs. And it wasn’t — it was the orchestra’s music director Andris Nelsons.
Mr. Nelsons suddenly has time on his hands, after a dramatic withdrawal from the Bayreuth Festival’s new production of Wagner’s “Parsifal” at the end of June cleared much of his summer schedule. He went home to Latvia for a beach vacation with his family. If his superb weekend of concerts at Tanglewood, including an optimistic Mahler Ninth Symphony and a buoyant Beethoven Seventh, was originally planned as an in-and-out visit between Wagner performances in Germany, it could now unfold more leisurely.
Why that withdrawal, though? Was Mr. Nelsons, who sees “Parsifal” as a fundamentally Christian drama, disturbed by the Islamic imagery in Uwe Eric Laufenberg’s staging, as some suggested? Was he angry at the Bayreuth music director Christian Thielemann’s interference in his rehearsals? What was the “differing approach in various matters” that led to an uncomfortable atmosphere, as his terse statement put it?
As for Mr. Thielemann’s public and patronizing barbs, including his dismissal of the spat’s causes in The Times of London as “nothing,” Mr. Nelsons simply reiterated his respect for that older conductor. “Some people will always gossip,” Mr. Nelsons said, “and I know Christian has been commenting. It’s his right.” Nevertheless, he agreed on silence with Bayreuth, and his word remains intact.
What Mr. Nelsons will talk about is his acquisition, starting in the 2017-18 season, of one of the gaudiest titles in music: Gewandhauskapellmeister, or music director, of the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra. The appointment, announced concurrently with an extension until 2022 of his Boston position, raised eyebrows for the workload entailed and for the lack of commitment to Boston it might imply.
In any case, Mr. Nelsons’s two concerts here with the Boston Symphony suggested that the partnership is going from strength to strength. (A third he conducted, Sunday’s all-Brahms affair with the young players of the Tanglewood Music Center Orchestra, was dominated by Paul Lewis’s unsparingly transparent, exceptionally judicious playing in the Piano Concerto No. 1.) In Mozart’s Piano Concerto No. 27 with Jonathan Biss (perky, yet delicate when needed) and Sibelius’s Violin Concerto with Augustin Hadelich (commanding, impassioned), the conductor and orchestra’s work was showier than one might hear indoors at Symphony Hall in Boston, but still searching, considered and supple.
After several years playing and touring Mahler’s Ninth, Mr. Nelsons and his players have found a coherent, crushing interpretation, a young man’s take in which death is the fulfillment of a life very well lived. Not for him the unblinking steadfastness of a Bernard Haitink or the shattering tonal language of an Esa-Pekka Salonen: Instead, a sense of wonder so great that on Friday Mr. Nelsons could carry the Adagio to its demise with a smile on his face.
Promising, too, was the Beethoven Seventh on Friday that allayed doubts about whether this conductor is ready to record a promised cycle with the Vienna Philharmonic. Here there was a striking balance between brawn and bite, and innumerable, tiny interpretive touches made their mark without ever seeming forced or overbearing.