Eugenie Bouchard’s fall last year at the United States Open is still reverberating.
Bouchard, who late one night after a mixed-doubles win sustained a concussion that forced her to withdraw and miss subsequent tournaments, filed a lawsuit in October against the U.S. Open and the United States Tennis Association.
Ranked 39th, Bouchard lost her first-round match at this year’s Open on Tuesday against Katerina Siniakova, 6-3, 3-6, 6-2. But nearly a year after her concussion, the case that started here is far from settled. No depositions have been taken, and the window for the discovery period has been extended through January.
In a statement last week, Chris Widmaier, the U.S.T.A.’s managing director of corporate communications, reiterated the organization’s stance that it did not comment on continuing litigation, but he then expressed disappointment with Bouchard.
The match between Bouchard and Siniakova took place on the shining new Grandstand court, but Bouchard’s postmatch news conference was relegated to Interview Room 2, away from the tournament’s transcription and live streaming services. The room, which had chairs for seven, was quickly packed as dozens of reporters crammed in.
Bouchard said she had been treated well at the tournament, but she rejected the U.S.T.A.’s assertion that her focus had been foremost on her legal issues.
Benedict Morelli, Bouchard’s lawyer, said in an interview last week that taking a deposition from his client before the Open would have been a distraction and that she would be ready once her season ended in October.
Bouchard’s suit contends that the organizers are liable because her injury resulted from a slippery, foreign substance on a tile floor, in a room that was left open and unattended.
Morelli also said he objected to what he saw as unnecessarily “hardball” legal tactics, including the serving of a subpoena to the limousine driver who took Bouchard and her mother, Julie Leclair, to the hospital.
In his calculations, Morelli posits an alternate life for Bouchard, one in which she would have won the Open last year and raked in further endorsements, appearance fees and prize money.
Bouchard, however, had lost 15 of 18 matches heading into last year’s Open. Her fourth-round match, from which she withdrew, would have been against Roberta Vinci, the eventual finalist, who had clobbered Bouchard, 6-1, 6-0, a week earlier in New Haven.
Except for one abortive comeback attempt in Beijing, Bouchard did not play for the remainder of the 2015 season. Her start to 2016 was strong but has been inconsistent. Morelli said he thought that Bouchard was no longer suffering the physical effects of the injury, but that the emotional and psychological damage lingered, as did the damage to her ranking.
Although Bouchard is Canadian, Morelli said the U.S.T.A. had an obligation to look out for her.
