Expanding the definition of what it means to be a parent, especially for same-sex couples, the New York State Court of Appeals ruled on Tuesday that a caretaker who is not related to, or the adoptive guardian of, a child could still be permitted to ask for custody and visitation rights.
The ruling emerged from a dispute between a gay couple from Chautauqua County, known in court papers only as Brooke S.B. and Elizabeth A. C.C.
Brooke and Elizabeth began their relationship in 2006 and announced their engagement the following year, even though same-sex marriage was not permitted in New York at the time and they did not have the resources to travel to a state where it was allowed.
In 2008, Elizabeth became pregnant with their child through artificial insemination. Though Brooke had no legal or biological ties to the child, a boy, she maintained a close relationship with him for years, cutting his umbilical cord at birth, giving him her last name and raising him jointly with Elizabeth.
In 2010, the couple ended their relationship, court papers said, and three years later, Elizabeth tried to cut off Brooke’s contact with the boy. Brooke sued for custody and visitation privileges, but was turned down by a lower court, which found the lawsuit “heartbreaking,” but ruled nonetheless that legal precedent under a New York case called the Matter of Alison D. v. Virginia M. did not define a nonadoptive, nonbiological caretaker as a parent.
More broadly, the court noted that “Alison D.’s foundational premise of heterosexual parenting and nonrecognition of same-sex couples is unsustainable,” particularly in light of New York’s law allowing gay marriage, which was passed in 2011, and the United States Supreme Court’s landmark ruling last year granting same-sex couples the right to marry.
Elizabeth’s lawyer, Sheryl Bjork, could not be reached for comment.
The appeals court accompanied its ruling in the case of Brooke and Elizabeth with a decision in a similar dispute between a biological mother of a child who sued her former partner, the nonbiological mother, for child support. After paying child support, the nonbiological mother asked to be granted custody and visitation rights. The court agreed with her request.
