In the middle of the night, Friedrich Trump left his house in Kallstadt, a small town spotted with vineyards and a Lutheran church, for a northern port city that served as Germany’s gateway to America.
“He had thought, ‘Gee whiz, I’m not going to be able to sell these homes if there are all these Jewish people,’” said Donald J. Trump’s cousin John Walter, the Trump family historian, who has worked closely with Fred and Donald.
Mr. Trump has been called to account for the discrepancy in the past, sometimes admitting it, sometimes not. In an interview in his Trump Tower office, he at first claimed not to know that his father pretended to be Swedish, saying: “Is that true? I don’t know.” He later acknowledged that the two of them would occasionally discuss the concealment of their heritage, explaining that his father “didn’t want to put any pressure” on his Jewish friends.
“We have a war, we are fighting a war with Germany,” said Mr. Trump, who was born a year after World War II ended.
Mr. Trump’s family history was recounted by Mr. Walter in an interview and was also the subject of “The Trumps: Three Generations of Builders and a Presidential Candidate,” a family biography by Gwenda Blair. It is the kind of story that echoes the hopefulness and travails of many immigrants still today, and one that many a politician has trumpeted to gain an advantage.
Though a pillar of Mr. Trump’s campaign is stopping the flow of immigrants entering the country illegally and deporting them en masse, he often voices his support of legal immigration. And his personal life has been full of émigrés.
While Mr. Trump’s German grandfather came to and stayed in America legally, he had little choice but to remain: German officials refused to restore his citizenship when he tried to move back to his hometown from the United States.
Upon landing in New York in 1885, Friedrich Trump moved in with his older sister, who had left Kallstadt a few years earlier, and her husband at 76 Forsyth Street, in what is today the Lower East Side of Manhattan. He worked as a barber, a trade he had apprenticed for in Germany after his father, a vintner, died, leaving the family in dire economic straits.
Mr. Trump and his sister’s family soon moved uptown to 17th Street, and then to 104th Street on the East Side, an area thick with his hometown’s dialect and wine.
But Friedrich wanted more. At age 22, he moved to Seattle, opened and then sold a restaurant and then, with some more cash from his mother, bought the first Trump real estate: a property near Monte Cristo, Wash., a mining boom town. He staked claim to more property for gold prospecting and built hotels for prospectors.
“He was a very entrepreneurial person,” Mr. Trump said.
Gold fever hit Friedrich Trump, too, but on the way to the Yukon he opened the popular New Arctic Restaurant and Hotel and the White Horse, which according to Ms. Blair’s book featured prostitutes as well as food and drink.
Four years later, he returned to Germany and married a former neighbor, Elizabeth Christ, the daughter of a tinker, “in a lovely Lutheran church in Kallstadt,” according to Karen T. Ingraham, a granddaughter. He persuaded Elizabeth to move to America, sold off his properties in the West and invested in vacant lots in Queens.
In 1904, he returned to Kallstadt with his homesick wife, but German officials turned him away, viewing his absence as a willful attempt to avoid military service. He protested, declaring, “It was my intention to remain in America forever,” according to Ms. Blair’s book.
Mr. Walter, the family historian, said he had often discussed Friedrich’s life story with his cousin and how, at least in one crucial way, their grandfather was indeed not German at all.
