RIO DE JANEIRO — Poised far above a swimming pool, about to somersault four and a half times into the water — that is no moment for a philosophical discussion, even if there is a person standing right next to you. But practitioners of the curiously mesmerizing sport of synchronized diving, who aim for dives that are not only perfect but also perfectly in sync, tend to have their own last-minute communication rituals.
“We keep it very, very brief,” said the American diver Sam Dorman, who won the silver medal in the synchronized three-meter springboard with his partner, Mike Hixon, on Wednesday.
“I tell him what dive we’re doing, which he already knows,” Hixon said.
“And then I give him a fist bump and say, ‘Let’s do it,’” Dorman went on.
For the longtime Canadian diving pair Meaghan Benfeito and Rosaline Filion, it is a back-and-forth script, always the same.
Synchronized diving is a peculiar discipline, intermingling individual and team performance, egotism and selflessness, in a way that is perhaps unique in Olympic sports. A synchronized diving team is not like a soccer team, with each member having a different role. And it is not like a synchronized swimming duet, with the swimmers aware of and able to adjust to one another’s performance, midroutine.
Instead, synchronized divers start together and then strike out alone before (theoretically) hitting the water simultaneously.
So there is the moment before they dive, and then there is the dive itself, two different things. Once the divers are in the air, there is not much they can do to resynchronize with an out-of-kilter partner, so it is no good even checking to see how he or she is doing.
Quinn Rooney/Getty Images.
Scoring in synchronized diving is also an unusual hybrid reflecting individual and team performance: There are two sets of judges and two sets of scores, one each for execution and for synchronization (from the side, the pair is supposed to look like one person). So all is not lost if each member of a pair performs a beautiful dive but the two are not perfectly attuned, or if each performs a not-so-great dive that by some happy chance matches the partner’s.
When Filion broke her ankle last December, throwing her Rio prospects into doubt, Benfeito drove her to the gym, took her to doctors’ appointments, checked in with her every day and then modified her own diving style as Filion gingerly began diving again. The two took the silver medal in the 10-meter platform on Tuesday.
The American diver David Boudia, who won a bronze in synchronized diving in the 2012 London Games, said that afterward he had been struck by a malaise that made him question whether he even wanted to go to practice. He said his new partner, Steele Johnson, had restored his excitement about the sport, becoming his “friend and brother”; the two took the silver this time in the 10-meter platform.
Boudia said he had tried so hard not to be anxious in the competition this week that he had not even looked at the scores or the team rankings between rounds. (Each pair performed six dives of differing difficulties.) That willful ignorance seems to be the preferred state of many synchronized divers, although partners do not always agree on the best approach.
Dorman, for instance, watches the scores; Hixon does not. That rules out one potential conversation topic on the diving board. “We can’t talk about it,” Hixon said.
Nor can they fight about it. Even if one of them completely messes up a competition, synchro divers say, they never argue.
When Germán Sánchez of Mexico began diving with his partner, Iván García, they were all business.
So they worked on it.
This time, they finished fourth.
