NORTH ADAMS, MASS. — The artist Nick Cave was standing, with a slightly awe-struck look, in the middle of the largest exhibition space at the Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art, a former factory known as Building 5 that is as long as a football field.
“It’s the biggest space I’ve ever worked in, and that’s pushing me out of my comfort zone,” said the energetic Mr. Cave. He was preparing “Until,” a massive, immersive installation slated to open Oct. 16 that will also be Mass MoCA’s costliest, most elaborate exhibition to date.
Mr. Cave gave a reporter a peek when he was in residence here for a few weeks, working constantly and staying nearby. It was a chance to see how Mr. Cave’s mind works (fast, but very precisely) and how one of the most popular contemporary artists turns his serious ideas into buoyant aesthetic concepts.
Three and a half years in the making, “Until” is what Mr. Cave called his most personal work to date. It will lead visitors on a path through an enchanted but menacing landscape featuring, among other things, 17 black-faced lawn jockeys on a crystal cloudscape 18 feet in the air; 20,000 whirling wind spinners; a “waterfall” of shimmering foil-like strips; a thousand or so intentionally garish ceramic tchotchkes; and several million beads, some of which will comprise shimmering mountains. For the time being, some of those components were heaped in riotous piles in the museum’s basement, and others in Mr. Cave’s studio in Chicago, where he is based.
Looking past what he called the “bling bling, sparkle sparkle” factor of the exhibition is a grave theme: the fraught nexus of gun violence and race, in particular the deaths of African-Americans in police custody in places like Ferguson, Mo., and elsewhere. Some of those wind spinners will have bullet and target images on them.
Mr. Cave, 57, is best known for his “Soundsuits,” the wearable, noise-making costumes that entertain while they raise questions about race, gender and identity.
Although “Until” is unusual in its lack of an aural component, the work is a next-level amalgamation of everything he knows about sculpture, performance and audience engagement.
Asked how fans of his “Soundsuits” should think about this new work, Mr. Cave, a graceful and powerful sort who once studied with the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, mimed the motion of scooping out his own stomach and raising it up as an offering.
Mr. Cave talks with his arms — not in the way of a point-making politician, but as if he were trying to sculpt the very air around him.
Nor will Mr. Cave hide. He will do a single performance as part of a once-a-month activation of the installation, although details are still being worked out.
It’s been long-planned, but there’s an improvisational element in “Until” at this stage, because its size allows for endless fine-tuning.
He pointed to a several small fake Christmas trees that he had attached to metal rings and topped with a cartoonish crown, the product of a recent weekend visit to the workroom. A couple of days later, Mr. Cave started to arrange colorful marbles on the back of a 10-foot fiberglass crocodile but realized bigger marbles worked better. An intern was dispatched to a local antiques market to buy more.
He admitted that the scale and scope were daunting — Building 5 stretches over nearly 18,000 square feet — as was the institution’s reputation.
Many hands are involved to make “Until,” including the 10 or so assistants working in Mr. Cave’s Chicago studio, and Mass MoCA’s staff.
For Mass MoCA’s director, Joseph C. Thompson, the comparison was a decadent, superabundant scene in a Dutch still-life painting.
The installation will be on view for nearly a year, until September 2017, and then travels to Carriageworks, an art center in Sydney, Australia. It may visit additional venues in the United States, too. Carriageworks is partnering to fund the piece because it is “a heavy, heavy lift by Mass MoCA standards,” Mr. Thompson said.
“Until” got its start in 2012. Ms. Markonish saw a previous piece of Mr. Cave’s at Jack Shainman Gallery in New York that involved a lawn jockey — the first time he had ever used one — and she requested a meeting with him.
For her part, Ms. Markonish has been involved in the project in ways that go beyond her official job description, including finding a lawn jockey on eBay and going to pick it up personally.
“It was within 45 minutes of my family’s house, so I thought I’d go get it and save money on shipping,” Ms. Markonish said.
The errand gave her pause. “Even those words coming out of my mouth was just really intense,” Ms. Markonish said.
The jockeys appear to have a special symbolism for Mr. Cave, though he said he did not see a lot of them on lawns when he was growing up in Missouri in the 1960s — “thank god,” he added.
He recounted the possibly apocryphal origin of the figures: On a cold winter night, an African-American boy who served George Washington during the Revolutionary War was asked to keep watch on the horses and light the way until Washington returned. But the boy froze to death, in the familiar pose holding a lantern.
“It’s such a repressive image,” Mr. Cave said, adding that it was the element of fruitless loyalty that bothered him the most.
In his installation, however, the jockeys will be holding elaborately beaded butterfly nets, which Mr. Cave also called “dream catchers,” giving “Until” a hopeful aspect.
And with that, Mr. Cave went back to work for an evening session amid his bric-a-brac — there were still miles to go to get “Until” up and running.