MONDAY PUZZLE — We’ve seen a lot of people make their New York Times Crossword debuts, but I wonder how many of those constructors took up this endeavor in their fourth year of medical school. Talk about taxing one’s brain.
Emily Carroll offers us a tasty puzzle with which to start our solving week and she clearly makes efficient use of her time. Not only that, but she imparts a bit of what she learned in her medical training to make a pun on TASTE.
Dr. Carroll’s lesson teaches us about four of the five tastes that the human tongue can detect: BITTER, SALTY, SWEET and SOUR. As she states in her notes below, there really aren’t any good phrases that start with “umami,” so that was left out.
We’ve seen iterations of this theme before, but I always like to see what new eyes do with the theme and the rest of the grid.
Dr. Carroll introduces seven lively entries today and my hands-down favorite is SOUR PATCH KIDS. I also loved SWEETHEART DEALS, WARM SPELL, POP OFF and RUSH WEEK. Other entries that have been seen before but are fun to see again include BITTER ENEMY, SALTY LANGUAGE, UP TO SPEED and ONE BY ONE.
• 23A: SALTY LANGUAGE means profanity, but my kids, who are young adults now, report a newer usage for being SALTY; I’m told that being SALTY means being angry or resentful about something.
• 37D: “Charles Lamb’s ‘Essays of ELIA’” is tough fill for a Monday, but it’s worth knowing if you are a writer. Mr. Lamb published his book of essays in 1823 and all columnists owe him a debt of sorts for popularizing the form.
So excited to be making my New York Times debut!
I got into constructing last year as a fourth-year medical student eager to procrastinate from working on residency applications by any means necessary.
I think the idea for this puzzle was born from a sweet tooth and an empty stomach. I was initially trying to work SOUR PATCH KIDS into an overly ambitious themeless with which I quickly grew frustrated and abandoned. Instead I brainstormed ways to fit it into a themed puzzle and hit on the idea of starting the themers with different TASTE MAKERS. My only regret is that there aren’t more phrases starting with umami — and by more I mean any.
I also agonized over the ROEG/GERARD/ANDREI situation for the longest time and sadly couldn’t find a way around it. Nothing like intersecting semi-obscure proper names to start your Monday morning. Speaking of proper names, as a die-hard Patriots fan I’m a little disappointed in the clue revision for 60A, but I suppose I should be grateful Will didn’t twist the knife further and include a reference to Eli’s Super Bowl MVP awards.
Thanks for solving and I hope you enjoyed!
A very tasty Monday puzzle, Dr. Carroll. Hope to see you again soon.