Brides who once may have looked forward to walking down the aisle dressed to the nines are now bouncing down it dressed to the eights, or maybe a seven and a half (narrow).
Many wedding guests this summer may glimpse sneakers under traditional gowns. And not just plain white tennis shoes. Some are brightly colored, others are embroidered with names and dates, or decorated with beading or lace to match the dress.
Ronnie Rothstein, an owner of Kleinfeld Bridal in New York, thinks the bridal sneaker is not so much a fashion statement as a lifestyle statement, with fashion in general being more casual these days.
And pairing sneakers with wedding dresses fits with the overall easing of dress codes, at work and at leisure. Millennial women in particular are about comfort. “If a girl wears jeans to work, she’s wearing sneakers to the wedding,” Mr. Rothstein said.
The fashion industry is helping by making sneakers as glamorous as possible. At a Karl Lagerfeld 2014 haute couture collection, a model wore white running shoes with a bridal gown.
Now brides have an expanding choice of comfortable yet stylish sneakers from sources like Etsy, Bill Blass online, Keds and Converse. Tory Burch is also showing dressed-up sneakers, and there are high-heeled Chuck Taylors, if the bride is looking for height, said Cathy Schroeckenstein, the editor in chief of weddingbee.com.
Mr. Rothstein said that in his workrooms, 17 people bead dresses and now also embellish many pairs of sneakers each week with beads or lace to match the gowns. “If the dress is heavily embellished, the sneakers get the same embellishment,” he said.
Mrs. Arellano ordered her shoes online from Converse. She said that the 100 guests couldn’t see them under her long dress until she got onto the dance floor and showed off her footwear.
Jennifer Contreras was wearing customized Converse sneakers when she was married in June 2014 in San Diego. “I wanted to be comfortable,” she said, something her mother was all for.
All of her bridesmaids wore gray Converses. And the groom wore sneakers from Vans. “My husband isn’t super tall, and in heels I am taller than he is,” she said.
But for Randy Fenoli, a host on the TLC show “Say Yes to The Dress,” a pair of sneakers with a wedding dress is appalling.
Marshall Cohen, the chief retail market research analyst with the NPD Group, disagreed. “It’s about, ‘This is my day,’” Mr. Cohen said, speaking for the brides.
Lisa Blanck wore heels down the aisle when she was married two years ago in Detroit, just to feel like a lady, she said. But right after the ceremony, she changed into blue Nike sneakers that her husband, Peter Ehrlich, had bought for her.
Converse, Keds or Nikes are reasonably priced, but there are few limits on what a bride can choose to spend on personalized sneakers. At Kleinfeld Bridal, lace-embellished, customized sneakers that coordinate with a Mark Zunino gown can cost up to $800. But, Mr. Rothstein said, if the dress costs thousands of dollars, spending hundreds on the shoes is just part of the package.
Some women are ordering complete sets of custom shoes for themselves and their bridesmaids, Ms. Culp said. And sometimes the sneakers are coordinated with the color of the flowers.
Mothers of some brides are not on board with this look. When Chantalle Crolly, a kindergarten teacher and graphic designer in Ontario, Canada, was married in a backyard there in July 2015, she said, her own mother had a hard time with the nontraditional elements of the wedding — like her shoes.
“I wore a big custom ball gown with sneakers,” she said. She had her married name embroidered on the back of her fluorescent pink Converses. “They were bright and happy and comfortable,” Ms. Crolly said.
She admitted to being influenced by a lot of what she sees on Pinterest and other websites, and agreed that there is a generational shift at work here. “I rely 100 percent on social media,” she said, referring to her personal style.
Sandra Corona has an Etsy shop called NewBrideCo, where she sells embellished sneakers. “It’s usually the under-40-year-olds, and they want to enjoy every moment,” Ms. Corona said, pointing out that brides don’t want their day ruined by sore feet.
Ms. Miller said that sometimes brides use the sneakers to tie a theme together by having the rest of the wedding party wear pairs in a certain color while hers are white or a bright color to flash under her dress.
And, worst-case scenario, if the bride is of the runaway variety, at least she’ll have the aprropriate footwear.