In 2012, Adam Smith was getting drinks with his friend Stacy Lambe and mentioned a photo he’d seen of Hillary Clinton wearing sunglasses and stoically checking her BlackBerry.
And thus, the website Texts From Hillary was born. Mr. Smith and Mr. Lambe started posting photos of Mrs. Clinton overlaid with snarky imagined text conversations. Within a week, their blog went viral, with people submitting their own fake text exchanges between Mrs. Clinton and other politicians and celebrities. Soon after, Mrs. Clinton submitted her own contribution to the site. The State Department invited the site’s two creators to meet Mrs. Clinton, who posed with them in her sunglasses.
Now Mrs. Clinton’s campaign — staffed by tech-savvy young people at its Brooklyn headquarters — is trying to make her go viral again, this time on purpose, and with a specific political aim.
Their task is a tricky one. People already tend to distrust politicians, and it’s even harder to project an authentic self on social media. On top of that, people think of Mrs. Clinton as calculating and untrustworthy. How can someone like that sound like a real person online?
Mrs. Clinton’s legion of online content producers have been hard at work, putting together video clips and writing listicles to expand the former first lady and secretary of state’s bona fides. Scroll through Mrs. Clinton’s Facebook feed, and you’ll see posts talking about the Zika virus and the recent flooding in Louisiana, highlighting the accomplishments of female Olympians, criticizing Mr. Trump for refusing to release his tax returns, and wishing her husband a happy birthday.
Presidential candidates have a long history of slightly embarrassing themselves on national media in an effort to appeal to The Youths: from Richard Nixon’s “sock it to me?” cameo on “Laugh-In” to Bill Clinton’s playing sax on “The Arsenio Hall Show” to Mitt Romney’s referencing “Who Let the Dogs Out” while posing for a photo with a group of black people to Barack Obama’s using a selfie stick in a BuzzFeed video. Now, with the advent of social media, there are millions more ways to potentially make a fool of yourself and have it distributed instantaneously across the World Wide Web.
Sometimes, inauthenticity can become a meme unto itself. When Mrs. Clinton released a short video saying, unconvincingly, “I’m just chillin’ in Cedar Rapids,” internet denizens pounced, remixing the clip on their Vine accounts. In response to these incidents, the website Super Deluxe made a video deftly skewering the Clinton campaign’s less-than-successful attempts to use memes for political gain.
The reason so many people like to follow Mr. Trump on Facebook and Twitter (if not for his policies) is that he is the rare politician whose online persona seems like a pretty accurate reflection of who he is in real life. He is just as unfiltered online as he is in person, and as consumers of internet content, searching for some morsel of levity to fill the vacuum of our workday, we live for that kind of drama. The closest Mrs. Clinton’s campaign has come to Mr. Trump’s brand of Twitter pugilism is telling him, “Delete your account.” The message has been reposted more than 480,000 times.
Social media has caused many politicians strife (looking at you, Anthony Weiner), but it has also allowed candidates to reach voters where they are, without having to go through traditional gatekeepers, like pesky reporters. Mrs. Clinton hasn’t given a news conference in more than 250 days, but her campaign has sought out friendly alternative media that is well known to a certain set of urbane, college-educated millennials. She has sat down for interviews with Lena Dunham and the hosts of BuzzFeed’s podcast “Another Round,” and has written (or had ghostwritten) articles for The Toast and Teen Vogue.
Most recently, the Clinton campaign started a podcast called “With Her,” in which the host, Max Linsky, interviewed her about her alarm clock (she chose “the most obnoxious sound that I could find on the ringtones”), Congress’s stall on Zika funding (“It just infuriates me”) and her acceptance speech at the Democratic National Convention (“It was both a liberating moment and a crushing sense of responsibility”). The podcast currently sits at No. 3 in iTunes’ news and politics section.
Laura Olin, who ran the Obama campaign’s social media operation in 2012 and now works as a consultant to the Clinton campaign, said the podcast is a way to make Mrs. Clinton a more approachable figure.
Running for president is hard, and we often expect candidates to perform in ways that have no real bearing on the actual job qualifications. Now, on top of partaking in local cuisine without looking embarrassing in photos, candidates must project an “authentic” online persona to fulfill yet another ideal that doesn’t really exist.
Mrs. Clinton’s advisers readily admit that she is not at her best or most authentic self when she’s put in front of a large crowd of people.
One moment in the Clinton campaign is perhaps a perfect allegory of her own online popularity versus Mr. Trump’s. At an Iowa campaign stop last November, an audience member asked Mrs. Clinton about unexploded bombs in Laos, left over from the Vietnam War. She launched into a four-minute response about the fallout from the Vietnam War, humanitarian efforts in the region, the status of the anti-landmine Ottawa Treaty and the United States military’s involvement in the demilitarized zone between North and South Korea. While Mrs. Clinton’s response demonstrated her impressive intellect and diplomatic experience, it was decidedly not a viral moment.
Unfortunately for the Clinton campaign, “Reasoned, Diplomatic Policy Answers From Hillary” just doesn’t have the same ring to it.