RIO DE JANEIRO — Just when the United States women’s eight needed it the most on Saturday, when other crews threatened to pull away and win the Olympic gold medal, coxswain Katelin Snyder shouted something special into her headset. Her voice echoed through the Americans’ boat.
The words were meant to make the rowers pull harder, to make the United States eight surge ahead. They were supposed to remind the rowers that they could push through the searing pain in their legs and lungs, and push through it together, because they had done it so many times before.
Hold it. That was it?
That was the inspirational phrase Snyder chose at a crucial moment in the 2,000-meter race, not long after her eight had crossed the 1,000-meter mark in third place? Sounds kind of flat. Like, no kidding: The rowers knew which boat they were in.
But in those words, there was brilliance.
Snyder wasn’t shouting nonsense. She was reminding her rowers, and those in the boats around them, that a legend was on the course. Make way!
Going into the final on Saturday, the United States women’s eight had won every major international race for a decade. Two Olympic gold medals. Every world championship gold since 2006. The Americans had won with a different lineup every time, too.
Rowing gets little attention outside the Olympics, but the United States women’s streak is astonishing. Saturday’s victory gave the team its 11th straight major title.
When Snyder said, “This is the U.S. women’s eight,” her words carried a deep meaning.
Her rowers were inspired.
In the stroke seat, Amanda Elmore could feel a spark of electricity travel down the boat.
In the bow seat, Emily Regan could feel her end of the boat rise, as if the whole shell were taking flight.
“It was like I wasn’t even touching the water,” she said.
When the Americans won in London four years ago, they led from start to finish. Not on Saturday. Here, with the Christ the Redeemer statue towering in the distance, the team won its third Olympic gold in a row, but this time it had a race on its hands.
The rowers were not surprised by the difficulty. They’re pragmatists; they know their streak can’t last forever.
Snyder kept saying: “Believe! Believe!” She led the United States to the finish line in 6 minutes 1.49 seconds, nearly two and a half seconds ahead of Britain, which won silver. The Romanians took the bronze.
Even for a dynasty, the racing was agonizing.
Elmore said she had blacked out with 300 meters to go and didn’t remember a thing afterward. She didn’t recall letting go of her oar as they crossed the finish line or seeing Snyder smack the water with her hands, sending water splashing high into the air. All Elmore remembered was downing a Coke and a Snickers bar at the dock. She needed them so she wouldn’t pass out, she said.
Later, the British rowers said the Americans had been so dominant because of the strength of their collegiate rowing system. When the British visited the University of Washington’s boathouse a few years ago, they thought the training center was better than anything they had back home.
The Romanians said the Americans’ dominance made sense.
“If we could have half of what the U.S.A. has, we could have the same results,” said Roxana Cogianu, the bow seat, explaining that the Romanians had only 10 women from whom to choose their team of eight.
The Americans had about 28 women to choose from, said Tom Terhaar, the United States coach. That depth, Terhaar said, is what makes his team so formidable.
Terhaar, 46, has coached the team since 2001. He often deflects praise for the team’s success.
On Saturday, he praised his rowers, like Eleanor Logan, for making him look good. Logan now has three Olympic gold medals.
 Because the water in the lagoon was polluted and could possibly make rowers sick, the coaches scrubbed each oar handle and washed down the boat after every row. They even made sure the rowers’ uniforms were extra clean, race after race.
So everybody on the team played a role in keeping the United States’ winning streak alive. It’s just that the rowers and the coxswain celebrated with the most panache.
As it turns out, a dynasty celebrates just like any other winning crew. Following the sport’s tradition, Snyder said, the rowers tossed her into the water — the putrid lagoon water — and her entire body submerged.
She said she had come up dripping wet, not cringing, but smiling.
