FARMINGDALE, N.Y. — For much of 2016, including the first two rounds of the Barclays tournament, Adam Scott has been able to relate well to an observation on golf’s dark and sometimes elusive art by the British golf writer Peter Dobereiner.
Scott, an Australian who counts the 2013 Masters among his 13 career PGA Tour victories, has endured mostly frustration on the greens the last several months — a lull for which his reliable ball-striking has not been much of a counterweight.
Putting has not been fun for Scott, 36, despite plenty of effort. He won twice and was runner-up twice in his first six starts this season, but he has not finished better than a tie for 10th in his last 10 tournaments going into the FedEx Cup playoffs.
In Saturday’s third round of the Barclays at Bethpage Black, a different approach led to different results. Forgetting about technique, Scott went from dreadful to dreamy on the greens, shooting a six-under-par 65 to vault into third place with a total of 206, seven under. Rickie Fowler, who shot a bogey-free 68 and has only one bogey in the tournament, led at nine-under 204, with Patrick Reed, who had a 71, one shot behind. Jason Day, the defending champion, shot a 70 and was four strokes behind.
Scott made 150 feet of putts on Saturday, compared with 58 feet on Friday and 30 feet on Thursday. When he went seven under for the day by making a 45-foot birdie putt on No. 15, his second birdie from that length in four holes, he knew he was in position to break the course record of 64 shared by Craig Thomas (2007 New York State Open), Lucas Glover and Mike Weir (2009 United States Open) and Padraig Harrington (2012 Barclays).
But Scott bogeyed No. 16 and parred the last two holes, completing a round that he had begun in flashy fashion, holing a 98-yard wedge from the rough on No. 1 for an eagle 2. After shooting a four-under 32 on the front nine, Scott kept his momentum going.
The 10th, 11th and 12th holes constitute a difficult stretch of the Black course, three stout par 4s — two measuring more than 500 yards on the scorecard — that test a golfer’s constitution. Scott sank a two-foot birdie putt on No. 10, saved par with a hard-breaking 14-footer on No. 11 and rolled in a 45-footer on No. 12.
Scott won the Honda Classic and the World Golf Championships-Cadillac Championship in consecutive weeks last winter, answering those who doubted he would enjoy success after having to stop using an anchored-putting style when it was outlawed at the start of the year. But his early-season momentum slowed.
On the 15th green Friday, en route to shooting a one-over-par 72, Scott began to alter his putting attitude when he put a good roll on a 30-foot birdie attempt.
He sank an 11-footer for birdie on the next hole. That was all the convincing Scott needed.
Fowler, 27, has not won on the PGA Tour this season and also had a disappointing major record. Like Scott, he is happy his putting, a strength until recent months, has perked up at an opportune time.
