Book Review|Caleb Carr’s New Thriller Takes On Fancy Forensics. Michael Connelly Reviews.
Caleb Carr’s New Thriller Takes On Fancy Forensics. Michael Connelly Reviews.
598 pp. Random House. $30.
Untarnished and unafraid is easy. But where are those mean streets today? Detective work has changed dramatically in the last ­quarter-century as science has seemingly replaced shoe leather. Investigators are more likely to solve a case with a walk to the forensics lab than down the mean streets where a murder has occurred. Greatly improved collection of fingerprint and ballistic evidence and their attendant and ever-growing databases routinely ferret out the guilty — or at least the accused. And then there is DNA. Despite some early bumps in its judicial rise (the O.J. Simpson case, in particular), DNA has become the magic bullet, the slam dunk used by prosecutors coast to coast to leverage the guilty plea that avoids the trial. It is little wonder that arguably the most popular television franchise of this era was about crime lab technicians who solved crimes in hours instead of days and weeks. With this the state of the system in reality and entertainment, what is a serious crime novelist to do?
If you are Caleb Carr, you create an investigator who is a man of science yet who also possesses a jaundiced eye when it comes to the science of crime detection, a man who clangs that bell of warning: We may have gone too far.
Carr is best known for “The Alienist,” a beautifully wrought novel set more than a century ago at the dawn of behavioral profiling and other detective sciences. In “Surrender, New York,” he has written an addictive contemporary crime procedural stuffed with observations on the manipulations of science and the particular societal ills of the moment. Call it mystery with multiple messages.
The steady beating heart of the novel is provided by the criminal psychologist Trajan Jones, late of the New York City Police Department, now living in exile in the upstate town of the novel’s title, where he spent much of his youth. He has a sidekick named Mike Li, who is an equally exiled trace-evidence expert. The two ran afoul of the N.Y.P.D.’s politics and ­practices too many times. They now teach online criminology classes for the state university out of Albany. An old plane in an old hangar is their classroom, set with multiple video screens for the benefit of students who Skype in to class.
But of course darkness soon descends on Surrender, and the local sheriffs come calling on Jones and Li. A teenager is dead — the latest in a series of strange deaths of young boys and girls. A serial killer may be stalking the rural community, and investigative skills are greatly in demand. With the game afoot, it is not long before Jones and Li focus on an epidemic of teenagers’ abandonment by parents and society. They bring in a young assistant named Lucas to help them navigate and understand this world of “throwaway children.” It becomes the dark secret pulsing beneath the community and at the center of the case. They proceed undaunted down these mean streets, but their investigation is not without danger. There are those of power and wealth who are willing to kill to keep some uncomfortable truths from being revealed.
 He never uses one sentence when there is room for two. The book weighs in at a dense 600 ­pages, which requires more dedication (from the reader as well as the writer) than is usual for a crime novel. But Carr’s work has never been for the book-a-day reader. Every character and location is multilayered and heavily defined, and that would include even the animals — the mysterious pet Jones calls his “rare African hunting dog” named Marcianna. The reader is treated to many history lessons, including the journey, across four continents, of a pre-World War II aircraft from Germany to New York — perhaps a nod to Carr’s other writing as a military historian.
Carr skillfully links this story to his best-known work by making Jones the world’s leading authority on Laszlo ­Kreizler — the Alienist — and a practitioner of his philosophies. The mystery is high-grade stuff, but this allusion makes one of the central messages of the book even clearer. If “The Alienist” celebrated the dawning era in the application of science to crime detection, from fingerprinting to other means of physically and psychologically identifying suspects, Carr now uses Jones to sound the warning that things may be going awry. Forensics should not be treated as faith.
Jones and his team set off on an investigation that proves their thesis, swooping down as a “righteous scythe” on society and the guilty as they go.
While the story is hypermodern in subject matter, it feels decidedly old-school in its delivery. Jones uses a cane and takes slow, measured steps. He narrates the novel in the same way, delivering the story in contemplative and starchy prose, sounding not only like the academic he now is but also like a man seemingly from another time and place.
It is hard to resist a character with such eloquent charm and a story with such deep meaning, no matter what its time and place.