ANAHEIM, Calif. — When Gary Sanchez took a walk with one out in the eighth inning, he trotted to first base, where he joined on the basepaths Jacoby Ellsbury, who was stationed at second. They represented the tying and go-ahead runs with the cleanup and No. 5 hitters coming up.
In years past, this would have started stomachs churning in the opposing dugout. But on Sunday, Angels reliever J. C. Ramirez was not facing vintage sluggers named Rodriguez, Teixeira, Beltran or McCann.
He was facing Didi Gregorius and Starlin Castro.
So Ramirez took a deep breath, steadied himself and settled down. He struck out Gregorius and retired Castro on the most harmless of hits, a dribbler two feet in front of the plate that catcher Carlos Perez pounced on and threw to first.
That inning, like the rest of Sunday afternoon, was an opportunity lost for the Yankees, who squandered a chance to make up ground in the playoff race when they were defeated, 2-0, by the Los Angeles Angels.
While the Yankees have steadily begun to play better baseball, even as they have turned over the roster and prioritized playing prospects over veterans, they have yet to truly inject themselves into the playoff chase. They sit four games out of a wild-card berth and six and a half games out of the division lead.
On a day when the three teams ahead of them in the American League East — Toronto, Boston and Baltimore — all lost, they once again could not finish off a series sweep. It is the sixth time since mid-June that the Yankees failed to win the final game of a series and complete a sweep, and this against a team that had lost 15 of its previous 17 games.
While Sanchez has continued to shine in the three weeks since his recall, moving to third in the batting order and proving to be proficient behind the plate — he threw out Mike Trout trying to steal on Sunday and picked Kole Calhoun off first base on Saturday — the Yankees are still searching for middle-of-the-order pop.
Aaron Judge might provide it some days, but he was given a rest after seven consecutive starts, and Brian McCann and Mark Teixeira were slotted down in the lineup, hitting sixth and seventh.
Gregorius, who has hit a career-high 17 home runs, is getting an audition there, as is Castro, who has hit 15. But neither is a prototypical power hitter — something Gregorius readily acknowledges. His home runs are functions of solid contact from a line-drive swing that just carry over the fence.
Gregorius, who hit cleanup for the second consecutive day, said he had not changed his approach. He is 13 for 49 (.265) with four home runs and 10 runs batted in across 11 games while hitting in the middle of the order. However, Girardi said he planned to keep using Gregorius in the middle of the lineup.
But Teixeira said it could be an adjustment, since Gregorius is not naturally a hitter who hits doubles and home runs.
“There are certain players that are comfortable in that role, and I was, right from the beginning, because I was a power hitter going back to high school,” Teixeira said. “I think if you’re that type of player, it’s not a big deal.
The Yankees’ problems on Sunday ran beyond lineup construction. They had only a few chances to dent the Angels right-hander Jhoulys Chacin and could not. Brett Gardner hit into an inning-ending double play with runners at first and third in the third. And Teixeira flied out with the bases loaded to end the fourth.
Those wasted chances squandered another first-rate performance from Chad Green, who allowed only a run-scoring single by Andrelton Simmons in the first, a grounder that scooted past Simmons’s childhood teammate Gregorius and into left field.
Green, whose family had season tickets to St. Louis Cardinals games when he grew up in Southern Illinois, was tormented by a player he grew up rooting for — Albert Pujols.
Pujols singled twice off Green, scoring on Simmons’s single, and had a two-run homer snatched away by center fielder Jacoby Ellsbury, who leapt over the wall to make the catch.
