He heard a click. That was how Roger Federer discovered the knee injury that cost him most of his 2016 season. He was running a bath for his daughters — and since he is Roger Federer, we have to assume he was running a gorgeous bath, possibly the greatest bath of all time, perfect temperature, immaculate bubbles, faint scent of lavender, business as usual.
But then: He turned a little to one side — a movement he’d later tell the news outlets that he must have performed a million times in his life — whereupon a wrinkle of un-Federer-like concern appeared in the gap between his eyebrows. What was that noise? Click.
As a longtime Federer fan, I replay the sequence of events that followed with something approaching dismay. The frown. The slight limp on the way out of the bathroom — marble, in my imagination, and hung with Tintorettos. The visit to the doctor. The diagnosis: torn cartilage. The February surgery and the frustrating, abbreviated season that followed it: just 18 matches, zero finals, zero wins against the Top 10.
In July, after missing the French Open and losing to Milos Raonic in the semifinals at Wimbledon, Federer announced that rehabbing his knee would mean sitting out the rest of the year, including the United States Open, which started yesterday. It’s the first time Federer has missed the draw in Flushing since 1999, and only the second major he’s skipped in 17 years.
I keep telling myself that on the grand scale of mortality, one knee injury doesn’t weigh much. Federer says he wants to play a few more years, and missing a couple of majors doesn’t mean that he won’t be able to do it. It doesn’t even mean that he won’t keep playing at the same near peak of almost greatness he’s occupied since his run of unquestioned dominance over the sport ended — but gently, oh, so gently — in 2009 or so.
Still, this injury feels a little different from the average tennis setback. It feels different even from the average season-scuttling, surgery-necessitating setback that makes you worry a player will never be the same. I’ve been thinking about why it feels different, especially in light of two small but significant Federer occurrences that took place this month.
The first occurrence: Aug. 20 was the 10th anniversary of David Foster Wallace’s essay “Roger Federer as Religious Experience,” which was originally published in The Times’s now-defunct sports magazine, Play. I’ve spent the last 10 years alternately loving and being exasperated by this work, which is probably a sign of all great essays; in any case, it’s the piece of writing that did more to construct the terms in which we now view Federer than any other.
Wallace advances the impossibly ambitious, totally doomed and thrillingly beautiful idea that high-level spectator sports serve an aesthetic and even quasi-spiritual function, namely to reconcile viewers to the limitations of their own bodies. The body ages, breaks down, gets sick, suffers and dies. But when we watch Federer in peak moments, Wallace says, we imagine what it would be like to experience a physical freedom unburdened by pain or weakness, and this in turn helps us cope with the troubling fact of our own mortal embodiment.
After reading Wallace’s description of Federer as “both flesh and, somehow, light” in 2006, it was hard to see Federer as merely a tennis player, even a great tennis player. Even the very best who ever lived. To many fans — including me, at times — he became something more than that. He became a kind of abstract principle, a living avatar of sport’s potential for transcendence.
The second occurrence: Mercedes released a new commercial in which Federer goofs his way through different eras of tennis history. Have you seen it? It’s fantastically silly. Federer appears in old-timey mock-newsreel footage with a wooden racket and a cable-knit sweater, shaking hands with a mustachioed duke. He plays freewheeling matches against Rod Laver and parks his red convertible under the Eiffel Tower. He becomes a 1970s bad boy, posing in the nude and throwing apocalyptic, McEnroe-ish tantrums on the court.
The joke here is partly about Federer’s astonishing longevity as a player. But the ad is also funny because it exaggerates to the point of absurdity the essence of Federer’s luxury-commercial persona, which is that he is a figure of timeless style. People who buy Rolexes want to believe they’re part of a tradition that stands above mere fashion.
So here’s the ageless Fed with his small, knowing smile, reminding you of values like “class” and “elegance,” which market-test as pretty much eternal. Eras may come and go, the ads say, but Federer will always be Federer, and a Mercedes will always look good.
It seems poignant, to me at least, that an essay depicting Federer as transcending the body and a commercial depicting Federer as transcending time should pass across the tennis world’s news feed at a moment when the real Federer is home with an injury. And not just an injury — an old-person injury, a dad injury.
Federer’s dark post-bathtime of the soul feels different from the typical sports layoff, I think, because it brings to the surface a tension that’s been seeping into his persona for a few years now: How do you square the image of the transcendent, unchanging champion with the fact of a player who is growing old?
For a long time, Federer’s incredible run of continued success made this problem easy to ignore. He might not be the absolute best, we could tell ourselves, but he’s still one of the best, still someone we can regularly watch in semifinals. If he’s making deep runs in majors, is that really a decline? Even when he was losing to Andy Murray or Novak Djokovic, you could watch him and see the player he’d always been — the same unhurried quickness, same air-eviscerating slash of the forehand.
Just last year, Federer reached two Grand Slam finals. Now, though? If the challenge is not winning majors — something he hasn’t done since 2012 — but simply appearing in them, the tension becomes harder to overlook.
All athletes eventually age out of the games they excel in, because bodies, even supremely capable bodies, are imperfect and subject to time. But most athletes don’t command global adulation based on the idea that somehow, magically, theirs isn’t.
That Federer does — that we’re sold, in some semiconscious way, on the idea that he is partly made of light — is of course another amazing mark of his more-than-amazing career. But the truth is that while art and sport both extend the reach of our imaginations, only one of them can sustain the illusion for long.
The Federer of Wallace’s essay can be a transcendent player forever. But the real Federer is made of nothing but flesh, and I can’t help but wonder how we’re going to absorb that news when it finally becomes unmistakable. When the athlete who reconciles us to our failing bodies watches his own body fail — what’s supposed to reconcile us to that?