In the ’70s, She Motorcycled Around the World. Today, She’s Fashion’s Unlikely New Muse.
Meet Chloé’s freewheeling inspiration, Anne-France Dautheville.
Anne-France Dautheville is 28 in 1972, astride a Moto Guzzi 750 motorcycle on the way to Tehran, traveling alone cross-continent. She’s flagged down by a car, and three children get out to ask Dautheville about herself, her life and her eye makeup. (“I always made up my eyes,” she recalls.) “Then they start driving faster than me. Ten kilometers later, they stop on the side of the road, and they stop me again. I ask, ‘Is there something you forgot?’ And they say, ‘Well, we were wondering, are you a girl or are you a boy?’ ” Dautheville throws back her head and roars with laughter.
Dautheville spent most of her younger years trying to escape her hometown of Paris, before finally succeeding at the age of 28. After an unfulfilling period working as a copywriter, she sat on a motorcycle and her life was transformed. From 1972 to 1981, she motored across the globe: First across the Orion Raid, a motorcycle tour from Paris to Isfahan, Iran; then to Afghanistan. In 1973, she became the first woman to ride across the world solo on a motorcycle: Astride a Kawasaki 125, she trekked three continents and covered 12,500 miles.
The ’70s were also a high point for Chloé. Under the leadership of Karl Lagerfeld, who served as the creative director from 1964 to 1984, the brand’s signature brazen femininity was firmly established. At the same time Dautheville began exploring the world, Lagerfeld introduced fluid crepe de Chine and lacy tea dresses knotted with scarf belts. When Waight Keller joined in 2011, times had changed, as had demands. To Chloé’s well-established formula of flou, she added tomboy tailoring, sportswear, slick coats and a litany of oddly desirable ponchos as unexpectedly practical outerwear. For fall, she wanted to convey a tougher attitude, which led her to vintage motocross imagery, mostly of guys on motorbikes. Women, literally, weren’t in the picture. Until she discovered Dautheville.
After that visit, it became even clearer that Dautheville perfectly aligned with Chloé’s history of strong heroines: the women who have inspired the clothes which, as Waight Keller emphasizes, are shorn of any visible logo, as well as the previous designers behind them, from Martine Sitbon to Stella McCartney. Waight Keller cites ongoing inspirations, such as Charlotte Rampling or Jane Birkin, ­“the obvious ones, who­ if you asked people on the street who they’d say was a ‘Chloé Girl.’ ” Dautheville fits in perfectly, albeit with slightly less everyman recognition.
Some riffs on Dautheville’s looks from the fall show included leather bib overalls and washed-­in leather jackets: The elbows were intentionally baggy, an inspiration taken from those photographs of Dautheville’s clothes. The designer herself enthusiastically tries on vintage garments in her research process, excited not just by the look but by the feel, the reality of the person who wore them. “Having that sense of a person, that sense of a personality through their clothes, is part of what makes them desirable,” Waight Keller explains. She isn’t likely, she says, to look to, say, a Le Corbusier building for inspiration.
Following the victory of François Mitterrand and the Socialists in the May 1981 elections, an austerity program began in 1983, introducing laws restricting movement of currency abroad to just 2,000 francs, which made Dautheville’s kind of journeying impossible. She retired to La Ferté-­sous-Jouarre, where she continues to write about her love of plants and animals. Ultimately, a life centered around the home gave her a different satisfaction. “It was another story, another trip, inside of me,” she says, with a smile.
