The images tell a heartbreaking story: Zika’s calamitous attack on the brains of babies — as seen from the inside.
A study of brain scans and ultrasound pictures of 45 Brazilian babies whose mothers were infected with Zika in pregnancy shows that the virus can inflict serious damage to many different parts of the fetal brain beyond microcephaly, the condition of unusually small heads that has become the sinister signature of Zika.
The images, published Tuesday in the journal Radiology, also suggest a grim possibility: Because some of the damage was seen in brain areas that continue to develop after birth, it may be that babies born without obvious impairment will experience problems as they grow.
“It really brings to the forefront the importance of truly understanding the impact of Zika virus and the fact that we need to follow children who not only are exposed to Zika in pregnancy, but even those who don’t appear to have any complications at birth,” said Dr. Catherine Y. Spong, acting director of the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, who was not involved in the study.
Most of the babies in the study were born with microcephaly, although three were not. Each also suffered other impairments, almost all of which emerge earlier than microcephaly because a smaller head is really a consequence of a brain that has failed to develop fully or has been damaged along the way, experts said.
The scans show the range of Zika’s brain targets, some of which experts knew about, including the corpus callosum, which facilitates communication between the two hemispheres; the cerebellum, which plays a significant role in movement, balance and speech; and the basal ganglia, which are involved in thinking and emotion.
Together, the images provide a more detailed guide that might help doctors diagnose Zika-related fetal damage earlier — possibly in the second trimester at a point early enough to help women decide whether to terminate a pregnancy, said Dr. Adre du Plessis, director of the Fetal Medicine Institute of Children’s National Health System, who was not involved in the study.
One finding that surprised several experts could become an especially meaningful diagnostic clue. Many infections that target the brain produce clumps of calcium, called calcification. But in Zika-infected babies, calcification often occurred in an unusual place: at the intersection of the gray matter of the outer layer of the brain, the cortex, and the white matter of the layer just below that.
That pattern could emerge as a particular stamp of Zika infection, experts said. Dr. Spong said that because the area involves two different types of blood vessels, it might suggest that Zika targets vascular areas.
And it could signal why the virus wreaks such ruthless effects on brain development.
Most of the babies in the study had such damage in the cortex, which plays a crucial role in learning, memory and coordination, and also continues to develop at least through infancy, suggesting that Zika-infected babies who seemed to emerge unscathed might be vulnerable to difficulties as they grow.
 The ventricles may be filling with fluid because Zika is obstructing their ability to drain normally, or because damage to other brain areas leaves a kind of vacuum that the enlarged ventricles fill.
The fluid-filled ventricles can make the head size seem normal earlier in pregnancy, Dr. Levine said. But as scans of one pregnancy taken at 36 weeks gestation show, the fluid can be so prominent that the scan shows what “looks like the skull and very little brain tissue inside it,” she said.
The images come from 17 babies whose mothers had confirmed Zika infection during pregnancy and 28 without laboratory confirmation but with all indications of Zika infection. Dr. Levine worked with colleagues in Brazil, which has more than 1,800 cases of microcephaly, to analyze images from the Instituto de Pesquisa in Paraiba in the northeastern part of the country. Three of the babies died in the first three days of life, and researchers studied autopsy reports in those cases.
The images include scans of twin girls, who both developed microcephaly. The pictures show folds of overlapping skin and a sloping forehead, indications not only that the brain is smaller, but also that the forebrain has not developed normally, Dr. Levine said.
Dr. Levine said the images suggest that Zika is like a formidable enemy able to do damage in three ways: keeping parts of the brain from forming normally, obstructing areas of the brain, and destroying parts of the brain after they form.
