Esther Jungreis, a charismatic speaker and teacher whose enormously popular revival-style assemblies urged secular Jews to study Torah and embrace traditional religious values, died on Tuesday in Brooklyn. She was 80.
The cause was complications of pneumonia, her son-in-law, Rabbi Shlomo Gertzulin, said.
Ms. Jungreis (pronounced YOUNG-rice), a Hungarian Jew who spent several months in the Bergen-Belsen concentration camp as a child, was often called “the Jewish Billy Graham,” and her artfully staged rallies, with theatrical lighting and musical accompaniment, were in fact inspired by Mr. Graham’s Christian crusades.
She styled herself “rebbetzin,” the Yiddish honorific bestowed on wives of rabbis. Her husband, Rabbi Theodore Jungreis, led the Congregation Ohr Torah, an Orthodox synagogue in North Woodmere, N.Y., on Long Island.
Alarmed at the threats to Judaism posed by assimilation, secularism and the rise of religious cults, Rebbetzin Jungreis held a rally attended by 10,000 people at the Felt Forum in Madison Square Garden in 1973 to inspire a Jewish awakening. She also founded an outreach organization, Hineni, its name — Hebrew for “I am here” — alluding to Abraham’s answer when called upon by God in Genesis.
The organization offered classes in the Torah and social mixers at which Jewish singles could find one another. As its leader, Rebbetzin Jungreis addressed large audiences around the United States and abroad and, beginning in 1982, broadcast a weekly half-hour Torah program, “Hineni,” on National Jewish Television.
Her style was impassioned, her message urgent. She routinely called the threat of assimilation “a spiritual Holocaust.” Onstage, she would exhort and scold, admonish and warn, tugging at the heartstrings with both hands, distraught at the erosion of Jewish identity and religious devotion.
“We have a generation that has surpassed expectations in every field,” she told The New York Times in 1997. “But when it comes to the Torah, we — the people of the book — have Jewish illiterates.” It was her life’s mission to correct this state of affairs.
Esther Naomi Jungreisz was born on April 27, 1936, in Szeged, Hungary, to Abraham Jungreisz, a rabbi descended from a long line of rabbis, and the former Miriam Cohen.
In June 1944, as mass deportations of Hungary’s Jews gathered momentum, Esther, along with her parents and her two brothers, was put on a train bound for Auschwitz. Although the family did not realize it, an aunt in Budapest had placed their names on the passenger list of a special train traveling from Budapest to Switzerland, organized by Rudolf Kastner, a founder of the Jewish Aid and Rescue Committee. Mr. Kastner had bribed Adolf Eichmann to allow some 1,600 Jews to escape the country.
On reaching Budapest, the family was transferred to the Kastner train, which, for unknown reasons, was diverted to Bergen-Belsen. Esther and her family remained there as inmates for six months — she was prisoner No. 5357 — before being released and traveling on to a refugee camp in Caux, Switzerland.
The family emigrated to the United States and settled in a basement apartment in the East Flatbush section of Brooklyn. Her father started a shul and yeshiva in the Canarsie neighborhood. She recounted the events of her childhood in her first book, “The Jewish Soul on Fire” (1982), which wove her life story together with her religious views.
Esther received a yeshiva education at the Bais Yaakov School for Girls, then studied in Israel with the biblical scholar Nechama Leibowitz. On returning to the United States, she married a distant cousin, Theodore Jungreis, also a Hungarian refugee, in 1955.
After moving to Long Island, the couple founded both the North Woodmere Jewish Center and Congregation Ohr Torah in 1963, and Rebbetzin Jungreis began developing her speaking style by lecturing to Jewish groups and presiding over Torah lunches.
Hearing her speak at a hotel in the Catskills in the early 1960s, the editor of The Jewish Press invited her to write an advice column, “Rebbetzin’s Viewpoint.” It ran for the next 45 years. Her last column appeared on Aug. 19.
She is survived by her two brothers, Jacob, a rabbi, and Benjamin; two sons, Yisroel and Osher, both rabbis; two daughters, Chaya Sora Gertzulin and Slovi Wolff; 23 grandchildren; and 32 great-grandchildren. Her husband died in 1996.
Initially, Hineni offered classes and social events in the Canarsie shul, but over the years it expanded its reach, establishing offices in Jerusalem and elsewhere. In 1989, Rebbetzin Jungreis opened the Hineni Heritage Center on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, where it houses a multimedia museum and offers Torah classes, singles events and religious services on High Holy Days.
To apply the lessons of Torah to modern life, Rebbetzin Jungreis wrote the self-help books “The Committed Life: Principles for Good Living From Our Timeless Past” (1998), “The Committed Marriage: A Guide to Finding a Soul Mate and Building a Relationship Through Timeless Biblical Wisdom” (2002) and “Life Is a Test: How to Meet Life’s Challenges Successfully” (2006).
