It was a simple gesture captured in a photograph: Malcolm Turnbull, the prime minister of Australia, leaning over and placing money in the paper cup of a homeless man in Melbourne this week.
The contrasts in that moment of charity were stark. There were the buffed shoes and suit of a man of power, next to the ragged clothes of a man sitting on a sidewalk. The prime minister’s cleanshaven face was inches from the man’s scraggly hair and furrowed brow. In one of Mr. Turnbull’s hands, a wad of bank notes; in the other, the single note he was depositing in the cup, an Australian 5-dollar bill (worth about $3.80).
The political overtones were also hard to miss: Mr. Turnbull, who led his conservative coalition to an election victory just last month, was on his way to deliver a major speech at the Committee for Economic Development of Australia.
By the end of the week, those few dollars had bought Mr. Turnbull a barrage of attention and had spurred a debate about how best to help homeless people — a problem that has bedeviled major cities around the world, including New York, Los Angeles and San Francisco.
Some critics called the prime minister a cheapskate, while others complained that his actions flew in the face of official efforts to address the problem of people living on the streets of Melbourne, a coastal city of about four million people.
Robert Doyle, the mayor of Melbourne, has maintained that giving money to beggars entrenches homelessness, and he has urged people to donate to charitable organizations that help the homeless instead.
Officials and advocates for the homeless in the United States also discourage people from giving money to homeless people on the streets, saying that donations to service providers like the Salvation Army do much more good. In New York City, Mayor Bill de Blasio makes the same argument.
Some of the reaction to Mr. Turnbull’s gesture was supportive, but he also faced questions and criticism from social media users and the news media.
Last month, shortly after the election won by Mr. Turnbull and his right-wing Liberal Party, a Salvation Army official, Brendan Nottle, said that homelessness in Melbourne was at a crisis point. The Age newspaper reported that 247 people were living on the city’s streets, according to the latest census report.
David Leydon, the assistant secretary of the Australian Services Union, was critical of Mr. Turnbull on Twitter, prompting replies that insinuated the prime minister had meant his gesture to serve as a photo opportunity.
“Cheap skate Turnbull. He found $2 million for the Liberal Party but only managed $5 for a poor homeless fella,” Mr. Leydon wrote.
Another man suggested the attention had gone too far.
Politicians especially seem to be the targets of criticism, and sometimes ridicule, when they drop change in cups, especially if cameras are around when they do. In 2014, Ed Miliband, the former Labour leader of Britain, was criticized for giving a woman a few coins.
In March of this year, he was spotted handing over 10 British pounds ($13) to several youths on the street, The Independent reported. But that was after the teenagers had directed him to an automated teller machine, reports said.
