WASHINGTON — One of President Obama’s top priorities during his last months in office is to help make sure that Hillary Clinton succeeds him. To do so, the president will make at least a dozen campaign appearances in battleground states from now to Election Day on Nov. 8.
Mr. Obama’s task is not to try to persuade independents or Republicans that they should choose Mrs. Clinton over Donald J. Trump, the Republican nominee, according to White House officials and the Clinton campaign. Instead, he will urge his most enthusiastic supporters — young voters and African-Americans — to register or to be sure to turn out to vote for Mrs. Clinton.
“The president’s focus is on getting the Obama coalition to the polls,” said Jen Psaki, the White House communications director.
Most of his appearances will be timed to coincide with voter registration deadlines and the start of early voting, White House officials said. On Sept. 13, for example, Mr. Obama will appear at a rally in Philadelphia, four weeks before the last day that Pennsylvanians can register to vote.
Neither the Clinton campaign nor the White House has announced any more appearances, in part because they want to be able to send Mr. Obama where they think they need him most. But his visits are likely to be concentrated in Florida, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, New Hampshire, Nevada and Iowa, campaign officials said. Mr. Obama will generally campaign without Mrs. Clinton.
His focus on turnout reflects concerns that while polling suggests Mrs. Clinton has broad support from the same blocs of voters who twice elected Mr. Obama, they are not as enthusiastic about her candidacy and will need prodding to visit the voting booth.
Mr. Obama has been among the most effective critics of Mr. Trump, shifting between humorous needling and incredulous outrage at the Republican candidate’s positions. But as with his speech at the Democratic convention, Mr. Obama intends to spend much of his time praising Mrs. Clinton rather than criticizing Mr. Trump, Ms. Psaki said.
Mr. Obama will spend so much of the next two months campaigning for Mrs. Clinton despite polls suggesting that she is a solid favorite to win because, he said this month, Democrats tend to oscillate between full-blown panic and dangerous complacency.
Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. will also hit the campaign trail about twice a week stumping not only for Mrs. Clinton but for Democratic Senate candidates in states like Pennsylvania, Ohio and Missouri, said Kate J. Bedingfield, a spokeswoman for Mr. Biden.
On Thursday, Mr. Biden will campaign in Cleveland and Youngstown, Ohio, and on Monday will be in Pittsburgh.
Mr. Biden has warned that Mr. Trump has already made the world a more dangerous place, and he intends to continue making the case that Mr. Trump is not qualified to be commander in chief, Ms. Bedingfield said.
So far, the process for scheduling appearances for Mr. Obama and Mr. Biden has begun with administration officials telling the Clinton campaign what dates the president and vice president are free, and the campaign telling the White House where they want them to go. In late September and early October, that may be Iowa, where early voting begins Sept. 29, a campaign official said.
Mr. Obama is an unusually good advocate for Mrs. Clinton in Iowa, where the president defeated Mrs. Clinton in the 2008 caucuses and which he carried in 2008 and 2012.
“Iowa is a place where the president has a special connection, where he feels at home when his plane lands,” Ms. Psaki said Tuesday.
Early voting begins in Ohio on Oct. 12, in Nevada on Oct. 22, in Florida as early as Oct. 24 and in North Carolina on Oct. 20 — dates that could be a factor in scheduling Mr. Obama’s visits, according to one campaign official. There is only absentee voting in New Hampshire and Pennsylvania before Election Day.
Mrs. Clinton’s eagerness for the president’s help is a rarity among recent candidates. Al Gore decided against extensive appearances by Bill Clinton, which may have cost him the 2000 election. In 1988, Ronald Reagan campaigned infrequently for George Bush, and in 1960, Dwight D. Eisenhower offered little support for Richard M. Nixon.
Mr. Obama’s get-out-the-vote efforts for Mrs. Clinton could also benefit other Democrats in reclaiming the Senate majority and making inroads in the House of Representatives. And Mr. Obama is likely to shoehorn fund-raisers for the Democratic Party and individual candidates into more of his schedule.
“The president will continue to look for ways to support down-ticket candidates, and he has told us he wants to make that a priority,” Ms. Psaki said.