RIO DE JANEIRO — A thousand metaphysical miles from the well-heeled Olympic zone, a couple of activists and I entered the Favela do Mandela, a ramshackle collection of brick-and-tar-paper buildings. We walked a narrow road ringed by wary-eyed young men, which led to a narrower one, which led to a five-foot-wide alleyway. We found the home of 64-year-old Marie Auxiliadora.
With blond hair brushed back, she was a diminutive eruption of joy. She apologized for her modest home, scrubbed and packed with crucifixes and plastic flowers and pastel curtains. She wore a sun dress and pink flip-flops. Although morning gunfire had earlier forced her to hide in her bedroom, she insisted hers had been a good life. She noted she had four beautiful adult children, thank God. On her television, we watched demonstrators protest the presence of the Olympic torch on the day before the Olympics started.
She pursed her lips and put her hands over her chest.
“I am so upset,” she said. Her eyes turned red-rimmed. “I have not gotten my retirement check for a month. Our hospitals and schools are broken. 
Seen from the northern and western precincts of Rio de Janeiro, which sprawl inland from the green Tijuca forest and the coastal mountain spine, the Olympics inhabit a foreign and wealthy world.
In two days of wandering through favelas and working-class neighborhoods, I found Olympic excitement an often extinguished fire. Graffiti and signs draped across walls by labor activists document the Games’ huge cost to a wounded city. Olympic torchbearers jogged into several working-class neighborhoods and left sprinting, chased by angry residents. Outrage is not difficult to understand.
Billionaire developers and media magnates have made a fortune off the Olympics; bribe and corruption investigations arising from these Games are a growth industry, with construction companies and hundreds of congressional deputies potentially in the dock. An extremely expensive subway was built to run the length of this city’s well-to-do south coast from Copacabana to the Olympic site. A forest of towers to house athletes rose on publicly owned land; afterward, the developer will turn these into luxury housing. On the route from the international airport to the south shore, Olympic organizers put up colorful walls so that visitors could not see the favelas.
The International Olympic Committee’s chieftain, Thomas Bach, proclaimed the Rio Games a grand success last week. I wondered at the quality of his eyes.
To write of pain is to take nothing from the Brazilians, who are gracious hosts and exuberant fans, crowding the waterfront of Copacabana for beach volleyball. Grand athletic achievement is inspiring, and these athletes, the world’s greatest, deserve applause. But the practiced I.O.C. shakedown of cities, the demands that local officials compete to construct obscenely expensive stadiums and news media centers and to guarantee that tourist zones have been swept of the desperate, has rarely looked more problematic.
Rio is all but bankrupt. Teachers have gone months without pay. Retirees are months behind on pension checks. University professors gather to mop floors and empty overflowing garbage cans.
I talked to a hospital administrator in a northern neighborhood who asked that I not use his name for fear he might lose his job. Officials had instructed him, he said, to reserve beds in overcrowded wards and to put aside hard-to-obtain medicines, such as blood pressure pills, for Olympic tourists. His hospital received a new ambulance to serve the Olympics.
I traveled this day in the company of Anderson Franca, a sturdy, bearded activist, writer and researcher, and his wife, Suelen Masiero. Anderson sees a bill of lading for decades of neglect come due.
Later, we will put the question of the Olympics to Geovane Prince, a muscular, tattooed photographer in the Mandela favela. He has created a thriving studio and travels about the city. He shakes his head before I get the question out.
Violence is a caldron still boiling and cannot be separated from this Olympic antipathy. In advance of the 2014 World Cup and now the Olympics, the police and the military pushed at the point of semiautomatic rifles and armored cars into hundreds of favelas in brutal pacification campaigns. Homicides dropped significantly but spiked again this year. New York City recorded 350 murders in 2015. Rio de Janeiro, a state with roughly double the population of New York City, recorded 461 murders in April 2016 alone.
The police were responsible for one-fifth of all murders in Rio last year, according to Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International.
At 8:30 a.m. last week, we traveled toward the Complexo do Alemão favela, which sprawls across four hills. We stopped at a traffic light. Crack-pop, crack-pop. I tilted my head; it sounded like firecrackers, except not really. The driver in the car next to ours rolled his eyes. The paramilitaries and drug gangs, he said through his open window, shoot early this morning.
Hers was an often repeated observation. Residents want peace, but they harbor no particular rooting interest in the army or the drug gangs or the paramilitaries composed of retired cops: All armies are lethal.
We scrambled up a hardscrabble path to the new police precinct that commands the hill like a medieval castle keep. Inside, three police officers in body armor nodded warily.
Officials cut several bus lines that run north to south during the Olympics, in hope of keeping gangs from invading the tourist zones of Copacabana and Ipanema and the central business district. Many tens of thousands of working-class Cariocas, as natives of Rio are known, spend two and a half to three hours commuting to distant jobs, journeys made far more arduous during the Games. Anderson’s mother lives in a favela. She is in her ninth decade and has never visited the white sand beaches of Copacabana and Ipanema.
The city’s public safety director talks about the disaster that could await when the Olympics end and soldiers withdraw from the tourist zones.
The next day, I talked with Carla Maria Avesani, a young professor at the Rio de Janeiro state university. She has a Ph.D. and runs a nutrition institute at the University of Rio de Janeiro. She serves on the board of a prestigious journal and writes for an international audience of academics. She studies how changes in diet help poor patients on dialysis and those with heart problems. It was her dream to work at a public university with a mission.
Now she and her fellow professors pool their Brazilian reais to buy computers and paper towels, and to fix doors. They try to figure out what to do about the broken elevator. Their university is broke, its pockets turned out.
She lives in an upper-middle-class neighborhood, with good restaurants and that Mediterranean climate. The evening atmosphere, with young couples hand in hand, calls to mind Rome, except with enormous rock faces nearby and an ocean lapping at your feet. She watched the opening ceremony, all the brilliant choreographies, and read her friends’ proud posts on Facebook.
She could not join them.
