A state judge ruled on Thursday that a reporter for The New York Times must testify at a trial this fall about her jailhouse interview with a man accused of killing the toddler known as Baby Hope.
Justice Bonnie G. Wittner said in her ruling that the notes and testimony of the reporter, Frances Robles, were “material, relevant and critical to the people’s case” against the man, Conrado Juárez, because her interview with him was the only other public statement he made about the crime besides his confession to the police.
In April, the judge decided Ms. Robles could not be compelled to testify at a pretrial hearing about whether Mr. Juárez’s videotaped confession could be admitted into evidence. In that decision, Justice Wittner said the prosecution had not shown that its case would rise or fall on Ms. Robles’s testimony.
Mr. Juárez, 55, a restaurant worker from Mexico, was arrested in October 2013 a few days after the police, acting on a tip, identified the dead girl as Anjélica Castillo, and began interviewing her relatives. Mr. Juárez was an older cousin of Anjélica, who lived with his sister in Queens.
His arrest ended a 22-year search for the killer of a girl no one reported missing and whose identity had remained a mystery. Her body was found in July 1991 in a cooler near the Dyckman Street exit on the Henry Hudson Parkway. Detectives had named her Baby Hope.
After an all-night interrogation, Mr. Juárez confessed on videotape to having smothered the child with a pillow while trying to rape her, then he and his sister dumped the body in the woods near the highway.
Four days later, Ms. Robles interviewed Mr. Juárez at Rikers Island and The Times published an article. In the interview, Mr. Juárez said he had help dispose of the girl’s body, but he denied he had killed the child and claimed the detectives browbeat him into a confession.
Mr. Juárez’s lawyer, Michael J. Croce, has argued the confession was coerced.
In court papers, the Manhattan district attorney’s office argued the interview that he gave to Ms. Robles corroborated many of the details he gave to the police and added a few more, even though he denied raping and killing the child.
Still, prosecutors argue the fact Mr. Juárez repeated so many of the same details freely to a reporter just days after talking to the police proves the confession was neither coerced nor fabricated.
The lead prosecutor, Melissa Mourges, said in court papers that no scientific evidence, like DNA, linked Mr. Juárez to the crime, so every statement he made to Ms. Robles was critical to proving to jurors that he had told the truth to the police.
“Simply stated, the prosecution cannot succeed unless the jury accepts the statements as both voluntary and true,” she wrote. “This means the case virtually rises and falls on evidence surrounding all the statements Juárez made” about the crime and his confession.
Ms. Bolger, the lawyer for Ms. Robles, argued the prosecution did not need the published article, nor her client’s notes, to prove the confession was truthful.
“The district attorney has three hours of a video confession along with the corroborating evidence from the victim’s body and related physical evidence; it does not also need to question Ms. Robles about an interview in which Mr. Juárez did not confess,” Ms. Bolger wrote in her court papers.
The New York shield law says journalists cannot be compelled to testify or provide information about news obtained from confidential sources, but it provides only limited protection regarding named sources, like Mr. Juárez.
In those cases, a journalist can be forced to take the stand or turn over notes if prosecutors can show the information is “highly material and relevant” as well as “critical or necessary” to prove their case. The prosecution must also show it cannot be obtained from another source.
Justice Wittner based her decision partly on a recent appellate division ruling in People v. Bonie. In that case, the appeals court in Manhattan ordered a television reporter for News 12 the Bronx to turn over to prosecutors unaired footage of an interview with a landlord accused of killing his tenant, in which the accused man talked about the murder. That ruling has been appealed to the state’s highest court.
Justice Wittner said she would limit the cross-examination of Ms. Robles by a defense lawyer.
