Move to Amend is thrilled that our brand new mini documentary about Move to Amend is FINISHED!
To ask whether public banks would interfere with free markets assumes that we have free markets, which we don’t. Banking is heavily subsidized and is monopolized by Wall Street, which has effectively “bought” Congress. Banks have been bailed out by the government, when in a free market they would have gone bankrupt.
With U.S. Chamber of Commerce representatives standing by and security guards at the door, the Operation Green Jobs March, sponsored by Poor People's Economic Human Rights Campaign (PPEHRC), and Shut the Chamber, arrived in Washington, DC on May 24th as planned, from Philadelphia, PA.
WASHINGTON – Guillermo Santos, 10, walked 150 miles from Philadelphia to Washington bringing letters that his classmates wrote for President Barack Obama, asking him to stop budget cuts affecting public schools. He was with a group of activists who ended their six-day march Friday with a rally in front of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. The protesters rallied against the chamber’s lobbying efforts in support of multinational corporations.
An upcoming action this month is simultaneously taking on the unemployment crisis, the climate crisis, and the corporate corruption of Congress crisis all at once. And it needs your support.
Last term, the Chamber of Commerce was undefeated — it won every Supreme Court case it weighed in on. So far this term, it has secured favorable rulings in 6 out of 7 cases.
The U.S. Chamber of Commerce is under fire from some local chambers over its hard-hitting $75 million ad campaign to elect a Republican House, with dozens of groups distancing themselves from the effort and a handful even quitting the national group in protest.
NOT long after 10 a.m. on March 27, a restless audience waited for the Supreme Court to hear arguments in the second of two historic cases involving same-sex marriage.
What if there was a really smart, knowledgeable, innovative guy who had dreams of curing cancer or writing a bestselling novel or recording an acclaimed album, but couldn't do any of the above because of a crippling cocaine addiction? Similarly, Congress' deadly addiction to corporate cash is the main reason Washington is unable to solve the myriad problems affecting our economy, environment and politics. If only we could help Congress kick the habit, our government could work for us again.
In 1971, Lewis Powell, a well-connected corporate lawyer, wrote a confidential memo to an official at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. “The American economic system is under broad attack,” Powell warned, by everyone from “New Leftists and other revolutionaries” to academics, the media, and politicians. It was time for the right, and the Chamber itself, to fight back.
Since 2009, nearly 60 local Chambers of Commerce have publicly denounced or canceled their membership to the U.S. Chamber, citing the national organization's extreme positions. For a printable list of these organizations and their statements CLICK HERE.
THINKPROGRESS: US Chamber Used Funds From Job Outsourcers to Attack Politicians For Being "Anti-Jobs"
If you want to understand the source of the world's problems, follow the Davos coverage by CNN and Bloomberg News for a few days. Not only will they tell you what the source is, they'll prove that your instincts are right about billionaires and those who present them as the arbiters of all things fair and right.
WASHINGTON, D.C.-The United States Chamber of Commerce expressed disappointment today with the U.S. House of Representatives for passing an increase in the federal minimum wage and encouraged the Senate to carefully consider its impact on small businesses.
**This is a press release from the US Chamber's website, commending the SCOTUS for pushing class-action lawsuit plaintiffs out of state courts and forcing them into corporate-friendly federal courts. The SCOTUS has ruled 100% in the US Chamber's favor since the start of Obama's presidency.
Washington, D.C. – The U.S. Chamber of Commerce today praised a decision by the U.S. Supreme Court that preserves a key provision of the landmark Class Action Fairness Act (CAFA).
WASHINGTON, D.C. – The U.S. Chamber of Commerce and its affiliated Institute for Legal Reform (ILR) failed to report millions in taxable spending from 2000 to 2004 intended to influence state-level attorney general and supreme court races and federal races around the country, according to a Public Citizen complaint filed today with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).
South Carolina Republicans on Friday asked the state's highest court to stop a recount of votes in Richland County, arguing that a GOP candidate fairly won a disputed legislative race.
The state party made the request to the Supreme Court a day after a circuit judge ordered that ballots and voting machines in Richland County be guarded by state police while state election officials reviewed them. County election officials had planned to certify election results Friday, but that process is on hold.
