The Treasury Department has moved a step closer to tightening the way family limited partnerships are valued for tax purposes. And the prospect that the tax code could be changed by the end of this year has tax planners pushing their clients to consider stepping up estate and business planning, or risk paying more taxes.
Earlier this month, the Treasury Department issued “proposed final regulations” to eliminate a provision in the tax code that effectively allows wealthy people to greatly discount the value of shares in a family limited partnership given to family members. These partnerships are able to own assets like family business, real estate and securities.
The discount, which has been allowed since the 1990s, is granted for what is considered a lack of marketability for minority shares in these partnerships. If a family member, for example, wanted to sell his or her share in a partnership that was entirely owned by other family members, the pool of buyers might well be limited to his or her relatives. They might not have the money — or desire — to buy him out.
This provision, contained in section 2704 of the Internal Revenue Code, has been abused by aggressive tax planners and lawyers who used the discount, sometimes as high as 40 percent, and applied it to partnerships that contained marketable securities or other assets that could otherwise be easily valued and sold.
The Internal Revenue Service has repeatedly balked at stocks and bonds being discounted just because they were owned in a family partnership. On Dec. 1, it will hold a hearing on the new regulations, which would strip away the discount from all family limited partnerships regardless of what they hold.
And this is one of the sticking points for planners. Many argue that partnerships that hold businesses should still be entitled to the discounts.
“There have been abuses in the past, like when families took a $100 million of marketable securities and wrapped them in a family limited partnership wrapper and took a discount,” said Christopher Pegg, regional wealth planning manager for Southern California at Wells Fargo Private Bank.
Mr. Pegg pointed out that if nonfamily members owned the same private company, the I.R.S. would allow a discount for the very same lack of marketability.
Tax experts do not rule out that these new regulations, although labeled final, could be changed in the comment period. Their enactment, which is set for 30 days after they become final, could also be delayed. At the earliest they would take effect on Dec. 31.
Still, predicting when the regulations will take effect is beyond people’s control and could be risky for those who would benefit from a family partnership.
Some planners are drawing parallels to the fourth quarter of 2012, when wealthy people scrambled to make gifts under what was then a $5.12 million exemption for individuals. The rush was generated by the fear that the Obama administration would abolish or greatly reduce the exemption in 2013. Instead, the government kept it in place, with an annual increase for inflation.
For the very wealthy, there is good reason to set up a family limited partnership by the end of the year. The discounting, for example, can turn a $10 million gift into $6.5 million for tax purposes.
If the proposed changes go into effect as planned, they will certainly have an effect on certain very wealthy families. “We’re telling clients to move quickly,” Mr. Pegg said. He said that it typically takes six months to set up a family limited partnership, but if families were motivated and focused on this they could set one up in about 45 days.
But even if discounting goes away, the ability to save on tax, protect assets from creditors and pass any future appreciation on to the next generation still exists through tax planning.
Apart from the discount, there are two effective strategies to move money or business interests to heirs.
The first is simply getting assets that are going to appreciate out of a person’s estate. If the gift is over the exemption amount, the person may have to pay gift tax. But after that, all future appreciation will grow outside of his or her estate.
The second is to put those assets into what is called a grantor trust, which benefits future recipients by allowing the person making the gift to pay all the income taxes in the trust.
Seth R. Kaplan, a shareholder with the law firm Gunster, said he recommends some type of family entity for any family with more than $10 million in assets.
And it is that desire for control and protection of the assets that planners say may be the most valuable benefit. If someone is sued, the assets inside the partnership are viewed as separate from the individual’s assets, just as they would be in a well-crafted trust.
That partnership structure also gives the family the ability to bind family interests together. This may not always be what beneficiaries want, but it is meant to ensure that a family business has the best chance of continuing.
