Last Sunday at the twice-yearly Jazz Age Lawn Party on Governors Island, revelers bravely attempted to recreate 1920s cool in the face of hideous heat and humidity. There were men in boater hats, bow ties and suspenders; women wore bias-cut dresses and cloches while carrying parasols.
Standing in the center of Gatsby’s Garden, the event’s V.I.P. section, was Michael Arenella, the conductor of the headliner, Michael Arenella and his Dreamland Orchestra, and the festival’s founder.
His manners, like his clothes, are reminiscent of another era. At 6 feet 1½ inches tall, he is built like a strongman with broad shoulders, and most of his vintage-look clothing, including the white cotton suit he was wearing, must be custom-made.
His head is partly shaved, and a wave of curls cover part of his forehead; he has a mustache just slightly thicker than the one John Waters pencils on.
“I do not own a microwave and I never will. Same goes for TV,” he said, attempting to define exactly how unfettered by technology he is.
He left to conduct his band, while on the dance floor below the stage, people gamely attempted the Charleston (with mixed results).
After playing, he enjoyed a bare-chested ferry ride back to Brooklyn, where he changed into a red-and-white-striped shirt and khaki pants to meet a group of friends at Kittery, a seafood restaurant in Carroll Gardens. There were plates of fried calamari, Caesar salad and sliders spread over several adjoining tables.
Adam Coren, a 26-year-old hat salesman and artist, said, “When I was 2, I made my mom buy me dress shoes instead of sneakers.” The comment was enough to spur a spirited discussion of Crocs.
“They can’t be sensible,” said John Veglak, who is in his early 50s and wore round eyeglasses and knickers. He noted that the group’s style of living was not made up purely of anachronisms. “There’s no block of ice for the refrigerator, no coal stove,” he said.
On the other side of the room, Mr. Arenella could be seen writing a text message on another outdated device: his flip phone.