Francis was meeting privately with bishops in Poland last week when he broached the matter. “Today, in schools they are teaching this to children — to children! — that everyone can choose their gender,” he said, according to a transcript released by the Vatican on Tuesday.
Marianne Duddy-Burke, the executive director of DignityUSA, a leading organization of L.G.B.T. Catholics, said the comments represented a “dangerous ignorance” about gender identity, which is no more a choice than height or hair color.
In his remarks, the pope said the idea of choosing gender was being taught with schoolbooks supplied by influential donors and countries. He did not identify which.
“This is terrible,” he said, according to the transcript.
Francis, who is Argentine, also did not offer examples of classrooms using such a curriculum. But church analysts say he has long harbored resentment over so-called ideological colonialism, the notion that international groups offer aid to developing nations contingent upon the adoption of Western values.
The pontiff’s latest remarks represented a letdown for gay rights groups that were encouraged by the pope’s conciliatory remarks in June after the massacre of gay patrons at a nightclub in Orlando, Fla. Francis said at the time that gays were owed an apology for past mistreatment by Christians.
Sarah McBride, a spokeswoman for the Human Rights Campaign, said the words sent a ripple of hope through the L.G.B.T. community that the Vatican might be embracing a broader stance on inclusion.
Francis, whose papacy began in 2013, has won admirers, and detractors, for his relatively progressive views on social issues, once declaring, “Who am I to judge?” on the matter of gay priests.
Mr. Ivereigh said the pontiff’s remarks last week represented no prejudice toward transgender people, but rather a rejection of so-called gender ideology.
In a major document regarding family issues released in April — titled “Amoris Laetitia,” Latin for “The Joy of Love” — Francis warns of “an ideology of gender” as a threat to the family.
L.G.B.T. leaders said Wednesday that the pope had failed to grasp that one’s gender identity is discovered, often at a very young age, not chosen. Ms. McBride, of the Human Rights Campaign, noted that transgender people have been a part of humanity throughout time and across cultures.
