In an unparalleled moment of national pride laced with sorrow, Canada stopped for a few hours on Saturday night to venerate the Tragically Hip, the band that for many has come closest to defining that country’s cultural identity.
“Thank you,” Gord Downie, the Hip’s frontman, told the crowd from a stage in Kingston, Ontario, “for keeping me pushing, and keeping me pushing.”  Far from retreating, the band instead planned a short summer tour, by turns jubilant and wrenching, that has transfixed much of Canada for the last month.
Kingston, the group’s hometown, was the last stop.
Mr. Downie arrived onstage at the Rogers K-Rock arena — on The Tragically Hip Way — in a suit and jauntily feathered hat, and, with his four bandmates of over 30 years, tore through a three-hour set of blues-rock hits and lyrical deep cuts. The mood was triumphal: The concert started after a spontaneous audience rendition of “O Canada” and ended with three encores.
With a nationally televised live stream on Saturday, people gathered to witness what could be Mr. Downie’s last major outing with the Hip, a rock act that is “our Stones, our Hendrix, our Zeppelin, our Bob Dylan, all wrapped up in one awesome band,” as one Kingston fan, Wes Guidry, put it.
In terms of national attention, the Kingston concert was “analogous to the Super Bowl,” said Randy Lennox, president of broadcasting and content for Bell Media, a major Canadian broadcaster.
Though they’ve had a few legs up — in 1995 Dan Aykroyd, a longtime fan and fellow Canadian, brought them to play on “Saturday Night Live” — their success never translated south. But being a uniquely Canadian phenomenon (they’re on a stamp) has endeared them even further at home.
With Dave Hamelin, Mr. Drew was a producer on the Hip’s most recent album, “Man Machine Poem,” which was recorded, he said, before Mr. Downie’s December cancer diagnosis, and released in June, shortly after the band announced it.
And Mr. Downie was as open and gung-ho as a novice. “He would be pacing around, saying, ‘Let’s go as far as we can,’” Mr. Drew said.
At a Pearl Jam concert in Wrigley Field in Chicago on Saturday, Eddie Vedder dedicated the song “Light Years” to the Hip.
Ms. Polley was also at one of their recent Toronto shows.
The tour has also become a fund-raising mission: Mr. Downie, whose cancer, glioblastoma, is not curable, started a brain cancer research fund at the Sunnybrook Foundation, a health center affiliated with the University of Toronto, and the Canadian Cancer Society was also expecting hundreds of thousands of dollars in donations this weekend, a spokeswoman said.
In the final moments of many of their recent shows, Mr. Downie has been alone onstage, looking out into a roaring audience. “It’s an implicit goodbye, without being overt,” Mr. Lennox, the media executive and Mr. Downie’s longtime friend, said.
But at the end of their show in Kingston, for their much-wondered about final song, the Hip simply played one of their biggest hits, “Ahead by a Century,” a 1996 acoustic-based pop song about childhood innocence, beloved and performed by gymnasiums full of Canadian schoolchildren for years.
