By the second inning of Sunday’s 6-4 victory over the Colorado Rockies, the Mets looked even less like themselves. Only two position players from their opening-day lineup — second baseman Neil Walker and outfielder Michael Conforto — were on the field.
Many had sustained injuries, including David Wright, Juan Lagares and Lucas Duda, and Asdrubal Cabrera joined their ranks early on Sunday when he had to be helped off the field because of a knee injury.
“I’m really concerned,” Mets Manager Terry Collins said of Cabrera.
With the nonwaiver trading deadline set for 4 p.m. Eastern on Monday, the Mets faced a crossroads.
The front office has been reluctant to part with top prospects the way it did last season, when the team used its farm system to complete trades that fueled a run to the World Series, and the Mets have recently lost ground in the playoff race. But the Mets are also 54-50 — the same as they were at the same point last season — and within striking distance of a wild-card spot.
The Mets have publicly acknowledged a desire to add a reliever, and behind the scenes, they have also pursued help for their offense, one of the worst in the majors. Still, how much help can the meandering Mets get by Monday afternoon?
The Mets talked to the Milwaukee Brewers about the All-Star catcher Jonathan Lucroy, a person familiar with the team’s situation said, but the sides could not agree on a deal. The Brewers then reached an agreement with the Cleveland Indians, but Lucroy exercised his no-trade right to veto the deal on Sunday.
The Mets were also reportedly among several teams considering the Cincinnati Reds All-Star Jay Bruce, a slugger who could provide needed thump in the lineup, but the Mets already have many left-handed corner outfielders.
After the trading deadline passes, the Mets will face the Yankees in a series that will offer a stark contrast. 
On Sunday at Citi Field, despite their injuries and weak offense, the Mets avoided a sweep at the hands of the Rockies. Starter Noah Syndergaard did not possess his best command or velocity, but he delivered six innings, allowing three runs (two earned) while tossing a career-high 118 pitches (although eight came on intentional walks).
The Mets’ offense sputtered for six innings against Rockies starter Chad Bettis, who entered the game with a 5.19 E.R.A. and had allowed 142 hits, the worst total in the National League.
The Mets produced three runs against Bettis — but not without some cost. They were already without Curtis Granderson, who had a scheduled day off, and their top hitter, Yoenis Cespedes, whose right quadriceps was still sore. And in the first inning, Cabrera joined his injured teammates in the clubhouse.
Cabrera stumbled slightly as he rounded third base on a triple by Walker. After he hobbled home, Cabrera fell to the ground. He was carried into the dugout and, later, the clubhouse.
The Mets said Cabrera had a strained patellar tendon in his left knee, the same injury he had in spring training, which caused him to miss nearly three weeks. He was scheduled to see a doctor on Monday.
Wilmer Flores moved from third base to shortstop to replace Cabrera. After the game, Collins suggested the team could call up Matt Reynolds from Class AAA Las Vegas if Cabrera had to go on the disabled list.
Despite Cabrera’s departure, the Mets eked out a victory, with Walker providing another lift after Mets reliever Jerry Blevins coughed up a run in the seventh.
After a hot start to the season, Walker had hit .214 in June and, entering Sunday, .237 in July, a slump that prompted Collins to give him two days off last week. The break has served Walker well.
“Sometimes the best medicine is get out of your own way and stop thinking,” he said.
After Alejandro De Aza and James Loney drew seventh-inning walks, Walker smashed a three-run homer off Rockies reliever Boone Logan to put the Mets ahead, 6-4. Walker has now gone 12 for 22 since his days off.
Addison Reed and Familia struck out five of the final seven batters to preserve the win.
