A Saudi-led military coalition conducted air strikes on the Yemeni capital of Sana for the first time in five months, killing as many as 20 people, though reports conflicted on the total.
A Saudi-led military coalition conducts air strikes on the Yemeni capital Sanaa for the first time in five months killing 20 people, residents say, after U.N.-backed peace talks to end the conflict broke down over the weekend.
SANA, Yemen — The military coalition led by Saudi Arabia significantly stepped up its bombing campaign in Yemen on Tuesday, striking the capital, Sana, and killing 21 people across the country, most of them civilians, according to medical and security officials in three provinces.
Health ministry officials in Sana said the dead included 10 civilians, all employees of a potato chip factory, with 13 others wounded at the factory in the al-Nahda neighborhood. The international airport in Sana was shut by the airstrikes after Saudi coalition officials notified airlines that incoming flights would be barred for 72 hours, said Khalid al-Shayef, the airport director.
It was the first time in five months that Sana was bombed by warplanes from the coalition, which also includes the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain, Egypt, Sudan and other Middle East countries. It came after peace talks collapsed on Saturday between the Houthi militias that dominate the capital and the largely exiled government of President Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi, which is backed by the coalition and Western powers.
Saudi Arabia intervened after the Houthis seized power, prompting Mr. Hadi to flee the capital. The Saudis accuse the Houthis of working on behalf of their archrival, Iran.
The swift escalation of airstrikes and the closing of the airport happened when many Houthi officials were outside the country, and they were unable to return to Sana by air from Kuwait, where the peace talks were held.
Numerous violations of the cease-fire have been reported on both sides in recent months, including airstrikes in some areas. But while peace talks were going on, the capital had largely been spared from the sort of heavy bombing that characterized the early stages of the Saudi-led intervention, which began in 2015.
The coalition launched airstrikes on Sunday in Nehm District, northeast of Sana. Reports said 18 civilians were killed there.
In northern Sada Province, close to Yemen’s border with Saudi Arabia, nine people were killed in two airstrikes that hit homes, according to Muhammad Hajar, the director of the al-Jumhori Hospital, which is supported by Doctors Without Borders. In central Ibb Province, three people were killed in two airstrikes that struck a house and a gas station, according to the provincial health director, Abdulmalik al-Sanani. It was the first time Ibb was bombed since last April.
In the Red Sea province of Hudaida, another coalition airstrike hit a government intelligence building late on Monday, killing four, who were presumably Houthi officials, and wounding 28 others, according to a security official in the province. He asked not to be identified because of military restrictions on news statements.
Brig. Gen. Ahmed al-Asiri, a spokesman for the Saudi-led coalition, could not be reached for comment on Monday or Tuesday.
On Monday, a spokesman for the Yemeni military, Samer al-Haj, speaking from the Saudi capital, Riyadh, said that coalition and Yemeni government forces had begun an offensive to drive the Houthis from Sana, saying only military action would persuade the Houthis to come to terms.
In southern Yemen, officials loyal to the government of Mr. Hadi said on Tuesday that Qaeda extremists had pulled out of the city of Azzan in Shabwa Province. Azzan was Al Qaeda’s last stronghold in the province, and the extremists apparently abandoned it in fear of an impending military operation by Yemeni forces supported by the Saudi-led coalition, according to Col. Awadh al-Dahbool, the head of Yemeni military security in the province.
Their departure was announced in messages to military officials and the local civilian council. “I think they deserted the city after hearing about an imminent military operation, so they decided to leave to save their lives, as they did in Hadramout,” Colonel Dahbool said. He was referring to Al Qaeda’s retreat from the important city of Mukalla in Hadramout Province on April 24.
The war in Yemen has gone on for 15 months, claiming more than 6,500 lives and provoking a humanitarian crisis, with hundreds of thousands of severely malnourished children and more than half of the population no longer able to feed itself adequately. It was already one of the poorest countries in the Arab world before the war began.