Secret speeches and leaked government documents reveal how Chinese officials carried out the systematic internment of as many as a million people.
It’s Tuesday, December 10.
Paul Mozur, tell me about these leaked documents from inside the Chinese government.
403 pages of documents about the concentration camps there.
You just don’t see this kind of thing happen.
So somebody took a tremendous risk in making these documents available to The Times.
Yes, untold risk, not just to themselves — to their family, to their friends.
And beyond the unusualness of the scale of this leak, what is significant about the fact that this is coming directly from the government?
So prior to this, the best proof we had of what was happening was mostly anecdotal. So you would talk to relatives of people who had been imprisoned, like, for instance, Ferkat, and maybe you’d be able to talk to somebody like his mother, who had been through the system, but you had no real hard proof. And Beijing used that to its benefit to basically come up with a very different version of reality, one in which this was an attempt to very gently teach Uighurs Chinese and to guide them away from extremism, and that this was a beneficial act by the government to raise up a minority that was lost in poverty and radical Islam. And with these documents, in these 403 pages, we see that even as the government is saying this, internally, they have a completely different calculus. And it’s one of punishment, and it’s one of indoctrination, to bring an entire ethnic minority to heel.
O.K., so take us through how these documents lay all that out.
So there’s basically three major takeaways from these documents. And the first and probably the most important is that the architecture and the ideas behind this crackdown come from the very top. They come from Chinese President Xi Jinping himself.
Long before any camps had opened in the region, in 2014, Xi Jinping goes to Xinjiang. And in the documents, what we see is, in secret speeches and internal discussions, he lays the groundwork for a truly ferocious crackdown.
And what would be the instigation for that crackdown? What would be the rationale in 2014?
Xinjiang has seen a spate of deadly attacks recently, where Muslim Uighur separatists seek autonomy from Beijing.
So 2014 is a particularly bloody year in what has been just a longtime conflict between Uighurs and Han Chinese.
43 people killed when a bomb detonated in a market in the regional capital of Urumqi.
China’s state media reports 27 people are dead after mass stabbings at a train station.
It’s the second time this station’s been targeted in two months.
— there’s a car bomb that goes off at the train station in Urumqi, the capital of the region.
Beijing blames this violence on separatists from the mainly Muslim Uighur minority.
So you have these attacks, and they’re getting larger in scale. And so as a leader, he’s watching this happen and trying to figure out how to deal with it.
And so he does something that I think would be surprising to a lot of people, but what happens a lot within China and its leadership. He looks to the United States.
He says that Chinese officials should study the American response to the September 11 attacks. And I think this gives you a sense of the sense of crisis he felt, even though, in comparison, the 9/11 attacks are so much of a larger scale than what’s happening in China at that moment. And so what he says is, basically, we are going to have an all-out war against terrorism, infiltration and separatism. And he says this very chilling thing. He says, we must use the “organs of dictatorship” and show “absolutely no mercy” in how we fight back against this.
He likens Islamic extremism to a virus and a contagion, and one of the quotes goes, basically, “people who are captured by religious extremism” have “their consciences destroyed.” They “lose their humanity and murder without blinking an eye.” And he calls for treating the contagion with a period of painful interventionary treatment.
So effectively, this is a doctor or a surgeon going in and cutting something out that is a problem.
So Xi Jinping is making the intellectual case, basically, for camps, for detention, for active repression.
Right. And within months, we see indoctrination sites start to open. And these hold dozens or maybe a couple hundred people.
And they have classes, which basically teach people to disavow Islam, or profess their gratitude for the Chinese Communist Party. Which brings us to the second big takeaway from these documents, which is how these small camps evolve into this tremendously complex and large-scale system of concentration camps and prisons that we see scattered across the region today.
And how is that? What do the documents show?
They show a trajectory that is led by a single man, Chen Quanguo.
This official, Chen Quanguo, is known as a hardliner, and he’s been in Tibet for about five years. And during this period, he installs police stations across the major cities and across the region to gain really strong control over the ethnic minority Tibetan population there. So he’s seen as a guy who had a solution to a problem in another part of China that has a similar issue with an ethnic minority that resents Chinese rule. And the idea is, he could do it once, maybe he can do it again.
Any kind of sign of religious devotion becomes something that you can be rounded up for. So issues like people who would pray regularly, people who have a Quran at home, men who grow long beards or who advise against smoking or drinking, people who study Arabic, and also, importantly, people who have ties overseas or relatives who are studying overseas. So that’s the plan, but it doesn’t go all that smoothly. As these orders come down, lower-level officials aren’t implementing them the way Chen Quanguo wants. In some cases, they are helping shelter Uighurs and letting them out of camps. In some cases, they’re not putting as many in the camps as Chen Quanguo would want. And so there’s a real resistance in some ways to the severity and strictness of what’s coming from the top.
And why would that be? Given everything that you have explained, why would these lower-level officials not carry out the orders that they have been given?
So China is very authoritarian, but it’s also not a monolith. And what I mean by that is that the top officials will set goals, and then lower officials have to carry them out. But oftentimes, lower officials are judged by a different set of metrics — in particular, economic growth. And so in this case, a lot of local officials were looking at these new guidelines that said to throw a fifth of the population into camps and saying, well, there’s no way I can grow the economy at the level I need to and also do this. This is just unrealistic. And so they started to undermine what these rules were. And so we see very specific examples laid out in the documents of how officials grumble privately about this exact problem.
And so how does this new leader in the region respond to all this resistance, basically this failure to carry out this crackdown?
He punishes the officials that aren’t seen to be carrying out his orders. He opens up investigations into thousands and thousands of them. Many are sent to jail, and they’re made to sign confessions before they go. And then he takes those confessions, and he spreads those around to the officials as a warning, saying, these guys, they didn’t listen to my orders, and now they’re in jail. And it’s breathtaking, the level of fear, not just in the Uighur population but in the population of officials that are having to enact it. Because even if they don’t want to enact it, they no longer have a choice. They’re stuck.
So now, with all of this opposition essentially wiped away, what happens to the camp system in Xinjiang?
It begins to grow utterly unimpeded.
So you started with small camps in cities, maybe schools that were repurposed to hold people. Now we see large concentration camps going up outside of cities, where you have maybe a dozen buildings, each possibly holding thousands of people. And we see new lots that are then filled in again and again, to the point where you just have probably more than 1,000 of these camps around the region.
The prison system as well starts to fill up, and so the prison system is expanded, and there’s overcrowding there. We see hundreds of thousands of convictions, with people being thrown into prisons. And ultimately, the last phase of this is the labor camp. So either a factory goes in, or a fence and a road is built to a factory. And we start to see people being siphoned out into these factories. And this is the idea of how you would graduate from one of these camps is, you would eventually return not to your hometown but to a factory town, where you work in a factory in compulsive labor. And so all of this together, by 2018, is just taking a tremendous toll on the entire region. When you go there, the streets are empty. People are clearly scared. Businesses are shut down. Mosques are all locked up. Nobody dares go near them, and they’re closed anyway. People are being taken away at night. And ultimately, a million to 3 million people have been swept up into this system.
I mean, Paul, what’s staggering about that number is that even in a country as big as China, it’s hard to fathom more than a million people suddenly disappearing from their homes and their streets. What is the story that China tells to explain that?
Yeah, and that leads us to the third major takeaway from the documents, which is how the Chinese government methodically tried to hide that all of this was happening.
So Paul, what do these secret documents show us about how the Chinese government somehow hides this all from its own people?
One of the biggest things they’re worried about is actually students. So a large number of Uighur students go out from Xinjiang each year to go to college all over China. And so within the documents, they’re specifically worried about those children returning home for the summer, seeing their home just transformed and their relatives missing, and then spreading news about it across apps like WeChat and other social media, and talking about the problem. And so what they do is they come up with this incredibly bureaucratic guide.
It’s basically a manual for how to deal with these kids who have a lot of questions about the missing relatives, and the empty streets, and the locked mosques.
And what does the manual say should be done? I wonder if you could read from it.
Wow. That’s positively Orwellian.
So in this telling, these re-education camps, they’re a gift to the people in them. Their life is good. The food is wonderful. The tuition is free.
So here the mission is being described with a little bit more candor. We think something is wrong with these people, and we will not return them home until it’s been fixed.
Exactly. And again, we come back to that language of illness, the idea that this is infectious, and that people have to be isolated and the problem with them eradicated. And then, as you go down, it starts to deal with, well, if the students are pushing harder, if they seem like they suspect something’s up, then you start moving more towards threats.
And that becomes apparent in one of the questions: “When can my family member graduate and leave school?” And the answer says that the family members must be diligent in their studies, abide by the school rules, and do outstandingly in morning exercises, chores, dining, study and so on. And family members, including you, must abide by the state’s laws and rules, and not believe or spread rumors, and take an active part in collective life. Only then can you add points for your family member. And after a period of assessment, they can leave the school, if they meet course completion standards.
And Paul, what are these points that this passage refers to?
So another really important thing that comes from the documents, it lays out how there is a point system for getting through the camps, and that if you act out or if there are problems, you lose points. And if your family members act out, you can also lose points. And if you go below a certain threshold, then one year of study — quote, unquote, “study” — turns into two, or turns into three.
Hmm. So the concept here is, complain too loudly about your missing relative, and your missing relative may be missing for even longer. You have the power to make this better, or you have the power to make this worse for them.
Exactly. And this is why Ferkat is so unique, because he goes the opposite way. He speaks out, and continues to speak out. And many people in his community in the United States are afraid to speak out. And they’re not afraid for themselves. They’re in the United States. They’re afraid for their family members, and they’re afraid the punishments that will come down on them or that other family members could be thrown into camps for what they’re saying and doing. And Ferkat’s point in all this is that this whole system is bogus, that you should not sit back and hope that silence will secure a release for your family members, because it won’t. This is just an intimidation tactic. And all along, the kind of punitive measures are going to be worked out anyway. So you might as well go out and talk.
Right, because this system hinges on silence, on people’s belief and their fear that unless they are anything other than silent, it will all get worse.
Exactly. And that’s why, I think, Ferkat told us that once he had no more fears, he felt like he had power, because that was when he could speak up and speak out and say, this is what’s happening, and it needs to stop.
Paul, what has happened since The Times published these 400 or so pages of internal documents? What has been the response from the international community that has consumed everything that you’ve just described?
Not a lot. You get some condemnations from some quarters, but the rest of the world is basically quiet about this, because China is such an important global player, and they fear the consequences.
And so I talked to Ferkat about that.
We have been speaking the same things for a couple years, but many of them, they still trust the Chinese government, even though there are really strong facts.
And I think for him, it’s just both baffling and infuriating. Because he’s fighting this propaganda war where the Chinese government keeps saying these things don’t exist or aren’t as we’ve described them, and now you have the proof. You have it.
And then the first feeling I had is, just bring the document and then slap on the face of country leaders, and then tell them, this is the proof that you needed.
He wanted to take this pile of documents and basically use it to slap the faces of the leaders who continue to do nothing about this across the globe.
It is the time that you have to speak out.
He said, what more does the world need?
Like, what else do you need? Do you need — do you want to see the pile of bodies piled up as a mountain and then you’re going to speak up? What are you waiting for?
Do they need a pile of bodies in front of them in order to act? What are they waiting for?
Here’s what else you need to know today. A long-awaited report from the inspector general of the Justice Department has found no evidence that the F.B.I. engaged in a politically biased investigation of the Trump campaign’s ties to Russia, and that the F.B.I. had sufficient grounds to open the investigation in the first place. The report, released on Monday, debunks the president’s repeated claim that the investigation was an illegal conspiracy carried out by his enemies. But the report did criticize the F.B.I. for its handling of a controversial wiretap used to monitor a Trump campaign adviser, Carter Page. It found that the documents filed to justify the wiretaps contained significant omissions, inaccuracies and claims not backed up by supporting evidence.
With the ability to reconstruct faces, the Chinese police would have yet another genetic tool for social control. The authorities have already gathered millions of DNA samples in Xinjiang. They have also collected data from the hundreds of thousands of Uighurs and members of other minority groups locked up in detention camps in Xinjiang as part of a campaign to stop terrorism. Chinese officials have depicted the camps as benign facilities that offer vocational training, though documents describe prisonlike conditions, while testimonies from many who have been inside cite overcrowding and torture.
To unlock the genetic mysteries behind the human face, the police in China turned to Chinese scientists with connections to leading institutions in Europe.
“To be frank, you overestimate how genius the Chinese police is,” said Dr. Tang, who had recently shut down a business focused on DNA testing and ancestry.
The Max Planck Society “takes this issue very seriously” and will ask its ethics council to review the matter, Dr. Beck said.
Dr. Tang said he was unaware of the origins of the DNA samples examined in the two papers, the 2018 paper in Hereditas (Beijing) and the Human Genetics paper published in April. The publishers of the papers said they were unaware, too.
