Weather: It looks like a rainy start to the weekend, with the likelihood of showers increasing, along with the temperature, throughout the day today. Count on a wet Saturday, with a high in the mid-50s. Brighter but colder on Sunday, in the mid-40s.
Alternate-side parking: In effect until Dec. 25 (Christmas Day).
Years ago, many students at Barnard College and Columbia University considered the nearby Morningside Park too dangerous to enter, especially at night.
Then, as crime dropped in New York City, more people began to use the park, even cutting through its secluded wooded lanes after nightfall.
But the killing of an 18-year-old Barnard student in the park on Wednesday evening shattered that sense of safety and left the abutting campuses, and the Morningside Heights neighborhood they are a part of, in shock and grief.
The student, Tessa Majors, was stabbed repeatedly after she was approached by one to three people near West 116th Street and Morningside Drive, the police said. Once the attackers fled, Ms. Majors climbed a staircase out of the park. A security guard found her and called 911.
She was taken to Mount Sinai St. Luke’s Hospital, where she died from her injuries, the police said.
Ms. Majors, who grew up in Charlottesville, Va., had arrived in New York City only three months earlier with the hope of developing her musical skills. She sang and played bass in a band called Patient 0, according to her Instagram account.
As of early today, the police had made no arrests in the case. Investigators interviewed and later released two teenagers considered to be persons of interest, officials said.
The Harlem precinct that is home to the park had grown safer.
Still, safety concerns persist in Morningside Park, where playgrounds and ball fields have replaced patches that were once littered with drug paraphernalia.
Since June, five people reported being robbed near the spot where Ms. Majors was killed. Recently, the police said, several teenagers were arrested in connection with robberies in the area, but officials did not provide additional details.
Across the city, major crime was down about 1 percent this year through Dec. 1, compared with the same period last year. Murder, however, was up about 8 percent; there had been 298 murders by Dec. 1, compared with 275 to that point in 2018, police data showed.
The news shocked students as they were preparing for finals.
Isabel Jauregui, 20, a Barnard student, told The Times that her classmates were frightened after hearing about the killing.
Aja Johnson, 20, a Columbia student, said she had previously participated in an effort to help clean up the park, which some people considered dangerous, and improve its reputation.
She said the murder of Ms. Majors would affect students’ perception of the park.
“This is going to demonize the image,” she said.
Want more news? Check out our full coverage.
The Mini Crossword: Here is today’s puzzle.
Events are subject to change, so double-check before heading out. For more events, see the going-out guides from The Times’s culture pages.
And finally: Who’s got the poop?
Each neighborhood in New York City is known for something: It’s cyclist-friendly or has the worst bedbug violations or great swimming pool access.
Then there are those with the most dog-poop complaints.
Michael Kolomatsky, who writes the Calculator column for The Times’s Real Estate section, recently explored the areas in the city where people didn’t pick up after their furry friends.
A study by RentHop showed that from January to early November this year, Middle Village in Queens had the most dog-poop complaints per 10,000 households. Hollis, also in Queens, had the least.
The complaints were made to 311. Wednesdays usually saw the most complaints, the study found.
But even with an estimated half a million canines in the city — at least 80,000 of which are registered — complaints have decreased over the years.
It’s Friday — pick up after your pooch.
I was driving down my block on the Upper West Side with a trunk full of groceries in the pouring rain.
I could see my dream parking spot, right in front of my building. Of course, a black S.U.V. just ahead of me pulled into it.
In a moment of desperation that was clearly written all over my face, I rolled down my window and did something I had never done in all my years of parking on the street in New York City.
“Are you parked for the night or just for 10 minutes?” I asked the man at the wheel of the S.U.V. as his wife peered at me from the passenger seat.
Parked for the night, he said.
As I prepared to drive off, the man asked a question I did not expect.
I was still feeling desperate.
New York Today is published weekdays around 6 a.m. Sign up here to get it by email. You can also find it at nytoday.com.
We’re experimenting with the format of New York Today. What would you like to see more (or less) of? Post a comment or email us: nytoday@nytimes.com.