Alex Eaton-Salners makes a periodic appearance.
THURSDAY PUZZLE — Wow. Did you have a tough time with this one? It took me a long time to crack the code, and I honestly thought the fact that I had very little in the grid (and was cursing at it) meant that this puzzle by Alex Eaton-Salners had a rebus element to it.
No such luck. This one requires a bit of alchemy to solve, although the “Aha!” moment is worthwhile.
And if you do not want to solve this on your own, you can always join me and the associate puzzle editor Sam Ezersky as we solve the puzzle with your help on Crosswords Live. Tune in on Thursdays at 1 p.m. Eastern on Wordplay’s Twitter account or on our YouTube account. This week’s guest will be the magician and puzzle maker, David Kwong.
1A. Trivia time! On the television show “Friends,” Monica and Ross’s last name was GELLER.
23A: I’m guessing that “Prime business” refers to Amazon Prime, and the answer is E-TAIL.
39A. A great entry, which makes its debut: BEGGED FOR MORE.
42A. Flummoxed by musical terms? Wade through our Crossword Symphony, which not only tells you about musical terms that appear frequently in the puzzle, but also helps you learn to recognize how they might be clued. The answer to “Bowed, to a cellist” is ARCO.
61A. My favorite one-panel cartoon in the whole world is one that was originally printed in The New Yorker. It was a drawing of a tuxedoed conductor on his podium, baton in hand, reading a note that said, “Wave the stick until the music stops, then turn around and bow.” Also, “Stick-up artist?” is a great clue for MAESTRO.
5D. According to the Bible, pretty much everyone’s fathers lived to be around 105 unless they were smote by God, so that leaves us with a lot of options. My first guess was Esau, but it turned out to be ENOS.
8D. The money suffix in question is AIRE. I, for example, can tell you with great pride that I am a thousandAIRE. Your mileage may vary.
9D. I thought this was going to be an answer that used the proverbial Boston “ah” accent, but it’s simpler than that. If you speak with a true Boston accent, your words will essentially be R-LESS.
56D. I was envisioning a perch for a dove, but the “Dove bar?” in this puzzle is a COO. The clue is using the word “bar” in the musical sense.
Mr. Eaton-Salners provides a thorough technical explanation of the theme and the grid design in his notes below, but for those of me who are still confused, the theme is about ATOMIC NUMBERS. The ATOMIC NUMBER of an atom is the “number of a chemical element in the periodic system,” according to Brittanica.com, which I rely heavily on for themes like this.
I’m sorry, where was I? Right, the theme. There are eight, two-letter answers in Mr. Eaton-Salners’s grid, which breaks a rule of crossword construction but has been known to happen. This is my favorite of the other two-letter rule breakers (there was no online version of this puzzle because of technical constraints that existed at the time).
These two-letter answers are the names of chemical elements, and Mr. Eaton-Salners has placed them in slots that match their ATOMIC NUMBERS (34A). That was a particularly elegant touch. For example, at 20A, we are referred back to the revealer clue, “What this puzzle’s two-letter answers correspond with, given their locations in the grid,” and the answer in that slot is CA (or Ca), the periodic table’s name for calcium. The ATOMIC NUMBER for Ca is 20.
Mr. Eaton-Salners mentions in his notes that there have been only six puzzles edited by Will Shortz that contained two-letter words. What I found particularly interesting was that some of the chemical elements in this puzzle had appeared before 1993, mostly in the 1940s, when Margaret Farrar was editor. Ms. Farrar was known for modernizing the rules of crossword construction, including banishing two-letter words, but it seems as if this particular rule was not set until the New York Times Crossword became a daily feature in 1950.
The impetus for this puzzle was a bizarre desire to make something interesting out of the terrible crosswordese abbreviation AT NOS. My original submission used that phrase as the revealer, thereby giving a raison d’être for abbreviating the chemical elements. To enhance the theme, I created a sparse, supersymmetric, grid-art layout evocative of the Rutherford-Bohr model of an atom.
Unusually, this theme relies on two-letter entries. They break the fundamental crossword convention that all words should be at least three letters long. For reference, only six other New York Times Crossword grids in the Shortz era (1993-present) have contained two-letter words.
Unfortunately, since the original grid had only 25 black blocks, the fill was relatively weak. Generally speaking, the more white space you have, the harder it is to find clean fill. Furthermore, by using such a spartan grid configuration, I was at the mercy of the crossword gods as to which elements got featured. Luckily, despite these flaws, Will and crew were still interested in the idea. They offered that if I could create a cleaner grid featuring more familiar elements, they’d take a look.
The current arrangement uses 12 cheater squares. They both make filling easier and provide flexibility to manipulate which elements get featured. By changing how many black squares there are and where they are deployed, the two-letter slots can correspond to different clue numbers. For example, if the cheater square in the upper-left corner were removed, the first element would be beryllium (BE) instead of lithium (LI).
Using these cheater squares, however, muddles the grid art and eliminates the super symmetry. Ultimately, however, a clean, interesting solve rightfully takes priority. I hope this puzzle provides that.