A school resource officer at a North Carolina middle school who was caught on camera slamming an 11-year-old to the ground now faces three misdemeanor charges.
A sheriff’s deputy who was caught on camera slamming an 11-year-old boy to the floor at a North Carolina middle school was charged with three misdemeanors on Tuesday, a local prosecutor said.
The prosecutor, District Attorney Michael D. Waters, said the officer, Warren Durham, faced charges of assault on a child under 12, child abuse and failure to discharge his duties.
The episode occurred on Thursday at Vance County Middle School in Henderson, N.C., about an hour’s drive north of Raleigh, where Deputy Durham had served as a school resource officer.
Video published on social media and local news sites on Friday showed him slamming the student to the ground twice, then dragging him along the floor. On Monday, the Vance County sheriff, Curtis Brame, said the officer was no longer on the force.
The sheriff called in the North Carolina State Bureau of Investigation to determine whether charges were warranted. Mr. Waters said that the student had been examined at an emergency room and in a follow-up visit, and that he had not sustained serious injuries.
The authorities could not charge the officer with a felony because of the lack of serious injuries, Mr. Waters said. The sentence for the misdemeanors could vary based on a defendant’s prior convictions. If none exist, the maximum penalty would be 90 days total, he added.
The officer turned himself in to the authorities on Tuesday and was released on $10,000 bond, Mr. Waters said. He is due back in court on Feb. 3.
The boy’s grandfather, the Rev. John Miles, told reporters at a news conference on Tuesday that he was disappointed the officer had not been charged with a more serious crime.
Mr. Waters said that after the episode came to light, another parent said their child had also “had an incident” with Deputy Durham on Thursday, and that the authorities were investigating the claim.
“No student should ever experience this in any way, especially not in our schools,” he said.