One was in “Game of Thrones.” One is still in high school. They all act and play instruments. And in a new show they portray scrappy Dubliners creating a band.
Rebecca Taichman, a director known for her work with such leading playwrights as Sarah Ruhl and Paula Vogel, was addressing a gaggle of young men, most in their late teens and early 20s, in a Greenwich Village rehearsal space. They promptly picked up guitars and other instruments, and, within moments, they were stomping and bouncing and raising their voices in song, giddily summoning the rock gods. “Nice!” one shouted, as another slid across the floor on his knees.
As Taichman’s presence might suggest, this was no band practice. They were rehearsing a song aptly called “Up,” which is featured in the new stage musical “Sing Street.” Based on the 2016 film of the same name, the show follows a group of teenage boys who form a band in the recession-strapped Dublin of the ’80s. They’re led by a lad named Conor, who hopes to win the heart of Raphina, a girl nurturing her own dreams of a modeling career.
For the musical, set to open on Dec. 16 at New York Theater Workshop, the film’s writer-director John Carney enlisted the Irish playwright Enda Walsh to write the book. They’d had good luck on another stage adaptation of a Dublin-set, music-driven Carney movie: “Once,” which earned eight Tony Awards, including best musical, after transferring from the very same theater to Broadway in 2012.
For “Sing Street,” though, they needed kids who looked like kids and could play pop-rock songs by Carney and the Scottish musician Gary Clark. The group they put together included the English actor and “Game of Thrones” alum Brenock O’Connor, who portrays Conor, and Zara Devlin, an actor from Northern Ireland, as Raphina — along with a clutch of affable and energetic actor-musicians, one of whom is still in high school.
He and his cast mates described how their backgrounds — and their passion for music that was recorded well before they were born — make this show a serendipitous gig.
Getting started “My mum sent me to an amateur drama school because I was extremely shy.” Professional roles with leading Irish theater companies, including the Abbey, Gate and Druid, followed.
From Lancaster, Pa.
From St. Louis, Mo.
Getting started “My parents have video of me singing along to Disney movies and albums.” Community and regional theater followed, and he also served as music director for a children’s theater.
Getting started A guitarist “as far back as I remember,” Perez earned music scholarships in his teens after his family moved to Orlando, but shifted his focus to acting as a high school senior. He’s slated to earn his B.F.A. from the University of Michigan in 2020.
From Long Island, N.Y.
Getting started Hart’s father, a musician, “started me on piano when I was 4.” Guitar lessons followed a few years later, “but music became a weird thing, because my dad is so gifted, and I never thought I could measure up.” A leading role in a school play spurred an interest in acting; Hart has since accumulated Off Broadway, regional theater and TV credits.
