Researchers in Germany have been working on the Thesaurus Linguae Latinae — a Latin dictionary — since the 1890s. They hope to finish in 2050, but that might be optimistic.
In this lesson, students will consider the value of dictionaries and learn why one is taking so long to create. In a Going Further activity, they will imagine that all dictionaries in the world have been destroyed and that they must help to make a new one.
How often do you use a dictionary? Do you ever look through one for fun? Do you have a favorite dictionary? If yes, which one and why?
Have you ever studied Latin? Have you ever considered studying it? How might a knowledge of Latin help you with your English?
Which of the following words have Latin roots?
You’re right: c) All of them.
O.K. That was pretty easy. But did you know that around half of all English words are also derived directly or indirectly from Latin?
1. Besides its taking over 125 years to complete, how is the Thesaurus Linguae Latinae different from other dictionaries? What is the goal of the project? Who is the intended audience? Why might they find it useful?
2. Why is it taking so long to complete the dictionary? What specific challenges do the scholars and staff working on it face? How has German history over the past century affected the project?
3. How has the role of Latin in the world changed over time? What is the value of learning it now, according to the article?
4. Describe in your own words the process required to produce a single entry in the dictionary? Why is one researcher frightened about the prospect of writing the entry for “non” which means “no”?
5. What do the photos tell you about what it is like to work on the dictionary? Would you want to work on this kind of project, which the author describes as requiring “painstaking exactness and glacial speed”?
What does Mr. Flow mean by his statement? What do you see as the value of the project? Do you think it is worth the yearly cost of 1.25 million euros (roughly $1.4 million) that comes mostly from German taxpayers?
7. What was most interesting, memorable, surprising or provocative thing in the article? Does it change how you understand the value of dictionaries? How valuable are dictionaries in 2019?
1) Tell us about your relationship with dictionaries.
What role has the dictionary played in your life and your education? Do you have any favorable or unfavorable experiences and memories with dictionaries? Do you have a strong vocabulary? If yes, has the dictionary (or thesaurus) helped you to develop it?
Where do you go to find the meanings of words? Has this changed over time? How often do you look up the meanings of unfamiliar words? What advice do you have for young students who are frequently exposed to unfamiliar words? How can they get over any resistance they might have about looking up those words?
2) Create a dictionary entry for a favorite word.
Do you have a favorite word? Is there one word that always strikes you as funny? Is there a word that makes you feel smart? What word do you find most beautiful or ugly?
Imagine that all dictionaries have been destroyed. And you have been hired to help construct a new one.
Choose one word that you think should be in the first edition of this new dictionary.
If you are inspired, create an illustration to accompany your entry.
Teachers, if you are doing this activity in a class setting, you might consider having your students share their entries and then compiling them in a class dictionary.
