Readers react to The Times’s editorial calling for the impeachment of President Trump, and to a news article about the likely trial in the Senate.
Thank you for a crystal-clear argument for impeachment. This should be part of the House presentation to the Senate.
Maybe truth can still win.
Mr. Trump has diminished the office with barrages of tweets, public insults, veiled threats and grandstanding. His presidency now seems to be on a par with football games, sitcoms and quiz shows.
This is a dangerous situation; let’s hope that the American public starts paying attention.
As bad as President Trump’s shakedown of a struggling Ukraine is, the House and Senate Republicans are worse. All of them are deliberately damaging this country even further by consciously working to deepen the divisions among Americans.
They support Mr. Trump’s lies; they viciously attack their colleagues on the other side of the aisle; they repeat over and over again their own lies; they say everything they can dream up to defend the indefensible and to weaken this incredible Constitution of ours.
If the Republicans were true to their oath to protect and defend the Constitution, they would actually listen to the witnesses’ sworn testimony. They are not even trying to discover the truth; they are simply making a sham out of this very serious process.
If they acted honestly, they would do much to educate the American public and help heal the divisions in this country.
If the defense of the Constitution and the Republic are in the hands of the Democratic-controlled House of Representatives to impeach President Trump for the reasons argued in your editorial, the country is in big trouble.
Fortunately, the Republican-controlled Senate will restore sanity by acquitting the president, and American voters will have the last word on Election Day 2020 when they re-elect Mr. Trump, restore Republicans to the House majority and retain Republican control of the Senate.
Then, the Republic will not only endure, but it will also prevail and prosper.
Of course he will — must — be impeached. But as far as I know, President Trump is not entitled to a speedy trial in the Senate, where he can count on “jurors” who ordinarily would be excused for cause. A case in point is Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader, who has said he will be coordinating with the White House counsel in the process.
Also, Senator Lindsey Graham has pre-empted and rendered false the oath he will take to be fair by having decided the matter before considering the evidence. He should of course be excused.
Consequently, there is good reason for the House — representatives of the people, not the president — to delay sending the articles of impeachment to the Senate. At a minimum, it could give those who seek a fair trial the leverage to gain one by delaying until they are assured the right to call witnesses.
But even more critical, a delay might prevent Mr. Trump from rigging another game while allowing the House to pursue his numerous other offenses against the country.
Seeking relevant documents is one thing. But the notion that Mick Mulvaney, the acting White House chief of staff; Secretary of State Mike Pompeo; the former national security adviser John Bolton and others will come before the Senate and glibly pour out the true facts about Ukraine and the transparently false explanations by President Trump is a bit of a pipe dream.
Look back to what we’ve got from Attorney General William Barr; the former acting attorney general Matthew Whitaker; the former Trump campaign manager Corey Lewandowski; and the former special counsel Robert Mueller, for that matter, who when given the opportunity to enlighten Congress and the public on matters of importance, chose obfuscation or near silence.
