Hallelujah! Sarah Williams Goldhagen’s review of Paul Hendrickson’s “Plagued by Fire: The Dreams and Furies of Frank Lloyd Wright” (Dec. 1) cuts no slack for either Wright or Hendrickson. Wright was a “cad,” a “poseur,” a “liar” and a “cheat.” And Goldhagen could go on.  He had no academic training in architecture and remained stubbornly provincial even as the nation generated the “American Century.” Yet in his youth his talent was such that Daniel Burnham, then the most prominent Chicago architect, offered to educate Wright at the École des Beaux-Arts in Paris, the world’s premier program at the time, at Burnham’s expense, an offer Wright famously and arrogantly rejected.
On his own, then, Wright’s output ranged from “gruesome/lugubrious/coercive,” in the words of one eminent critic, to a handful of jaw-dropping masterpieces. Wright had a breathtaking eye for proportion and a robust interest in 20th-century building technology. He had an artist’s appreciation for materials, their color ranges, the interior and exterior lighting of surfaces and the effects of weathering. Wright was correct in his (sky-high) estimation of his ability. He was wrong in taking rather than soliciting the support he needed. For the reader, Goldhagen’s review might have distinguished the qualities of the architecture from the qualities of the architect.
Too bad Ash Carter and Sam Kashner’s “Life Isn’t Everything: Mike Nichols, as Remembered by 150 of His Closest Friends” (Dec. 8) drew as a reviewer that gentle, tender soul (I joke), the late John Simon. Leave it to Simon to have taken an egregious, sulfurous swipe at Nichols’s involvement in Wallace Shawn’s play “The Designated Mourner.” Not untypically for Simon, his judgment here is long on bile and short on insight. “The Designated Mourner” is an odd, soul-wrenching presage, and warning, of the times we find ourselves in. And Mike Nichols, starring in David Hare’s film adaptation, delivers an unforgettable performance.
In his review of “Life Isn’t Everything,” John Simon quotes Eric Idle as saying that Nichols could be “brutally frank.” But his brutal frankness was often cloaked in urbane wit. In an interview with Nichols I noted that his movies were wildly diverse. “What’s a Mike Nichols film?” I asked, and he responded, “I’m the bird. You’re the ornithologist.” I felt simultaneously chastised and complimented.
Readers of Edmund White’s review of Elaine Sciolino’s “The Seine: The River That Made Paris” (Dec. 8) might like to know that in “Pantagruel and Gargantua,” François Rabelais, referencing the delightful rain showers the city is known for and the bawdiness he is known for, suggests that an impish God is given to micturating “par ris” (for the fun of it) on the city.
A review on Nov. 10 about the picture book “Encyclopedia of Grannies” misspelled the surname of the author and illustrator. He is Eric Veillé, not Viellé.
A review on Dec. 1 misstated the name of the cartooning school that produced the graphic biography “Charlotte Brontë Before Jane Eyre,” by Glynnis Fawkes. It is the Center for Cartoon Studies, not Stories.
