“I’m on good terms with all the family, but I’m closest with Kris, Kim, Kylie and Kendall,” says the 23-year-old beauty entrepreneur.
Keeping up with the new besties in the Kardashian-Jenner entertainment complex can be a full-time job.
But even in their social media panopticon, Sophia Hutchins stands apart, and not just because of her ice-goddess looks and self-promotional savvy. Sometime in 2017, tabloid stories began linking Ms. Hutchins to Caitlyn Jenner, first as “friends” and “gal pals” who shopped and vacationed together.
Before long, the tabloids said that the two were romantically involved, and often pointed out their age difference: Ms. Jenner, who is 70, was apparently dating someone younger than her 24-year-old daughter, Kendall. (Ms. Hutchins is 23.) Some reports went so far as to say they were engaged.
Ms. Hutchins has not exactly hurried to dispel those rumors. She has posted selfies on Instagram from what looks like Ms. Jenner’s bed, with the caption “home sweet home.” Another time, she created an Instagram Story and took questions from followers; when one asked, “Are you in a relationship?,” she replied coyly, “Oh yes!” without naming anyone.
But Ms. Hutchins, the C.E.O. of a start-up beauty brand, has never commented directly on their relationship, until now.
On a recent Monday afternoon, Ms. Hutchins was sipping green tea in the lobby of the Mercer hotel in the SoHo neighborhood of Manhattan. Dressed in a black Alice + Olivia turtleneck, she had straight blond hair that framed her slate-blue eyes and gravity-defying cheekbones. She bore an uncanny resemblance to Ivanka Trump.
Seated with perfect posture, Ms. Hutchins expressed emotion sparingly and came across as analytical and preternaturally poised. She was keen to discuss her beauty product, Lumasol, a sunscreen mist she plans to release next year. We would get to that.
But first: Are she and Ms. Jenner really a couple?
She took a sip of tea and, with her firm tone, indicated that the matter was closed.
Before the spotlight beckoned, Ms. Hutchins grew up in Seattle, where she was a three-time state high school debate champion. She was raised by a single mother, who worked as a dental hygienist, and her grandparents.
“My grandfather, a rocket engineer at Boeing, was the greatest influence in my life,” she said. “My grandparents stepped in and helped out by sending me to an elite college prep school,” and later to Pepperdine University in Malibu, Calif., in part because it offered the best financial aid package.
Slightly built and studious, Ms. Hutchins initially identified as a gay man. At college, she was active in student government and planned a career in finance. But in 2016, during her junior year, she announced on Facebook without explanation that she was resigning as the student class president.
Ms. Hutchins, who had become disillusioned with a career in finance, also sensed an opportunity. Ms. Jenner’s former wife, Kris Jenner, was no longer her business manager. And although Ms. Hutchins had no relevant experience, she was persuasive and ambitious enough to convince Ms. Jenner to hire her.
They quickly developed a level of trust and, during her senior year, Ms. Hutchins became Ms. Jenner’s manager, taking a 10 percent cut. She also moved into Ms. Jenner’s ridge-top home in Malibu, the same four-bedroom, 11-acre compound where the “20/20” interview took place.
Since signing on, Ms. Hutchins said she has taken the lead on negotiating a raft of deals, including paid speeches for T-Mobile and the Harvard Leadership Summit, and before Britain’s House of Commons for Channel 4.
It didn’t take long for Ms. Hutchins’s business radar to detect other opportunities. The idea for her beauty product, Lumasol, was born one night in 2017 over dinner with Jami Morse Heidegger, a neighbor in Malibu who is an heir to the Kiehl’s beauty brand.
“We were talking about what’s missing in the market and I said, ‘Why can’t I get a makeup-setting mist with SPF?’” she said, referring to a spray used to help makeup last.
After months of market research, testing and pitch meetings, Lumasol is scheduled to begin selling next April. The mist will be priced between $30 and $50 and will be packaged in a bottle that changes color when exposed to ultraviolet rays, nudging consumers to spray early and often.
“We consider ourselves a health tech company because we see SPF as the first entry point to tackling the health crisis which is skin cancer,” Ms. Hutchins said.
Being associated with the Jenner-Kardashian clan probably doesn’t hurt. “I’m on good terms with all the family, but I’m closest with Kris, Kim, Kylie and Kendall,” said Ms. Hutchins, who recently posted a picture of herself to her 100,000 Instagram followers from a family dinner for Ms. Jenner’s birthday, standing between Kim and Kourtney Kardashian.
“And anytime I needed a meeting with someone that I couldn’t get, Caitlyn could get it for me,” she added.
Ms. Hutchins set down her tea and checked the time; she was fitting the interview into a busy day of meetings. When her phone rang, she didn’t hesitate to pick up. It was Ms. Jenner calling to report on repairs to her private plane, a Beechcraft Baron turboprop.
“I need to get to San Francisco from L.A. on Thursday super-early, and Caitlyn is flying me,” Ms. Hutchins said.
Hearing from Ms. Jenner seemed to cheer her up. The call also provided an opening to return to more personal questions. If she is not dating Ms. Jenner, is there another special someone?
Turns out, there is. Ms. Hutchins confided that she just started dating a 30-year-old gentleman who graduated from Harvard and works on Wall Street. No other details would be forthcoming. But for the second time that afternoon, she softened her gaze, looked up and smiled.