We’re covering the growing support among Democrats to impeach President Trump, the death sentence given to the former leader of Pakistan, and a new scoring record in the N.F.L.
The details: So far, the divide is largely along party lines, with all but two Democrats supporting and no Republicans doing so. Here’s where every representative stands.
Related: Rudy Giuliani told The Times that he informed Mr. Trump that the U.S. ambassador to Ukraine was, in Mr. Giuliani’s view, impeding investigations that could benefit the president. The ambassador, Marie Yovanovitch, was later removed.
Another angle: If you’ve Googled “impeachment” recently, you’ve probably run across a campaign ad for Michael Bloomberg.
The family whose members own Purdue Pharma withdrew more than $10 billion from the company from 2008 to 2017, as scrutiny of the drugmaker’s role in the U.S. opioid epidemic intensified, a new audit found.
The money, which was distributed among trusts and overseas holding companies, is more than eight times what the family took out in the 13 years after OxyContin, Purdue’s signature product, was approved in 1995.
A doctor’s diary from the E.R.
In a typical U.S. emergency room, demand far outpaces workers’ ability to provide care. The frantic pace leaves little time for deliberating a diagnosis or counseling patients.
737 Max suspension: Boeing’s decision to temporarily stop making its most popular passenger jet could have a broader effect on the U.S. economy. Boeing is the country’s largest manufacturing exporter.
Death sentence in Pakistan: Gen. Pervez Musharraf, the former military dictator, was sentenced to death today in a treason case, though he is currently in self-imposed exile in Dubai and unlikely to return to Pakistan.
Scorn for the BBC: During the British election, the public broadcaster was accused by both sides of bias, and Prime Minister Boris Johnson has raised questions about its main source of funding. Britain’s new Parliament is being sworn in today.
Rush for licenses: Undocumented immigrants in New York lined up for blocks on Monday, seeking to take advantage of a new state law allowing them to obtain driver’s licenses. On the same day, New Jersey lawmakers approved a similar measure.
Strobe attack: Hackers sent videos of flashing lights to Twitter followers of the Epilepsy Foundation last month in an apparent effort to provoke seizures, the nonprofit said.
Snapshot: Above, a school in Nagoro, Japan, which was closed after the last two students, depicted as dolls, grew up. A resident of the village helped produce 350 such dolls, which outnumber human residents by more than 10 to 1. The effects of Japan’s shrinking, aging population are felt most intensively in rural regions.
N.F.L. scoring record: Drew Brees surpassed Peyton Manning for the most career touchdown passes in league history. The New Orleans quarterback threw for four scores on Monday to reach 541.
No. 1, 25 years later: “All I Want for Christmas Is You,” the love-it-or-loathe-it hit by Mariah Carey, has reached the top spot on the Billboard Hot 100 for the first time since its release in 1994.
Watch: What if the future of TV were delightful, irresistible, meme-able versions of intellectual property you already loved … forever? Call it the Baby Yoda effect.
Listen: Esperanza Spalding upset Justin Bieber at the Grammys, #MeToo shook the scene and Jason Moran made giant leaps. Here are 10 definitive moments in jazz in the past decade.
Smarter Living: Do you often get stuck at the receiving end of a one-way conversation? We have help.
We wanted to take a deeper dive into the news this week that the U.S. secretly expelled two Chinese Embassy employees on suspicion of espionage, after they drove onto a base in Virginia that is home to Special Operations forces. Such expulsions haven’t happened in decades.
Edward Wong, a former Beijing bureau chief who now covers U.S. foreign policy, wrote the article with Julian Barnes, who covers intelligence and national security. Edward responded by email.
I first heard about the expulsions in October, a couple of weeks after the episode. My original source said diplomats in the Chinese Embassy were shocked because it was the first time in their memory that this had happened. The story took me two months to report, in part because I traveled to Hong Kong for two weeks to cover the protests there, and I’ve been involved in coverage of the impeachment inquiry.
American intelligence and counterintelligence officers have been tracking such appearances for some time. On Oct. 16, the State Department announced new rules on visits to official sites by Chinese diplomats — a sign that Chinese officials had been doing things that were making the administration uncomfortable.
Some American officials think that at least one of the two detained Chinese men was an intelligence officer and that they were doing a test run at the base to see if they could penetrate far into the perimeter without consequences. If they had gotten away with it, then a more senior intelligence officer might have tried to get onto the base using a similar tactic.
I don’t want a lot for Christmas, but we’ve recently started a referral program so that you can invite people you know to subscribe. For each person you refer, we’ll give five public high school students access to The Times.
• We’re listening to “The Daily.” Today’s episode is about the political realignment of Britain’s former industrial regions.
• Here’s today’s Mini Crossword, and a clue: Frodo and Bilbo’s home, with “the” (five letters). You can find all our puzzles here.
