The toddler’s death was the sixth of a child pedestrian who was struck by a vehicle in New York City this year, according to city data.
It was a dreary morning, but the mother still put her 3-year-old son in a stroller draped with a teal rain cover and headed out for a coffee and bagel in their East Harlem neighborhood.
As was her ritual, she went to the Dunkin’ Donuts just blocks from her home. She sipped on her coffee and ordered some hash browns for her child, according to a worker there.
After, as mother and child crossed First Avenue at East 116th Street, a driver in a blue Ford pickup truck turned left, striking her and her son in his stroller, the police said.
Her son, Bertin DeJesus, was killed.
After the collision, the mother was on the street with her son, sobbing and speaking loudly in Spanish, said Marisol Medina, who works at the Dunkin’ Donuts.
“She was crying, ‘I want my baby. I want to help my baby,’” Ms. Medina, 51, said.
The mother, who has not yet been publicly identified, had minor injuries.
Bertin was the sixth child pedestrian to be killed on city streets in 2019, according to city data.
Among the six were two killed in September: a 10-year-old boy waiting for a bus in Brooklyn and a 1-year-old girl in a stroller in the Bronx who were killed, one week apart, when drivers lost control of their vehicles.
Bertin was also the 104th pedestrian to be killed by a vehicle so far in 2019, compared to 101 in the same period last year. The slight increase in pedestrian deaths comes despite work and progress made by Mayor Bill de Blasio’s administration and the City Council as they focus on making the streets safer.
Last year, traffic fatalities in New York hit a record low, with 203 people killed by vehicles. With Bertin’s death on Monday, that number was equaled for 2019, but with three weeks still left in the year.
As of Sunday, pedestrians accounted for more than half of the traffic deaths in 2019 so far, the city’s Department of Transportation said. In an alarming increase, 27 cyclists had been killed by vehicles this year, as of Sunday, compared to just 10 in the same period last year.
In the last few years, New York seemed to be bucking a national trend: In the United States, more pedestrians and cyclists were killed last year than in any year since 1990, according to a report released by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
While the deaths had risen significantly in urban areas across the country, they had fallen consistently in recent years in New York. The city has been making progress toward reducing traffic deaths by providing safety upgrades, like so-called pedestrian head-starts at crosswalks, and reorienting what some safety advocates have called a car-dominated road culture.
On Twitter, the mayor called the crash “a tragedy” and said there would be a full investigation.
Mr. de Blasio has made street safety one of his key initiatives, and under a plan known as Vision Zero, his administration aimed to eliminate all traffic deaths by 2024.
The driver, Jaime Sabogal, 59, of Yonkers, N.Y., was arrested shortly after the collision, the police said. He was charged with aggravated unlicensed operation of a motor vehicle, failure to yield to a pedestrian and failure to exercise due care.
Ms. Medina said she felt that the street corner where the crash took place was particularly dangerous for pedestrians.
After the crash, Ms. Medina went onto the street. The mother “was on the floor with the baby, holding the baby, blood all over,” she said.
The driver was distraught, Ms. Medina said.
“He started banging himself on the head like he couldn’t believe that he did that,” she said.
Bertin and his mother were rushed to Metropolitan Hospital Center in East Harlem, where he was pronounced dead, fire and police officials said. His mother was in stable condition, officials said.
As it rained on Monday, officers spent hours at the scene of the crash in East Harlem, surrounding the intersection in police tape. Bertin’s stroller remained abandoned in the crosswalk.
Bertin’s death on Monday followed a weekend in the city marked by several other notable crashes. Early on Sunday, a 23-year-old woman was killed in the East Flatbush area of Brooklyn after the car she was in rolled through a stop sign and another car slammed into it, the police said.
An off-duty police officer was arrested in connection with that crash and initially charged with criminally negligent homicide, vehicular manslaughter, reckless driving, speeding and driving while impaired by alcohol, the police said.
The evening before, seven people were injured, including several pedestrians, in a multiple-car crash in Manhattan, according to the police.