New York|N.Y. Lawmakers Passed 935 Bills by June. Many Remain Unsigned.
N.Y. Lawmakers Passed 935 Bills by June. Many Remain Unsigned.
A groundbreaking legislative session has hit pause, with a slew of legislation awaiting Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo’s signature or veto.
ALBANY, N.Y. — For six months, Democrats in the State Capitol flexed the power of unbridled one-party rule, ushering in a sweeping overhaul of New York’s housing, environmental, criminal and social justice laws.
But this being Albany, not everything is quite as it seems: More than 300 bills that the Legislature had passed had still not been signed into law by the governor as of Dec. 5 — necessitating a recent flurry of signings and vetoes that cut the number of outstanding bills to 168 as of Friday.
The sheer amount of legislation, the most passed since 2006, was driven by first-term Democratic legislators who pushed a progressive agenda often to the left of Mr. Cuomo. Many of those bills advanced without the blessing of the governor’s office.
“It is our responsibility to ensure that the bills, as written, are responsible, enforceable and accomplish their intended purpose,” said Dani Lever, Mr. Cuomo’s communications director.
In New York, the governor typically has 10 days, not counting Sundays, to sign or veto a bill once it is sent to his office; if he does neither, the bill would automatically become law.
The trick is to actually get the bill sent to Mr. Cuomo. The Legislature typically only sends bills it has passed when the governor requests them — a time-honored practice that goes back several governors and allows Mr. Cuomo to set the pace of approving new laws.
The delays have enabled rituals familiar to the State Capitol, like last-minute lobbying from interest groups and a governor flexing his muscle to bend legislation to his liking.
In one such example, lawmakers passed a bill in late June to legalize electric scooters in New York. With the bill still not signed, officials for Bird and Lime, companies that run electric scooter operations around the world, have met numerous times with the governor’s office.
Mr. Cuomo has made it clear to the scooter companies that he has a number of safety and implementation concerns. The governor, according to Bird and Lime officials and an administration official, has discussed whether to amend the bill to require riders to wear helmets — a provision that many transit activists say could diminish ridership.
The bill was sponsored in the Senate by Jessica Ramos, a Queens Democratic senator who has been one of the more outspoken progressive lawmakers, and who has been critical of Mr. Cuomo. She has sponsored four other bills that are also awaiting the governor’s signature or veto.
The bill would also lift statewide restrictions on electronic bicycles, which many food delivery riders use in New York City even though they are illegal.
Some of the backlogged bills passed the Senate and Assembly with overwhelming support, including the e-scooter bill and measures to ensure higher wages for building service workers and to curb toxic chemicals in consumer products.
There are also seemingly less weighty bills to create task forces, rename subway stations and include the Asian longhorned tick on the invasive species list.
All these bills now may face a new deadline: If Mr. Cuomo does not act by the time the Legislature convenes next month for its 2020 session, the bills would face a new 30-day window. If the governor still has not signed or vetoed the bill after 30 days, it would result in a pocket veto.
That timeline is not lost on lobbyists.
“We check in weekly at this point,” said Matthew Lenz, the director of state government affairs for the Toy Association, an industry group which is lobbying the governor to veto a bill that would ban children’s products — including toys, clothing and furniture — with traces of certain toxic chemicals.
“They’ve been listening to our concerns, but they haven’t given any indication one way or another on what they’re going to do,” Mr. Lenz added.
Other opponents of the bill, like the American Chemistry Council, an industry group for chemical companies, and supporters, like Clean and Healthy New York, have also been in touch with the governor’s office since the summer.
The bill includes specific language that would exclude electronics like phones and computers. But the governor’s office is reviewing whether the bill could inadvertently apply to a wide range of electronic devices, according to the administration official, who requested anonymity to discuss ongoing deliberations.
Legislation can languish for different reasons: political spats, legal minutiae, nuanced input from state agencies or simply optics — the governor might want to time a bill’s signature around a news conference, for example. But governors have also been known to bury news of a veto during the holiday season.
Few such vetoes have been more memorable than Mr. Cuomo’s move two days after Christmas Day in 2014, right before a midnight deadline, to quash bipartisan legislation aimed at halting political interference and patronage at the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
Mr. Cuomo has vetoed an average of 113 bills each year since 2014. On Friday night, he signed and vetoed a large batch of lingering bills, raising the number of vetoes this year to 114.
Last week, he signed a bill to regulate the production and sale of hemp and another to ban the sale of cosmetic and personal care products with certain amounts of a harmful contaminant.
Lawyers were considering a bill that would ban chlorpyrifos, a widely used pesticide that experts have linked to serious health problems in children, and that the Trump administration decided against banning earlier his year.
But Mr. Cuomo vetoed the bill last week and took action himself, directing the Department of Environmental Conservation to ban the pesticide, with a few exceptions, by July 2021.
Still in flux is legislation that would create a permanent environmental justice advisory group. The creation of the group would put into effect an ambitious climate change plan that Mr. Cuomo and legislative leaders agreed to over the summer.
As the year comes to a close, supporters of unaddressed legislation have grown increasingly anxious, treading a fine line between pressuring the governor and torpedoing their bills.
Local 32BJ of the Service Employees International Union, for example, held a rally in Midtown earlier this month calling on the governor to sign bills that would raise wages for service workers in buildings owned by utilities and in luxury condos and coops.
But in an interview, the president of the union, Kyle Bragg, showered Mr. Cuomo with praise.
