Thousands of people fled from their homes as wildfires raged on the last day of the warmest decade on record in Australia.
Polls show a large majority of Australians view climate change as an urgent threat and want stronger government action to combat it. The catastrophic fire conditions have put an intense focus on the Australian government’s failure to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide, which traps heat when released into the atmosphere and contributes to global warming.
Prime Minister Scott Morrison, a conservative, has made it clear that Australia’s economic prosperity comes first. Even as his country burned, he has said repeatedly that it is not the time to discuss climate policy.
Those deaths raised new questions about Australia’s reliance on an overwhelmingly volunteer firefighting force. The physical and emotional toll on the thousands of unpaid firefighters has been mounting as some have worked shifts of 12 hours or more. After initially resisting calls to compensate firefighters, Mr. Morrison announced limited daily payments.
So heavy was the smoke, it even drifted over to neighboring New Zealand, 1,300 miles away, who woke up to a blood-red sun on New Year’s Day.
In Mallacoota, where several homes were destroyed, residents in boats shared footage of themselves wearing masks and life vests as they waited under the blazing red sky. Others opted to stay and defend homes, likening burning trees to “exploding infernos” and describing the roar of the blazes.
With several blazes burning out of control, thousands were stranded in evacuation centers in other towns along the coast as firefighters told people to stay put. Tens of thousands of people were without power, the Australian military was authorized to deploy aircraft and naval vessels, and the government requested firefighting help from Canada and the United States. Telecommunications remained down on Wednesday in a 200-mile stretch of threatened area on the southeast coast.
In Sydney, where heavy smoke from fires has obscured the sun many days this summer, officials rejected calls to cancel the city’s signature New Year’s Eve fireworks display after the Rural Fire Service in New South Wales approved the celebration. One blaze reached the western part of Sydney, threatening homes.
“I’ve never seen anything like it,” said one man filming his escape on a boat.
 “If we didn’t have a plan, I would have panicked a bit more,” she said.
“Everything’s gone,” he said.
“People have lost their homes, their farms, and people have lost their lives,” he said.
