Evangelicals continue to support Trump in overwhelming numbers.
The reaction — particularly from non-evangelicals — was excited and swift. “Whoa” and “big deal” led links to the piece on Twitter, suggesting that, after Mr. Trump spent four wildly successful years consolidating the support of white evangelicals, the magazine’s lofty stand would finally trigger a fatal exodus by this crucial demographic. The magazine’s website, apparently buckling under the unusual spate of traffic, was down for part of the evening, but that did not stop the avalanche of coverage on television, news sites and social media. “This is mainstream evangelical Christianity leadership,” remarked CNN’s Wolf Blitzer, reading segments of the “amazing” editorial on the air.
For many outsiders, Christianity Today seems to speak for millions of evangelicals. After all, the magazine was founded by Billy Graham, the pastor to presidents since Eisenhower. A pro-impeachment editorial would appear to be a game-changer — undermining the seemingly unmovable support for the president among white evangelicals.
That assumption, though, profoundly misapprehends American evangelicalism in the Trump era.
Since his 2016 election, in which 81 percent of white evangelicals voted for him, Mr. Trump continues to enjoy their unwavering loyalty. Three-quarters of white evangelicals approve of his job performance, and 80 percent of them remain opposed to impeaching him.
But Mr. Trump’s support is not just about anointings and prayers. It is also about personnel, policy and law — in other words, a government led by Christians who will undo, for example, advances in L.G.B.T.Q. rights. The Christian right enjoys not just regular and frequent access to the president, but virtual carte blanche on dictating policy, as top ideologues have been placed in cabinet positions and other political appointments in federal agencies.
Mr. Trump’s evangelical defenders may truly believe he is anointed, or they may just relish the unparalleled authority he has granted them. Either way, this actual mainstream of American evangelicalism is not likely to give up on its divine leader, or on its newfound power, no matter what the impeachment proceedings uncover.
Sarah Posner is a reporting fellow at Type Investigations. Her book, “Unholy: Why White Evangelicals Worship at the Altar of Donald Trump,” will be published in May.