The Paris cathedral, which suffered a devastating fire this year, is still closed to the public as reconstruction efforts slowly get underway.
Notre-Dame cathedral in Paris will not hold Christmas services this week for the first time in over two centuries, as workers continue to shore up the fragile building after a devastating fire.
Records show that Christmas Masses have been celebrated at Notre-Dame every year since at least 1803, after the cathedral was handed back to the Roman Catholic Church following the French Revolution, according to André Finot, a spokesman for the cathedral.
Mr. Finot said that the cathedral’s rector would instead hold this year’s Christmas service at the Église St.-Germain l’Auxerrois, a church near the Louvre where Notre-Dame’s religious services have been relocated since the fire.
“It’s very hard for everyone, it’s yet another blow,” Mr. Finot said by telephone on Monday.
President Emmanuel Macron of France vowed after the fire that Notre-Dame would be rebuilt in five years, a tight deadline that the authorities are sticking to so far.
The authorities caution that Notre-Dame is in an extremely precarious state and in need of constant monitoring to ensure parts of it do not collapse. The vault is still punctured by gaping holes, and the flying buttresses are propped up by giant wooden blocks.
But the most urgent threat to Notre-Dame is thousands of scaffolding tubes — remnants of renovation work from before the fire — that were welded together by the blaze, creating a mass of twisted metal of roughly 250 tons that is weighing down on the structure.
Workers are currently erecting a 200-foot crane that will loom above the cathedral to help finalize the operations needed to stabilize that welded scaffolding.
The exact cause of the fire is not yet known. Investigators are focusing on the possibility of a short circuit in the electrified bells of the spire, or in the elevators that had been set up on the old scaffolding. They are also considering cigarette butts, which were found on the scaffolding, apparently left by workers.