The author’s tweet in support of an anti-trans activist contradicts the messages of acceptance found in her stories.
On Thursday, J.K. Rowling caused an uproar when she tweeted her support of Maya Forstater, a British researcher.
Earlier this year, Ms. Forstater filed a lawsuit claiming her employer, the Center for Global Development, discriminated against her because of beliefs she has often shared on Twitter — namely, that a person cannot change their sex, and her opposition to the proposed changes to the United Kingdom’s Gender Recognition Act that would allow people to legally change their gender. A tribunal ruled against Ms. Forstater on Wednesday, on the grounds that her belief is “not a philosophical belief protected” by British law.
Ms. Rowling’s association with Ms. Forstater doesn’t come as a complete surprise; in June the author was criticized for liking a tweet by an anti-trans YouTuber, which her publicity team tried to pass off as a “clumsy and middle-aged moment.” But this week was the first time she explicitly broadcast her viewpoint to her 14 million Twitter followers.
As a devoted Harry Potter fan who also happens to be transgender, it was like a punch in the gut.
It was this community of loving, passionate people who accepted me with open arms when I came out as transgender at the age of 25. While I was nervous about coming out to some relatives and acquaintances, I never doubted that the Harry Potter fan community would accept me for who I was. After all, we all adhered to the values we learned from the books about being yourself, loving those who are different from you and sticking up for the underdog.
The book series, which I started reading shortly after its debut in the United States when I was 9 years old, was an escape from my lonely childhood of gender confusion. I used to dream about characters from the books showing up on my doorstep to whisk me away to the wizarding world, as they do for Harry in the first book. As I grew up and the series continued, I learned about the importance of critical thinking and standing up for your beliefs — as when Harry has to fight back against a government-sanctioned disinformation campaign denying the return of the evil wizard Lord Voldemort.
I internalized the half-giant Hagrid’s stance on self-acceptance in “The Goblet of Fire”: “I am what I am, an’ I’m not ashamed.” I felt Harry’s grief for his classmate Cedric and godfather Sirius after the deaths of my own classmates and relatives. I saw parallels between the politics of a war-torn wizarding world and the post-9/11 landscape unfolding around me.
Through her books, Ms. Rowling helped teach a generation the power of not just tolerance, but fierce acceptance and unconditional love. When Harry’s best friend Ron first learns that their professor Remus Lupin is a werewolf, he’s frightened and falls back on the stereotypes he’s been raised to understand, but over the years, he befriends Lupin and fights for him.
And through all the different spells and curses we learn of in the series, it turns out that the one magic power Harry needs to defeat Voldemort, in the end, is love.
I wonder now if I’ll be able to separate the author from the text, if and when I decide to read the books again — a decision I’ve yet to come to a conclusion on. It’s certainly not the first time I’ve had to consider this: It was disappointing to see the appropriation of Navajo culture in Ms. Rowling’s digital story collection, “History of Magic in North America” and the original books have been rightly criticized for promoting fatphobia, racial stereotyping and more.
Anytime she or the franchise’s decisions have sparked tension with my own ideologies, I think about what the real magic of Harry Potter is to me. It’s not the theme park in Orlando or trademarked merchandise, or even the deluge of information Ms. Rowling continues to release about the fictional universe on Pottermore. Those things have never been my favorite part of Harry Potter, though now I may avoid them more intentionally.
The real magic for me is what people have created around the books and the community we have built together.
I think of evenings spent in dark music venues in Brooklyn, screaming along with hundreds of other sweaty Harry Potter fans to songs inspired by the books. Taking inspiration from the series, bands with names like Harry and the Potters, Draco and the Malfoys and Tonks and the Aurors rage against supremacy and corrupt governments, and they preach the power of love above all else.
I think of a community that gave me a new home, my own kind of Hogwarts, after I came out as transgender — a community that continues to foster that same safe space for every queer or trans person who needs it, and which commits itself intentionally toward growth and learning in its inclusion.
J.K. Rowling’s latest opinions, as much as they might sting, can’t take that magic away from me. I can only hope she takes this opportunity to practice some of the same values she taught us and listens to trans fans of her books. Let us tell you about our lives, how we got here, and even how the world you created saved many of us. We’re ready to have a conversation if you are. Send us an owl.
