After receiving presidential clemency, Edward Gallagher has left the SEALs to become a pitchman and conservative activist.
Since being acquitted this summer, Navy SEAL Chief Petty Officer Edward Gallagher has been occupied with a variety of projects, including modeling his own clothing brand, Salty Frog Gear.
A year ago, Navy SEAL Chief Petty Officer Edward Gallagher was wearing a Navy uniform at a brig near San Diego, facing murder charges that could have sent him to prison for the rest of his life. Now he is modeling his own lifestyle clothing brand, endorsing nutrition supplements and positioning himself as a conservative influencer with close ties to the man who helped clear him — President Trump.
Now, Chief Gallagher is using his controversial past as a springboard to social media followers and branding opportunities. Beyond repping coffee beans and protein shakes, he is making appearances at influential conservative gatherings and rubbing elbows with Mr. Trump’s inner circle at Mar-a-Lago.
Paul Rieckhoff, the founder of Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America, who has openly criticized Chief Gallagher, said that the square-jawed, blue-eyed SEAL has been a valuable political weapon for the Trump administration.
Watch “The Weekly,” The Times’s new TV show, on Hulu and FX.
Watch never-before-released video and confidential interviews with the Navy SEALs who accused Special Operations Chief Edward Gallagher of war crimes.
The partnership is valuable for Chief Gallagher, too, Mr. Rieckhoff said, because in raising his profile in conservative circles, he can cash in on book deals, speaking engagements and other business opportunities.
Following the lead of many micro influencers, Chief Gallagher’s Instagram account has also endorsed veteran-owned coffee beans and muscle-building supplements with macabre names like Double Tap and Total War. Like a sponsored athlete of the world’s most dangerous sport, he regularly shows off the logos and clothing of a number of right-wing veterans’ groups that push a distinct brand of patriotism, including an apparel brand run by the SEAL veteran who made the knife Chief Gallagher was accused of using to kill a captive. Along with all sorts of items emblazoned with the logo “KILL BAD DUDES,” the site sells a “Waterboarding Instructor” shirt.
Chief Gallagher’s lawyer said the SEAL was writing a book about his career, but declined to provide details about whether he had signed a publishing deal or with whom.
But Chief Gallagher is the first to do it in the wake of a war crime court-martial, and the only one who has sought to tie his public persona so closely to a political party and a divisive commander in chief.
Chief Gallagher, 40, sometimes went by the nickname Blade during his 20 years in the Navy. He served eight combat deployments and was awarded repeated medals for valor under fire.
But he also ran into trouble over the years. He was investigated for shooting a small girl while targeting a suspected Taliban member in Afghanistan in 2010, and was arrested and accused of assaulting a Navy police officer in 2014. In both cases, no criminal charges were filed.
Despite his past, Chief Gallagher was respected in the SEAL teams as an aggressive operator. But when he was assigned to lead his first platoon in combat in 2017 in Mosul, Iraq, SEALs who served under him said he became fixated on getting in firefights, made bizarre and dangerous tactical decisions, seemed to not know how to do his job and killed people with little regard to the rules of engagement.
Sometimes he would go on solo “gun runs,” they said, emptying loads of heavy machine gun fire into neighborhoods with no apparent targets.

Several members of the platoon eventually turned him in for murder.
Nine Line Apparel, the clothing company he partnered with to make Salty Frog Gear, defended its collaboration.
Nine Line’s promotional photos and videos for the new clothing line show Chief Gallagher shooting an AR-15 assault rifle. In closed online forums, several of the SEALs from his old platoon whom he had accused of not being able to meet his high standards noted derisively that the holographic sight on his rifle had been put on backward.
Mr. Trump has signaled he has few misgivings in associating with Chief Gallagher. He said he would like to have Chief Gallagher and other service members accused or convicted of war crimes campaign for him, and perhaps even appear at the Republican convention in 2020, according to The Daily Beast.
Earlier this month Chief Gallagher attended the conservative youth organization Turning Point USA’s Student Action Summit with his wife, Andrea, where he met with Donald Trump Jr. A short time later, he was at Mar-a-Lago with Mr. Trump.
