Media|Peloton’s Cringe-y Ad Got Everyone Talking. Its C.E.O. Is Silent.
Peloton’s Cringe-y Ad Got Everyone Talking. Its C.E.O. Is Silent.
But the “Deadpool” star Ryan Reynolds describes how he found a way into the conversation.
During a talk in New York on Monday, John Foley, the chief executive of Peloton, did not laugh off the negative reaction to the fitness company’s holiday commercial, a 30-second spot that drew intense criticism and caused Peloton stock to drop 9 percent in one day. Neither did he apologize or defend it. In fact, Mr. Foley did not mention it at all.
During his 40-minute appearance at a Midtown Manhattan conference hosted by the financial firm UBS, Mr. Foley discussed profitability and international expansion. The closest he got to discussing the commercial — which has been derided as sexist, classist, dystopian and tone deaf — was talking about the high prices of the company’s equipment.
“We have a fun challenge, and we’re going to solve it as marketers, because the reality is that it is an incredible value, and we’re changing lives, and we’re allowing people to get more fit and get more healthy and get those endorphins and be better versions of themselves and all this existential stuff that we’re excited about at the top of Maslow’s hierarchy of needs,” he said, referring to the 1943 theory by the psychologist Abraham Maslow.
“But we need to communicate that better,” Mr. Foley continued, in what seemed a tacit acknowledgment that the commercial may have hurt the company.
In an interview on Sunday, Mr. Reynolds said he had heard about the Peloton commercial on Tuesday, when his business partner, George Dewey, sent him a 2:34 p.m. text about the backlash. Mr. Reynolds and Mr. Dewey run Maximum Effort Productions, an entertainment and marketing company that has gained a reputation for advertising stunts, including a mock Twitter war between Mr. Reynolds and his fellow superhero-movie star Hugh Jackman.
Mr. Reynolds and Mr. Dewey decided to respond to the Peloton ad with a promotion of the gin company, knowing they had to do work quickly, before the social media furor had died down.
On Wednesday morning, Mr. Reynolds and Mr. Dewey contacted Ms. Ruiz. They shot the gin commercial, called “The Gift That Doesn’t Give Back,” for less than $100,000 in several hours on Friday and released it that night, as Mr. Reynolds was boarding a flight to Brazil. In the ad, Ms. Ruiz sits at a bar between two friends, gazing blankly ahead, as if stunned or traumatized. An awkward silence follows.
“To new beginnings,” Ms. Ruiz responds, before guzzling one gin cocktail and accepting another from her concerned pal.
Mr. Reynolds said he had sympathy for Ms. Ruiz’s plight as collateral damage in the backlash to the Peloton commercial.
