Sports|This Intersex Runner Had Surgery to Compete. It Has Not Gone Well.
Annet Negesa, Uganda’s 800-meter Olympic hopeful, says she was advised to undergo an irreversible surgery because of naturally elevated testosterone levels. Her career has never been the same.
Annet Negesa had just finished training in Kampala, Uganda, in June 2012 when she received a call from a doctor from track and field’s world governing body. He told her that she would no longer be competing in the London Olympics because her testosterone levels were too high for competition.
“I went back into the house and started crying,” she recalled.
World Athletics, formerly the International Association of Athletics Federations, or I.A.A.F., track and field’s world governing body, did not catch Negesa using performance-enhancing drugs. Rather, she is an intersex athlete.
“What happened to Annet is dangerous, and happened because she wanted to compete,” said Payoshni Mitra, a researcher and activist on gender and sports who has lectured on the topic of intersex athletes.
For the past decade, Mitra has stood alongside numerous athletes with naturally high testosterone levels, including Caster Semenya, the South African middle-distance champion, and Dutee Chand, the Indian sprinter. Negesa’s case, however, was one of the most difficult ones for Mitra to reconcile because Negesa opted to have surgery.
For years, World Athletics has struggled to create rules that maintain a level playing field for the overwhelming majority of women with only female genitalia without impinging on the human rights of intersex people, who account for roughly one in every 2,000 births. A study this year found that female athletes with male testosterone levels are overrepresented in women’s middle-distance races.
After years of litigation, the Court of Arbitration for Sport in May upheld World Athletics’ testosterone restrictions for female athletes in races with distances from 400 meters to the mile. The court ruled by a 2-to-1 vote that the restrictions were indeed discriminatory but also a “necessary, reasonable and proportionate” means of achieving the World Athletics goal of preserving a level playing field in women’s track events.
Intersex athletes who want to participate in middle-distance women’s track events must take hormone-suppressing drugs and reduce testosterone levels below five nanomoles per liter for six months before competing, then maintain those lowered levels.
She said a World Athletics physician, Dr. Stéphane Bermon, told her she needed to undergo medical treatment and was given surgery as her first option: a gonadectomy to remove her internal testes.
“I love my sport so much, that’s why I decided to go for the surgery,” she said in a recent video interview from Germany, where she now lives.
After Negesa appeared in a documentary on German television’s ARD network in October, World Athletics issued a statement denying that it participated in or recommended a specific treatment to Negesa.
“Dr. Bermon has never met the athlete in question and was not at either the consultation in Nice nor the surgery she speaks of in Uganda,” the statement said. Through a World Athletics spokesman, Dr. Bermon declined to comment.
She hasn’t returned to the sport and has suffered from depression and joint pain since the operation.
Negesa’s medical record from the Women’s Hospital International & Fertility Centre in Kampala was reviewed by The New York Times and confirmed that World Athletics, then known as the I.A.A.F., recommended a thorough medical examination, citing the high levels of testosterone in her body. The report states that after her testing in Nice she had a gonadectomy in Kampala. The document states that her surgeon in Kampala, Dr. Edward Tamale Sali, did not start her on hormone therapy because he was awaiting further discussion with Dr. Bermon.
In 2013, Dr. Bermon, now director of the World Athletics’ health and science department, published a report citing four unidentified athletes from developing countries who were referred to hospitals in France for naturally high testosterone levels.
“I think I was the first one,” Negesa said of the four athletes cited in the study. She said Dr. Bermon was the World Athletics official who first called her in 2012.
After Negesa’s appearance in the German documentary in September, 25 French athletes wrote to World Athletics, the International Olympic Committee and the minister of sports and health calling for an investigation.
In March, the United Nations Human Rights Council condemned World Athletics’ attempt to regulate female athletes’ testosterone levels. And in May the World Medical Association advised physicians around the world to abstain from implementing the new regulations.
“They are assigned female at birth and have grown up to have a female gender identity, so there’s no question that they belong in that category,” said Katrina Karkazis, a fellow at Yale University’s Global Health Justice Partnership.
