Thousands of people gathered at two funerals.
Among those killed on Tuesday were three bystanders who were inside the store when the shootout began. They have been identified as Mindel Ferencz, 33, who ran the market with her husband; Moshe Deutsch, 24, a rabbinical student who lived in Brooklyn; and Miguel Douglas Rodriguez, 49, who may have worked at the store.
Outside Satmar Shul orthodox synagogue in South Williamsburg, Brooklyn, thousands of people gathered on the street to mourn Mr. Deutsch. A full block transformed into a sea of black hats — every stoop and step packed with observers. The women stood on one side of the street, separated from the men, as per Orthodox Jewish tradition.
Rabbi Zalman Leib Teitelbaum, the grand rabbi of Satmar Shul, spoke over a loudspeaker, crying as he delivered remarks in Yiddish calling the killing a senseless, anti-Semitic act.
In Jersey City, hundreds gathered to pay their respects to Ms. Ferencz at the Khal Adas Greenville, which houses a synagogue on the lower level and a yeshiva for children on the upper level.
Women huddled on a sidewalk could be heard crying as pallbearers carried Ms. Ferencz’s coffin out of a hearse. Some dried tears from their eyes after speaker after speaker expressed their sorrow in Yiddish.
More than a hundred men huddled around the coffin as they listened to others take turns speaking into a microphone. When a speaker sobbed, the women’s weeping grew louder. Many looked to the ground and covered parts of their faces with tissues or their hands.
She quit paying her common charges for the condominium they shared and also stopped paying her water bill, he said.
As for Ms. Graham, he said he had not seen her in a year. He learned of the Jersey City shooting when the police banged on his door at 2:30 a.m.
Around 12:30 p.m., the authorities were alerted about a shooting at the market, at the same time hearing about the detective being shot, officials said. Two police officers who were on a foot patrol nearby immediately responded to the call and were met with gunfire. Both the officers were injured but in stable condition, officials said.
Nick Corasaniti, Laura Dimon, Corina Knoll, Jeffery C. Mays, Sarah Maslin Nir, Sharon Otterman, Azi Paybarah, Ed Shanahan, Andrea Salcedo, Edgar Sandoval, Nate Schweber, Ashley Southall, Tracey Tully, Michael Wilson and Mihir Zaveri contributed reporting. Susan C. Beachy and Jack Begg contributed research.