Our reporters followed all of the exchanges and fact-checked the candidates, providing context and explanation on the policy debates.
Seven candidates vying for the 2020 Democratic presidential nomination took the debate stage Thursday night in Los Angeles for the sixth round of debates.
Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind., correctly noted his low net worth compared with Senator Elizabeth Warren’s.
According to Forbes, Ms. Warren has a net worth of $12 million, or 120 times Mr. Buttigieg’s net worth of $100,000.
Ms. Warren and her husband, Bruce Mann, were both professors at Harvard University and added to their wealth through retirement funds available to teachers. Forbes reported that their home, bought in 1995 for $447,000, is now worth an estimated $3 million.
Mr. Buttigieg is the least wealthy Democratic contender. The disparity between their net worths reflects a generational wealth gap between millennials and boomers.
Mr. Buttigieg said that Ms. Warren was hypocritical for criticizing him for accepting money from big donors because she did so during her Senate campaign and transferred some of that money to her presidential campaign.
As The New York Times reported in September, Ms. Warren transferred $10.4 million in leftover funds from her 2018 Senate campaign to underwrite her 2020 presidential run. Some of that money was raised under the same guidelines she is now running against.
However, The Times noted that there was no way to say exactly how much of the $10.4 million Ms. Warren transferred from 2018 was attributable to large donations. Records show about $6 million of her Senate funds also came from donors who gave at least $1,000.
Still, Ms. Warren’s criticism of Mr. Buttigieg for holding a fund-raiser in a Napa Valley “wine cave” could leave her open to some cries of hypocrisy. Last year, Ed Rendell, the former governor of Pennsylvania, recruited donors to attend a fund-raising dinner for Ms. Warren at Barclay Prime in Philadelphia. The steakhouse serves a $120 cheesesteak that includes Wagyu rib-eye, foie gras, truffled cheese whiz and a half-bottle of champagne.
Mr. Rendell said that Ms. Warren sent him a “glowing” thank-you letter.
Former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. said he advocated a reduction in troop numbers in Afghanistan, a proposal that he said put him at odds with senior Pentagon officials.
This is true. In 2009, he did propose this, during a period of reassessment of Afghanistan strategy, but President Barack Obama at the time sided with Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates and Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, choosing to add to the American troop presence.
Later, in 2011, Mr. Obama supported Mr. Biden’s proposal for a drawdown and ordered the departure of 30,000 troops by the summer of 2012.
Senator Bernie Sanders was largely accurate about childhood poverty.
This is mostly true. The United States has a childhood poverty rate of 21.2 percent. That is high among peer nations — the rate in Finland is 3.6 percent — but lower than that of six other countries in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development: Chile (21.5 percent), Spain (22.2 percent), Israel (23.7 percent), Turkey (25.3 percent), Costa Rica (28.4 percent) and South Africa (32 percent).
Ms. Warren claimed that her 2 percent wealth tax on households worth more than $50 million would pay for a sweeping expansion of the nation’s social safety net, providing free child care and college tuition.
Mr. Sanders accurately counted the number of billionaires donating to his rivals.
This is true. Mr. Sanders is referring to a Forbes analysis of each Democratic campaign’s billionaire donors. The magazine did count 44 billionaires for Mr. Biden to 40 for Mr. Buttigieg (so he has caught up a bit more than Mr. Sanders said). Both men lag behind Senator Cory Booker of New Jersey, who has 45 billionaire contributors. The Forbes analysis was of contributions to the candidates’ campaign committees by the billionaires or their spouses. Contributions to campaigns are limited to $2,800 per person.
Ms. Warren has six billionaire contributors, while Mr. Sanders himself had one — though his campaign told Forbes it would return the check.
Fact-checks provided by Linda Qiu and Alan Rappeport.