The fire, the deadliest in the city’s history, broke out early on Saturday and quickly filled the building with smoke, inundating the upper floors, where several residents jumped from windows, an official said.
Authorities said they were investigating whether a stove that was being used for heat ignited an early-morning fire in a Las Vegas apartment building on Saturday, killing six people and injuring 13 in the deadliest blaze in the city’s history.
The fire broke out around 4:13 a.m. near a stove in a first-floor unit, Timothy R. Szymanski, a spokesman for Las Vegas Fire and Rescue, said. Thick, poisonous smoke quickly traveled throughout the three-story, 42-unit building, inundating the upper floors, where several residents jumped from windows, he said.
Mr. Szymanski said witnesses told him one of those who jumped was pregnant. She was in critical condition, Mr. Szymanski said.
Several residents reported that they had been using their stoves for warmth because the heat in the building wasn’t working, he said.
Firefighters quickly put out the fire, which Mr. Szymanski estimated caused $475,000 in damage to the building, called the Alpine Motel Apartments. He said nearly 50 people were displaced.
Two cats and a dog also died in the fire, he said. One dog, a Chihuahua, was saved and taken to a veterinarian, he said.
A maintenance worker tried to kick a back door open, but the door was bolted shut, Mr. Guenther told The Review-Journal. He said the door was locked to keep homeless people and others out of the building.
“It’s a fire hazard right there,” Mr. Guenther said.
Mr. Guenther said he and others helped rescue babies and dogs until the fire became too intense. He told The Review-Journal that he used his stove for heat, since the heat in his unit didn’t work.
Mr. Szymanski said it seemed that at least some smoke alarms in individual units were working because he could hear them from the street. But he said it was not clear if a separate fire alarm system intended to alert the entire building to an emergency was working.
In 1980, a fire at the MGM Grand Hotel killed 85 people and injured more than 700, but the casino was located in Clark County, outside Las Vegas city limits, Mr. Szymanski said.
Most of the people injured in Saturday’s fire experienced smoke inhalation, but some had multiple fractures after jumping from windows, Mr. Szymanski said.
When burned, polyurethane foam, which is used in common household items like beds and sofas, produces a thick, black smoke that the lungs immediately reject. It’s the biggest contributor to smoke in a building fire, Mr. Szymanski said.
Michele Fiore, mayor pro tem of Las Vegas, said city officials were not aware of any code violations or complaints about the building in the past, although she cautioned that an investigation was just beginning.
She said the fire had spurred officials to examine other residential buildings in the downtown area to make certain that they were up to code and had working heat and smoke alarms.
“This is a tragic wake-up call that we have to go back and look at it all,” Ms. Fiore said.
The holiday season is the “perfect storm for fires,” Mr. Szymanski said, noting the often deadly combination of Christmas trees, candles and space heaters.
“We’ve always told people never use a stove as a heating device, they’re not designed for that,” Mr. Szymanski said, because they can overheat and catch fire.