ARTEK at the Church of St. Mary the Virgin (Dec. 28, 8 p.m.). Gwendolyn Toth will direct this highly rated period instrument ensemble in a program built around the Monteverdi Mass “In Illo Tempore,” which was published as a companion to the much more famous “Vespers.” The performers, instrumentalists and singers alike, will weave in other pieces by Monteverdi, as well as music by Gabrieli.
NEW YORK STRING ORCHESTRA at Carnegie Hall (Dec. 28, 8 p.m.). The young players of this annually refreshed ensemble return for their second concert of the holiday season, led by Jaime Laredo. On the bill are Mendelssohn’s early Sinfonia No. 10, Brahms’s portentous Symphony No. 1 and Tchaikovsky’s evergreen Violin Concerto. Shannon Lee is the soloist.
SEMPLICE PLAYERS at Bargemusic (Dec. 31, 7 p.m.; Jan. 1, 3 p.m.). For the Met, the Philharmonic and other New York institutions, New Year’s Eve and New Year’s Day are gala season. Spare a thought for Bargemusic, though: Its artistic director and stalwart violinist, Mark Peskanov, joins the Semplice Players to celebrate with Vivaldi’s Concerto for Four Violins in B minor, Bach’s Concerto for Two Violins in D minor and Mendelssohn’s Octet.
TENET VOCAL ARTISTS at St. Jean Baptiste Church (Jan. 2-3, 7 p.m.). The Green Mountain Project reaches its final performance of Monteverdi’s “Vespers” of 1610, the last in a series that has been ongoing since 2010, when the project gave what was thought to be the first performance of the work for its 400th anniversary. Performers will include the soprano and artistic director Jolle Greenleaf, and the cornets and sackbuts of the Dark Horse Consort.
‘WOZZECK’ at the Metropolitan Opera (Dec. 27, 8 p.m.; Jan. 2, 8 p.m.; through Jan. 22). The artist William Kentridge follows up his pioneering productions of “Lulu” and “The Nose” with Berg’s first opera, a take that my colleague Zachary Woolfe called extraordinary on its debut at the Salzburg Festival in 2017. The Met’s music director, Yannick Nézet-Séguin, wields the baton for this run, with Peter Mattei as Wozzeck, Elza van den Heever as Marie, Christopher Ventris as the Drum Major, Gerhard Siegel as the Captain, Andrew Staples as Andres and Tamara Mumford as Margret. Also at the Met are “Der Rosenkavalier” on Saturday and Wednesday evening and the family-friendly “Magic Flute” on Saturday and Thursday afternoon.
