Saudi Aramco, the oil giant that underpins the Saudi economy, emerged as the world’s most valuable public company on Wednesday as its shares traded for the first time. But the stock offering fell short of the royal family’s goal of luring huge amounts of global investment.
Aramco shares rose 10 percent within seconds after they started trading on the Saudi stock exchange in Riyadh, reaching the largest daily increase permitted. The surge took the company’s value to nearly $1.9 trillion, substantially larger than Apple at about $1.19 trillion.
Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, whose reputation was damaged last year by the murder of the dissident journalist Jamal Khashoggi by Saudi agents, will probably claim the I.P.O. as a big victory. The proceeds from the shares sold in the offering — initially estimated at $25.6 billion — will help fund the crown prince’s Vision 2030 plan, which aims to finance vast projects in renewable energy and real estate and reduce dependence on oil.
But the slice of the company being traded is tiny, and the shares are benefiting from the hothouse environment of the local stock exchange, which the Saudi leadership chose over a bigger, more global market. Given the opportunity to buy into a national crown jewel, Saudi individuals and companies lined up to buy the shares. Many major investment funds from outside the region were largely on the sidelines.
Aramco, fully state owned until now, has some of the largest oil fields in the world.
Outside investors were concerned that the Saudi government would retain around 98 percent of the shares, leaving them with little influence.
After reaching an impasse with the Wall Street banks, Aramco decided to go a different route. It downgraded the role of the American financial institutions, and pressed local and regional investors in the Middle East to buy its shares.
Prince Mohammed originally wanted the prestige of an international listing, but exchanges in locations like New York and London posed hurdles in terms of disclosure and regulation. Saudi officials were also concerned that a listing in New York could expose Aramco to lawsuits by families of victims of terrorism linked to Saudi Arabia.
Saudi banks have enabled individuals to buy the shares by phone, A.T.M. or other convenient means. To entice investors, Aramco has guaranteed a dividend amounting to a 4.4 percent yield for five years.
A primary goal of the share offering was to bring outside capital into the kingdom. Proceeds from the offering are likely to flow largely into the Public Investment Fund, a sovereign wealth fund that has become Prince Mohammed’s main vehicle for shifting the Saudi economy from its reliance on oil.
