Without duplicating our critics, there was plenty to champion, from “The Inheritance” on Broadway to “Romeo and Juliet” in sign language in Seattle.
Where was “Hadestown”?
That was one takeaway from New York Times readers when asked to tell us what shows our critics overlooked on their Top 10 lists. But in widening the scope to include work outside New York, too, we heard about productions in Atlanta, Boise, Rochester and Washington, D.C. — not to mention Off Broadway.
Theatrical Outfit in Atlanta performed “The Laramie Project” in repertory with “Our Town” as its season opener in September. The masterful cast played multiple roles in both productions, giving life to the townspeople of Laramie and Grover’s Corners as they went about their daily lives. The common themes of ordinary life and tragic death made the pairing particularly meaningful. ALICE TENOLD, Milledgeville, Ga.
I live in Alabama so I see many more local/regional shows than Broadway. I challenged myself to see 52 live events in 2019. Favorite new shows were “Ever After” and “Becoming Nancy” at Atlanta’s Alliance Theater. LAURA LEE VANN, Birmingham, Ala.
“The Royale” by Marco Ramirez at Geva Theater Center. The way the fight scenes were staged — with foot-stomping to represent the blows of the boxers — was phenomenal. The actors were strong and the pacing kept me on the edge of my seat. IRENE STUMBERGER, Rochester, N.Y.
Roundabout Theater Company’s production of “Toni Stone” by Lydia Diamond was the year’s best play. April Matthis’s performance as Toni Stone was transcendent. It’s a poignant story about race, gender, sports and Jim Crow America. The audience was on its feet.  ERIKA SCALES, Ocean County, N.J.
I loved “The Wrong Man” so much that after seeing Ryan Vazquez in the lead role I made another trip to New York to see Joshua Henry as Duran. I hope it will make it onto a Broadway stage. I would love a cast recording with Joshua Henry as lead. LINDA LEWIS, Gainesville, Fla.
Standouts this season at the Oregon Shakespeare Festival were Christina Anderson’s “How to Catch Creation,” with indelible performances by Christiana Clark, Chris Butler and Kimberly Monks. And Lauren Yee’s “Cambodian Rock Band” absolutely deserves all the attention and positive press it’s getting. It’s just a knockout. CAROLE FLORIAN, Ashland, Ore.
Definitely add “Seared” to your list. Here’s why: great performances, especially Raúl Esparza, who ranges from spluttering with rage and indignation to simmering over betrayal and defeat. MYRNA WALSH, Duxbury, Mass.
I want to give a shout-out to Trinity Repertory Company’s production of “The Prince of Providence,” a spot on examination of Providence’s most famous mayor, Buddy Cianci. The ending was one of the best I’ve seen in theater — a perfect summation of a deeply flawed man who was larger than life, even after death. ANNIE VOSS-ALTMAN, Providence R.I.
Despite including some serious topics and themes, “Love in Hate Nation” at Two River Theater still had upbeat songs, lighthearted moments and a happy ending. I enjoyed every second. MELANIE RAUSH, New Brunswick, N.J.
Aaron Posner’s “Life Sucks.” was a brilliant reworking of “Uncle Vanya,” presented by Wheelhouse Theater Company. I laughed, I was sad, and the play provoked a lot of thought about the complexity of the human condition and how, really, nothing has changed in the last hundred or so years. I bought the coffee cup emblazoned with “Life Sucks,” and when I’m having a bad day, I use it. MARJORIE WOODRUFF, Weehawken, N.J.
