Opinion|Win-a-Trip in 2020!
Win-a-Trip in 2020!
I invite university students to enter a contest for a reporting trip next year.
I’m delighted to invite university students to apply for my 2020 win-a-trip contest. I’ve been holding these contests since 2006, and taking the winner along with me on a reporting trip to cover global poverty and social justice issues. My aim is to generate interest in neglected topics and get more people writing about them.
The winner will write pieces for me on The New York Times website. HBO did a documentary called “Reporter” based on my 2007 win-a-trip journey to Congo; it’s on Amazon and iTunes if you want to see what you’re letting yourself in for. The contest begins on Saturday and the entry deadline is 11:59 p.m. E.T. on Jan. 7, 2020.
Read the full rules here. The contest is open to students enrolled in an American college or university, either as an undergraduate or graduate. To apply, submit an essay of up to 700 words explaining why we should pick you for win-a-trip. Tell us about yourself and what you would bring to the reporting and to readers. If you’d like, you may also A) suggest where we should go and what you would like to write about for the NYT, and/or B) discuss your aspirations and what you would like to be doing in 10 years. We’re trying to be flexible, because our goal is to get a better understanding of you, your accomplishments and your writing ability.
What are we looking for? Someone very smart with excellent communications skills, so that your posts, photos and social media will make other students interested in these issues and generate conversations. If you blog or have other writing, photography or video experience, be sure to mention it and send links.
To enter, use this form at the Center for Global Development website. The center will help me winnow down the applicants to a much smaller pool of finalists, and then, with the help of my assistant, Gina Cherelus, I’ll choose the winner. My plan is to travel for a week or two, perhaps in the late spring or early summer. I’ll try to work around the winner’s schedule, but if you know for sure you won’t be able to take the time off, then please don’t apply. Your expenses will be covered, but there’s no cash award, and you may have to pay taxes on the value of the trip. I’m not sure just where we’ll travel, and I’m not even sure that it’ll be abroad. One possibility is Zimbabwe or Congo, another is American Indian reservations in the United States, or perhaps somewhere else entirely, like Haiti or Papua New Guinea.
Also, remember that the traveling is sometimes tough. The joke within The New York Times is that first prize is a trip with me; second prize is two trips with me. We may be bouncing over awful roads, eating wretched food, and you may get sick. “Hotel” rooms may come with bed bugs and rats. And we’ll be on the go from dawn to dusk. To get a sense of what the past winners have done, check out Tyler Pager’s posts from Central African Republic in 2018, Aneri Pattani’s posts from Liberia in 2017, Austin Meyer’s post on malnutrition in India in 2015, Saumya Dave’s first impressions of Morocco in 2011 or Paul Bower’s reflections in 2009 on how religion in Liberia shares many similarities with the South. You can also see what past win-a-trip winners are up to; the 2013 winner, Erin Luhmann, caught up with the previous winners, going back to Casey Parks in 2006. In 2016, I did something different: winner Cassidy McDonald and I reported on domestic poverty here in the United States. Last year I went to Guatemala with winner Mia Armstrong, and she wrote great stories like this and this.
If you want to get a sense of the issues I cover and care about, subscribe to my free email newsletter. But don’t feel you need to agree with me to apply or win! And I’d like to see a diverse pool of applicants, so if you don’t look like me, that’s welcome. Writers of color, women, L.G.B.T.Q.+ students, conservatives, liberals, artists, athletes, veterans — send in your essays!
One other suggestion. Only one person will win this trip, but you can always try to make your own trip. Africa can be relatively expensive, but traveling around Nicaragua, India/Bangladesh or Vietnam/Cambodia may be more affordable. You may also be able to get a job teaching English to defray expenses. And for that matter, there are many opportunities to leave your comfort zone without leaving this country — tutor in a prison, or in an inner-city school. Over the years, I’ve heard from a number of win-a-trip applicants who, disgusted by my poor judgment in failing to pick them, went off on their own journeys and had life-shaping experiences. So if you don’t win my trip, win your own! You may also find ideas for places to volunteer abroad at omprakash.org and idealist.org.