The Life of a Mansion in Old Westbury, N.Y.
Both the lady of Westbury House and its designer were English. In 1903, John Phipps, known as Jay, married Margarita Grace, whose family owned the shipping line that became the Grace Steamship Company. Mr. Phipps promised to build his bride a great country house reminiscent of those in her native country.
To keep his word, he turned to the London aesthete George Crawley, a passionate student of design with no formal architectural training. According to a biography by Cuthbert Headlam, Mr. Crawley had befriended Amy Phipps, Jay’s sister, while the Phipps clan was renting a manor in England.
In 1904 the Phipps patriarch, a partner of Andrew Carnegie, hired Mr. Crawley to decorate several rooms of his Manhattan mansion, including the one that was eventually transferred to Westbury House. That same year, Jay Phipps retained Mr. Crawley to design Westbury House itself.
“He was at last enabled to put into actual shape — in stone and marble, in iron and wood — the beautiful things which filled his mind,” Mr. Crawley’s biographer noted. To help him realize his vision, Mr. Crawley was paired with Grosvenor Atterbury, an architect of Gilded Age confections both on Long Island and in Manhattan.
At Old Westbury, Mr. Crawley conjured up a home of subdued, symmetrical elegance, its cherry red Virginia brick accented by cream-colored Indiana limestone and a terra-cotta cornice.
The house’s crowning glory was to be its broad-hipped roof of gold-hued Collyweston slate, a material Mr. Crawley likely knew from visits to a relative who lived near where it was mined.
The slate is made from a unique limestone found only in a narrow, three-foot seam 40 feet beneath the earth in Collyweston, a Northamptonshire village.
The laborious traditional production method required three to four winters to create slates. Once mined, hunks of stone called logs were laid in a field and kept constantly wet to promote repeated freeze-thaw cycles. Eventually, the stone began to split and workers separated it into sheets of slate with a hand-forged tool known in England as a cliving hammer.
Climate change badly damaged production in the 20th century, however, by reducing the number of frosts. Builders, meanwhile, began buying cheaper, reclaimed slates from farmhouses. By the early 1970s, all the Collyweston mines were shuttered.
But as buyers like King’s College, Cambridge, emerged, Mr. Smith reopened the mine beneath the land his father had bought as a builder’s yard in the 1980s.
Technological breakthroughs made the new slating business viable. Limestone logs are now mined by a robot called the Brokk 100, and clever innovations have reduced production time from years to about a week.
Instead of relying on nature to provide the necessary frosts, Mr. Smith said, he experimented with a “lorry-back freezer,” a frozen-food truck he bought on the cheap from the Tesco supermarket chain. He now uses refrigerated steel containers designed for carrying frozen goods on ships.
Among the four workers Mr. Smith sent across the pond this year to install 37,000 new Collyweston slates at Westbury House was 26-year-old Tom Measures, a big, shy man whose baby face is covered with a rugged brown beard. It was Mr. Measures’ ancestor, Arthur Osborne, who sailed on the S.S. Teutonic from Liverpool with a fellow slater in 1905 to consult on the original roof.
Mr. Osborne’s services were necessary because American workers had botched the roofing job, failing to allow for air circulation around the slates and using stiff Portland cement instead of a more breathable mortar mix. Many slates also broke during shipping and installation.
This time around, Old Westbury Gardens made sure to import Collyweston artisans.
On a recent frigid morning, as a bone-chilling wind sent snow flurries dancing, Mr. Measures and Conor Depellette balanced themselves on a plank supported by ladders near the ridge of the mansion’s 60-foot-high roof.
Working toward each other from opposite ends of a stretch of roof, the partners were mirror images as they moved along a horizontal wooden batten that had been nailed across the roof’s surface.
After setting a line of lime-rich mortar, each man would lay down a slate and push its bottom edge into the mortar bed until the excess oozed out like mustard from a sandwich. Then he would pick out the optimal next slate, expertly anticipating the width, thickness and texture needed to create the right functional and aesthetic relationship to both its neighboring slate and the two just below it.
When the pair met in the middle, each went along his half of the course of slates, driving a nail through a pre-drilled hole in the top of each slate and into a batten. The process, performed with a minimum of words, was intuitive and oddly intimate.
Later, as the pair tooled back the mortar in the slate joints to create a clean drip edge, the scraping of their trowels echoed across the countryside.
