A collection of long-lost Zora Neale Hurston stories, a heart-stopping novel about a migrant’s journey across Mexico, a look at the crisis facing America’s working class and more.
Lydia, a bookstore owner, had a pleasant life in Acapulco before the arrival of a violent cartel called Los Jardineros. After her husband publishes an exposé about the group’s leader in the local newspaper, her family is massacred, and Lydia and her young son must go on the run. This novel is a heart-stopping story of survival, danger and love, as they undertake the grueling journey to the United States.
Bernstein, an investigative journalist, maps the two families’ paths to the White House, describing their arrival in the United States as immigrants, how they amassed and hid wealth, and how they leveraged their political power.
Going back to 1979 — the height of the Iranian Revolution that brought down the monarchy and ushered in an Islamist government — Ghattas shows how Saudi Arabia and Iran’s fractured relationship has had profound consequences for the entire region. Ghattas, a Lebanese journalist who has covered the Middle East for decades, focuses on people whose lives were upended by the rivalry between Iran and Saudi Arabia, including the journalist Jamal Khashoggi, who was killed in 2018.
In this follow-up to his debut novel, “What Belongs to You,” Greenwell returns to his unnamed narrator, an American teaching in Bulgaria, who is now preparing to leave. Desire, longing and taboo all converge here, as the teacher reflects on the encounters and relationships that shaped him.
A new collection of short stories by the author of “Their Eyes Were Watching God” includes eight selections that were recently discovered in archives and periodicals. The stories here deal with race, class, migration and love, and are an invaluable window into African-American experiences during the Harlem Renaissance.
In Moore’s suspenseful new novel, two sisters in Philadelphia are driven apart by the opioid crisis. Kacey is an addict, living on the streets, while Mickey, a police officer, does her best to keep tabs on her sister. Kacey vanishes, coinciding with a string of killings, and Mickey races to discover what happened to her sister.
The premise for this timely debut novel is anything but simple: the perils of babysitting while black. Emira, who is African-American, is accused by a grocery store security guard of kidnapping her young charge, a white child. Emira is humiliated, angry, and hardly assuaged by her employer’s good-faith efforts to help. But soon the women are bound together as the ramifications of the episode follow them both.
Kristof, a New York Times columnist, and WuDunn, a former reporter at the paper, assess the inequality that’s endemic to the working poor, telling stories from across the country. The heart of the book is set in Kristof’s hometown — Yamhill, Ore. — where nearly a quarter of his classmates have died from overdoses, accidents or suicide. The authors are careful to show not just misery but moments of optimism and resilience, too.
When Wiener took her first job at a start-up, she was (like many liberal arts majors at the time) ambivalent about tech: intrigued by its promises but aware of the specter of dread surrounding it. “Uncanny Valley” recounts her years working in San Francisco as the tech industry was radically reshaping the country. She’s perceptive about her own motives as well as those of her colleagues. Her insightful, darkly funny memoir may confirm many of your worst fears about big tech and the people driving it.
Why do Gen X women seem to be struggling? As Calhoun contemplated her own malaise and unhappiness, she realized that most women her age were grappling with many of the same worries: insecure finances, stalled careers, the pressures of caregiving. In her book, she explores why for so many Gen Xers — who were raised expecting “to have it all” — it’s practically impossible to keep up.