Other legal academics took issue with his view that impeachment only happens when the House transmits its charges to the Senate.
WASHINGTON — Maybe President Trump has not been impeached after all, or at least not yet.
Impeachment happens, according to Noah Feldman, a Harvard law professor, only when the House transmits the articles of impeachment to the Senate.
That idea has left much of the legal academy unconvinced, including Laurence H. Tribe, one of Professor Feldman’s colleagues at Harvard. “The argument is textually bizarre, historically inaccurate, structurally misguided and functionally misleading,” Professor Tribe said.
Professor Feldman was one of three constitutional scholars to testify in favor of impeachment before the House Judiciary Committee this month. Jonathan Turley, a law professor at George Washington University and the sole scholar invited by Republicans to testify against impeachment at that hearing, also disagreed with Professor Feldman.
The question of precisely when impeachment happens would ordinarily be of interest to almost no one. But it has taken on at least symbolic weight given Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s statement that the House may not transmit the articles of impeachment until it is satisfied that the Senate will conduct a fair trial.
Professor Feldman set out his views in a Bloomberg Opinion article on Thursday and elaborated on them in an interview. History supported his position, he said, as the framers of the Constitution drew on English procedures under which the House of Commons brought charges of impeachment to the House of Lords.
“The act known as impeachment was an act that took place in the upper house when people from the lower house appeared at the bar of that other house and said, ‘We hereby impeach so-and-so for high crimes and misdemeanors,’” Professor Feldman said.
He added that the term itself supported his view.
But impeachment is functionally similar to a criminal indictment, and few people would say a grand jury had not indicted someone after voting to do so even if no trial followed. But Professor Feldman said that was a poor analogy.
Professors Feldman and Tribe used the same thought experiment to come to opposite conclusions on the question of when impeachment happens. Suppose, they said, that President Richard M. Nixon had not resigned in the face of pending impeachment, as he did, but after the House voted for articles of impeachment and before transmitting them to the Senate.
Professor Tribe took the contrary view. “We would all say, for sure, that Nixon had been impeached,” he said.
Professor Feldman was not without allies. “A vote to impeach without attempting a prosecution (like not delivering the articles) is unrecognizable historically as ‘impeachment,’” Jed Shugerman, a law professor at Fordham, wrote on Twitter.
The debate struck some observers as fit for a faculty lounge but of no larger consequence. The two Harvard professors were “engaged in what may truly, and literally, be described as a paradigmatic *academic* debate about whether the House has already impeached Trump,” Martin S. Lederman, a law professor at Georgetown, wrote on Twitter.
On that point, Professors Tribe and Feldman were united in their disagreement, if for different reasons.
Professor Tribe, an author, with Joshua Matz, of “To End a Presidency: The Power of Impeachment,” said taking Professor Feldman’s analysis seriously could lead to pernicious consequences.
“The only consequence is that if some time passes and they never present the articles the president can begin to say, with credibility, that he has not actually been impeached,” Professor Feldman said.
What was more urgent, he said, was questioning what he called Ms. Pelosi’s “silly, counterproductive strategy” of holding off sending the charges to the Senate.
On Wednesday, almost every news outlet in America published headlines saying that Mr. Trump had been impeached. Was that wrong?
