What effect does what we eat, and the food we waste, have on the environment?
These graphs about what we eat for protein and about what we waste by throwing out food appeared elsewhere on NYTimes.com.
By Friday morning, Dec. 13, we will provide the “Reveal” — the graphs’ free online link, additional background and questions, shout outs highlighting student comments and headlines, and Stat Nuggets.
What’s going on in these graphs? Write a catchy headline that captures the graphs’ main idea.
On Wednesday, Dec. 11, our collaborator, the American Statistical Association, will facilitate this discussion from 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. Eastern time to help students’ understanding go deeper. You might use their responses as models for your own.
Sign up for our free weekly newsletter so you never miss a graph, and add our 2019-20 “What’s Going On in This Graph?” live-moderated discussion Wednesdays to your Google calendar (1/8, 1/15, 1/22, 1/29, 2/5, 2/12, 2/26, 3/4, 3/11, 3/18, 3/25, 4/1, 4/8). Graphs are always released by the Friday before to give teachers time to plan ahead.
Our Nov. 20 graph “The Most Detailed Map of Auto Emissions in America” showed the sources of greenhouse gas emissions by sector of the economy — electricity, transportation, industry, and agriculture. We saw that transportation, and cars in particular, is a large and increasing source of emissions. This week’s graph from the New York Times article “Your Questions About Food and Climate Change, Answered” shows the sources of greenhouse gas emissions from the food we eat, specifically food that is high in protein. Food accounts for about 25 percent of all greenhouse gases. That includes raising and harvesting (agriculture), processing and packaging (industrial), and shipping (transportation). To make matters worse, about 20 percent of food is tossed, often into the landfill, which then releases methane that harms the environment.
We have showed you the graphs for greenhouse gases from the proteins you eat and the percentage of food you waste by food category. The article has three other graphs: greenhouse gas emissions by seafood and by kinds of “milk,” and drop in greenhouse gas emissions by changing from a typical Western diet to lower-impact ones. Notice and wonder with these graphs to get more insight on the effect what you eat has on the environment.
There is another article “Quiz: How Does Your Diet Contribute to Climate Change?” This has an interactive calculator that asks you to pick one breakfast, lunch, and dinner option that is most similar to what you ate yesterday. The site then shows your climate impact for these choices and compares you to other Americans. Here is a good starting point to assess how you could reduce your food carbon impact.
Here are some of the headlines that really capture the meaning of these graphs: “Doomed by Food” by Sage of Tumwater, Washington, “Cut Out Meat, Veggies to Eat! (Don’t Waste It!)” by Mrs. Lane ELP class at North Star Elementary School in Salt Lake City, Utah, “Mother Nature Has Beef with Beef.” by Sophie, Mady, Keegan, Lauren of Eden Prairie, Minn., and “Eating Away the Earth” by Lauren of Academy of Saint Elizabeth, in Morristown, N.J.
Which category of protein is best for the environment? Worst for the environment? Explain how you arrived at your answer.
Why do you think beef has such a large greenhouse gas emissions impact? Why do you think nuts have such a small impact?
Read this article, then make a list of ways to reduce the amount of greenhouse gas emissions. Which ones are being implemented in your area? Which ones could be implemented most quickly?
Below in the Stat Nuggets, we define and explain mathematical terms that apply to the graphs.
Join us Wednesday, Jan. 8 to notice and wonder about the “readability” of internet privacy policies that we are asked to read and confirm. We look forward to your responses between 9 a.m. - 2 p.m. Eastern time during the live online moderation.
A bar graph displays the distribution of a categorical variable by showing the number of values (frequency bar graph) or percentage of values (relative frequency bar graph) that fall in specific categories. A bar graph can be described by its mode, the category with the most cases.
The food eaten graph is a frequency bar graph showing the average greenhouse gas impact for 50 grams of protein. The food wasted graph is a relative frequency bar graph showing the percentage of food wasted or lost by food category.
The graphs for “What’s Going On in This Graph?” are selected in partnership with Sharon Hessney. Ms. Hessney wrote the “reveal” and Stat Nuggets with Erica Chauvet, a mathematics professor at Waynesburg University in Pennsylvania, and moderates online with Leigh Nataro, a mathematics professor at Moravian College in Bethlehem, Pa.