The California senator broke barriers but ran out of money as she struggled in polls. Her abrupt announcement is perhaps the most surprising development to date in the 2020 race.
The speech was a signal of the careful balance her campaign tried to strike throughout the year: leaning on her personal story as a daughter of Indian and Jamaican immigrants while offering policy preferences that toggled between the party’s moderate and progressive ideological wings. Ms. Harris sought to focus on incremental and deliverable change rather than the type of systemic upheaval popularized by rivals like Senators Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts and Bernie Sanders of Vermont.
But almost immediately after her campaign began, she faced questions about her policy core that resulted in damaging news cycles. She reversed her position on single-payer health care, removing herself from the “Medicare for all” bill sponsored by Mr. Sanders. She struggled with how to frame her record as a prosecutor, oscillating between defending it against progressive criticism and embracing it in a play for more moderate votes.
On a conference call with donors Tuesday, Ms. Harris said she arrived at the decision after conferring with her family over the Thanksgiving holiday. She stayed up meeting with advisers until 2 a.m. Tuesday, before concluding she had “no path” forward in the race, a person on the call said.
Ms. Harris said she would have needed to raise $5 million in two weeks, a goal she described as impossible. 
Over the weekend, after a New York Times article detailed problems within her campaign, Ms. Harris did a financial audit of her operation, according to a senior aide. One of Ms. Harris’s aides, who spoke with her about her decision to drop out, said that her instinct was to keep fighting but that she was told her campaign would have to go into debt in order to continue.
In her announcement Tuesday, Ms. Harris reaffirmed her commitment to her campaign’s unifying ideals. She is likely to immediately become a top-tier option for the party’s vice-presidential nomination.
Ms. Harris’s withdrawal will set off an arms race between the remaining presidential campaigns, as they try to lap up her top-tier roster of endorsements and staff members. Some of her donors have already begun to field calls from her rivals.
But it is unclear how much Ms. Harris’s exit will aid any one candidate in polling, considering how her standing had declined in recent months. She and Ms. Warren were competing for many of the same voters earlier in the year, but moderates like former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind., may seek a boost from her supporters in Iowa and New Hampshire.
Throughout her candidacy, Ms. Harris faced concerns about her political strategy and her campaign’s organizational structure. She relied on a stable of California political strategists, led by the longtime political operative Averell Smith, who did not heed warnings from grass-roots organizers to invest more heavily in early voting states like Iowa and New Hampshire. Instead, the campaign focused on later primaries in states with more nonwhite voters, including South Carolina and California.
Her campaign miscalculated. Mr. Biden remained popular with black voters, preventing her campaign from making significant headway in South Carolina. In California, Ms. Harris was increasingly boxed out, as candidates like Mr. Sanders and Ms. Warren excited the state’s liberal wing and Mr. Biden persisted among moderates.
Still, Ms. Harris had already qualified for the next presidential debate, scheduled for Dec. 19, the only nonwhite candidate to do so thus far. Without her, Democrats may have an all-white debate stage, though candidates like Representative Tulsi Gabbard of Hawaii and the businessman Andrew Yang may still qualify in the coming days.
“No matter your candidate, you have to recognize that going from the most diverse field ever in January to a potentially all-white debate stage in December is catastrophic,” wrote Leah Greenberg, a co-executive director of Indivisible, a national progressive group, on Twitter.
It was on an earlier debate stage in June when Ms. Harris generated one of the most electric moments of the race so far, challenging Mr. Biden over his record on race and busing. “I do not believe you are a racist,” she began. Mr. Biden was so taken aback, he cut his own answer short.
Money poured into her campaign and she spiked in the polls. But those numbers declined steadily in the months that followed, beginning when she had difficulty articulating her own position on mandated busing — undercutting her star turn.
Ms. Harris’s online fund-raising slowed in recent months, and large donors increasingly turned toward other candidates. In the third quarter of the year, she spent more than $1.41 for every dollar she raised, burning through millions. She stopped buying ads, both online and on television, slashed her staff in New Hampshire and retrenched to Iowa, where she spent the Thanksgiving holiday with her family.
In the days leading up to her withdrawal, as her campaign grew increasingly desperate, she surprised one donor who is not a major Democratic bundler by telephoning him to see if he could reach out to his associates who had yet to give. Another donor recommended to her that she leave the race.
Even as she struggled, Ms. Harris had assembled a coveted list of more than 130 bundlers who had raised at least $25,000 for her campaign, more than half of whom were from her home state, California, one of the deepest wells of Democratic cash. Ms. Harris canceled a scheduled fund-raiser with some of her top bundlers in New York on Tuesday just hours before the event. On Wednesday, she had been scheduled to attend an event in Los Angeles at the home of Sean Parker, the billionaire tech entrepreneur.
A pair of California-based Democratic strategists, Dan Newman and Brian Brokaw, had just secured the money and the implicit signoff from Ms. Harris’s campaign to begin a “super PAC” in support of her candidacy. The group, named People Standing Strong, was to begin a million-dollar ad buy in Iowa on Wednesday.
But it was not enough, as her campaign determined that she did not have the financial resources to continue. The group quickly began canceling its reservations.
Ms. Harris’s former rivals for the Democratic nomination quickly expressed their admiration for her on Tuesday.
Mr. Biden, campaigning in Iowa, called Ms. Harris “a first-rate intellect, first-rate candidate, real competitor.” He walked away when a reporter asked whether he would consider Ms. Harris as a running mate.
Maggie Astor and Alexander Burns contributed reporting.