Soccer|He Can Have Any Job He Wants. Right Now, He Doesn’t Want One.
Massimiliano Allegri is one of soccer’s top free agents. But he says he will only coach again when he is ready, and only when the job is right.
MILAN — Massimiliano Allegri is a doodler. Over the course of two hours, Allegri, the former Milan and Juventus manager, slowly fills the pad of paper in front of him. By the end, he has seven pages of scribbles and scrawls and sketches.
In some cases, the images are easy to identify: outlines of soccer fields, pockmarked with numbers to denote formations and arrows to highlight runs. Others are more hieroglyphic: in a corner of one sheet, a stick figure hangs, condemned, from a noose. Diagonally opposite, he has written the word “tablet.” It is circled, and underlined, so it must have been important.
Spend a little time in his company, though, and that is not the impression he gives. These last six months have been Allegri’s first break from soccer in 34 years: 18 as a rather better midfielder than he gives himself credit for — “I was a mediocre player,” he says, wrongly — and 16 as a coach, an Italian champion once with A.C. Milan and five times with Juventus.
It has become de rigueur, of course, for elite coaches to take sabbatical years, ever since Pep Guardiola declared himself so burned out after four seasons at Barcelona that he took himself off to New York for a year to refresh and recharge.
Allegri does not regard himself as being on sabbatical, though. That would suggest that he had become too consumed by his job, by his sport, by his ideas. He is just having “a break,” one that he feels he deserves, plain and simple.
He has not spent it traveling around Europe, watching training sessions, tracking his rivals or prospective employers, refining his thoughts. Where Guardiola took time off because he felt burned out, because he was too committed to soccer to keep on going, Allegri just has other interests.
Over the course of two hours, as the 52-year-old wields his pencil and turns his pages, this becomes something of a theme. If there is an orthodoxy in soccer, there is a good chance Allegri does not really subscribe to it.
He is coaching royalty, of course, the winner of six Serie A titles, a veteran of two appearances in the Champions League final. He was one of only 12 men invited to UEFA’s Elite Coaches’ Forum in November. He was the only attendee who does not currently have a job.
He is not prepared to take a risk on a team that cannot compete. In recent months, he has been linked with posts (some available, some not) at Europe’s aristocrats: Arsenal, Manchester United, Bayern Munich, Paris St.-Germain. Together with Mauricio Pochettino, he is the most coveted free agent in the game.
But while Allegri might be an accepted part of the establishment, he has a strong countercultural streak. He does not quite fit the paradigm of the modern manager. In an era when coaches are supposed to be obsessional, visionary philosophers, imbued by fans and news media with almost messianic, transformative powers, Allegri runs a little against the grain.
He said that he believes that clubs, and cities, have distinct “identities,” and that his job, really, is to adapt to those “intangibles,” rather than impose some grand, alien concept. Soccer, in his eyes, is “a team game defined by individuals: one against one against one against one.” He likes watching basketball, attracted by the emphasis on the talent of the individual.
He is a little dismissive of complex patterns of play: They are better suited, he said, to the small court of basketball than the vast sweep of a soccer field. “Soccer is art,” he said. He does not own a computer — though he concedes there is a family tablet — and is sceptical of a reliance on data.
He is especially scornful of what he sees as Italian soccer’s “extreme” reliance on tactics, its tendency to put “chains around the game.” He finds it odd that at Coverciano, where Italian soccer trains its coaches, the focus is on systems, and not how you “transmit messages, how you perceive the game.
For now, he has time for art, for books, for travel, for everything else in life. He has time to doodle, and he is enjoying it. Maybe, though, there is something in those snapshots of his subconscious, all those fields and formations. There is time for working through problems on paper, but deep down, there is nothing quite like solving them on the field.