LaPierre has faced many political battles over the course of his long career at the top of the N.R.A., but the personal stakes have never been higher than they have been in the last year. His organization sued Ackerman McQueen, its longtime advertising and public relations firm, which long safeguarded the N.R.A.’s secrets, accusing the firm of overbilling and fraud. He — perhaps temporarily — held off an internal campaign to oust him. And since April, the New York State attorney general, Letitia James, has been conducting a civil investigation of the N.R.A., which is chartered in New York. Now, veterans of the attorney general’s office and some within the N.R.A.’s inner circle believe James will weigh whether to seek a criminal referral related to LaPierre’s use of nonprofit funds for personal expenses.
In 1934, the N.R.A.’s 22nd president, an Olympic marksman named Karl Frederick, testified before a congressional committee weighing a ban on fully automatic guns, providing a view that would be heretical to his organization today. “I do not believe in the general promiscuous toting of guns,” he said. “I think it should be sharply restricted and only under licenses.” For most of the time since the N.R.A. had been founded — in 1871, by two Union Army veterans seeking to improve shooting skills — it has been open to dialogue on gun control. But in 1975, the N.R.A. created a lobbying arm, and the following year it added a political-action committee — and so began its transformation into an active political organization.
LaPierre came on board in 1978. He grew up mostly in Roanoke, Va., where his father was a General Electric accountant, attended Siena College in upstate New York, interned in the State Legislature and worked toward a doctorate in political science and government at Boston College before departing to delve into electoral politics. He helped a Democratic grocery-store owner named Vic Thomas run, successfully, for the Virginia Legislature. Working for Thomas, a stalwart N.R.A. ally, led LaPierre to a job lobbying for the N.R.A.
By the 2010s, the once-bipartisan organization had become almost completely Republican in its orientation, hardening political divides. Republicans coveted its money — the N.R.A. donated $20 million to six Republican Senate candidates in the 2016 election cycle — but also its ability to rally grass-roots support with endorsements and independent expenditure advertising campaigns. Even the Russians took notice. In 2014, Maria Butina, a Russian who liked to pose provocatively with rifles and who later pleaded guilty to conspiracy to act as an unregistered foreign agent, began appearing at high-level N.R.A. functions, claiming to be a gun rights activist.
“My attitude was, stay away from her,” LaPierre said, but he did not aggressively intervene, even as Butina coordinated a 2015 N.R.A. trip to Moscow. “I saw this itinerary that somebody had,” LaPierre recalled. “It’s got all of these meetings with this guy — what are they called? — oligarch so-and-so, and oligarch so-and-so, and deputy so-and-so. And I’m like: ‘You guys are all nuts. Are you crazy?’ ” But the trip, in which several donors and board members, including a former and a future N.R.A. president, met with senior aides to Vladimir Putin, went forward nonetheless.
Over the years, the N.R.A. had become more nonprofit in theory than in practice. Revenue passed $350 million last year, with some prodigious donors continuing into the afterlife (a foundation set up by Robert Petersen, who published Tiger Beat and Guns & Ammo magazines, has contributed at least $56 million since his death in 2007). Much of the money goes to the usual gun-safety programs and political contributions, but there is more and more to go around. In 2017, eight N.R.A. executives outearned the head of the American Red Cross, another tax-exempt organization, and one with 10 times the revenue, according to a previous analysis by The New York Times.
It was just after the massacre at the Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Fla., that LaPierre decided the N.R.A. needed a new lawyer. While the N.R.A. had faced many legal troubles over the years, the February 2018 attack, in which a former student murdered 14 students and three staff members with a legally purchased AR-15-style rifle, had renewed widespread revulsion toward efforts to block gun-control measures. Corporations fled. United and Delta airlines, along with the car-rental giant Enterprise Holdings, stopped offering discounts to N.R.A. members, and the First National Bank of Omaha stopped offering an N.R.A.-branded Visa card. The N.R.A.’s aura of invincibility was fading, and New York regulators were already investigating Carry Guard, an N.R.A.-branded insurance plan for shooting incidents, which the organization had seen as a key new revenue source. The group was unsure how to proceed.
That March, an unexpected call came in to William A. Brewer III’s law office in Dallas. Steve Hart, then chairman of the Washington law firm Williams & Jensen and a longtime N.R.A. counsel, wanted to know if Brewer might be interested in representing the N.R.A. Brewer was a $1,400-an-hour, sharp-elbowed litigator — and a Democrat. He has supported Hillary Clinton and Beto O’Rourke and fought pro bono in Texas against efforts to disenfranchise Latino voters. But what might seem at first like an odd fit actually made some sense.
The N.R.A. had plenty of Republican legal talent, including Charles J. Cooper, chairman of the Washington firm Cooper & Kirk, who is representing John Bolton in the presidential impeachment proceedings. But New York was controlled by Democrats, the N.R.A. needed to widen its bench and Brewer was a known quantity. Born in Long Island, he had taken to the role of Texas character, bringing a patricianly bearing and a flair for drama. Hart had worked with him on a number of cases over the years, and Hart’s daughter once interned for Brewer’s firm.
A few weeks after the call, Brewer traveled to Fairfax, expecting to meet with some of LaPierre’s lieutenants so they could size him up. Instead, he was ushered into the office of the man himself. Brewer laid out his views. The situation was serious, he said. Gun-control advocates and blue-state politicians were working jointly to thwart the N.R.A.’s ability to operate. “They believe that you guys are ripe to be taken,” he recalled telling LaPierre. A thorough self-audit and an aggressive legal response were required.
LaPierre was noncommittal, and Brewer had his own reservations. But a few days later, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, citing the Parkland shooting, directed the New York State Department of Financial Services to press banks and insurers, which it regulates, to review their relationships with the N.R.A. and “consider whether such ties harm their corporate reputations.” The D.F.S. has significant leverage, and was effectively discouraging banks and insurers from doing business with the N.R.A. In LaPierre’s view, it was a direct attack. “All of a sudden, this ghost ship, the Department of Financial Services of New York State, pulls up beside us and fires every cannon they have,” he said, estimating the state had in 2019 already cost the N.R.A. as much as $20 million in lost revenue from Carry Guard, and another $20 million in legal fees.
Brewer went to work. Rivals quickly came to view him as a Rasputin-like figure, whispering in LaPierre’s ear and billing the N.R.A. into oblivion, but he moved forward. He filed a First Amendment case that accused New York of blacklisting the organization simply for expressing its views. He also got the green light from LaPierre to undertake a broad internal audit. That summer, James, by then a leading candidate to become New York’s next attorney general, vowed to investigate the N.R.A.’s nonprofit compliance, alarming the organization’s lawyers. After she was elected, Hart warned, in an internal memo that I was able to review, that she was interested “in pursuing a dissolution case” — essentially prosecuting the N.R.A. out of existence — and even contemplated reincorporating the organization in Texas, Tennessee or Delaware.
In recent years, however, that work became increasingly dark, promoting the N.R.A. as the last defense against a threatening world. The apocalyptic promotional effort reached its apotheosis with NRATV, an online streaming service that evolved beyond gun rights into a sort of paranoid-lifestyle channel. Live production was expensive, and more N.R.A. dollars began to flow through Ackerman McQueen.
The N.R.A. says that NRATV’s budget grew from an initial $12 million a year to more than $20 million. “It got to a point where in 2017, I’m starting to look at our ad budget,” LaPierre said, “and I’m starting to really question, ‘How many people are watching this?’ ” The answer, according to an independent analysis by comScore, was: not many.
As N.R.A. money was funding NRATV, LaPierre was charging many of his expenses through Ackerman — charges that were then reimbursed by the N.R.A., an unusual arrangement that has attracted the attention of investigators. In a single May 2004 outing to the Zegna boutique in Beverly Hills, LaPierre dropped nearly $40,000, using a credit card billed through Ackerman and reimbursed by the N.R.A., among nearly $275,000 worth of Zegna purchases through 2017.
LaPierre also billed more than $250,000 in travel through Ackerman for trips to, among other places, the Bahamas, Palm Beach, Reno and Italy’s Lake Como. During a 2014 European trip to film at the Italian gun maker Beretta, he took a side trip to a Four Seasons in Budapest. Was it for N.R.A. business? He met with officials at “the firearms museum there,” he said, and “talked about a trade of whatever,” without offering more detail. Nonetheless, he said he had only used Ackerman McQueen’s credit card because his own cards had been hacked.
By Aug. 8, 2018, with relations breaking down and pressure building in New York, the N.R.A. sent a letter to Ackerman seeking specific records, including expenses billed to the N.R.A. Stephen M. Ryan, an outside attorney for Ackerman, wrote in a letter that Ackerman’s production of records had been exhaustive. Some of the requested documentation did not currently exist, he wrote, and any documents it produced could become fodder for regulators. He warned that the House of Representatives could change hands in the midterms. “N.R.A. may wish to proceed with caution in creating paper trails,” he wrote.
When the N.R.A.’s 2017 tax filings were released last year, they showed a nearly-tapped-out $25 million line of credit, backed in part by the deed to its Fairfax headquarters, and that the N.R.A. borrowed against insurance policies taken out on executives. Gun-control groups like Everytown for Gun Safety and Giffords were ascendant, amid outrage about mass shootings, and they outspent the N.R.A. in midterm elections.
Despite the setback, Brewer’s firm was charging $1 million to $2 million a month, stunning the N.R.A.’s other, increasingly marginalized lawyers. Some said a boutique firm didn’t have enough manpower to justify such bills. N.R.A. officials countered that the firm was not just suing New York, dealing with James’s office and juggling civil litigation, but also dealing with multiple congressional investigations of the N.R.A.’s relationship to Butina and Russia. Seeking to break the impasse, Brewer called Angus McQueen. In his recollection of the conversation, his father-in-law brusquely dismissed his request for help in getting information from another Ackerman executive, instead telling him something he already knew: “She’s in Dallas,” he said.
Ackerman, in a statement, said McQueen “would never waste his time or energy ‘offending’ Brewer.” Regardless, it was the last conversation Brewer would have with his father-in-law.
The N.R.A. had another problem. Earlier in 2018, Pete Brownell, the organization’s president, unexpectedly announced that he would not seek a second term. Christopher Cox, the N.R.A.’s top lobbyist and heir apparent, also wanted out. His house had been splashed with fake blood twice, and there was a protest outside his wife’s interior-design business. LaPierre said he talked Cox out of resigning, but Brownell he couldn’t keep.
“I think it was actually Angus that suggested Ollie North,” LaPierre said. McQueen had been trying to recruit the late-career Fox News personality, long past his Iran-contra scandal days, to do an NRATV show. Maybe he could be president as well? To LaPierre, it seemed like a good fit: “I considered him a friend, to tell you the truth.” The hope was that North, a retired Marine lieutenant colonel, would play the kind of role the actor Charlton Heston once had, as a charismatic fund-raiser and figurehead. But North appeared to have other ideas. While the N.R.A.’s presidency was traditionally unpaid, North negotiated an NRATV salary package above $2 million — paid by Ackerman and reimbursed by the N.R.A.
As Brewer demanded to review North’s contract, North began to ask questions about Brewer. In late February, he asked LaPierre and the N.R.A.’s general counsel for Brewer’s invoices but was rebuffed. In March, under pressure from North, the N.R.A. had another outside law firm, Morgan Lewis, review the organization’s relationship with Brewer. The firm found that Brewer’s “billing rates and monthly retainer, while high, are not unheard-of in the context of high-stakes corporate litigation.” North wanted yet another firm to review billing in more depth, but LaPierre thought it was a setup. “I can see a railroad when it’s right in front of me,” LaPierre told me.
In August, attorneys from James’s office met with North at the Washington offices of Williams & Connolly, home to Brendan Sullivan, who was by North’s side during the Iran-contra hearings more than three decades earlier. This time, James was seeking documents concerning “financial impropriety, mismanagement, misuse or waste of assets, governance failures or other wrongdoing,” according to her office’s subpoena to North. James had come to see him as a key cooperating witness, a once-unthinkable development.
Earlier this month, James’s office sent the N.R.A. a new subpoena, seeking records related to political donations, tax compliance, payments to board members and to the N.R.A. Foundation, an affiliated charity that diverted $36 million to the N.R.A. last year. The foundation’s move raised red flags among tax experts I spoke with, since donations to it are tax deductible, while donations to the N.R.A., which is not a charity, are not deductible. The foundation is also being investigated by Karl Racine, the attorney general of the District of Columbia, where it is chartered.
I asked LaPierre if he worried about his own criminal exposure. “I actually don’t,” he said, citing the safe-harbor provision. He called Brewer’s work “the largest forensic audit that’s ever been done on the association” to “see if there was anything we needed to self-correct.” Tax experts I spoke with, however, noted that such provisions did not generally apply to personal expenses, and in any case would need to have been addressed before James opened the inquiry. The investigation is being led by the charities bureau of the attorney general’s office, which oversees all nonprofits. Such investigations are typically civil procedures, but the office can refer criminal findings to another agency, or be granted criminal jurisdiction by the governor.
“If the expenses incurred by Mr. LaPierre were not legitimate business expenses of the N.R.A., and if he conspired with others within or outside the N.R.A. to incur those expenses in a way that would conceal them, then criminal charges could not only be brought against Mr. LaPierre, but also the others who were involved in the scheme,” said Sean Delany, a former chief of the charities bureau. Daniel Kurtz, another former charities-bureau chief, said the N.R.A. would have to establish that such transactions were “fair, reasonable and in the corporation’s best interest,” adding, “They can assert that, but it’s preposterous.” Kurtz did see some hurdles for a criminal case, based on what was known, because LaPierre was not said to have diverted money directly into his own pocket. But the attorney general can go to court and seek to restructure an organization’s board, oust its management, recoup misspent funds or even pressure it to dissolve.
