In the newest iteration of the Buy Black movement, entrepreneurs are creating marketplaces that pool black-owned brands in one space.
What used to be considered a statement of radical Afrocentricism is now little different from “buy green, buy woman-owned or even buy American,” said Maggie Anderson, the author of “Our Black Year: One Family’s Quest to Buy Black in America’s Racially Divided Economy,” via email.
Like those movements, buying black broadcasts one’s politics.  By buying black, consumers are consciously disengaging from the viral cycle of corporate ignorance, public outrage and corporate apology.
And in the face of today’s fraught politics and overt racism, it marks a return to a form of economic protest from another time in America’s not-so-distant history.
Buying black has been at the center of the fight for civil rights since Reconstruction. In the days after emancipation, black businesses flourished. Though the government never ponied up the promised 40 acres and a mule, many black Americans were able to build thriving general stores, barbershops and funeral homes.
Bustling areas of economic activity were called “Black Wall Streets” and could be found all over the country, most famously in Tulsa, Okla., Richmond, Va., and Birmingham, Ala.
Incensed by their success and competition, white Americans laid waste to entire communities, salting the earth with lynchings, tax sales, predatory land speculation and disenfranchisement.
Over the years, every prominent figure in the movement for racial equality implored their brothers and sisters to spend money within the community and boycott white businesses to, in the words of Martin Luther King Jr., “redistribute the pain” Jim Crow inflicted. The day before he was assassinated, Dr. King had a “buy black” message in his “I’ve Been to the Mountaintop” speech.
Paradoxically, integration hurt black businesses, marking a steady decline in the type of collective economics that had been the norm. Black Americans were hobbled as entrepreneurs, but not as consumers, as multinational companies began targeting them or creating separate products of sometimes unequal quality.
“In the ’80s, it became fashionable to abandon our own banks and businesses, to show and prove how equal we are, that we were good enough to buy products and shop at stores once denied to us,” Mrs. Anderson said.
But in recent years, as black culture sets trends but often doesn’t see any profits from it, many consumers are making a pointed return to spending their money at black-owned businesses.
There was a time when people looking for black-owned companies to patronize had a hard time finding them. Big-box stores and chains made convenience, not provenance, king. Why do the legwork of tracking down several different items when you can get everything you need in one place?
Now a new wave of entrepreneurs have created businesses — e-commerce platforms, bricks-and-mortar shops, subscription boxes and pop-up markets — that primarily or exclusively sell black-owned products.
The e-commerce platform We Buy Black may be closest to meeting the big-box model. Along with its marketplace, it also plans to create a supermarket called Soul Food Market in Atlanta. We Buy Black stands out for selling products you would think would be hardest to find — that is, “black versions” of things like batteries, laundry detergent and dog food.
“A segment of our community was doubtful that we would be able to produce everything we want and need,” Shareef Abdul-Malik, the chief executive of the platform, said via email. Over time, he said, We Buy Black was able to release everyday products to replace ones from larger nonblack-owned companies — products like toothbrushes, detergent, toilet tissue and shaving razors.
BLK + GRN, which opened in early 2018, has curated scores of high-quality wellness brands for discerning consumers, like Golde, a line of single-origin turmeric powders; the Honey Pot Company, a line of plant-based feminine care products; and Black Girl Sunscreen, which doesn’t leave behind sunscreen’s usual telltale white residue.
BLK + GRN has been successful from the start, with “around $100,000 in revenue” in its first year, Ms. Henderson said.
It also delivers for vendors. “On the wholesale side, BLK + GRN is our top performer, even topping the sales of our largest retail partner, Whole Foods Market,” Leigh Byers, the founder of a cosmetics and skin care line called Hunnybunny Boutique, wrote in an email.
Black spending power, currently at $1.3 trillion, is on track to reach $1.5 trillion by 2021, according to a report by Nielsen. The group outspends in proportion to its population in several categories, from ethnic hair care and beauty (85 percent) to bottled water (16 percent).
Yet most of their money goes to white-owned multinational companies. Diversity programs that help promote emerging businesses owned by minorities lump all minority groups together (including businesses owned by veterans, L.G.B.T.Q. and disabled people), Mrs. Anderson said. This can obscure who is actually getting the contracts.
Access to capital is a recurring barrier to growth for businesses of all stripes, but traditional financing options are especially difficult for black owners. When black entrepreneurs do get loans, they tend to receive lower amounts and at higher interest rates than other groups.
Black women, the fastest growing segment of business owners, are the least likely to receive investments from venture capitalists. They account for less than 1 percent of the $424.7 billion raised in tech V.C. funding since 2009, according to the 2018 Project Diane study conducted by DigitalUndivided, an organization that empowers women entrepreneurs of color.
Michelle Dalzon is confronting this reality as she plans the next phase of the Black-Owned Market, or theBOM, her three-year-old pop-up. Ms. Dalzon put on her first event in New York in December 2016 without sponsors. It was a huge success — guests came from as far away as Ohio to shop — but it depleted her savings.
“That whole market, altogether, was, like, $16,000 that I have not recouped yet,” she said.
Since then, Ms. Dalzon has worked with brands like Airbnb, Blavity and Jack Daniel’s, and introduced a pop-up experience in Boston as well as an e-commerce site. But now that the pop-up field has become oversaturated, Ms. Dalzon wants to build a permanent market that could be a multiuse space catering to black-owned brands.
Instead of going the V.C. route, Ms. Dalzon has opted for angel investment.
As much as the Buy Black movement calls attention to systemic issues, it also holds up a mirror to the community. Many black businesses say that even after addressing the discoverability issue, they still have the hurdle of overcoming black consumer bias toward black businesses.
That sentiment has led to two oft-repeated, though most likely apocryphal, statistics. One is that only 2 cents of every black dollar is spent with black-owned businesses.
The other, though debunked by a media student at Howard University, has grown legs and hands to wag a disappointed finger: A dollar’s life span is 28 days in Asian communities, 19 days in Jewish communities and a mere six hours in black communities.
From his table at a Black-Owned Small Business Saturday pop-up event, Robert Robinson, a brand ambassador for an all-natural sanitary napkins brand called Cherish, was blunt.
And unfortunately, some consumers believe black-owned means low quality. That myth creates another barrier: “the lack of forgiveness in our own community,” Ms. Porcher said. She used the example of McDonald’s notoriously out-of-order ice cream machines to illustrate her point.
Ms. Henderson agreed. “One bad experience colors the entire collective,” she said. “For some reason it seems like the fuse is shorter” for common errors that can occur when running a business.
To combat that stereotype, BLK + GRN ends up eating those losses.
“That means our numbers don’t look as good as they could because we are doing that despite the fact that we’re a small company,” Ms. Henderson said.
Much like civil rights leaders of the past, the new wave of black entrepreneurship is just as motivated by social and economic uplift as it is by profits. By returning to the collective economic principles of yesteryear, entrepreneurs and consumers are hoping to replicate the success of business leaders turned community guardians like Jackie Robinson and Madam C.J. Walker, the hair-care tycoon (and reportedly the first black millionaire).
At Reparations Club, Ms. McGilbert buys products upfront and pays vendors’ wholesale rates, instead of using a commission-based model, so they’re not waiting for a paycheck. And in having a business, she’s living a dream long held but never realized by her mother.
This latest push is an attempt to course correct and reverse that trend. Black business owners have a median net worth 12 times higher than a black person who doesn’t own a business, according to the Association for Enterprise Opportunity.
Black wealth through entrepreneurship could help shore up the middle class: Black businesses are the second highest employers of black people after the government, which has not been as steady an employer of late as it has been in the past.
“Buy Black” is the start of the conversation, Ms. Dalzon said, and an answer to the question of how to build generational wealth.
Support isn’t limited to one type of consumer either.
For those on the outside looking in, the Buy Black movement can be seen for what it is: a concerted effort to right a long history of wrongs. Or, it can be seen as an instance of “reverse racism” (which is not a thing), a hypocritical attempt to segregate or be exclusionary.
“How can anyone look at what is happening to the black community and not support the people from that community trying to show accountability instead of asking those who claim it is not their fault, not their problem, to help us?” Mrs. Anderson said.
