Justin Trudeau’s minority government means that everyone in the new Parliament is likely to be in campaign mode all the time.
Well, they’re back, and once again newscasts are brimming with clips from Question Period in the House of Commons. But don’t despair if you’re not a fan of Parliamentary debate. The all-new, postelection Parliament is only sitting for just over a week before cooling off with a six-week break.
The election, of course, left Prime Minister Justin Trudeau’s Liberals without a voting majority in the House of Commons. And that made the Speech From The Throne that officially kicked off the 43rd Parliament arguably of more interest than many.
Governor General Julie Payette, as Queen Elizabeth II’s representative, read it. But, of course, the text was the work of the prime minister’s office. There was, however, one tiny section that may have been the work of Ms. Payette, a former astronaut.
But, that aside, there was little that Mr. Trudeau had campaigned on or announced during the previous Parliament, including a ban on military-style rifles, a pledge to eliminate carbon emissions in Canada by 2050, tax cuts for all but the highest earners and introducing legislation to implement the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples within a year.
For Mr. Trudeau, the return of Parliament helped swiftly change the channel, at least in Canada, from his Buckingham Palace cocktail hour chatter about President Trump during this week’s NATO meeting in London.
And for Canadians who watched the live broadcast, the throne speech allowed a peek at the sometimes arcane ritual that surrounds parliament. It is a rare occasion when the members of the House of Commons pay a visit to the Senate chamber.
That already ritual-laden procedure was extra complicated this week because Parliament’s center block is closed for renovations. So members of the House piled into a fleet of Parliamentary minibuses at their temporary home in the West Block for the long drive of about 700 meters to the former railway station that has been transformed into the Senate.
They were invited to make that trip by J. Greg Peters, the Usher of the Black Rod, a Senate official whose many ceremonial duties include effectively acting as M.C. during throne speeches.
Professor Turnbull acknowledged that the ceremony, which comes from Britain’s Parliament, may seem elitist and not all that accessible to every Canadian. But she argued that it still had value.
A year after Canadian officials arrested her at Vancouver’s airport at the request of the United States, the Huawei executive Meng Wanzhou is still going through extradition proceedings and living effectively under house arrest. In an open letter this week, she wrote that she had experienced “moments of fear, pain, disappointment, helplessness, torment, and struggle,” while also thanking Canadian security officers for their kindness. But the open letter provoked a backlash in China. Among other things, Ms. Meng’s life in her luxurious Vancouver home was contrasted with the fate of Li Hongyuan, a former Huawei employee who was jailed for 251 days for demanding severance pay after his contract wasn’t renewed.
About 18,000 acres of potatoes in Canada have become frozen in the ground and can’t be harvested this year. But, perhaps to the dismay of physicians and dietitians, that won’t lead to a shortage of French fries.
In his look at what domestication of animals actually means, James Gorman found that there used to be an International Fox Show in Montreal. And during the 1921 edition, a fox breeder from Prince Edward Island brought two tame foxes to a dance “where the girls did the fox trot with these foxes around their necks.” As a bonus, the article also reveals that Summerside has an International Fox Museum and Hall of Fame.
The residents of a South Korean village enjoy tax breaks and other special benefits. 
China’s crackdown on fentanyl is genuine, but the drug problem is persisting. Dan Levin, whom you may remember from his time reporting with me on Canada, has grimly documented the toll drugs have taken on one American high school class in the 19 years since graduation.
New York Times theater critic Jesse Green was concerned that “Jagged Little Pill,” a Broadway show based on Ottawa-born Alanis Morissette’s music, would fail to mix pop music and musical theater. But he has declared it an NYT Critic’s Pick. “It feels like a summation: of our world’s worst ills but also the way song can summon resistance to them,” he wrote.
