The team was a winning machine at first, but then tailed off, giving its rivals hope for 2020.
It was a Formula One season in which Mercedes started off perfectly, but by the conclusion it was obvious that it did not consistently have the best car. That is giving other teams hope for next season.
Mercedes scored five successive one-two finishes in the opening five grands prix. Toto Wolff, the team principal, said it was “five fantastic performances.” He also said it was “not realistic” to expect the results to continue. He was right.
Mercedes set a record, winning constructors’ and drivers’ titles for a sixth successive year. Its top driver, Lewis Hamilton of Britain, won his fifth championship with the team and his sixth over all.
Despite its continued dominance, winning 15 of the season’s 21 races, Mercedes won only five of the final nine grands prix after the sport’s summer break in August, for a winning percentage of 56 percent, compared with 83 percent before the break.
Ferrari won three races and Red Bull one in the second half.
“You can see the top three teams are really close together in terms of performance, so it looks like exciting racing for next year,” Wolff said in an interview.
He said that in a recent conversation, a friend told him it was good for Formula One that Ferrari and Red Bull were winning races.
Hamilton, who finished 87 points ahead of his teammate, Valtteri Bottas of Finland, started from pole position only five times.
Since the introduction of the current turbo hybrid era in 2014, his previous lowest total had been seven.
“This car has not been easy,” Hamilton said after winning the title at the United States Grand Prix in November. “Midpoint of the season we were behind, and it’s been a real challenge.
He said it was also “the hardest year for us as a team” because of the “emotional roller coaster” of losing Niki Lauda, the team’s former nonexecutive chairman and three-time Formula One champion, who died in May.
Despite not always having the best car, Mercedes and Hamilton still found ways to win.
“In terms of race pace, which has been my weakness in the years before," he said, “I’ve made huge gains by working really hard with the engineers, every single detail of my driving and setup.
Ferrari could have won more than its three races, and it had to wait until after the summer break for its first victory. Charles Leclerc won back-to-back grands prix in Belgium and Italy; his teammate, Sebastian Vettel, won the next race in Singapore.
But Ferrari started on pole nine times. “It’s true we didn’t get enough victories,” said Mattia Binotto, the team principal.
Binotto also had to deal with issues with his drivers throughout the season. It culminated in their crashing out after a collision in the penultimate race in Brazil.
A few days after the race, the drivers and Binotto met at Ferrari’s headquarters in Maranello, Italy, to work out the problems this season.
There is a disparity between the drivers. Vettel is a four-time champion and has driven for Ferrari for five years. He is 10 years older than Leclerc, who has spent one season with the team and two in Formula One.
Red Bull finished third in the constructors’ championship for the third consecutive year. It was 87 points behind Ferrari, the closest it has been in that period.
The team switched to Honda engines at the start of the year after a long relationship with Renault. Christian Horner, team principal, said the partnership could improve in 2020. “It’s been a transitionary year for the team,” he said. “It was always going to be, with the first engine change we’ve had in 13 years.
Max Verstappen of the Netherlands was a career-best third in the drivers’ championship after winning three races and finishing on the podium six other times.
McLaren had its best season since 2012 to finish fourth, 272 points behind Red Bull but 54 ahead of Renault in a tight midfield battle, with Toro Rosso, Racing Point and Alfa Romeo close behind.
Williams again finished last. The team had its worst season, scoring one point. “We came into the season knowing we would be last, that we would be tugging around at the back.” said Claire Williams, the deputy team principal.
