Collectors seek out evocative vestiges of a city that has long been fading away.
Some 300 eager collectors descended on a drab hotel conference room in Midtown Manhattan last month for the annual international show hosted by the Metropolitan Postcard Club of New York City. Over two days, as they rummaged through the roughly 800,000 cards of the 30 dealers, most were hunting for obscure, beautiful or intriguing postcards to add to their collections. But an impassioned subset was after something far more resonant and elusive. They were searching for lost New York.
This quest meant different things to each of them, for every longtime lover of Gotham has his own, personal version of the vanished city.
And for Miriam Berman, a graphic designer who once worked in the 1902 Flatiron Building, the neighborhood she longed to stroll was the glamorous Madison Square of the early 20th century.
Members of the Metropolitan club generally meet monthly to swap gossip and vintage postcards, often keeping an eye out between gatherings for unusual items that will enrich one another’s highly individualized collections. It was Mr. Pisark who gave Ms. Berman her most prized artifact of old New York — as precious to her as a signed Babe Ruth card would be to a baseball card collector.
In 1912, America’s first public Christmas tree — a 63-foot balsam fir — was ceremoniously displayed in Madison Square, initiating an annual ritual imitated thereafter across the country. Yet in years of research, Ms. Berman had never found a single photographic print depicting that inaugural fir.
Ms. Berman said that before a friend took her to her first postcard show in the 1980s, she knew nothing about the history of the Flatiron Building or its environs. But her journey down the rabbit hole of postcard collecting opened her up to various vibrant, earlier incarnations of the area. In making the past present, her ever-growing hoard of cards taught her that she lives in a palimpsest of a city, layers of past streetscapes poking out from beneath the current ones.
Ambling along Madison Square West through the antique postcards and photographs she found, Ms. Berman passed the white-marble 1859 Fifth Avenue Hotel (a spot occupied today by the Fifth Avenue Building, home to Eataly) and stumbled upon Delmonico’s, the famously elegant restaurant built at 26th Street in 1876. Next door, she observed a four-story townhouse.
“It’s like putting together a great puzzle,” she said.
But there are eight million puzzles in the naked city, each collector assembling a unique one.
Among the postcard dealers at the Watson Hotel on West 57th Street was Hy Mariampolski, whose 12,000-card collection of old New York images offers a deeply personal exploration of the Lower East Side, where he grew up in the 1950s.
Some of his most abiding recollections are of the gracious, red brick and brownstone building at 425 Lafayette Street. Most New Yorkers know the structure as the Joseph Papp Public Theater. Some are aware that it was originally the Astor Library (of which Mr. Mariampolski has a black-and-white 1905 postcard).
But for Mr. Mariampolski, who was born to Polish Jewish survivors of Auschwitz in a refugee camp in Germany in 1947, the building was his first home in America. For decades before Mr. Papp transformed the library into a theater complex starting in 1967, 425 Lafayette housed the Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society, which sheltered Mr. Mariampolski and his parents when they immigrated in 1950.
Mr. Mariampolski acquired his first postcard at age 11, and as a globe-trotting market researcher in subsequent decades, he said, he haunted “flea markets and antique dungeons” from Budapest to Buenos Aires, buying up period postcards of New York mailed home by tourists.
His collection is particularly strong in cards depicting the Yiddish theater district on lower Second Avenue, where his parents sometimes took him in the 1950s. And he especially loves cards showing immigrants “earning their livelihood right on the street,” images that evoke the pushcarts he visited with his father on Avenue C.
In living his life with one foot in New York’s past, Mr. Mariampolski was right at home at the postcard show. In a back corner, Mr. Pisark, the department-store aficionado, was shooting the breeze with Bob Stonehill, a Queens native who has amassed 30,000 New York postcards, an archive-quality collection for which he built an addition on his house.
“Those were the biggies,” Mr. Stonehill said when his friend mentioned Macy’s and A & S, “but I just saw a card of H.B. Claflin,” a long-gone dry-goods wholesaler with a colossal 1861 Italianate building on Worth Street.
