Sam Esmail’s paranoid techno-thriller kept the major twists coming until the very end.
Let’s talk about what the series finale of “Mr. Robot” isn’t.
First and foremost, it is not a story of parallel dimensions and alternate realities. At least, not insofar as these things exist anywhere outside the mind. Despite appearances to the contrary, Whiterose’s huge MacGuffin didn’t send Elliot Alderson to a new world where the problems of the old one have been wiped clean.
That doesn’t stop him — the Elliot we know, the one with the black hoodie — from wandering around inside a place that sure looks like an alternate reality, though. In fact, the first half of the series’s two-part conclusion backtracks from where the previous episode left off, showing us how our version of Elliot wound up in the shiny happy alternate Elliot’s apartment.
It turns out that both Elliots exist simultaneously. This leads to a lot of confusion when our Elliot visits his childhood home and encounters his mother, or goes to his beloved Angela’s apartment and encounters her parents, including a friendly retiree version of the E Corp chief executive Phillip Price.
But there’s a sinister edge to all these encounters. After all, Elliot’s mother abused him, as did his father, and they’re both dead; here they’re cheery, loving, living parents, and yet Elliot’s sister Darlene is nowhere to be found. And every time the two Elliots brush against each other, earthquakes erupt.
After one such tremor, the new Elliot falls and hits his head on his radiator, paralyzing him. And our Elliot — who has taken to looking right into the camera when his voice-over narration addresses us directly — kills him in order to take his place and marry Angela, the woman he loves.
This plan falls apart pretty rapidly. A cop who is a dead ringer for the F.B.I. agent Dom DiPierro stops Elliot as he tries to load his alternate self’s corpse into his car. When Elliot flees to Coney Island, where the wedding is to take place, he’s greeted by a wedding party full of people in fsociety’s trademark money-man masks.
Before long he’s seeing the face of his alternate personality Mr. Robot on every passerby, like something out of an Aphex Twin video or “Being John Malkovich.” The E Corp executive Tyrell Wellick appears to shoot him and bury him in a shallow grave. Angela leads him to fsociety’s old headquarters, where she tells him that he’s not Elliot: “You’re the Mastermind,” she says cryptically.
Whiterose’s machine did not somehow create a better world. If it wasn’t clear already, a segment in which some kind of mental avatar in the form of Elliot’s therapist, Krista, makes it so: This is all in Elliot’s head.
But never mind the walk-back from the science-fictional explanation of this new world: The show has something even bolder in mind. Over the course of the finale’s second half, a major “everything you know is wrong” revelation emerges.
Our Elliot is not the real Elliot at all.
He is just one more alternate personality, the “Mastermind” who embodies Elliot’s rage and thirst for vengeance against the 1 percent and its destructive system. He took over shortly before the beginning of the show’s story, at which point he shunted Elliot’s “real” personality into the placid alternate reality he entered after having been knocked unconscious when Whiterose’s machine exploded.
That’s why that new world’s Elliot is so happy, so successful, so surrounded by friends and by love. Our Elliot, the Mastermind, needed to keep the real Elliot someplace that was part paradise, part prison — a place where he would be safe, yes, but also where he would feel no need to escape and retake control.
It’s the Mastermind incarnation of Elliot who wakes up in the hospital, his sister, Darlene, by his side. After informing Elliot that he has been credited with stopping a nuclear meltdown, destroying the machine (which never fully activated) and saving the world, she confesses that she knew she had been dealing with someone other than the real Elliot — “the one I grew up with,” as she puts it — all along. She kept silent because she treasured the time this Elliot wanted to spend with her, after she had pushed his true self away.
The episode concludes with our “Mastermind” Elliot joining the other manifestations of his shattered psyche — his abusive mother; his inner child; his protective Mr. Robot; and “the voyeurs,” a.k.a. us, in the audience — as they willingly retreat into oblivion. Esmail represents this with the light from a movie projector, which becomes a dizzying vortex of blurred images, a “2001” star gate at 24 frames per second.
But in a way we already said goodbye to “Mr. Robot,” or at least “Mr. Robot” as we knew it. The creator, writer and director Sam Esmail did not choose to end his series as a techno-thriller, or a deadly game of cat and mouse, or a science-fiction mind-bender, or a work of political agitprop. He — and his luminous cast, particularly Rami Malek and Carly Chaikin as Elliot and Darlene — ended it as an exploration of an alienated, mentally ill young man.
Elliot’s psychological coping mechanisms may have been … baroque, to say the least. But his underlying problems, from the childhood abuse to his fury at the condition of the world, are far from unique. Perhaps you share one, or both.
In the end, the most tantalizing fantasy “Mr. Robot” places before us isn’t a reckoning with the upper class or the creation of an alternate reality, it’s the possibility of reintegrating our shattered selves and healing the breaches caused by the people, and the system, that have hurt us. No, I’m not fully convinced by Elliot’s concluding declaration that standing our ground and refusing to change who we are is sufficient for changing the world for the better. I’m not even sure that it’s sufficient for changing our individual lives for the better.
But as another paranoid TV thriller once put it, I want to believe. And for making me want to believe, “Mr. Robot” has my thanks.