The gunman was identified by Russian news outlets as a 39-year-old loner who owned seven rifles.
MOSCOW — The gunman who attacked the headquarters of Russia’s feared security agency this week and killed one of its agents was an unemployed security guard and gun enthusiast, various Russian news outlets reported on Friday.
The gunman, identified as Yevgeny F. Manyurov, 39, wounded five other people before being killed by the police in the assault, which took place on Thursday, the authorities said.
While official sources of information have been largely silent, many Russian news outlets and social media accounts known for having connections with the security services have filled the vacuum.
He was widely described in the Russian news media as a loner who lived with his mother.
Ren-TV, a Russian news network, said that Mr. Manyurov lived in Podolsk, Russia, just south of Moscow, and that he enjoyed practice shooting in his free time and did not have many friends. The news network also published a picture of the gunman shortly after he was killed, showing what appeared to be a heavyset man with a full beard.
In an interview with Komsomolskaya Pravda, a popular Russian tabloid, Mr. Manyurov’s mother, Svetlana, described him as a private person who worked for a series of security companies. Mr. Manyurov had seven rifles, all registered under his name, Komsomolskaya Pravda reported, and he frequently won prizes at shooting competitions.
The shooting occurred just as President Vladimir V. Putin was congratulating the country’s top security agents in a ceremony at the Kremlin, less than a mile from the scene. For Russians, it carried a symbolic significance in that the security agency, the F.S.B., is seen as the most important and feared government institution.
Its fortresslike headquarters occupy an entire block in central Moscow amid a warren of buildings that house branches of the security service. Its basement rooms were used as torture chambers for its predecessor agency, the K.G.B., and during Stalin’s purges of 1937-1938.
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, the K.G.B. was split into several security agencies and its power briefly waned. But it was restored to its previous status by Mr. Putin, a former K.G.B. agent who headed the current security agency in 1998 and 1999.