LeBron James Jr. hit the go-ahead shot for his California high school team against St. Vincent-St. Mary, his father’s alma mater.
They crowded into Nationwide Arena, 13,000 strong, cheering every shot, roaring with every basket.
Bronny James, the son of the N.B.A. star LeBron James, made his Ohio debut on Saturday, and hit the go-ahead shot in the Sierra Canyon Trailblazers’ 59-56 victory over the St. Vincent-St. Mary Irish. Sierra Canyon is 8-0.
Watching, cheering loudest of all and pacing the sideline, was LeBron James, St. Vincent-St. Mary’s most famous alumni.
But his heart on Saturday was clearly with the Trailblazers, as he yelled tips and encouragement from his courtside seat.
James and Dwyane Wade decided months ago that they would have their sons pair up at Sierra Canyon — just as they did in Miami from 2010 through 2014, winning two championships together with the Miami Heat. Now their children are chasing a title, although Wade’s son Zaire was injured and did not play on Saturday.
LeBron James said his only regret so far was that his schedule with the Lakers takes him away from Trailblazers’ games.
Sierra Canyon has been a well-known program in high school circles for some time. The Trailblazers have won the last two California Open Division state championships and were ranked nationally last year with a roster loaded with blue-chip prospects.
Celebrity sightings are an everyday thing at the school where it costs $37,700 a year in tuition alone for high schoolers to attend: Recent Sierra Canyon rosters included the sons of the former N.B.A. players Scottie Pippen and Kenyon Martin. Marvin Bagley III of the Sacramento Kings played there. Kendall and Kylie Jenner attended the school. The rapper Drake has been to games as a fan.
Saturday’s game was part of a four-game run that will see them play in four different states: California, Arizona, Ohio and next up will be Nevada in a few days. They’ve played in Texas already. Games in Massachusetts and New Jersey are later this season.
Bronny James being compared to his father is inevitable. The attention he draws is also enormous. Videos of his first dunk, when he was 13, have been viewed on YouTube more than 20 million times, and he has 3.8 million followers on Instagram. For now, the family is trying to squash any talk of how good a player he can be or if he’ll one day make the N.B.A.
Tim Reynolds, the Associated Press basketball writer, contributed reporting from Miami.