Jay Sekulow is a trusted, telegenic presidential adviser more experienced in religious liberty cases than impeachment battles.
Despite having limited experience in white-collar criminal law or impeachment investigations, Jay Sekulow is representing the president in a broad swath of high-profile defense cases. He also has deep ties in the evangelical community, a key constituency for the president.
This is Jay Sekulow. He’s a lawyer for President Trump and a regular on TV news. “I’m not going to discuss what the president discussed with me about any event, in the context of attorney-client privilege.” His job? Supervising work on a raft of litigation facing the president and fervently defending him on TV. “And what you don’t have is a quid pro quo.” “And let me answer the question—” “Secondhand information—” “Hold it. Of course they were. Who are they trying to investigate? The president.” Sekulow has emerged as a strong asset to Trump, even though he has very little experience in white-collar criminal law or impeachment investigations, the type of allegations the president is facing. But Sekulow does bring Trump other key benefits: a telegenic TV presence and a bridge between two uneasy factions of the evangelical community. This is footage from an often-overlooked period of Sekulow’s trajectory: his years on the Trinity Broadcasting Network, run by televangelists Janice and Paul Crouch. Sekulow got his start on TV here, on a show called “Praise The Lord.” “And my feisty little mouthpiece is here tonight, Jay Sekulow. Hello, counselor.” Sekulow is a so-called “Jew for Jesus” and formerly served on the group’s general counsel. “So that was number one, reading the scriptures and then realizing that Jesus, Yeshua, came to the Jew first.” Sekulow not only appeared on the show, the Crouches also fundraised for him. On their TV show, the Crouches preached prosperity theology, or the belief that the stronger your faith in God, the richer you will be. “Don’t go to the Christian bookstore till you write me first, O.K, and send your telethon pledge in.” He would come on the show to give updates on various legal cases he was working on for the evangelical community. “Interestingly, on February 24 we’re going back to the U.S. Supreme Court on another case, again dealing with the censorship of religious expression.” These days, Sekulow doesn’t talk much about his time with the Crouches. Prosperity theology is generally rejected as heresy by mainstream evangelicals, an important constituency for Trump. Sekulow is also close to Pat Robertson, another prominent televangelist with strong ties to the Republican Party. Robertson hired Sekulow in 1990 as general counsel for his faith-based law firm, the nonprofit American Center for Law and Justice, which he founded as the conservative answer to the A.C.L.U. “Religious persecution is a situation where your life is literally put in jeopardy simply because of what you believe.” Sekulow also has become a regular on Robertson’s Christian Broadcasting Network. “First of all, there’s nothing in the Constitution, nothing in the Free Speech Clause, nothing in federal law that prohibits prayer.” “He’s being persecuted with facing the death penalty simply because he shared his faith.” “You said it exactly correct. We’re watching and witnessing an onslaught here.” Now he hosts his own shows on religion, law and politics. “Now I’m going to just talk to this as a constitutional matter, that is unconstitutional.” Sekulow’s time in the spotlight is only expected to grow as he leads Trump’s defense team, both in legal spaces and on the airwaves.
WASHINGTON — Jay Sekulow is a real lawyer, and he plays one on TV.
Mr. Sekulow, the coordinator of President Trump’s personal legal team, does not have an office in the White House. He is best known as a prodigious fund-raiser on evangelical television and a litigator for the Christian right, not for handling criminal prosecutions or executive power disputes. In 2016, Mr. Sekulow said he voted for Hillary Clinton, according to people close to him.
Yet with the House Judiciary Committee set to begin impeachment hearings on Wednesday and Mr. Trump enmeshed in legal battles on other fronts — like his tax returns, claims of immunity from prosecution and elements of his immigration and health care policies — Mr. Sekulow has emerged as one of Mr. Trump’s most trusted advisers and loyal defenders in the news media.
Operating under the name Constitutional Litigation & Advocacy Group from a co-working space in a Pennsylvania Avenue office building, Mr. Sekulow, 63, coordinates the efforts of eight outside lawyers enlisted to help Mr. Trump. He is in regular touch with the White House counsel, Pat A. Cipollone, and speaks frequently with the president.
A long list of lawyers have cycled tumultuously in and out of Mr. Trump’s orbit over the past three years: Donald F. McGahn II, his first White House counsel; Ty Cobb and John M. Dowd, who represented him in the early stages of the special counsel’s investigation; and Emmet T. Flood, who saw Mr. Trump through the completion of the Mueller report. Then there is Rudolph W. Giuliani, like Mr. Sekulow a personal lawyer for Mr. Trump, whose aggressive digging for political dirt in Ukraine has put him under federal investigation and led to the president facing a House impeachment inquiry.
But Mr. Sekulow has hung on.
He was recommended by the erstwhile Trump adviser Stephen K. Bannon to help guide Mr. Trump’s legal response to the investigation by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III. Like Mr. Giuliani, he has New York roots and spent decades as a pugilistic advocate on television, in Mr. Sekulow’s case in a natty on-air uniform of bespoke suit and three-corner silk pocket square.
Unlike Mr. Giuliani, he has avoided messy public conflicts that upstage his client, and he reflects the embattled president’s reliance on evangelical Christians, a crucial political constituency. He declined to be interviewed on the record for this article.
Mr. Sekulow was born in Brooklyn and grew up an observant Jew, first on Long Island and later in Atlanta, where his father, a clothing buyer, moved the family to take a job at a department store.
Mr. Sekulow attended Atlanta Baptist College, today known as Mercer University. It was around that time, he has said, that he became a Christian, in part because of the influence of a college friend, Glenn Borders, who led him through an exploration of the Bible. He would go on to be active in Jews for Jesus, an organization of evangelical believers of Jewish ancestry.
After graduating from law school at Mercer, Mr. Sekulow worked briefly at the Internal Revenue Service, then opened a law firm in Atlanta with a few Mercer classmates and his brother Gary. Working a network of contacts, including a local pastor, Mr. Sekulow swiftly moved from routine real estate closings and wills to a business renovating and flipping historic properties, at the time a popular tax shelter for the wealthy.
The venture imploded in 1986, a development Mr. Sekulow omits from his Jews for Jesus biography. Mr. Sekulow; his brother Gary; his father, Stanley; his law partner Stuart Roth; and their business associates were sued for fraud and securities violations. They declared bankruptcy, leaving a trail of unpaid debts.
Within a year of his bankruptcy, Mr. Sekulow reinvented himself as a litigator for the Christian right. As general counsel for Jews for Jesus, he argued before the Supreme Court and won a 9-to-0 victory in 1987, successfully making the case that by banning Jews for Jesus from distributing pamphlets at Los Angeles International Airport, the Board of Airport Commissioners violated the group’s First Amendment rights.
Mr. Sekulow won a string of Supreme Court cases in the early and mid-1990s by arguing that bans on various forms of religious expression in public places violated the practitioners’ right to free speech.
He won cases on behalf of a Christian club in Omaha seeking to study the Bible and an evangelical church on Long Island asking to screen religious films in public schools. He defended anti-abortion Operation Rescue activists who confronted women entering abortion clinics.
His streak ended in 2000, when he lost Santa Fe Independent School District v. Doe, a case involving a public school board’s practice in the small town of Santa Fe, Texas, of choosing a student to deliver a prayer before Friday night football games.
His legal successes impressed the televangelists Janice Crouch and Paul Crouch Sr., founders of Trinity Broadcasting Network and icons of what is commonly called prosperity gospel, the belief that following God yields wealth and health. Many mainstream Christians consider the theology heretical.
Mr. Sekulow appeared on the rhinestone-clad couple’s “Praise the Lord” TV show, where they solicited “love gifts” for the young lawyer they called “our little Jew” and “our little David,” battling the Goliath of the secular state.
The Crouches gave Mr. Sekulow his own show, broadcast from a mock courtroom in a TBN studio in Mobile, Ala., and produced by their son, Paul Crouch Jr.
“We got him launched,” the younger Mr. Crouch, who has since left TBN, said in an interview.
Mr. Sekulow still appears on TBN, which carries his show and hawks his books, like “Unholy Alliance,” whose blurb says it “exposes the attempts by fundamentalist Muslims to destroy our legal system and liberties.” Paul Crouch Jr. has also asked Mr. Sekulow to appear in “Trump 2024,” an election-year Christian documentary about Mr. Trump that assumes a second term.
In 1990, the televangelist Pat Robertson, a close friend of the Crouches, hired Mr. Sekulow as chief counsel for the American Center for Law & Justice, a group founded in opposition to the American Civil Liberties Union.
Over three decades, CASE and the A.C.L.J., funded by donations Mr. Sekulow solicits on TV and through telemarketers, have channeled tens of millions of dollars to the Sekulow family and their affiliated businesses, financing homes in Washington, Tennessee and France; private jet travel; and a chauffeur.
Over the years, several news outlets have investigated the groups and their payments to Mr. Sekulow and his wife, sons, brother, sister-in-law, niece and nephew. In 2017, The Guardian, citing documents, published an article saying that between 2000 and 2017 CASE has “steered more than $60 million to Sekulow, his family and their businesses,” including for property, production services and a private jet lease.
The same day, The Washington Post published an investigation of the organizations’ tax records, finding that between 2011 and 2015 the interconnected charities paid $5.5 million in compensation directly to Mr. Sekulow and five family members, another $7.5 million to “businesses owned by Mr. Sekulow and his sister-in-law for producing and consulting on TV, movie and radio shows, including his weekday program, ‘Jay Sekulow Live!,’” and $21 million to a law firm co-owned by Mr. Sekulow: Constitutional Litigation & Advocacy Group.
During the Obama administration Mr. Sekulow continued his work at the center, fighting against the Affordable Care Act and defending an Operation Rescue activist sued over “undercover” videos filmed at a Planned Parenthood clinic. During the recession, the group used telemarketers to solicit “sacrificial gifts” from struggling people by phone, according to the Guardian article.
Mr. Robertson said in an interview that if Mr. Sekulow were being “compensated as an attorney for the work that he does, he would be making in the seven-figure range.” Unlike Mr. Giuliani, Mr. Sekulow is paid for representing Mr. Trump; Mr. Sekulow’s son Jordan and Mr. Roth are also on the Trump payroll.
Every weekday Mr. Sekulow takes to the Christian airwaves, amplifying White House talking points and raising money for the A.C.L.J. Last month he and his son worked to impugn the impeachment inquiry’s “alleged whistle-blower,” casting him as part of an Obama administration “chain of deep staters.” As witnesses testified before the House Intelligence Committee, his show promoted its “exclusive live analysis of Adam Schiff’s phony, lacking-due-process” hearings.
Whether he will argue the case himself before the Supreme Court has not yet been decided.
Charlie Savage contributed reporting. Kitty Bennett contributed research.