It started with hysteria. As the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences planned the 72nd Oscars, a growing panic seized the nation: What if all the computers suddenly self-destruct on Jan. 1, 2000, crippling life as we know it?
“This is not one of the summer movies where you can close your eyes during the scary parts,” President Bill Clinton warned of the fear of the looming Y2K bug in a 1998 speech.
Americans stockpiled food, bought guns and prepared for the apocalyptic worst. But not the academy. As Sid Ganis, a former academy president then on the Board of Governors, recalled, “The contingency plan was we scratched our heads and said, ‘Oh my goodness, what are we going to do?’” As the clock struck 12:01 a.m. on the new millennium, the computers survived. But a string of foreboding events soon paved the way for a wholly unpredictable 2000 Oscars.
First, thousands of ballots vanished. Ten mail bags containing about 80 percent of the voting sheets were misrouted, resulting in a mad dash to resend new mailers three weeks before the ceremony.
Then, while the academy was still sorting out the ballot issue, 55 Oscars were stolen off a delivery truck in a crime, if not of passion, of easy opportunity for two men who worked for the Roadway Express transportation company.
With the ballots and trophies under control, the show itself promised a hip new Oscars for a brave new millennium. The “South Park” creators Trey Parker and Matt Stone walked the red carpet in copies of Gwyneth Paltrow’s pink Ralph Lauren 1999 Oscars gown and Jennifer Lopez’s iconic Versace look from the 2000 Grammys. Their ensembles delighted Michael Caine and horrified Gloria Estefan, and Parker and Stone later admitted they’d eaten sugar cubes laced with LSD immediately prior.
The ceremony proved equally unpredictable. Other than bringing back Crystal for his fourth round as host, the producers Richard and Lili Zanuck aimed to modernize the evening in nearly every way. They hired one of People’s “most beautiful people” of 1999, the pop songwriter Burt Bacharach, as co-musical director, and for the first time in Oscars history, a D.J. and turntables appeared in the orchestra pit. Giant high-def screens were added to the stage, where presenters included Erykah Badu and LL Cool J, as well as the stars of “Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me” and the upcoming “Charlie’s Angels” movie.
An evenly spread slate of nominees and vicious campaigning meant there were no sure bets ahead of the show. Ill-fated couples like Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman, and Ethan Hawke and Uma Thurman, looked on as “American Beauty” triumphed for best picture over the box-office favorite “The Sixth Sense,” and “The Matrix” swept the sound and visual effects categories.
While the Oscar veterans Kevin Spacey (“American Beauty”) and Caine (“The Cider House Rules”) took home the actor gold, the actress categories went to upstarts. Hilary Swank, then a virtual unknown who earned $3,000 for her starring role as a transgender man in “Boys Don’t Cry,” beat the likes of Annette Bening, Meryl Streep and Julianne Moore to win best actress.
In post-show recaps, Swank’s victory would be overshadowed by that of another first-time nominee: Angelina Jolie. As the then 24-year-old took the stage for her supporting actress win for “Girl, Interrupted,” she joyfully declared, “I’m so in love with my brother right now.” That remark coupled with an on-the-lips kiss with her sibling, James Haven, at the Vanity Fair after-party that night, sparked widespread outrage and a “Saturday Night Live” sketch.
And then there was “Blame Canada.” The nominated song from “South Park: Bigger, Longer & Uncut” was performed in the movie by the voice actress Mary Kay Bergman and Trey Parker, but following Bergman’s death in 1999, showrunners sought to put a new spin on the expletive-laden satirical track. Cue: Robin Williams. The comedian appeared onstage with duct tape over his mouth, ripped it off, screamed, “Oh my God, they killed Kenny!” and proceeded to dance and sing with a flock of characters, including a high-kicking chorus line of women dressed as Canadian Mounties. The network censors were sweating.
But the most buzzed about act of the night wasn’t any of those songs (or the eventual winner, Phil Collins’s “Tarzan” tearjerker, “You’ll Be in My Heart”), it was a star-studded tribute medley rife with off-camera drama involving Whitney Houston and a tearful Garth Brooks.
In the end, the trophy heist hype and a relative “cool” factor proved irresistible to audiences. The 2000 telecast drew more than 46 million viewers, an improvement on the 1999 show and numbers ABC could only dream about today.
