Asia Pacific|As Protests Rage on Citizenship Bill, Is India Becoming a Hindu Nation?
As Protests Rage on Citizenship Bill, Is India Becoming a Hindu Nation?
Several people have been killed as unrest spreads to new corners of the country. Many see the passage of a new law as anti-Muslim.
When students at a university in India’s capital protested a controversial citizenship bill, the police responded with violence. We analyzed the footage to show the tactics officers are using.
Days of protests at a university in India’s capital, New Delhi, have led to a violent crackdown by police. Officers beating unarmed protesters with large sticks, [explosion] and firing tear gas in the streets and inside university buildings. We reviewed dozens of videos that have led to accusations that the police used excessive force against protesters. Protests at Jamia Millia Islamia University in New Delhi are in response to a new citizenship law that will favor every major religion in South Asia except Islam. The Indian prime minister says the measure helps persecuted minority migrants. But students and teachers at the predominantly Muslim university are protesting the bill, which they say will exclusively target Muslims. Over the course of three days, the police and protesters clashed at the university. Some protesters were armed with sticks and rocks. But the protests were largely peaceful. But videos show how the police responded swiftly and indiscriminately. In one video shot in a nearby residential area, a group of women confront officers. But the officers are determined to stay. When a man tries to shield the women, he is grabbed from behind by officers and pulled to the ground. He appeared to be unarmed. But at least five officers beat him. In a video filmed inside the university by a reporter with The Indian Express, and widely circulated on Twitter, officers are seen beating protesters with large, heavy sticks. None of these protesters appear to be armed. One of the most harrowing examples of the police’s questionable tactics happened at the university’s library. A video from the library captures what appears to be a flash-bang grenade, a device often used to scare and disperse a crowd. Eyewitnesses say the police entered the campus and fired tear gas at protesters and students who were studying inside. Footage of the aftermath shows tear gas still lingering in the air. United Nations guidelines state that tear gas should never be used in confined spaces. Dozens of students were hospitalized after the protest. But the police say they used maximum restraint in their response. The protests against the controversial citizenship law have spread throughout India, galvanizing opposition groups, and setting up the prospect of more protests and more violence.
NEW DELHI — Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s government has rounded up thousands of Muslims in Kashmir, revoked the area’s autonomy and enforced a citizenship test in northeastern India that left nearly two million people potentially stateless, many of them Muslim.
But it was Mr. Modi’s gamble to pass a sweeping new citizenship law that favors every South Asian faith other than Islam that has set off days of widespread protests.
The law, which easily passed both houses of Parliament last week, is the most overt sign, opponents say, that Mr. Modi intends to turn India into a Hindu-centric state that would leave the country’s 200 million Muslims at a calculated disadvantage.
Indian Muslims, who have watched anxiously as Mr. Modi’s government has pursued a Hindu nationalist program, have finally erupted in anger. Over the past few days, protests have broken in cities across the country.
Mr. Modi’s government has responded by calling out troops, shutting down the internet and imposing curfews, just as it did when it clamped down on Kashmir. In New Delhi, police officers beat unarmed students with wooden poles, dragging them away and sending scores to the hospital. In Assam, they shot and killed several young men.
India’s Muslims had stayed relatively quiet during the other recent setbacks, keenly aware of the electoral logic that has pushed them to the margins. India is about 80 percent Hindu, and 14 percent Muslim, and Mr. Modi and his party won a crushing election victory in May and handily control the Parliament.
The world is now weighing in, too. United Nations officials, American representatives, international advocacy groups and religious organizations have issued scathing statements saying that the citizenship law is blatantly discriminatory. Some are even calling for sanctions.
Critics are deeply worried that Mr. Modi is trying to wrench India away from its secular, democratic roots and turn this nation of 1.3 billion people into a religious state, a homeland for Hindus.
Mr. Modi is no stranger to communal violence. The worst bloodshed that India has seen in recent years exploded on his watch, in 2002, in Gujarat, when he was the top official in the state and clashes between Hindus and Muslims killed more than 1,000 people — most of them Muslims.
Mr. Modi was widely blamed for not doing enough to stop it. Courts have cleared him, but many people believe he was at least partly responsible for the brutality that unfolded.
But this contentious citizenship law, which paves a special path for non-Muslim migrants in India to become citizens, has galvanized the opposition. Rival opposition leaders who usually can’t agree on anything are planning protests together. Students from across the country are rallying to each other’s defense. Each episode of harsh police action captured by mobile phone and beamed around cyberspace catalyzes more sympathy, more protests — and more prospects for violence.
Some analysts are quick to point out that the course Mr. Modi’s party is charting could lead to an India dominated by one faith and one viewpoint, where existential tensions hold back the economy and hamstring politics — as embodied by Pakistan, India’s struggling, Islamic archenemy next door.
"We’re chasing a failed dream,’' said Yogendra Yadav, a political commentator.
The legislation follows hand in hand with a divisive citizenship test conducted this summer in one state in northern India and possibly soon to be expanded nationwide.
All residents of Assam, along the Bangladesh border, had to produce documentary proof that they or their ancestors lived in India since 1971. Around two million of Assam’s population of 33 million — a mix of Hindus and Muslims — failed to pass the test and now risk being rendered stateless. Huge new prisons are being built to house anyone determined to be an illegal immigrant.
A widespread belief is that the Indian government will use both these measures — the citizenship tests and the new citizenship law — to strip away rights from Muslims who have been living in India for generations. The way this will happen, many Muslim Indians fear, is that they will be asked to produce old birth certificates or property deeds necessary to prove citizenship and they will be unable to do so. And while Hindu residents in the same situation will be given a pass, it seems, Muslim residents will not have the same legal protections.
The protests started last week in Assam, led by Hindus and joined by Assamese Muslims and Christians. Many Hindus in Assam don’t like the new law either: They fear it could open the floodgates to poor migrants who will settle in Assam and take their land. And so, despite the legislation’s potential to drive a sectarian wedge across India, in Assam it backfired, unifying protesters across religious lines.
Witnesses said that security forces fired live ammunition into a crowd, killing a 17-year-old Christian student as he walked home. Outraged demonstrators then burned down train stations and attacked the police.
On Sunday, the protests spread to Delhi. Students of Jamia Millia Islamia University, a predominantly Muslim institution, gathered peacefully, witnesses said. But chaos broke out after a separate group of violent protesters joined the fray and began clashing with the police, witnesses said.
Mr. Modi’s supporters have dismissed the protesters as being exclusively Muslim, or from a die-hard political opposition group. But in Assam, many protesters said they had voted for the Bharatiya Janata Party and now regretted it.
On Monday morning, some 5,000 protesters, of many faiths, gathered in central Guwahati, Assam’s capital.
Reporting was contributed by Suhasini Raj from Guwahati, India, by Vindu Goel from Mumbai and by Hari Kumar, Shalini Venugopal, Sameer Yasir and Karan Deep Singh from New Delhi.