The results are from the annual Arctic report card, a peer-reviewed assessment produced by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration that takes a broad look at the effects of climate change in the region and compares current findings with the historical record. The Arctic is of interest to researchers because it is warming twice as fast as the rest of the planet, causing changes both in the ocean and on land.
In July, Reykjavik, Iceland, experienced its warmest month on record. Similarly, Anchorage, Alaska, set heat records in June, July and August.
But the extreme temperatures were not confined to summer. In Svalbard, Norway, December temperatures were 10 degrees Fahrenheit, or about 5.5 degrees Celsius, warmer than the 1981-2010 temperature average. A study published this year in the journal Science Advances found that, under a high-emissions scenario, late autumn temperatures in some parts of the Arctic could reach more than 23 degrees Fahrenheit warmer than the historical average.
In particular, the Bering Sea, site of some of the largest commercial fisheries in the United States, saw unprecedented reductions in sea ice for the second winter in a row. What sea ice does exist tends to be younger, thinner and more susceptible to melting.
The loss of sea ice changes how much heat is in the ocean, which in turn affects fisheries and ecosystems, creating cascading effects within this interconnected system. Among those affected are the more than 70 Indigenous communities in Alaska including the Inupiat, Central Yupik, Cupik, St. Lawrence Island Yupik and Unangan peoples. For the first time in the report’s 14-year history, it included input from some of these communities.
They said that the warming Arctic was shrinking their access to the food resources that have long provided the basis for their communities’ resilience.
The delayed and more drawn-out autumn freeze leaves communities isolated during a growing part of the year. That’s because they can’t use boats to travel to neighboring communities during this time but also can’t safely travel on top of the ice. At the same time, changing ocean temperatures are shifting food seasons. In Wales, Alaska, an Inupiat community that is the westernmost settlement in the United States, clams that once used to be harvested in the fall are now ready in summer.
Similarly, whole Arctic communities have been built on permafrost. Because of climate change, that ground is now thawing. As it does, it causes roads to slump and houses to collapse.
But what happens in the Arctic doesn’t stay in the Arctic. Permafrost sequesters twice as much heat-trapping carbon dioxide as is currently in the atmosphere. As that ground thaws it releases that carbon into the atmosphere, exacerbating climate change. Researchers say that if too much permafrost thaws it will create a self-reinforcing cycle wherein thawing permafrost will lead to still more thawing permafrost, which in turn will make climate change worse. Recent observations of carbon flows in Alaskan permafrost have found that more carbon is being released than stored.
