Two others were injured, one critically, in the shooting at a housing complex. The gunman, a 66-year-old resident, was found dead of what appeared to be a self-inflicted gunshot wound, the police said.
A 66-year-old resident at a housing complex in Westerly, R.I., shot two employees and a neighbor on Thursday, setting off a manhunt before he was found dead in his room, the police said.
All three victims were women. Julie Cardinal, 47, a manager at the complex, was identified on Friday as the woman who had been killed. Another manager, Robin Moss, 38, was in critical condition. The third, Donna Thornley, a 66-year-old resident, was in stable condition, Chief Shawn Lacey of the Westerly Police Department said in a statement.
The gunman was identified as Joseph Giachello, a resident at the complex, Babcock Village, which offers affordable housing for older adults and people with disabilities. The motive for the attack was not clear.
Officers arriving on the scene pulled surveillance camera footage to identify the suspect and entered his room with a master key, Chief Lacey said at a news conference on Thursday. The man was found in the room with what appeared to be a self-inflicted gunshot wound. The authorities said they recovered a weapon at the scene.
Angelo Fusaro, 65, a resident at the complex, said he had been in his third-floor apartment when he heard a shot and a scream. Rushing to a window in the hallway, which looks down on the lobby, he saw a complex employee lying on the floor. Nearby was another victim, a resident in her 60s, who was bleeding from the neck.
“It was horrible,” Mr. Fusaro said. The police soon arrived, saw him in the window and ordered him to come down the elevator with his hands up.
When Mr. Fusaro stepped into the elevator, he saw shell casings. “I could smell the gunpowder,” he said. The gunman, he later realized, had fled back to his apartment after the shooting.
The employee who was killed had recently started working there, Mr. Fusaro said. He described her as a conscientious worker who took residents’ complaints seriously.
The shooting prompted a two-hour lockdown at schools in Westerly, a waterfront town on the southern shore of Rhode Island, near the Connecticut border. Residents reported a heavy police presence, including armored trucks and helicopters, as the authorities searched for the suspect.
The Connecticut State Police dispatched troopers along the border and in the town of Stonington, Conn., which sits next to Westerly, to help with the investigation, a spokeswoman said.
The Boston Field Division of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms & Explosives tweeted that special agents from the bureau’s Providence office were on the scene to help the local police.
Jacquelyn Smith, an administrator at Christ Episcopal Church, about a mile from the shooting, said the church had been locked down afterward. Seven people were there at the time.
As they waited for an all-clear, they alerted neighbors, friends and relatives about the shooting, she added.
“We’re all as concerned about ourselves as we are our community and the people in it,” she said.
Town Councilor Karen A. Cioffi said Babcock Village was a “normally quiet” public housing complex on Cross Street, about eight blocks from her home.
Derrick Bryson Taylor and Robert Liguori contributed reporting. Susan C. Beachy contributed research.