Mr. Simon, light of touch yet breathtakingly pyrotechnic, was known for his interpretations of the Romantic literature.
Abbey Simon, an American pianist celebrated for a style that harked back to an earlier, golden age of keyboard prowess, died on Wednesday at his home in Geneva. He was 99.
His death was announced by his son, Jonathan.
Mr. Simon, who had appeared on concert stages around the world since the early 1940s, was often called a pianist’s pianist — greatly admired by musicians and critics if not strictly a household name. Known in particular for his interpretations of the Romantic literature, he was lauded for the fleetness of his fingers, the lightness of his tone and the thoughtfulness of his interpretations.
Although some critics faulted Mr. Simon’s playing for being overly cerebral, most concurred that in his pianism and choice of repertoire he recalled late-19th and early-20th-century virtuosos like Josef Hofmann, who had been his teacher. The style of both men was breathtakingly pyrotechnic yet no less sensitive for it — in stark contrast to the more bombastic approach that came to be regarded as a hallmark of many younger pianists.
Mr. Simon was widely heard on recordings; as a soloist with orchestras, including the New York Philharmonic, the Chicago Symphony and the Philadelphia Orchestra; and, in particular, on recital stages, including those of Carnegie Hall and Town Hall in New York.
The son of Solomon Simon, a dentist, and the former Vera Sheldin, Abbey Simon was born in New York on Jan. 8, 1920, and reared in the Bronx.
At 3, Abbey could pick out perfectly on the piano any tune he heard on the radio; he began formal lessons at 5.
At 10, he received a scholarship to Curtis Institute of Music in Philadelphia. Taking up the scholarship the next year, he moved to Philadelphia with his mother and studied there with Hofmann.
In 1940, Mr. Simon was a winner of the Walter W. Naumburg Foundation competition, a prestigious musical honor that carried a debut recital at Town Hall. After Army service in World War II he resumed his career, touring nationwide. Throughout much of the ’40s, he appeared annually in recital at Carnegie Hall.
After the success of his first European tour in 1949, Mr. Simon moved to Europe for more than a decade, living primarily in Switzerland.
But Mr. Simon’s long sojourn in Europe, whose musical climate appeared more tolerant of inspired imperfection, let him grow as he might not have done otherwise, he said.
“Getting away gave me the possibility of having thoughts of my own, of developing my own personality, a chance to find myself, even the chance to play badly!” he told The Times in 1960 on a rare visit to New York.
Mr. Simon, who also taught over the years at Indiana University and the Juilliard School, had homes in Houston and Geneva. His wife, the former Dina Levinson, died in 2014. In addition to his son, he is survived by two grandchildren.
If Mr. Simon, as The Times reported in 1988, sometimes bristled at the appellation “pianist’s pianist,” with its implied, if rarefied, marginalization, he was ultimately sanguine about his professional course.
Michael Levenson contributed reporting.