Xiyue Wang was a graduate student at Princeton who had been sentenced to 10 years in prison on two charges of espionage that U.S. officials have called groundless.
In exchange for Mr. Wang’s release, the United States freed Masoud Soleimani, an Iranian scientist who was arrested at a Chicago airport last year and was convicted on charges of violating American trade sanctions against Iran. The Justice Department has dropped those charges. American officials said that Mr. Soleimani’s release was a low price to pay for Mr. Wang’s freedom because Mr. Soleimani was expected to be released from prison as early as next month under a plea agreement.
The senior American officials, speaking only on the condition of anonymity to discuss the delicate nature of the exchange, said they saw no indication that the exchange portended a larger dialogue with Iran.
But another senior administration official who briefed reporters on Saturday said he was “hopeful” the trade could signal a future willingness by Iran to discuss its broader relationship with Washington. Mr. Trump himself appeared to be thinking the same way. “Thank you to Iran on a very fair negotiation. See, we can make a deal together!” he tweeted on Saturday.
Mr. Trump has shown a particular interest in prisoner and hostage releases, highlighting them with triumphal White House welcomes. A senior administration official said on Saturday that he expected Mr. Trump would like to meet with Mr. Wang.
Speaking to reporters at the White House on Saturday, Mr. Trump, always keen to outdo his predecessor, noted that Mr. Wang “was taken during the Obama administration. We got him back during the Trump administration.” He also referred to the exchange as a “one-on-one hostage swap.” It was unclear whether he intended to suggest that the United States had been holding Mr. Soleimani on extralegal political grounds.
Mr. Wang was born in 1980 in Beijing and in 2001 came to the United States, where he was naturalized in 2009.
On Thursday afternoon, before she first heard rumors that her husband might be freed, she told a reporter in New York that her biggest wish was for him to be home in Princeton, N.J., for the holidays.
Mr. Wang flew from Zurich to an American military hospital in Germany where he is being evaluated before his return home. The official who briefed reporters said he appeared healthy and was in good spirits.
Mr. Soleimani, who had been held in an Atlanta prison, was due to appear in court next week, according to the official who briefed reporters. Asked whether the United States might be encouraging Iran to unjustly imprison more foreigners in order to trade them for duly convicted prisoners in America or for other concessions, the official noted that Iran had been granted no cash payments or sanctions relief. He added that he hoped Mr. Wang’s release would be a sign that Iran’s practice of “hostage-taking diplomacy” would come to an end, although it was unclear why that might be the case.
American officials came to believe that Mr. Zarif expressed particular interest in Mr. Soleimani because he has a personal connection to the scientist, whose details remain unclear, one said.
At least four other Americans remain in custody in Iran, and Trump administration officials call their release a top priority. They include Siamak Namazi, a business consultant, and his father, Baquer Namazi, a former Unicef diplomat. Another, Robert Levinson, a former F.B.I. agent and C.I.A. contractor, disappeared in Iran more than 12 years ago. Iran unexpectedly disclosed last month it had an “ongoing case” into him.
American officials had been pressing Iran for more information about Mr. Levinson and for his return over the last two months. The Iranians were not forthcoming, a senior United States official said, but instead raised the idea of exchanging Mr. Wang for Mr. Soleimani.
“We can’t help but be extremely disappointed that, despite all its efforts, the United States government was unable to secure his release as well,” Ms. Halpin wrote, referring to Mr. Levinson.
Babak Namazi, who is the son of Baquer Namazi and the brother of Siamak Namazi, expressed similar sentiments, saying he was thrilled for Mr. Wang and his family but “beyond devastated” that his father and brother had been left behind. “I hope, pray and expect that this is not a one-time trade but the beginning of an expedited process that will bring my family home soon,” he said.
Adam Goldman and Edward Wong contributed reporting.