Monday: An expert talks about the effects of seeing people living on the streets. Also: A major PG&E settlement, and Katie Hill speaks out.
A note: Over the past couple of months, we’ve been featuring pieces from my colleague Marie Tae McDermott, who works with The Times’s Reader Center. Those are part of Your Lead, our series answering readers’ questions. Right now, we’re focusing on the ways inequality plays out in California.
To find out more about the ways in which we internalize human suffering and how to recognize compassion fatigue in ourselves, I talked with Benjamin Henwood, a licensed clinical social worker, an associate professor and director of the Center for Homelessness, Housing and Health Equity Research at the University of Southern California.
What is compassion fatigue, and how can we combat it?
Compassion fatigue is when a person who wants to and has been trying to help address a problem, which in this case could be homelessness, begins to personalize and experience the distress of those they are trying to help. It is a form of what we would call a “secondary trauma,” and can result in people being less “present” and able to help others.
People in homeless services may be especially susceptible when the problem is prolonged and best efforts to help don’t yield satisfactory results.
While there’s not a lot of research on how best to address it, there are plenty of best practices that in different ways emphasize being kind to yourself. Of course, there may also be collective compassion fatigue, which can occur when the public is invested in trying to help address homelessness but don’t see the problem getting better.
Why do you think people can so easily turn away from the sight of human suffering?
I think it is self-protective. All of us are trying to “make it” in this world and the amount of human suffering out there can be overwhelming. I think we rationalize that since we can’t solve a problem on our own then it isn’t worth addressing the problem and we instead focus on the things we can and need to attend to in our own lives. This is faulty logic. We can help ease human suffering each and every day by taking the time to care about and relate to others.
We are often quick to reach into our pockets when disaster hits, like after an earthquake or wildfire, but do you think people are more reluctant to pitch in when it comes to helping the homeless?
With a natural disaster we attribute problems people face to the disaster itself, regardless of the state of affairs people faced before the natural disaster. In short, we do not place blame on people who are displaced by a natural disaster.
Homelessness is instead attributed to poor decision making or the fault of the person experiencing homelessness who we conclude are somehow to blame and not deserving of help or relief.
History shows us that vulnerable populations are often stigmatized. Do you think this applies to the homeless population?
Absolutely. Homelessness is highly stigmatized, which is why people resist having shelter or supportive housing in their neighborhood.
Ideas that most people experiencing homelessness are dangerous, criminals or mentally ill come from and are signs of stigma that aren’t supported by facts.
What can we do to combat the stigma?
We haven’t studied and don’t know a lot about fighting stigma related to homelessness. In other fields we’ve looked at stigma related to, for example, serious mental illness and found that there are several approaches including disseminating information (e.g. people with serious mental illness are more likely to be victims than perpetrators of crimes) and exposing the public to people who have disclosed having a mental illness.
These can be targeted anti-stigma campaigns or part of a much larger media campaign. More recently, there have been media campaigns that appear to be addressing stigma related to homelessness, but it isn’t clear whether the message “anyone can become homeless” impacts stigma since while this may be true, we also know that certain groups, including African-Americans, are more likely to become homeless in the United States.
