A Gary Klinsky Children’s Center in East New York instills a love of learning in a safe environment, and forges lasting bonds among members of its staff.
When the school day winds down at P.S. 149 in East New York, Brooklyn, hundreds of students shuffle out of the building’s bright blue doors.
But about 200 others stay behind. After enjoying a hot meal and doing their homework, they disperse into classrooms where, depending on the semester’s theme, they delve into topics like Greek mythology, outer space or ancient Egypt.
The program is hosted by the Gary Klinsky Children’s Centers, which are run by Brooklyn Community Services, one of the seven organizations supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund. A grant that Brooklyn Community Services received this year from The Fund’s endowment supports the operation of the centers.
Steven B. Klinsky, the founder and chief executive of New Mountain Capital, a private equity firm, started the Klinsky program in memory of his older brother Gary, who died from a genetic illness in 1978. Gary used to tutor Mr. Klinsky after school when they were children and “was a big influence on my education and my life growing up,” Mr. Klinsky said.
The first of the five Klinsky centers opened at P.S. 149 in 1993. Today, the program serves about 800 students in kindergarten through fifth grade in the East New York, Brownsville and Bedford-Stuyvesant sections of Brooklyn.
Mr. Klinsky had envisioned a recreational program that would enrich students’ education. “Everything is very academically driven,” he said, “but it feels like fun.” He also sought to support children from disadvantaged neighborhoods.
Roughly 29 percent of residents in Community School District 5, which includes P.S. 149 and comprises the East New York and Starrett City neighborhoods, live in poverty, the second-highest rate among community school districts in Brooklyn, according to a 2017 report from the mayor’s office. The district’s elementary schools had a 31 percent absenteeism rate in the 2016-17 academic year, compared with the citywide rate of 20 percent, according to a report from the New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene.
Mr. Klinsky wanted the centers to be easy to replicate, so he placed them in schools that were willing to open their classrooms and had staff members who could stay after hours. Several teachers who work at P.S. 149 during the day now also work in the after-school program.
Donna Morancie, 66, has been the site director of the Klinsky center at P.S. 149 for 18 years. When it opened, she said, there were few, if any, after-school programs in the area. “It was like a novelty,” she said.
Sherril Williams, 61, joined the Klinsky center as an assistant teacher when it was founded. Now she is a substitute and helps with supervisory duties. Three of her children have been in the program. “I liked that we really nurtured the children into wanting to learn,” she said.
Each semester, the curriculum covers a single theme, usually relating to culture or science. The students take classes and field trips to museums; they create art projects and enhance their vocabulary through word games.
Over the years, the program has had a lasting influence on many former students.
When Shakiera Harkless was about 8, she moved into the care of her grandmother. “I took it very hard,” she said. “I didn’t always react in the best way.” The Klinsky program became her safe haven. The staff there nurtured her, she said, and did not judge her when she misbehaved.
Shakeema Rodriguez, 31, grew up in East New York and attended the Klinsky program for about four years. She was an only child, and her mother worked long hours. The center was a safe place where she could socialize with other students. It also opened her eyes to new experiences.
Ms. Rodriguez enrolled her son, Majah, 9, in Klinsky once he started kindergarten.
About two years ago, she was out of work and started volunteering at the center. After about five months, she was hired as a teaching assistant. She said Klinsky taught her to share and be kind to others.
Lanetta Darlington, 32, said the staff at Klinsky made her feel welcome after she arrived in Brooklyn from her native Guyana when she was in the first grade. “They saw my potential and helped to bring out the best in me,” she said.
Ms. Darlington volunteered at Klinsky during high school, and then worked there for about four years, first as an assistant teacher and then as a teacher. Last year, she placed her daughter, Olivia, 6, in the program.
The center’s influence extends beyond its walls. Providing a safe, free space for students to gather after school gives parents time to work on themselves, Ms. Morancie said. Several have pursued college degrees or earned high school equivalency diplomas because Klinsky gave them the flexibility to do so. Many students live in the shelter system, Ms. Morancie said; their parents use the time their children spend in the program to search for work or apartments.
Staff members often stay behind after dismissal to supervise students whose parents work late. Ms. Rodriguez even walks some children home and lets others spend time at her house if needed. The program also operates 10 hours a day on weekdays during the summer, a relief to many working parents, Ms. Morancie said.
Perhaps most essential, the staff is also a source of emotional support. Ms. Rodriguez said she encourages students to follow their passions. Ms. Williams uses jokes and silly games to cheer anyone who may be going through a tough time. “It deflects from the negativity that might be going on,” she said.
Looking ahead, Mr. Klinsky hopes to open more centers. But he said there are not enough resources to do so at the moment.
As for the staff, the program has inspired Ms. Rodriguez to pursue a college degree and become a teacher. Ms. Harkless said she does not know what is next for her, though she also has her eye on the education field.
