Opinion|Cybersecurity Experts Are Leaving the Federal Government. That’s a Problem.
Cybersecurity Experts Are Leaving the Federal Government. That’s a Problem.
The departures leave our critical infrastructure, elections, data and networks vulnerable.
Dr. Wolff is a professor at Tufts University and a contributing opinion writer.
At the end of 2019, with less than a year to go until the presidential election, the government official who has been leading efforts to secure voting systems in the United States will leave the Department of Homeland Security to join Google. The impending departure of Jeanette Manfra, the assistant director for cybersecurity at the department’s Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, is a major loss for the federal government’s civilian cybersecurity efforts, and it comes at the end of a year that saw a series of departures by key cybersecurity personnel.
Mr. Vastakis’s memo stated that the majority of the high-level cybersecurity personnel at the White House had already resigned because of the administration’s “habitually being hostile” to them, including using tactics such as “revocation of incentives, reducing the scope of duties, reducing access to programs, revoking access to buildings and revoking positions with strategic and tactical decision making authorities.” Through these tactics, in combination with a structural reorganization this summer, the White House effectively dismantled the Office of the Chief Information Security Officer, which was established by President Barack Obama in 2014 following the discovery that Russian hackers had infiltrated White House networks.
Turnover in the federal government is normal, and cybersecurity professionals, in particular, have plenty of outside career options should they choose to leave. But taken together, the departures by high-level cybersecurity officials in the last half of 2019 amount to more than just the expected churn of government officials — they signify the systematic decimation of the personnel most directly responsible for protecting critical infrastructure, shielding our elections from interference and guarding the White House’s data, devices and networks.
There are still tremendously talented people in the federal government working on cybersecurity, but they are now fewer in number. In particular, there are many fewer people focused on trying to address the threat posed by Russia to government networks and voting systems — at exactly the moment when we need them most. And increasingly, the government personnel working on cybersecurity issues are concentrated in the Department of Defense. This means the balance between military and civilian cybersecurity expertise has shifted to emphasize primarily offensive efforts undertaken by the military rather than the civilian tasks of partnering with the private sector to secure voting systems or the electric grid or other sectors of critical infrastructure.
Ms. Manfra, in her role at C.I.S.A., was at the forefront of the effort to bolster civilian cybersecurity. C.I.S.A. was established within Homeland Security last year by the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency Act of 2018 to coordinate efforts to address cybersecurity threats to critical infrastructure by working with private companies as well as state and local governments. In January 2017, election infrastructure was designated as critical infrastructure, bringing it under Homeland Security’s purview, and C.I.S.A. has done more than any other part of the federal government to try to help states secure their elections.
This year, for instance, the agency helped fund free, open-source software that can be used to perform postelection audits for verifying election results, and published a “Cyber Essentials” guide containing a set of best practices for small businesses and government agencies. Last year, during the midterm elections, the agency’s National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center provided election officials across the country with information about online threats through an online portal called the National Cybersecurity Situational Awareness Room. Of course, C.I.S.A. will continue to operate following Ms. Manfra’s departure, under the leadership of its director, Chris Krebs, and Ms. Manfra’s successor, who is reported to be the former AI entrepreneur Bryan Ware. But it will probably shift course under Mr. Ware, who joined Homeland Security just last year and whose background is primarily in data analytics and risk quantification.
The Department of Homeland Security plays a vital role in helping to protect nonmilitary cyber-infrastructure but it has historically struggled to find its footing in the federal government’s complicated and sometimes contentious cybersecurity landscape. Since online threats affect everything from medical devices to transportation systems to the energy sector, different government agencies and departments often vie for funding and authority tied to cybersecurity issues.
Defining the portfolio of civilian cybersecurity issues that Homeland Security was responsible for as distinct from the military cybersecurity issues owned by the Department of Defense, hiring people with sufficient technical expertise to fill the necessary roles, and figuring out how to work with private sector partners, as well as those in state and local governments, have all been significant challenges for the department. Moving out of the shadow of the Defense Department, and establishing itself as a source of credible, competent cybersecurity policymaking has been the work of at least a decade at Homeland Security, and it continues.
Ms. Manfra, who joined Homeland Security in 2007, witnessed and participated in many of the department’s efforts to carve out a space for itself alongside the Defense Department as a center of cybersecurity-focused, technically literate activity in the federal government. Her successor will be largely responsible for determining whether D.H.S. continues to grow in its credibility as a cybersecurity organization both within the government and outside it, or instead loses much of the ground it has made up in trying to become an equal partner to the Defense Department’s cybersecurity expertise and authority.
Just as Homeland Security was working on strengthening its cybersecurity work force for the past several years, so, too, was the White House. After hackers linked to the Russian government breached unclassified White House networks in 2014, Mr. Obama established a team within the White House focused on securing the Presidential Information Technology Community network. This was the team that Mr. Vastakis worked on, until it was absorbed by the Office of the Chief Information Officer in July. “This is a significant shift in the priorities of senior leadership, where business operations and quality of service take precedence over securing the president’s network,” Mr. Vastakis wrote of the reorganization in his October memo.
The fact that the White House is emphasizing convenience of communications at the expense of security is not entirely surprising in light of recent reports on President Trump’s continued use of unsecured phone lines and personal electronic devices. But even so, the disregard for security staff members described in Mr. Vastakis’s memo is alarming and extreme. It suggests that people who care about the security of White House data and networks are no longer welcome in the executive office of the president, at the same time that people who care about foreign interference in American elections are in increasingly short supply in the federal government. These will not be easy positions to fill — not just because cybersecurity professionals are in short supply and high demand, but also because the message being conveyed by this administration is that cybersecurity is no longer a priority for the federal government, especially civilian efforts focused on the defense of critical infrastructure and government facilities.
There have been warning signs of this shift even before this year. In May 2018, the White House eliminated the cybersecurity coordinator position on the National Security Council, suggesting that it might no longer be as focused on internet-based threats. But the impact of that decision pales in comparison to the mass departures of cybersecurity staff in 2019.
Mr. Vastakis concluded his memo with a grim warning: “I foresee the White House is posturing itself to be electronically compromised once again. Allowing for a large portion of institutional knowledge to concurrently walk right out the front door seems contrary to the best interests of the mission and the organization as a whole.” As we head into 2020, worrying about the integrity of our elections, the growing scourge of ransomware and the increasingly sophisticated forms of cyberespionage and cybersabotage being developed by our adversaries, it’s disconcerting to feel that many of our government’s best cybersecurity minds are walking out the front door and leaving behind too few people to monitor what’s coming in our back doors.