U.S.|Where Are Portable Toilets on City Streets?
We’ve heard from residents about sidestepping human waste on their way to work, and some, including Ms. Dunn, have wondered why there aren’t more portable toilets.
A 2017 report by the city of Los Angeles on the state of toilets on Skid Row found that there were just nine public toilets available for its 1,964 homeless residents. By contrast, the United Nations’s standard for refugee camps requires there to be one toilet for every 20 people.
When there is a lack of public toilets, as there is in California, people are forced to relieve themselves elsewhere. Sidewalks become a breeding ground for infectious diseases.
“It really is a human rights issue,” said the Rev. Andrew Bales, of Union Rescue Mission, about the current state of sanitation on Skid Row. In 2014, Mr. Bales had an open wound that came into contact with human waste while he was conducting homeless outreach. The wound became infected with flesh-eating bacteria and as a result, his leg was amputated in 2016.
Mr. Bales estimates that the population of Skid Row has swelled to around 2,800 people and the number of toilets is still lacking. The shelter he heads recently added 11 toilets for 120 women to use.
“It really is a health hazard, especially for people living on the streets,” Mr. Bales said.
In addition, many homeless people are hesitant to use existing public toilets and portable toilets because they pose risks. The 2017 report illustrated how people are afraid of being robbed or attacked in restrooms at night. Some toilets lack locks or even doors. In San Diego, one 24-hour restroom was removed after it became a public nuisance.
In efforts to mitigate the health hazard caused by human waste on the streets, the cities of San Francisco and Los Angeles started public toilet programs.
Facilities are maintained by paid attendants who make sure restrooms are clean and safe for people to use.
Mr. Bales thinks these attendants are key to the success of the programs. Although their jobs are to monitor the facilities, they are often the first people to respond to and prevent fatal drug overdoses and to intercept crime.
Since implementing the program in 2014, San Francisco has seen a decrease in requests related to cleaning human waste from the street. There are now 24 facilities throughout the city. The city recently announced that it will keep three restrooms, called Pit Stops, open all day, every day because of the growing demand.
“This is not complicated — when people have access to a clean, safe restroom, they will use it,” Mayor London Breed said in a statement.
Restrooms don’t have to be mobilized to be effective. A report found that adding an attendant to an existing underutilized restroom in L.A. resulted in an increase of daily uses, to 80 from 30, in the first four months.
In L.A., a single Pit Stop site, which includes toilets, a hand-washing station and an attendant costs $339,000 a year.
It would cost about $450,000 a unit to build subsidized affordable housing in California.
What questions do you have about inequality in the state? Ask them here.
More from this series: What is middle class in California? How do the state’s homeless rates compare with those in the rest of the country? Where do homeless people in California come from? How do you talk to kids about homelessness?
If you want to read more about the homelessness crisis from those who have experienced it, here’s a new reporting initiative from Law@theMargins, an organization that aims to highlight stories from communities whose voices often aren’t heard.
Chaumtoli Huq, the organization’s editor in chief and founder, said the stories are produced by a grant-funded and volunteer-powered virtual newsroom.
The “Right to Home” project brought together collaborators who work with street publications around the country, including Berkeley’s Street Spirit.
In one piece, Justin Jones, who grew up in Berkeley, wrote about navigating school and life as he moved from place to place. He described what it was like to set out on his own after growing up without a stable place to call home.
“The reality is that many young people are fighting the conditions of homelessness when we’re still works in progress,” he wrote.
