The digital effects were mocked for trying to make an old man young. But this is the rare American film that accepts what being old really means.
Early on in “The Irishman,” the latest film by Martin Scorsese, there’s a scene that draws more attention to Robert De Niro’s body than any movie has in years. The actor plays Frank Sheeran, an elderly hit man looking back on his life. It has been a long one — the film runs some 209 minutes. After 28 of them, we’ve reached the 1950s, and a 30-something Sheeran has just learned that a neighborhood grocer shoved his daughter. This younger Sheeran is still played by the 76-year-old De Niro; digital effects have been used to take years off his face, a technique that’s applied to a few actors as the film moves through time. And it’s this curiously smooth De Niro who marches the daughter back to the store, throws the grocer to the curb and stomps repeatedly on his hand.
Something is off about this stomping, though. It’s not done with the swagger you’d expect from a man comfortable breaking a grocer’s fingers in broad daylight. Like anyone his age, De Niro moves in a way that prioritizes stability: His elbows stay tucked protectively near his ribs, and his feet jab stiffly out without disturbing his center of gravity. It’s not that he looks feeble or frail; it’s just that he looks 76.
In the context of a three-and-a-half-hour film, you’d hardly think much of it. But if you were to take this shot in isolation and, say, post it on social media, it would seem risible, as if someone had made a very expensive period comedy about a cranky, violent senior. And that, obviously, is what was done with it: The shot was circulated, chuckled over, goofed on and treated — as so much is online — as self-evidently farcical.
But that mockery deserves its full context, too. Consider our nation: The president is in his 70s, as are his three leading challengers, as well as the Senate majority leader and the speaker of the House. It’s estimated that nearly one-quarter of the 2020 electorate will be over the age of 65. Baby boomers remain the largest age cohort in the country, as they have been their entire lives. There’s no shortage of actors who would leap at the chance to play a younger version of a Robert De Niro character — just as De Niro himself, 45 years ago, won his first Academy Award for playing a younger version of Vito Corleone. But with “The Irishman,” Scorsese has made a film in which a 61-year-old Ray Romano feels like a fresh face; its lead actors are, on average, older than the old people in “Cocoon,” a movie in which you definitely didn’t see Wilford Brimley curb-stomp anyone. So if you wanted to stir up young people’s long-simmering resentment of their elders, who seem reluctant to cede their power over anything and everything that happens in this country, you could do far worse than the sight of De Niro’s awkward beat down.
It’s impossible to think about “The Irishman” without considering the press cycle Scorsese wound up creating around the film. Just before its release, in an interview with Empire magazine, the director opined that Marvel superhero movies don’t really qualify as “cinema” — wonderfully crafted entertainments, maybe, but not art. This was like waving a red cape in the face of a very annoying bull: Fans of this sort of movie tend to react furiously to the sense that anyone is looking down on them from loftier artistic grounds, or to the idea that loftier artistic grounds exist at all. What is funny is that “The Irishman” is, in some ways, the “Avengers: Endgame” of Scorsese’s own movie universe — long and expensive, collecting his regular actors and milieus into one culminating story highly dependent on computer-generated effects.
It’s no wonder so much attention fell on these 27 seconds of stomping. You could certainly watch them and conclude that the decision to digitally fiddle with De Niro’s age and face was a poor one. His character, across the length of the film, seems less like a man seen at different ages and more like a collection of separate men, each well past 50 but each with a unique skin-care regimen. It is remarkable, really, how much online attention to this film has revolved around its actors’ bodies. An image circulated of De Niro wearing huge platform shoes to approximate Sheeran’s height; another focused on a World War II scene in which the effects make him look like a video-game soldier. Scorsese himself has joked about a scene in which a 79-year-old Al Pacino, playing a 40-something Jimmy Hoffa, had to leap up from a chair, but couldn’t manage to look much younger than 62.
But a better reading — advanced, almost apologetically, by a few critics — is that, in the full context of the film, the de-aging “works” beautifully. “The Irishman” is best watched as a film about old men, and the lifetimes they have spent wrapped up entirely in one another, moving through an era that has vanished from beneath their feet. Formally speaking, it has the tenor of a memory, soft and heavy and low on action; it looks on everyone, even the people Sheeran will kill, with a nostalgic fondness. It begins to feel, as you watch, that Sheeran is always already an old man — in the same way you can dream of your childhood home, but you will never really be a child inside it.
This film about the past was made, like so much else around us, primarily by people in their 70s: the three lead actors, the director, the editor Thelma Schoonmaker. But there’s one immense difference between “The Irishman” and so much else in American culture. Our septuagenarian politicians still tell us, with great optimism, how they wish to lead us into the future, assuring us that the grand and prosperous America of the late 20th century is just waiting to be recaptured. “Cocoon” might have had a younger cast, but it was still about harnessing alien powers to regain your youth and live forever. Whatever else a viewer might think about “The Irishman,” it can be commended for being curious about the exact opposite — about what things look like as they end.
This is a film that can imagine what it’s like to look back on your life and see a version of the world that has expired, and to reckon with how that era was spent, and with whom, and what ruins were made of it, and why. It’s a significant piece of American culture that acknowledges what it’s like to see your grip on the world loosen, and wonders what uses that grip was put to anyway. It’s strange to think how rare this perspective has been — and even stranger to think how common it’ll need to be in the years to come.
Nitsuh Abebe is a story editor for the magazine. He was formerly the pop critic for New York magazine and a columnist for Pitchfork.