He worked with the Monty Python troupe and was known for his own projects, including the Beatles parody band the Rutles.
Neil Innes, the British humorist and musician who was an honorary member of the Monty Python comedy troupe and made a name for himself with a nutty assortment of musical and television projects, including the Beatles parody band the Rutles, died on Sunday near Toulouse, France, where he had lived in recent years. He was 75.
His wife, Yvonne Innes, said the cause was a heart attack.
Mr. Innes, a multi-instrumentalist, was a particular type of songwriter: one who excelled at satirical songs and parodies of other people’s music, but who could also write a pretty good straight song. Sometimes it was hard to tell the difference.
In the early 1960s he was one of the first members of the Bonzo Dog Doo Dah Band, also known as simply the Bonzo Dog Band. He wrote the group’s biggest hit, “I’m the Urban Spaceman,” which climbed into the Top 10 on the British charts in 1968.
In the 1970s he wrote material for Monty Python, the groundbreaking six-member comedy troupe. Midway through that decade he and Eric Idle, a Python, came up with the Rutles, a deadpan parody of the Beatles; the group not only recorded albums but also made films, most notably the mock documentary “The Rutles: All You Need Is Cash” in 1978.
Mr. Innes also performed live shows throughout his career and was still doing so recently.
Neil James Innes was born on Dec. 9, 1944, in Danbury, England, northeast of London, to Edward and Rita (Hudson) Innes. His father was in the military, and he spent part of his childhood in postwar Germany.
He took piano lessons as a child, taught himself to play guitar and dabbled in drawing and painting. He pursued his art interest first at the Norwich School of Art, then at Goldsmiths College School of Art, graduating in 1966. That same year he married Yvonne Catherine Hilton.
While in school he had begun playing in what was originally named the Bonzo Dog Dada Band.
The group is seen in the Beatles movie “Magical Mystery Tour” playing its song “Death Cab for Cutie.” The Bonzos also appeared in about 20 episodes of “Do Not Adjust Your Set,” a children’s television show that had a lot of adult fans thanks to a cheeky cast that included Mr. Idle and two other future Pythons, Terry Jones and Michael Palin. Mr. Innes was never a Python, but he did contribute material to “Monty Python’s Flying Circus,” which premiered in England in 1969.
He also appeared in the movies “Monty Python and the Holy Grail” (1975) and “Monty Python’s Life of Brian” (1979), as well as films by individual Pythons.
The Rutles started as a quick gag on “Rutland Weekend Television,” a BBC sketch comedy series about a laughably small-town TV station. Mr. Idle wrote and starred in the show, which ran for two seasons in the mid-1970s; Mr. Innes’s job was to contribute one or two songs per episode.
In October 1976 Mr. Idle hosted “Saturday Night Live,” then in its second season, and played the Rutles clip. Lorne Michaels, creator of “S.N.L.,” became a fan and saw possibilities for a full-length mockumentary, an idea he sprang during a brainstorming meeting at which Mr. Innes was a casual participant.
“All You Need Is Cash,” a TV movie shown in both England and the United States, was the result. In the mock band, Mr. Innes was Ron Nasty, the John Lennon-like Rutle. (Mr. Idle, as the Paul McCartney character, Dirk McQuickly, lip-synced.) And he was responsible for the songwriting.
Mr. Innes was also known for two British TV series, “The Innes Book of Records” (1979-81) and the children’s series “Puddle Lane” (1985-89).
In addition to his wife, he is survived by three sons, Miles, Luke and Barney; and three grandchildren.
As news of Mr. Innes’s death spread, each social media post by admirers seemed to single out a different sketch or song or television show that he created or to which he contributed. Danny Kelly, a British music journalist, put it simply.
