It’s Monday. Rejoice! The annual headache known as SantaCon is behind us.
Weather: Snow today (maybe late) and rain tonight. Details below.
The touch of the snow that the New York region braced for last week might arrive this evening.
The morning commute should be fine, but heading home could be a different story.
Cloudy and calm, with temperatures in the mid-30s and a slight possibility of flurries later in the day.
Starting around 6 p.m., the National Weather Service says, the five boroughs are expected to be assailed by a mix of snow, sleet and rain, so you may want to give yourself some extra time on your commute home.
The snow and sleet accumulation could approach an inch before the precipitation turns solely to showers overnight.
And don’t expect the rain to go away quickly.
Get the umbrella and galoshes.
There is a “100 percent” chance of rain Tuesday morning, according to the Weather Service. About half an inch of rain may fall. That could be enough to require some extra commuting time.
There may be winds of around 10 miles per hour, with a high temperature still in the mid-30s.
And if you’re looking for a silver lining among all those clouds, try this: Wednesday, Thursday and Friday are expected to be sunny.
Winter tan, anyone?
Danny Aiello, the famed New York-born film and stage actor who died last week at age 86, never studied acting.
Here’s what else you may not know about him.
He dropped out of high school, joined the Army and was based in Germany during the Korean War.
He was a baggage handler for Greyhound in Manhattan and gave the public its first taste of his raspy voice when he started his job there as public address announcer, calling out the names of the stops for departing buses.
He wandered into a softball game organized by the Broadway Show League. One player, Budd Friedman, who owned the Midtown nightclub the Improv, offered him a job as a bouncer. Soon Mr. Aiello was filling in as M.C. at the Improv and doing late-late-night readings from “The Godfather” (the book, that is; the movie hadn’t been made yet).
A playwright patron, Louis LaRusso, persuaded Mr. Aiello to be in a production of his play “Lamppost Reunion.” The play opened Off Broadway in 1970, with Mr. Aiello making his New York stage debut at age 37 as a Hoboken bar owner. When the play finally made it to Broadway, in 1975, Mr. Aiello was back in the role.
It’s Monday — get the popcorn.
It was the first beautiful weekend of the year. I was walking home after enjoying one too many Aperol spritzes at a sidewalk cafe.
I felt my phone buzz. As I grabbed it, I also pulled out my keys. I was standing over a grate, and even in my inebriated state, I knew what was about to happen. There was nothing I could do to stop it.
It felt like things were happening in slow motion as I watched the keys fall through the grate into the underbelly of New York. I knew they were gone forever.
I screamed, took a moment to remember the grate for future laughs and continued walking. Before I got to the end of the street, I felt a tap on my shoulder.
I turned and saw a nice-looking man wearing tweed, a scally cap and a big smile. He pointed to the grate my keys had just fallen through. I noticed that he was in a group of men who were all dressed like him.
The men lifted the grate. Before I could say anything, one jumped down and then popped back up. I was dumbstruck. He took a drag from his cigarette, smiled and handed me my keys.
I didn’t know how to thank them so I just ran around giving hugs. They all shrugged it off.
As I walked away, one of them yelled a piece of advice.
