He competed on the NASCAR circuit for 12 seasons, became a successful team owner and was one of the first inductees in the organization’s Hall of Fame.
Junior Johnson, a former teenage moonshiner from the North Carolina hills who became one of the greatest drivers in stock-car racing and the personification of its country roots, died on Friday in Charlotte, N.C. He was 88.
His death, at an assisted living facility, was confirmed by his wife, Lisa, who said he had Alzheimer’s disease.
Long before NASCAR grew into a force in auto racing, the good old boys of the hardscrabble rural South in the 1940s were racing souped-up autos at small-town dirt tracks. Johnson was among the fastest and most daring of them all. By the time he retired in 1966, he had won 50 races on what became the NASCAR circuit.
He was an innovator as well, pioneering the technique of “drafting” — staying on the tail of a faster car and being dragged along in its aerodynamic draft until an opening arose — when he captured the 1960 Daytona 500 in a relatively underpowered Chevrolet.
After competing in NASCAR for 12 seasons, Johnson became one of stock-car racing’s leading team owners, with 132 victories and six points champions. He was an inaugural inductee of the NASCAR Hall of Fame in Charlotte, N.C.
Richard Petty, one of Johnson’s most celebrated rivals, was once quoted by The Tampa Tribune as calling him “the toughest, most stubborn driver” he knew.
It was a perfect time for the emergence of Johnson, who honed his driving skills in wild pre-dawn rides down country roads, with federal revenue agents in futile pursuit, delivering jars of the untaxed whiskey his father produced.
In his years delivering moonshine, beginning when he was around 14, Johnson invented the “bootleg turn” when he was being chased by revenuers. He would put his car into second gear, turn the wheel and step on the pedal, creating a 180-degree spin that enabled him to zoom back past his pursuers.
He was just as aggressive on the track. He slid his cars through curves instead of riding the brakes so that he could quickly regain speed when he was back on a straightaway.
Federal agents never caught up with Johnson on back-country roads, but in 1956, his second NASCAR season, they arrested him while he was tending to a family still. He was convicted of manufacturing untaxed whiskey and served 11 months at a federal prison in Ohio.
President Ronald Reagan, an auto racing fan, pardoned Johnson for his felony conviction in 1986. By then Johnson was a highly successful team owner and had won points titles three times with cars driven by Cale Yarborough and another three times with Darrell Waltrip driving.
Robert Glenn Johnson Jr. was born on June 28, 1931, in Ronda, N.C., in the state’s hilly western region. He was one of seven children of Robert and Lora Belle Johnson. The family had a farm, but his father was a moonshiner who spent time in federal prison.
As Johnson related it, one day in 1947 he was standing barefoot behind a plow mule on the family farm in Ingle Hollow, a section of Ronda, when he was told about an auto race on a dirt track at nearby North Wilkesboro. He entered it and finished second. After winning championships in minor categories, he captured his first NASCAR Grand National race at Hickory, N.C., in 1955.
When the NASCAR Hall of Fame opened in Charlotte in 2010, Johnson was one of its first five inductees. The hall’s artifacts included a still that Johnson once owned.
Johnson’s marriage to Flossie Clark ended in divorce in 1992. The next year he married Lisa Day, a registered nurse. In addition to her, he is survived by their daughter, Meredith Johnson; their son, Robert III; and a sister, Shirley Blackburn.
Johnson retired from team ownership in 1995. He continued to live in Ingle Hollow, where he had built a mansion, and had interests in cattle, real estate, Southern-style foods and a distillery with a flagship liquor named Catdaddy Carolina Moonshine.
But he still had a soft spot for the NASCAR of yesteryear.
Daniel E. Slotnik contributed reporting. Jack Begg contributed research.