While there will be stiff competition from around the world, the locals are making more of an impression.
Although Hong Kong is home to less than 1 percent of the world’s horse population, local runners made history last year at the Hong Kong International Races by sweeping all four of the horse races, a first for the event.
The four winners — Beauty Generation, Exultant, Glorious Forever and Mr Stunning — are all back this year to defend their titles on Sunday, but they will face some stiff opposition from around the world.
The Hong Kong International Races, at Sha Tin Racecourse, make up the last major international thoroughbred horse racing festival on the calendar each year and are collectively worth 93 million Hong Kong dollars ($11.86 million). They consist of the $28 million Hong Kong Cup, which is 2,000 meters; the $25 million Hong Kong Mile at 1,600 meters; the $20 million Hong Kong Sprint at 1,200 meters; and the $20 million Hong Kong Vase at 2,400 meters.
The Cup went to Glorious Forever last year, and his odds of repeating this year improved in the week leading up the race, as his main foe, Almond Eye, was withdrawn from the competition because of illness.
Almond Eye was meant to be one of a multitude of talented runners Japan is set to bring to Hong Kong, and one of three horses owned by the partnership group Silk Racing. She rose to stardom by winning Japan’s Fillies’ Triple Crown in 2018, and she added an international top-level victory to her resume in March by winning her first race abroad, the $6 million Dubai Turf.
Silk Racing’s Indy Champ and Glory Vase will still run in the Mile and the Vase.
When Glorious Forever won the Cup last year, he defeated another Japanese horse, Deirdre, who was second, as well as his own half brother, Time Warp, who was third. Time Warp won the race in 2017 and the two brothers will square off again, but Deirdre is entered in the Vase instead.
Deirdre made history of her own in August, when she won the Nassau Stakes during Glorious Goodwood. In doing so, she became only the second Japan-based horse to win a Group 1 race in England.
“It was a great success,” said Yoshitake Hashida, Deirdre’s assistant trainer. “It proved Japanese horses could get over the difference between Japan and Europe, and it was amazing to see people in Europe, where there are the top-class horses every time, noticing that we have good quality horses.
While there had been some talk that Deirdre was running in the Vase in order to avoid Almond Eye, her team members said it was for other reasons.
Deirdre will face last year’s winner, Exultant, who proved to be an anomaly in the history of the race. He was only the third Hong Kong-based winner to take the Vase, which was first held in 1994.
However, the form from last year’s race has continued to improve. The horse he beat by a neck, Lys Gracieux, in October became the first Japanese horse to win Australia’s Cox Plate, while last year’s fifth-place finisher, Waldgeist, upset Enable in this year’s Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe.
Exultant comes into the race having won his last start, the Jockey Club Cup, but will face some other interesting competition besides Deirdre. Anthony Van Dyck, from Ireland, is looking to become the first English Derby winner to run in the Vase, while Prince Of Arran heads to the race after finishing second in Australia’s Melbourne Cup.
Things have not been going as smoothly for Beauty Generation, who is Hong Kong’s two-time reigning Horse of the Year. The champion reeled off 10 consecutive victories, including the last two editions of the Hong Kong Mile, but has been beaten in his last two starts. In his last race, the Jockey Club Mile, he finished third behind Waikuku, whose trainer, John Size, concedes that Beauty Generation is still the headliner of the Hong Kong Mile.
Among the horses Beauty Generation is expected to face is Indy Champ, who has won five of his last seven starts, including beating his stablemate Almond Eye in the Yasuda Kinen in June, and winning Japan’s Mile Championship in his last start.
Should Beauty Generation regain his form and win the Mile again, he and Good Ba Ba would be the only horses to win the race three times. His jockey, Zac Purton, remains confident that he will run better on the big day.
Although Beauty Generation did not win as expected in his race leading up to the Hong Kong International Races, another one of Moore’s charges, Aethero, impressed in the Jockey Club Sprint and is one of the favorites for the Hong Kong Sprint.
Aethero is the youngest horse contesting the sprint. Among those he beat in the Jockey Club Sprint was fellow local Mr Stunning, who has won the last two editions of the Hong Kong Sprint.
At 7 years old, Mr Stunning is one of the oldest horses expected to run. Like Beauty Generation, he is looking to join Good Ba Ba as a three-time winner at the Hong Kong International Races, which began in 1988 but did not expand to four races until 1999.