The state’s governor released the results of an investigation into a photo and said he had approved the termination of the roughly 30 correctional trainees who appeared in it.
About 30 correctional officer trainees in West Virginia will be terminated after a photograph captured them raising their hands in what appeared to be a Nazi salute, according to Gov. Jim Justice, who said in a statement that he had approved a recommendation to fire the trainees.
The statement on Monday followed an investigation into the episode, which found that the trainees had made the gesture multiple times in the classroom and that an instructor had told students to make the gesture in the photograph.
The students were part of a basic training class for the West Virginia Division of Corrections and Rehabilitation. The words “Hail Byrd!” appeared at the top of the photograph; a spokesman for the state’s Department of Military Affairs and Public Safety said the phrase was a reference to one of the trainees’ instructors.
The report identified the instructor by her last name, Byrd. According to a training schedule obtained by West Virginia Public Broadcasting this month, an instructor named Karrie Byrd taught trainees on various subjects including use of force, correctional documentation and cultural diversity.
The military affairs department said this month that one cadet in the basic training class and two correctional academy trainers — one of whom took the picture — had been fired, and that an investigation was underway.
The cadets in the photo were state employees and had been suspended without pay.
Betsy Jividen, the commissioner of the West Virginia Division of Corrections and Rehabilitation, presented the findings of the investigation to Jeff Sandy, the secretary of the state’s military affairs department, on Friday.
In his statement on Monday, Mr. Justice said he had approved those recommendations.
The president of the union that represents West Virginia correctional officers did not immediately respond to a request for comment on Tuesday.
The hand gesture performed by the students was used in Nazi Germany to salute Adolf Hitler, and it endures as a symbol of anti-Semitism and racism. The report said that while trainees began doing the gesture during the second or third week of their academy session in what some called a “sign of respect” for Ms. Byrd, several recognized the gesture’s “historical implications” and refused to participate with the rest of the class.
Ms. Byrd was aware of objections to the salute, but she did not stop the behavior and instead “encouraged it, reveled in it, and at times reciprocated the gesture,” the report said, adding that she told the trainees to make the gesture for their class photo, which was to be distributed in a graduation packet.
The class photograph was sent to a secretary at the academy, who asked Ms. Byrd what the students were doing in the picture.
“Despite her own feelings of the picture, as well as those shared by the secretary and the two instructors, Daniels-Watts never addressed Byrd, had the pictures pulled from the packets, or reported the situation to her supervisor,” it added.
Ms. Byrd and Captain Daniels-Watts are no longer employed by the Division of Corrections and Rehabilitation, said Lawrence Messina, a spokesman for the military affairs department. He added that the trainees are Civil Service employees who have rights under state law that allow them to challenge the terminations.
In his letter to the governor, Mr. Sandy acknowledged that some of the trainees had been uncomfortable with the hand gesture. “Nonetheless, their conduct, without question, has also resulted in the far-reaching and harmful perceptions that are the antithesis of the values we strive to attain,” he said.