The inspector general provided a close look at what seemed at times to be a bungled relationship between Christopher Steele and the bureau.
WASHINGTON — The F.B.I. team landed in Rome in early October 2016 for a crucial meeting: to question Christopher Steele, a former British intelligence officer, about evidence he had gathered suggesting that Donald J. Trump’s presidential campaign might be conspiring with Russia.
The stakes could not have been higher. With the election only a month away, Mr. Steele had been writing a series of memos describing sensational claims that Mr. Trump was all but a Russian agent, the target of a yearslong recruitment and blackmail effort by Moscow. The claims included a wild account of Mr. Trump’s being with prostitutes in a Moscow hotel and his campaign working with the Russians who had hacked Democratic Party computers.
And the agents had few ways to assess whether his reports were reliable or were not much better than gossip, according to a detailed report by the Justice Department’s inspector general that was released on Monday.
The F.B.I. often receives information from imperfect sources, as the inspector general’s report said, and agents questioned Mr. Steele for nearly three hours, the report said. But when they flew home, the investigators had little clarity about the quality of Mr. Steele’s reporting or even about the rules governing the bureau’s relationship with the retired British spy, let alone the truth about Mr. Trump’s Russian connections.
The report from the inspector general, Michael E. Horowitz, gives the fullest official account to date of Mr. Steele and his dossier, which consisted of reports he sent to Fusion GPS, the Washington firm that engaged him, from June to December 2016. It tracks generally with what has already been reported, but gives new details of what appears to have been a bungled relationship between Mr. Steele and the bureau.
But that alarming description never made it to the Justice Department, where officials were using some of Mr. Steele’s reports to support a secret court order authorizing surveillance on a former Trump campaign aide, Carter Page.
It would get worse. The C.I.A., the F.B.I. learned, dismissed Mr. Steele’s reports as “internet rumor.” And when the F.B.I. investigators eventually interviewed the person described as Mr. Steele’s “primary subsource,” he claimed Mr. Steele’s reports had gone far beyond what he had been told.
Mr. Steele told the inspector general’s office that while he debated whether to include the salacious sexual allegations, he decided that “we have to be faithful to all of the information the source provided” and not avoid material because it was controversial.
Similarly, the source had passed on information about a visit to Moscow during the presidential campaign by Mr. Page, the Trump campaign aide. But the source told the F.B.I. agents that he — or she — had offered no evidence to support one striking claim in Mr. Steele’s reporting: that Mr. Page had been offered a lucrative brokerage fee in the sale of part of the Russian oil giant Rosneft.
The F.B.I. seriously considered the possibility that some of the claims that reached Mr. Steele were fed into his informant network by Russian intelligence agents, the inspector general said. But some officials were puzzled by the notion that Russia, which was known to have spread falsehoods about Mrs. Clinton, was also planting dirt about Mr. Trump. The bureau appears to have reached no firm conclusion on this critical question. Mr. Steele declined to comment for this article.
Mr. Steele, who had served in Moscow and London for Britain’s MI-6 and was considered a solid Russia expert, had provided information to the F.B.I. for several years before the 2016 election, first on corruption in soccer’s international governing body, known as FIFA, and later on Russian oligarchs, doping by Russian athletes and corruption in Ukraine. Much of the information proved valuable, and the bureau paid Mr. Steele a total of $95,000.
In addition, the inspector general found that “the F.B.I. and Steele had significantly differing views about the nature of their relationship,” causing considerable confusion. The F.B.I. considered him in bureau jargon a C.H.S., a “confidential human source,” and asked him not to discuss his findings with anyone. Mr. Steele felt he was following orders from his client, Fusion GPS, which directed him to brief some journalists on his research.
When the F.B.I. learned Mr. Steele was talking to the news media, agents were alarmed and senior officials decided to end the formal relationship with Mr. Steele. But a senior Justice Department official, Bruce G. Ohr, continued to meet with him.
One practical consequence of Mr. Steele’s reporting was to support the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act application for a wiretap on Mr. Page. The court was never told of the complaints of the source or Mr. Steele’s “passionate” belief in the need to defeat Mr. Trump, the inspector general said.
But perhaps just as consequential was the role of Mr. Steele’s dossier, which was published by Buzzfeed, in unleashing a flood of speculation in the news media about the new president’s relationship with Russia. News organizations spent frustrating months trying to prove or disprove that Mr. Cohen had traveled to Prague or that Mr. Trump might have indeed been visited by prostitutes in Moscow.
For the president’s supporters, the Steele sensations would provoke outrage and energize Mr. Trump’s claims that he was the victim of a witch hunt. For his critics, the dossier has also proved a frustration: As its more lurid claims proved false or unprovable, they have tended to tar criticisms of the president that were based on solid facts.