Movies|Women Made Them. Viewers and Critics Liked Them. No One Nominated Them.
Despite box office success and critical praise, female filmmakers are largely being left out of Hollywood’s awards season.
“It’s like ‘The Empire Strikes Back,’” Cantillon said on Tuesday, after female directors and films starring women were largely A.W.O.L. from the list of Golden Globe nominees. The Screen Actors Guild was similarly exclusionary on Wednesday, leaving out Greta Gerwig’s “Little Women” and Lulu Wang’s “The Farewell.” Academy Awards handicappers predict that female filmmakers will also be sidelined when Oscar nominations are announced on Jan. 13.
“I’m no longer relevant” (Robert De Niro’s assassin in “The Irishman”). “I’m too old to race cars” (Christian Bale in “Ford v Ferrari”). “I’m a washed-up actor” (Leonardo DiCaprio in “Once Upon a Time … in Hollywood”). “New York has become a mean place” (Joaquin Phoenix in “Joker”). “I’m the victim in this divorce” (Adam Driver in “Marriage Story”).
But Dr. Stacy L. Smith, the University of Southern California professor who has made studying gender bias in media her life’s work through the Annenberg Inclusion Initiative, sees the situation differently.
But the Oscar voting pool (about 9,000 film professionals) nonetheless remains 68 percent male and 84 percent white, according to academy data.
At this point, most of the leading Oscar handicappers — Anne Thompson of Indiewire, Glenn Whipp of The Los Angeles Times, Tim Gray of Variety — are predicting that the academy will put forward an all-male field for best director. Other categories could be similar. The front-runners for adapted screenplay are all men, with the exception of Gerwig, according to Gold Derby, an awards prognostication site. Only one woman, Wang, is among the favorites to be nominated for original screenplay.
Cinematography? Score? Male nominees are expected to fill 100 percent of the slots.
While the Screen Actors Guild was saluting movies by male filmmakers on Wednesday with its nominations, the most powerful women in Hollywood were uniting over coffee and quiche at The Hollywood Reporter’s annual Women in Entertainment breakfast.
The unstated theme was sisterhood. The power list is no longer ranked. Honoree Reese Witherspoon proclaimed her relief that her days of being the only woman on a set of a 150 men were thankfully well in her rear view, thanks both to her growing clout as a producer and her realization that for much of her career she had been siloed from other women. And Wilde, who will direct a thriller for New Line and a comedy for Universal Pictures as her “Booksmart” follow-ups, kicked off the festivities with a rousing speech that name-checked a slew of female filmmakers that inspired her this year, including all of the women mentioned above in addition to Alma Har’el (“Honey Boy”), Ava DuVernay (“When They See Us”), Elizabeth Banks (“Charlie’s Angels”) and Laure de Clermont-Tonnerre (“The Mustang”).
