Montgomery is the second N.H.L. coach in recent weeks to lose his job for behavior unrelated to his team’s performance.
Montgomery is the second coach in recent weeks to lose his job for behavior unrelated to his team’s performance. Calgary Flames Coach Bill Peters resigned on Nov. 29 after being accused of directing racial slurs at a black player 10 years ago while coaching in the minor leagues. Peters had also been accused of kicking and punching players on the bench while he was coach of the Carolina Hurricanes from 2014 to 2018.
At a news conference, Nill said he would not elaborate on what behavior led to Montgomery’s dismissal “out of respect for everyone involved.” Nill described the incident, which occurred last week, as “a material act of unprofessionalism.” He added that it did not involve a criminal investigation, any abuse of current or former players, or another employee of the team.
In addition to Peters’s situation, Mike Babcock was called a bully after being fired by the Toronto Maple Leafs last month. The Chicago Blackhawks recently suspended the assistant coach Marc Crawford as they investigate accusations that he physically abused players.
On Monday, Bettman announced a mandatory annual training program for the league’s coaches on diversity and inclusion.
“Our message is unequivocal: We will not tolerate abusive behavior of any kind,” he said.
Nill said that Montgomery’s firing was unrelated to the N.H.L.’s new initiative. The Stars became aware of his conduct on Sunday night; Nill said the team completed its internal investigation and made its decision before Bettman’s announcement.
Bettman also said that teams were “on notice” to report conduct involving N.H.L. personnel that is “inappropriate, unlawful or demonstrably abusive” to the league and that the N.H.L. would create a system in which instances of inappropriate conduct could be reported anonymously.
Montgomery, 50, was hired in May 2018 after five seasons at the University of Denver, where he won a national championship in 2017. He was the rare N.H.L. coach to make the jump from the college ranks. The Stars reached the playoffs in his first N.H.L. season, losing in the second round, and are 17-11-3 this season. The assistant Rick Bowness will be the interim head coach.
Dave Caldwell contributed reporting.