Wirecutter|I Tested 13 Bidets. I’m a Convert.
The difference between a bidet and a washlet, and why you might love one, too.
Mr. Mahoney is a senior staff writer at Wirecutter, a product recommendation site owned by The New York Times Company.
If you had told me I’d be turning my toilet into a backside-washing fountain, I wouldn’t have believed it. But after installing and using 13 bidets for Wirecutter (priced between $30 and $1,000) over the past 90 days, I now — like nearly everyone who can get past the uncontrollable giggles of those first few uses — count myself among the converted.
If you aren’t already familiar, a bidet uses a focused spray of water to clean your backside after you’ve used the toilet. They’re popular in parts of Europe, Latin America, and especially Japan. Yet before I tested them for Wirecutter, the idea of using one had never once crossed my mind. But now I feel cleaner when I use them, and I like that my hands are well away from the action — although I do still swoop in with a toilet paper pat-dry once the washing is over.
The best of these attachments offer a lot more than a simple spray of cleansing water. The fancier ones amp up your toilet time with heated seats, deodorizers, and even pre-mist functions, which spray the bowl as you sit, so that things are less likely to hang around after the flush.
Of these features, the heated seat is a real standout. Experiencing one feels as pleasant as walking barefoot across radiant floor heating for the first time.
Cost is entirely dependent on what features you’re after, but the $200 to $500 range is the sweet spot for a fully functional wash and the added toilet features, like a heated seat. The least expensive models, costing between $20 and $100, use cold water and typically have little more than a rudimentary pressure control. The cold water isn’t as bad as it sounds, but the lack of spray control and heated seat is noticeable. It’s probably why so many bidet newbies start with the cold-water models but soon upgrade to a more feature-rich electric bidet.
Not all bidet features are for everyone, but there are a few essentials that were consistent in the bidets I liked the best.
Water control: For the most pleasant experience, you should be able to do a lot with the spray of water as it showers your bottom. At a minimum, this means adjustable water temperature and pressure. I also preferred models with some forward and backward directional controls and settings for an oscillating and pulsating spray. The wider the range of options, the more you (and the people you live with) can dial in what’s most comfortable and effective.
Remote control: These are easy to use, have a clean look, and can be mounted on the wall in a convenient spot or simply placed on a vanity or nearby shelf. The other option is a control panel that sticks out from the side of the seat. Both of these do the same job, but I had to twist my body around to see the panel buttons. If you’re a larger person, this only becomes more difficult. The control panel is also not as discreet as the remote.
Heated seat: This is really a standard feature on electric bidets, but it’s just so nice that I wanted to mention it again. I love the heated seat even more than I love the bidet.
The bidet attachment I like the best, and the one we recommend at Wirecutter, is the Toto Washlet C200. It includes a full range of spray controls, temperature controls, and, of course, the beloved heated seat. But what really sets this model apart is the remote control. Operating the C200 is so intuitive that my 5- and 7-year-old kids picked it up with hardly any instruction at all. This also means that a curious house guest might even give it a try (either way, I guarantee that a bidet is an amazing conversation starter).
The C200 has other features that aren’t essential but that some might enjoy. The air dryer works but takes quite a while, as on all the bidets I tested. There is also an exhaust fan, to clear the air, and the bowl pre-mist feature. Both are fine, but they kick on automatically when you sit down, and I found them too distracting first thing in the morning. Others liked these features, so it’s purely a matter of personal preference. What’s so nice about the C200 is that if you choose to shut these off, it’s really easy to do with the remote. On other models, I had to scour the instruction manuals and, in one case, search the internet for a way to stop the automatic features.
The C200 usually costs more than $400, so it’s a big investment, but it’s right in the midrange for a full-featured electric bidet.
If you’ve never used a bidet before, getting one is a leap of faith. So if you’re not sure that a focused spray of water directed straight at your backside is your kind of thing, you can opt for a much cheaper cold-water model, such as the Brondell SimpleSpa Thinline Bidet Attachment (SS-250). Like the other stripped-down cold-water models, it has only a cold-water sprayer, pressure control, and a self-clean function. The SimpleSpa model has a sleeker look than many others, and, at around $30, its price falls in line with similar entry-level models. It doesn’t require an outlet.
The SimpleSpa is a good place to start, but it really shows only a fraction of what a bidet attachment can be. Once you get used to cleaning yourself with a spray of water, don’t be surprised if you find yourself considering a more advanced model, like the C200. By leveling up, at the very least you get the heated seat, and I guarantee you’ll like that.
What to Buy is a new series in collaboration with Wirecutter, the New York Times Company that reviews products. Want buying advice from the experts, or need help picking out the right thing for the right job? Email Smarter Living Editor Alan Henry at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| and we’ll look into it for you!
