The busy character actor was also known for “Benson,” “Boston Legal” and several Broadway roles.
René Auberjonois, a sought-after character actor whose hundreds of roles included a governor’s officious assistant in “Benson,” an alien security officer on “Star Trek: Deep Space Nine,” a managing partner in “Boston Legal” and a con man who gets Huck Finn into hot water in the Broadway musical “Big River,” died on Sunday at his home in Los Angeles. He was 79.
His son, the actor Rèmy-Luc Auberjonois, said the cause was metastatic lung cancer.
Mr. Auberjonois moved easily among television, film and the stage, and between comedy and drama, often playing scene-stealing characters who injected comic relief or snark or a plot wrinkle into the proceedings.
In “M*A*S*H” (1970), the first of several Robert Altman films in which Mr. Auberjonois appeared, he was Father Mulcahy, the chaplain for an offbeat medical unit during the Korean War. 
In the 1980s, in “Benson,” an ABC sitcom in which Robert Guillaume, as the title character, rose from butler to lieutenant governor over seven seasons, Mr. Auberjonois was Clayton Endicott III, a chief of staff who was as self-important as his name but also painfully insecure. In 1989, young moviegoers came to know him, or his voice, from “The Little Mermaid,” in which he was the chef who sings “Les Poissons,” a gleefully gruesome song about preparing fish for cooking.
In one of his most recent roles, Mr. Auberjonois played an international security official in several episodes of the CBS drama “Madam Secretary” whose job was often to convey bad news.
Major roles on long-running television shows in three decades — “Benson” in the 1980s, “Deep Space Nine” in the 1990s and “Boston Legal” in the 2000s — made him the kind of star whose face was familiar to millions, even if they might not immediately be able to put a name to it. Across almost 60 years as a professional actor, he was rarely not in demand.
He amassed more than 40 additional acting and voice-over credits after that.
Returning to the United States, the family settled in an artists’ colony in upstate New York; John Houseman, who would become a mentor to Mr. Auberjonois, lived nearby.
When he was 16, Mr. Houseman got him a job as an apprentice at the American Shakespeare Theater in Stratford, Conn. He graduated from the Carnegie Institute of Technology (now Carnegie Mellon University) in 1962 with a bachelor’s degree in fine arts.
Mr. Auberjonois began his professional career as a theater actor, performing with the American Conservatory Theater in Pittsburgh and San Francisco, among others. He made his Broadway debut in 1968 playing the fool in a production of “King Lear,” with Lee J. Cobb as Lear.
He did not consider himself a singer, yet some of his most prominent stage roles were in musicals, among them “Coco” and the 1985 Broadway production of “Big River,” the Huck Finn story, in which he played the Duke, earning a Tony nomination.
He appeared in episodes of seemingly every television show of the 1970s: “Starsky & Hutch,” “The Rockford Files,” “The Bob Newhart Show,” “Charlie’s Angels” and many more. “Benson,” which he joined in 1980 in its second season, made him a regular in American living rooms.
Mr. Auberjonois was thrust into a whole different level of fame when he took on the role of Odo, a stern shape-shifter and the security chief of the Federation space station Deep Space Nine, on the 1990s “Star Trek” spinoff, which ran for 173 episodes (several of which he directed). Mr. Auberjonois turned up at various fan fests for the “Star Trek” franchise and enjoyed the adulation — but as himself, not as an alien.
His other films included “McCabe & Mrs. Miller” (1971), “The Hindenburg” (1975), “Where the Buffalo Roam” (1980) and “Batman Forever” (1995). He recently completed “Raising Buchanan,” a comedy about a woman who steals President James Buchanan’s corpse. He plays Buchanan.
In addition to his son, Mr. Auberjonois is survived by his wife, Judith (Mihalyi) Auberjonois, whom he married in 1963; a daughter, the actress Tessa Auberjonois; two sisters, Marie-Laure Degener and Anne Auberjonois; and three grandchildren.
Mr. Auberjonois was an amateur artist, enjoying drawing, painting, photography and sculpture. At “Star Trek” conventions he would sometimes sell personalized cartoons to fans, the proceeds going to Doctors Without Borders, a favorite charity.
Another recipient of his artwork was William Shatner, his co-star on “Boston Legal,” who became a close friend. The two men shared a “Star Trek” connection, Mr. Shatner having played Captain James T. Kirk in the original television series.
“He loved my artwork,” Mr. Auberjonois said of Mr. Shatner, addressing an audience at a 2017 fan event in Denver. “He always reminded me — he’d say, ‘You know, in the bathroom of my office, there’s a whole wall of your drawings.’” The look Mr. Auberjonois threw in brought the house down.