In a little over an hour, an Iowa woman engaged in a trio of attacks, two of which the police said were racially motivated.
An Iowa woman who said she ran over a girl because she thought she was “a Mexican” was charged Monday in another hit-and-run involving a child, as well as in a separate hate crime — three attacks that the police said happened in a little over an hour.
That case was one of three episodes that unfolded on Dec. 9, according to the authorities.
On Monday, she was charged with attempted murder in a separate hit-and-run case involving a 12-year-old boy, the authorities said.
In that case, Ms. Franklin, 42, struck the boy, who was walking on the sidewalk of a Des Moines apartment complex with her Jeep Cherokee just before 4 p.m. local time, the police said.
Witnesses told the police that the S.U.V. accelerated immediately before the crash, which officials said left the boy with minor injuries. Ms. Franklin was charged with attempted murder in that case.
Sgt. Paul J. Parizek, a Des Moines Police Department spokesman, said on Monday night that Ms. Franklin did not make any statements to investigators about striking the boy, so they could not confirm her motive in that case.
At 4:45 p.m., Ms. Franklin yelled racial epithets at a Conoco convenience store clerk and a customer in West Des Moines, according to a police report.
On Monday, the police announced that Ms. Franklin had been charged with a hate crime for the tirade, in addition to public intoxication and a shoplifting charge of fifth-degree theft. The items she took were valued at $6.80 and included a bag of peanuts, an ice cream cone and a beef jerky stick, according to a police report.
Then, just before 5 p.m., Ms. Franklin drove her vehicle into a 14-year-old girl who was walking on the sidewalk to a junior high school in the Des Moines suburb of Clive, the police there said.
The girl sustained a concussion and bruises that required her to be hospitalized, according to the television station KCCI, which interviewed the victim, who was later discharged.
Ms. Franklin was charged with attempted murder in that case. She also made derogatory comments about Latinos to investigators, said Michael G. Venema, the police chief in Clive.
It was not immediately clear if Ms. Franklin had a lawyer.
Investigators used security camera footage from the first hit-and-run to identify Ms. Franklin, the chief said.