Expecting to become engaged during the holidays? Here are a few tips on how to enjoy the moment and create your own rules.
The holidays are here, and so is the season for marriage proposals.
The peak time for many couples to become engaged is typically from Thanksgiving to Valentine’s Day. Of the 10 most popular days to propose, six take place during the holidays, with Christmas Day the most favored of all, according to WeddingWire.
Holiday engagements, though, can often bring added stress to an already stressful time of year.
A couple discusses a mutual desire to marry.
Loved ones of the person being proposed to are consulted for their blessing.
The proposer pops the question.
The proposal is accepted and the couple share the good news publicly.
Mrs. Rodriguez-Soto and Mr. Suro, both 36, were living in Puerto Rico at the time, and only two jewelers were licensed to sell from the jeweler. The ring was more expensive than Mr. Suro had anticipated and took three months to arrive. “Of course Lily is asking and I didn’t tell her the ring was on order,” he said.
Finally, the day before Thanksgiving in 2013, Mrs. Rodriguez-Soto came home from work to find a Christmas tree. Mr. Suro reached for a little blue box hiding underneath and asked her to marry him. “It was a beautiful moment for us,” Mrs. Rodriguez-Soto said. “And I got to show off the ring at Thanksgiving dinner.” The couple married a year later the day after Christmas. This year they are celebrating with their daughter Claudia, born last December.
The couple, were married in Maui this past June.
While many proposals signify a couple’s growth, others may highlight areas that need improvement.
This proposal seemed to illustrate why the couple had first come to coaching: The woman didn’t feel heard by her partner. He had assumed since she was private in her career as a fertility specialist, Ms. Mattenson said, that she wanted a private proposal, which wasn’t the case.
Gay couples have led the way in creating their own rules and traditions when it comes to proposals and marriage.
The days of men being the only proposer in heterosexual relationships are also declining.
Angelina Lombardo, 49, the author of “The Spiritual Entrepreneur: Quantum Leap into Your Next Level of Impact and Abundance,” which was recently published, is excited to propose to her partner of two years, Brian Perry, 53. Both divorced parents, the couple have built a life together with her daughter and his two children, including joining their bank accounts as they prepare to move to Europe. After being proposed to five times in previous relationships and married, it was at the encouragement of Ms. Lombardo’s only child, her daughter Shamana Seeger, 23, that she plans to propose this time.
This shift in proposals may mean more romance showered on men. According to a study by WalletJoy, nearly one in five millennial women said they would be willing to propose to her partner.
