The government says it is trying to protect religious minorities from being persecuted in Muslim countries. Indian Muslims say the bill is discriminatory, and protests are spreading.
NEW DELHI — The upper house of the Indian Parliament passed a contentious citizenship bill on Wednesday, bringing a religiously polarizing measure one step closer to law as new protests erupted across the country.
The measure, called the Citizenship Amendment Bill, uses religion as a criterion for determining whether illegal migrants in India can be fast-tracked for citizenship. The bill favors members of all South Asia’s major religions except Islam, and leaders of India’s 200-million-strong Muslim community have called it blatant discrimination.
The Rajya Sabha, India’s version of a senate, approved the bill in a 125-to-105 vote. It next goes to the president’s desk, where it is expected to be signed into law in the coming days.
Opponents of the legislation in India and international rights groups have called the bill a major blow to India’s long-held commitment to a secular democracy. Officials in Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s government have insisted that the legislation would protect human rights.
The bill is a central piece of a far-reaching agenda by Mr. Modi and his Bharatiya Janata Party, which has long espoused a Hindu-centric worldview.
India is around 80 percent Hindu, with a large Muslim minority, and many of Mr. Modi’s supporters believe India should emphasize its Hindu identity as much as possible and become more of an overtly Hindu nation. India’s founding leaders, Mohandas K. Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru, resisted this, insisting on keeping India a secular state and carving out special protections for minorities, including Muslims.
Mr. Modi is popular and powerful, and his political party is one of the most dominant forces that India has produced in decades. Still, it has plenty of detractors, and protests over the bill have grown bigger and more violent throughout the week.
Late Wednesday, the Indian government shut down the internet in many districts in the state of Assam and called up the army in other areas to quell the chaos. The police were already battling demonstrators with water cannons and tear gas.
Protests have broken out in Aligarh, Bhopal, Deoband, Jaipur and several cities in the northeast, where the bill could have the largest effect by allowing Hindu migrants to settle legally in areas where locals have expressed anti-migrant sentiments.
The Indian government has promised to protect indigenous rights in these areas, but that has failed to quash suspicions or resentments.
More than 1,000 protesters gathered in the heart of Assam’s commercial capital, Guwahati, yelling: “Go Back Modi!” In other places, angry men set fire to tires and stomped on effigies of Mr. Modi.
As the protests spread, many people debated what kind of country India should be.
But this bill, the intellectuals said, is “a radical break with this history” and will “greatly strain the pluralistic fabric of the country."
The citizenship legislation, which passed through the lower house of Parliament on Monday, follows hand in hand with a divisive citizenship test conducted this summer in one of India’s states and possibly soon to be expanded nationwide.
All residents of the state of Assam, along the Bangladesh border, had to produce documentary proof that they or their ancestors had lived in India since 1971. Around two million of Assam’s population of 33 million — a mix of Hindus and Muslims — failed to pass the test, and these people now risk being rendered stateless. Huge new prisons are being built to incarcerate anyone determined to be an illegal immigrant.
Some of those who have been arrested have lived in India for generations.
Migrants who are Muslim — which might include people who have lived in India for generations but were unable to produce an old property deed or birth certificate to prove it — would not be afforded the same protection.
But, he said, the citizenship bill has “nothing to do with the Muslims of India. It relates to foreign Muslims who have infiltrated into India over the years."
The big question many Muslims in India are now asking is: Who will be considered an Indian citizen? And who will be considered an illegal foreigner?
Many of the people who failed to pass the citizenship test in Assam had lived in India all their lives, felt deeply Indian and were despondent to be stricken from the citizenship rolls. Some even killed themselves, including a 14-year-old girl from a small village.
Where all of this is going is hardly clear. Even if India rounds up thousands of people the government considers illegal migrants and puts them into the newly built prisons, it will not be easy to deport them.
Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan will be unlikely to accept India’s determination of citizenship, especially if it seems that most of those being slated for removal are Muslims.
India’s home minister, Amit Shah, considered the second most powerful man in the country, has vowed two things: to bring the citizenship tests nationwide and to protect Hindus knocked off the citizenship rolls.
Mr. Mander, who said he was born a Sikh, said that if the bill passed he would declare himself a Muslim to stand in solidarity with “my undocumented Muslim sisters and brothers."