A meeting with Nicolas Sarkozy, Michel Platini and Qatar’s prime minister draws scrutiny.
The investigation, which will be led by a judge, follows a three year operation by prosecutors specializing in financial crimes into the decision in December 2010. More than half of the 22 members of FIFA’s executive committee who voted have since been either accused of corruption or prosecuted for it.
French investigators have particularly focused on the case because of a meeting that took place at the Élysée Palace, the official residence of France’s president, a month before the vote. It was there that Nicolas Sarkozy, France’s president at the time, and two close aides, held a lunch with Michel Platini, a former head of European soccer and an influential voter in the choice of World Cup venues, and Qatar’s then prime minister.
Platini has been questioned twice by authorities. Most recently he was detained in June, along with the two aides to Sarkozy present at the lunch. Days earlier, in an interview with The New York Times, he said he had done nothing wrong.
Qatar has issued strong denials of corruption since the day it was picked to host the World Cup. That has not stopped a string of lurid allegations and claims over how the wealthy country managed to convince FIFA’s board members that it was more suitable than rivals including Japan, South Korea, Australia and the United States, which it defeated in a final runoff vote.
Platini, a French former midfield great who won the Ballon d’Or three times during his playing career, was barred from soccer for four years in 2015 after an investigation into a payment of 2 million Swiss francs, or about $2 million, authorized by Blatter, who was also barred. Platini’s soccer ban ended in October, and he has vowed to clear his name. FIFA has started legal proceedings to reclaim the money received by Platini.
France’s financial crimes prosecutors have been among the most active in pursuing allegations against Qatar. In a separate case, they filed preliminary charges against Nasser el Khelaifi and Yousef al-Obaidly, the most-senior figures at Qatar-based beIN Media Group, on suspicion of bribing officials during the bidding process for track and field’s world championships. Both men deny the allegations.