An admiring colleague said of the writer Alice Adams that she “threw a different kind of light on women and what they want, or think they want.” In one of Adams’s late stories, “Old Love Affairs” — published in The New Yorker less than four years before the author’s death in 1999 — Lucretia, a woman of a certain age, thinks she wants to have sex with a bearded fellow named Burt. After much effort he proves to be impotent, and instead moves “heavily, laboriously” downward to try a different approach. Lucretia feels sorry for him and pretends to enjoy herself so he’ll stop sooner. “It’s wonderful to give you pleasure,” he whispers into her ear afterward.
The disappointments of romance — “the great subject” of Adams’s life and work, as Carol Sklenicka writes in her new biography, “Alice Adams: Portrait of a Writer” — were all the more muddled with her other great subject, family misery, given that her father’s psychiatrist seduced her as a teenager. Indeed, Adams’s youth was largely a matter of amassing material for the late-blooming literary career. The end of her dismal marriage to Mark Linenthal coincided with her first published story, “Winter Rain,” at 32, whereupon she resumed having love affairs for many years while “writing as a sort of sideline,” as she put it.
As a writer Adams was often compared to Mary McCarthy, Jane Austen and John Updike, but her own favorite touchstone was F. Scott Fitzgerald, whose work she read again and again. “I don’t care for plot at all,” she replied when a friend dismissed her favorite Fitzgerald story, “The Rich Boy,” as “formless”; certainly Adams’s stories tend to proceed as a series of evocative, loosely ordered set pieces, impressions — or better just call them memories (“I really have no imagination at all,” she said, “just a terrific memory”) — revolving around the author’s childhood in Chapel Hill (often called Hilton in the stories), college at Radcliffe and later years in San Francisco.
Sklenicka is prudent and appreciative in her assessment of Adams’s work, but gives no explanation, except obliquely, for the simple fact that Adams isn’t read anymore. Her novels, especially, are all but entirely forgotten. Describing her seventh, “Caroline’s Daughters” (1991), Sklenicka ticks off the lurid plot elements (“a Mafioso-style murder, domestic abuse and rape, a homeless former doctor’s wife, a stock-market crash and a restaurant teetering toward bankruptcy”), then reports that the novel sold poorly because of competition from Danielle Steel on “the sleaze side” and from the likes of Jane Smiley and Milan Kundera on “the literary side.” And yet as a writer of short stories — the genre for which she reserved her finer perceptions — Adams was one of only four writers to receive the O. Henry Special Award, the others being Updike, Alice Munro and Joyce Carol Oates. “The Stories of Alice Adams,” a vast and splendid collection republished by Vintage in November, may restore her to such august company.