The next-highest rating, NC-16, would have barred children under 16 from attending.
Disney did not respond to a message sent on Tuesday.
There are few mainstream media representations of L.G.B.T. people in Singapore, where sex between men is punishable by up to two years in prison and there are no protections against discrimination based on sexual orientation. Anti-gay sentiment runs high in the conservative nation; 60 percent of Singaporeans surveyed in 2018 opposed gay marriage, according to the Institute of Policy Studies, a think tank.
The scene was already hotly debated among gay rights supporters. Some applauded the kiss as an overdue acknowledgment that gay people exist in the “Star Wars” universe. But others thought it was tokenism, saying a more robust gesture was needed to reinforce the message.
Some fans, seeing a palpable chemistry between two of the main characters, Finn and Poe Dameron, played by John Boyega and Oscar Isaac, hoped their bromance might elevate into romance. The actors have said they would have supported the development.
“Part of the whole experience was to see a same-sex couple have a moment together that was explicitly saying in this galaxy, everyone is there and is welcome,” he said.
Major film studios, including Disney, routinely bend to local sensitivities in hopes of maintaining access to viewers, especially in the lucrative Chinese market. The kiss was also cut from screenings in Dubai, in the United Arab Emirates, according to The Hollywood Reporter, but China’s censors allowed it.
Disney has tiptoed into including gay characters in its biggest film franchises. Donald Glover, who played Lando Calrissian in the “Star Wars” spinoff “Solo,” said in an interview with HuffPost that the resistance leader was pansexual but it did not figure into the plot. A gay character made a brief appearance in “Avengers: Endgame,” and LeFou, Gaston’s sidekick in “Beauty and the Beast,” was presented as gay in a 2017 live-action remake.
Singapore’s law against gay sex, which applies only to men, has been challenged in its top courts. A verdict is expected in the coming months.