She also wrote or co-wrote “Neutron Dance” for the Pointer Sisters, “What Have I Done to Deserve This?” for the Pet Shop Boys and Dusty Springfield, and other hits.
Allee Willis, one of the music industry’s most colorful figures, whose eclectic credits as a writer and co-writer included Earth, Wind & Fire’s “September” and the “Friends” theme song, died on Tuesday at a hospital in Los Angeles. She was 72.
The cause was cardiac arrest, her publicist, Ellyn Solis, said.
The animator and producer Prudence Fenton, Ms. Willis’s partner of 27 years, posted a photo on Instagram with the caption: “Rest in Boogie Wonderland,” referring to the Earth, Wind & Fire disco hit that Ms. Willis wrote with Jon Lind.
Ms. Willis, who grew up in Detroit, never learned to play music. But she was drawn to Motown as a child, and said she learned how to become a songwriter by sitting on the lawn outside the record company’s studios and listening to the rhythms seeping through the building’s walls.
“A lot of times I would learn a bass line and then I’d hear the records and I’d go, Oh, that was ‘I Heard It Through the Grapevine,’” she told The New York Times last year.
She attributed her career to her love of Motown.
“September,” released in 1978, was an instant smash and went on to become a staple at wedding receptions, with its driving beat and its opening lines, “Do you remember/The 21st night of September?,” all but guaranteed to propel people onto the dance floor.
Later songs included Top 10 hits for the Pointer Sisters (“Neutron Dance”) and the Pet Shop Boys and Dusty Springfield (“What Have I Done to Deserve This?”), as well as tracks for Ray Charles, Sister Sledge, Cyndi Lauper, Nona Hendryx, Taylor Dayne and Toni Basil.
Along with Stephen Bray and Brenda Russell, she wrote the music for the Tony-winning musical adaptation of Alice Walker’s novel “The Color Purple,” which ran on Broadway from 2005 to 2008. When it was revived on Broadway in 2016, she was part of the team that earned a Grammy for best musical theater album.
In 2018 she was inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame. But songwriting was far from her only passion. She was well known as a collector of kitsch, and her pink 1937 Los Angeles home housed her collection of candy-colored ephemera, cataloged online at her Museum of Kitsch.
Her passions also included making art (the walls of her home are lined with works by Bubbles the Artist, her alter ego), the internet (in the ’90s she developed her own social network of sorts, called Willisville), and hosting wild parties that drew a fascinating cross section of Hollywood.
Allee Willis was born on Nov. 10, 1947, in Detroit, where she was raised. Her father, Nathan, was a scrapyard dealer; her mother, Rose, was a schoolteacher. Her mother died suddenly in 1964, when Allee was a teenager.
In addition to Ms. Fenton, Ms. Willis’s survivors include her brother, Kent, and her sister, Marlen Frost.
After college, she moved to New York City. Within a month of starting as a secretary at Columbia Records, she was promoted to the advertising department, where she worked with artists she idolized, among then Barbra Streisand, Laura Nyro and Janis Joplin.
“Childstar,” Ms. Willis’s first and only album as an artist, was a disappointment. She realized she hated performing, and Columbia dropped her.
For nearly four years, Ms. Willis checked hats at a comedy club and hung posters for a cabaret.
At the beginning of 1978, she was living on food stamps. But then she met Mr. White of Earth, Wind & Fire, and she helped him write the lyrics to “September.” It reached No. 1 on the Billboard R&B singles chart and No. 8 on the pop chart. By the end of the year it had sold 10 million records.
In recent years, she shifted gears to performing one-woman shows and curating her museum-home, known as Willis Wonderland.
She never lost her curiosity and ambition to do as much as possible.
