The president suggested he lacked confidence in his own F.B.I. director, who did not share his negative view of a long-awaited inspector general report.
WASHINGTON — President Trump and Attorney General William P. Barr took aim at the F.B.I. on Tuesday, escalating their attacks on the bureau a day after an independent watchdog concluded that former F.B.I. officials had adequate reason in 2016 to open the investigation into the Trump campaign’s ties to Russia.
Mr. Barr said for a second straight day that he disagreed with the finding in a long-awaited report by the inspector general, Michael E. Horowitz, that the F.B.I. lawfully opened its inquiry. And he went further, saying that Obama administration officials had spied on the president’s associates and, in the process, jeopardized civil liberties.
“The greatest danger to our free system is that the incumbent government use the apparatus of the state, principally the law enforcement and intelligence agencies, both to spy on political opponents but also to use them in a way that could affect the outcome of an election,” Mr. Barr said in an interview with NBC News.
While Mr. Barr was careful to reserve his accusations for Obama-era F.B.I. and intelligence officials, Mr. Trump drew no such boundaries and attacked his handpicked F.B.I. director, Christopher A. Wray, who has said he accepted the inspector general’s findings and had ordered 40 corrective steps to address the report’s recommendations.
The fallout from the inspector general’s report was the latest example of the scrambling of traditional political alliances in the Trump era. A president and an attorney general from the Republican Party, long an ally of law enforcement, questioned the accuracy of the report and their trust in the F.B.I. itself.
He said bureau officials have explained that they opened the investigation in 2016 at a time when Russia was suspected of hacking into Democratic servers to steal emails that WikiLeaks later released. That itself helped prompt the Australian government to tell American officials that a Trump campaign aide had revealed an offer from a Russian intermediary of information that could damage the campaign of Mr. Trump’s opponent, Hillary Clinton.
“They opened a counterintelligence investigation on the whole campaign,” Mr. Barr said at a Wall Street Journal conference in Washington on Tuesday. “The proper response was to talk to the campaign,” he added, saying that law enforcement officials commonly give so-called defensive briefings to political campaigns to warn them about attempted intrusions by or other issues with foreign governments.
Mr. Barr noted that it was a highly unusual step for the F.B.I. to investigate people associated with a presidential campaign. But he failed to capture the extraordinary nature of the 2016 election, which the inspector general report underscored, and omitted context relevant to F.B.I. officials’ decision to open the Russia inquiry.
For example, though Mr. Trump himself was not under investigation, his actions puzzled agents. Days after the stolen Democratic emails became public, he called on Russia to uncover more. Then news broke that his campaign had pressed to change the Republican Party platform’s stance on Ukraine in ways that were favorable to Russia.
Additionally, two Trump campaign advisers were already separately under federal investigation. And investigators stayed within protocol in opening the Russia inquiry, Mr. Horowitz found; the F.B.I.’s guidelines do not suggest extra steps or safeguards to take in opening such a sensitive and politically explosive investigation.
Mr. Barr said at the conference that another investigation he has opened, led by John H. Durham, the United States attorney in Connecticut, would resolve why the F.B.I. investigated four Trump campaign advisers.
Mr. Durham issued an unusual statement on Monday publicly disputing the inspector general’s findings about how the case was opened. Coming amid an active investigation with high-stakes political implications, the comment was reminiscent of the 2016 decision by James B. Comey, the F.B.I. director at the time, to publicly discuss the bureau’s investigation of Mrs. Clinton’s use of a private email server. He was eviscerated for publicly discussing an investigation that ended without charges.
The bureau’s applications for a court order approving the wiretap of a former Trump campaign adviser, Carter Page, and three renewals of it made up the bulk of Mr. Horowitz’s scrutiny of the Russia investigation but were a relatively small part of the sprawling inquiry.
Mr. Horowitz said the bureau had a reasonable basis to open the inquiry, but he uncovered mistakes made by the F.B.I. in working to wiretap Mr. Page, including exculpatory evidence that could have hurt the bureau’s ability to obtain its warrant, and said they were never adequately explained. Many of the problems centered on the F.B.I.’s reliance for the wiretap application on a notorious dossier of unverified, salacious information about Mr. Trump compiled by a British former spy, Christopher Steele.
While Mr. Horowitz ruled out political motivations, he said in his report that he could not otherwise account for the withholding of the information from the secretive surveillance court that approved the wiretap.
Lawyers for Mr. Steele issued a lengthy statement on Tuesday pushing back on parts of the report, including material that indicated that Mr. Steele’s primary source of information later contradicted the veracity of his dossier.
“I think our nation was turned on its head for three years based on a completely bogus narrative that was largely fanned and hyped by a completely irresponsible press,” Mr. Barr said on Tuesday.
Mr. Wray had largely managed to avoid the president’s withering criticism targeted at the bureau, the Justice Department and intelligence agencies. The director and his aides had expressed hope that with the release of the inspector general report, the F.B.I. could finally move past the toxic politics of recent years.
But when Mr. Wray said on Monday that he concurred with Mr. Horowitz’s finding that political bias had not influenced investigative decisions in the Russia inquiry, he undercut Mr. Trump’s yearslong accusations.
He also seemed to push back on the president in another aspect. Mr. Wray said he had no information to support the assertion that Ukraine interfered in the 2016 election, as many of Mr. Trump’s supporters have said in trying to attack the accusations about the president’s dealings with Kyiv that are the subject of House Democrats’ impeachment investigation.
“It’s important for the American people to be thoughtful consumers of information, to think about the sources of it and to think about the support and predication for what they hear,” Mr. Wray told ABC News.
While there was little expectation that the inspector general’s conclusions would stop the partisan attacks on the Russia inquiry, the president’s suggestion that he lacked confidence in Mr. Wray’s ability to “fix” the bureau raised the possibility that he was considering replacing Mr. Wray, which would give the president his third F.B.I. director since he took office. The director position has a 10-year term limit devised specifically to prevent political interference.
Another former F.B.I. official whose actions Mr. Trump has frequently held up as evidence of bias against him, Lisa Page, sued the Justice Department on Tuesday, accusing officials of illegally releasing text messages she exchanged with a former bureau investigator that expressed animus toward Mr. Trump. Ms. Page said that the messages were released to reporters in violation of privacy laws.
The disclosures “caused Ms. Page significant harm and financial loss,” the lawsuit said.
