Lanfranco Dettori’s game face is anything but the strained, pained expression many jockeys wear when they arrive at the paddock for major races. When many others are deep in thought about scenarios that may unfold on the track, he poses for photos and greets strangers as if he has known them forever.
Dettori, also know as Frankie, seemingly offers a hug and a kiss on the cheek to everyone, but when he went to embrace Aly Orseno, the 10-year-old daughter of the trainer Joseph Orseno, before he rode Imprimis in the King’s Stand Stakes at Royal Ascot in June, the child shied away. Dettori thought the rebuff was hilarious.
“She wanted no part of that,” her father said.
Dettori, who turns 49 on Dec. 15, could not be more comfortable than he is at the track. He spent much of his boyhood there since his father, Gianfranco, was a jockey in Sardinia. He quit school to learn to ride when he was 13. He earned his first victory when he was 16.
His confidence, combined with what is vast experience and a riding style he described as “quite natural,” has taken him to rare heights at a time when his physical skills could be expected to diminish and his enthusiasm to wane.
This week, he was named the Longines World’s Best Jockey for the third time in five years. This year he won seven times at Royal Ascot and had his 250th Group 1 triumph, achieved aboard Star Catcher in the Qipco British Champions Filly & Mare Stakes, on Oct. 19 at Ascot Racecourse.
“I feel I got him at the top of his career rather than on the other side,” said the trainer John Gosden, who helped revive Dettori’s career after the jockey’s 18-year relationship with the horse operation Godolphin ended in 2012.
Gosden never hesitated in stepping up after Godolphin stepped away.
Dettori and the staid, professorial Gosden, 68, appear to be an odd pairing. Yet they complement each other.
Gosden appreciates Dettori’s willingness to assist the operation by working with their finest horses in the morning. Dettori views that time as a key to victories that lead to his hands-in-the-air flying dismount.
“Jockey is a very fine name, but we are actually psychiatrists of horses because we have to find what makes them tick,” he said. “We don’t just get on them and gallop them for the sake of it. We have to find their character and try to get the best out of them.
Dettori coddles Enable. He has driven to the stable to feed peppermints to the mare who is a two-time winner of the Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe and winner of the 2018 Breeders’ Cup Turf.
“She has emotionally taken me places no other horses have,” Dettori said.
Gosden looks forward to having Dettori aboard Enable next year after the decision to campaign her as a 6-year-old. The trainer allows the veteran jockey to work at his own pace.
Dettori’s relaxed approach appears to help him routinely make correct split-second calls. He said he no longer allowed “silly things” to trouble him since he survived a small-plane crash in 2000 that killed the pilot.
Even before the crash, his demeanor never reflected the gravity of the moment.
Dettori credited his wife, Catherine, with doing the heavy lifting in raising their five children. “I’m the sixth child,” he said.