A New York state judge on Tuesday handed Exxon Mobil a victory in the civil case brought by the state’s attorney general that argued the company had engaged in fraud through its statements about how it accounted for the costs of climate change regulation.
After some four years of investigation and millions of pages of documents produced by the company, the judge said, attorney general Letitia James and her staff “failed to establish by a preponderance of the evidence” that Exxon violated the Martin Act, New York’s powerful legal tool against shareholder fraud, in the closely watched case.
Throughout the 12 days of hearings, there were indications that the judge, Barry Ostrager, might rule against the state. He seemed frequently impatient with the presentation by the attorney general’s staff, and was fully engaged in the testimony from the company’s former chairman, Rex Tillerson.
The state argued that Exxon was essentially keeping two sets of books in regard to climate change: one presented to the public that accounted for the potential future costs and another internal set in which those costs were disregarded. The state was asking for as much as $1.6 billion to be paid in restitution to shareholders.
Exxon’s lead attorney, Ted Wells, Jr., countered that the company had developed a “robust” system for dealing with future climate costs, and that its statements about its accounting for such costs were not misleading.
The judge, who called the attorney general’s lawsuit “hyperbolic” in his decision, accepted Exxon’s argument that its internal practices to evaluate the possible costs of regulations of greenhouse gases on future projects “do not impact the company’s financial statements and other corporate books and records” at issue in the shareholder fraud charges. He said the state had presented no testimony that any shareholder had been misled, and that a company report that the state had argued was misleading was, based on evidence presented at trial, “essentially ignored by the investment community.” As a result, he said, the company had not made “any material misrepresentations” that would have misled a reasonable investor.
The decision in the civil case brought by New York’s attorney general that argued that the company had engaged in fraud through its statements about how it accounted for the costs of climate change regulation.
While a powerful tool for attorneys general, the Martin Act was, ultimately, not right for this case, said Michael Gerrard, director of the Sabin Center for Climate Change Law at Columbia.
This is not the end of legal entanglements for Exxon Mobil and other fossil fuel companies over climate change.
A large number of cities and counties across the United States, as well as the state of Rhode Island, are pursing lawsuits against the oil industry seeking compensation for their costs in dealing with climate change. While some judges have met those cases with skepticism, including a federal judge in New York City, many of the cases are moving forward.
