U.S.|Weinstein’s Accusers Near a $25 Million Settlement. He Pays the Victims Zero.
Weinstein’s Accusers Near a $25 Million Settlement. He Pays the Victims Zero.
Dozens of his alleged sexual misconduct victims would split the payout and a large part of the money would flow to the attorneys.
Katherine Kendall, a 50-year-old actress, accused Harvey Weinstein of luring her, in 1993, to what she thought would be a work discussion and then chasing her around his New York apartment while he was nude.
Now she is one of dozens of alleged sexual misconduct victims who, after two years of legal wrangling, were nearing a tentative $25 million settlement this week with the disgraced Hollywood producer.
The deal would not require that he admit any wrongdoing or pay anything himself to the more than 30 victims — actresses and former Weinstein employees in the U.S., Canada, Britain and Ireland — who have accused him of offenses ranging from sexual harassment to rape.
And while many of them were disappointed with the end result, a lawyer representing one plaintiff said that holding out for more favorable terms might have left the alleged victims completely empty-handed.
I caught up with Megan Twohey and Jodi Kantor — the New York Times journalists who broke the Weinstein story in 2017 and authors of “She Said: Breaking the Sexual Harassment Story That Helped Ignite a Movement” (Read it!) — to take a closer look at the settlement and discuss what comes next.
A $25 million payout shared between dozens of victims doesn’t sound like a lot. Why do they get so little?
Jodi: What’s the right recompense for these kinds of allegations? It’s a hard question. Consider that a single one of [former Fox News host] Bill O’Reilly’s accusers was paid $32 million, while in this tentative civil settlement, dozens or more of Weinstein’s accusers will split the $25 million.
And a sizable chunk of that will flow into the pockets of the attorneys who represented the plaintiffs.
Megan: At one point, Weinstein’s accusers were told they would receive as much as $90 million but that amount kept shrinking once Weinstein’s company filed for bankruptcy, forcing the women to get in line with the company’s creditors, and Weinstein has claimed that he was on the verge of filing for personal bankruptcy.
Will any of this money come from Weinstein’s pocket?
Megan: Under this agreement, Weinstein and the board members of his bankrupt company are not required to pay any money to his alleged victims. All of the money for the settlement is coming from The Weinstein Company insurance policies. The insurance companies are also covering a portion of the legal costs for Weinstein and the board members.
Some people have been shocked and dismayed that insurance companies are paying for Weinstein’s alleged sexual harassment and abuse — but this is the way insurance policies work. 
You mention in the story that another trial on charges of sexual assault involving two women is scheduled for late January. Tell us more about that case. And why aren’t they part of this original settlement?
Megan: There are two separate tracks by which Weinstein can be held legally accountable, one civil, one criminal. This tentative settlement involves dozens of women from around the world who are seeking financial recompense under civil law for the alleged sexual misconduct they suffered. Separately, Weinstein is being prosecuted here in New York for allegedly sexually assaulting two women. This case is an attempt to hold Weinstein accountable under criminal law. If convicted, he will go to prison.
The trial is scheduled to begin January 6. The two alleged victims would not be able to bring civil lawsuits against Weinstein until the criminal case is resolved.
So does this basically mean that Weinstein goes unpunished? Is he essentially off the hook?
Jodi: No, because of that criminal trial that’s about to start. But it means that the separate, much broader attempt of dozens of women to hold him accountable is coming to an ambiguous resolution.
What surprised you the most when reporting this story?
Jodi: The more interesting question may be what surprised others. Ever since we published earlier this week, readers have been asking us: Wait, insurance can cover sexual harassment and even assault? And Weinstein can wipe these claims away, without reaching into his own pocket to pay the victims?
Readers: Fair? Unfair? Surprising? Inevitable? Write in and tell us your views on the resolution of the civil lawsuits against Harvey Weinstein.
