The Learning Network|How Is What You Are Studying in School Relevant to Your Life and the Larger World?
How Is What You Are Studying in School Relevant to Your Life and the Larger World?
How much do you see the things you care about reflected in what you learn?
Credit...Illustration by John Whitlock. Photograph of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., Marion S. Trikosko/Library of Congress; other photos from Allport Library and Museum of Fine Arts, Brendan Smialowski/Agence-France Presse, Justin Sullivan, and Murat Taner, all via Getty Images; and The New York Times.
Note: This question is inspired by our Connections and Analysis Unit and related contest, in which we invite teenagers to connect anything they’re studying in school with the world today. If you are participating in the contest, we invite you to use this as a kind of “rehearsal space” to post ideas and see how others respond.
And, even if you’re not participating, we’d love to hear your thoughts.
When was the last time you read, wrote, watched, listened to, practiced or otherwise studied something in one of your classes that felt relevant to your life outside school?
Maybe it’s easy to answer that — maybe you saw a film in history class that helped you understand the roots of an ongoing problem in your community, or maybe you read a poem in English that expressed things you often feel yourself, or studied a condition in science or health that affects someone you care about.
Or maybe your school offers courses that teach skills, like computer coding, wood shop, music or photography, that build on interests you have always had and like to explore beyond the school day.
If so, what have these classes taught you? How have you connected what you learned in them with your real life?
If it’s not so easy to answer this question, think about why. What are you studying? How could it be better connected to who you are, the things you care about and the things you’d like to know more about?
In 2018 we asked teachers how they made the content they teach relevant, and you can find over 40 examples in “When School Gets Real: Teachers Connect Classroom Lessons to Current Events.” Here are a few.
Every year, my eighth-grade students choose a modern-day issue of injustice that they would like to learn about, and take action toward solving. This has resulted in everything from Instagram accounts about our society’s racist beauty standards, to Musical.ly fund-raisers for L.G.B.T.Q.+ rights groups, to creative writing pieces, artwork and political letters that urge others to help victims of police brutality, mass incarceration and the school-to-prison pipeline.
Part of me wondered if this was overstepping, if mental illness should be saved for health class. Yet over the past year, my belief that young people need to explore mental health across all disciplines has been reaffirmed. With the recent suicides of public figures, the bullying of L.G.B.T.Q.+ individuals, and society’s discussion surrounding school shooters and mental illness, this is a topic that we cannot afford to leave out.
I am designing an Earth and environmental science class in which students will connect a current event or issue to each unit’s content. For instance, for Unit 1, Earth as a Planet, students will explore the history of space exploration (and its funding), and prepare for a Lincoln-Douglas-style debate in which they will argue either for federal funding of space exploration, or for privatized space exploration.
Do any of the projects described here appeal to you? Which do you wish you could take part in? Why?
What is something you have studied in school that has felt especially connected to your life in some way, or to important issues in the world outside school? How? How much, in general, do you see the communities and issues you care about reflected in what you learn?
Should school try to make these connections more often? If so, how do you think that might be done? In general, do you think it should be the job of teachers to make the curriculum relevant to their students, or do you think that’s beyond the scope of their jobs?
