CANYON DREAMS: A Basketball Season on the Navajo Nation, by Michael Powell. (Blue Rider, $28.) Powell, a New York Times sports columnist, spent months in northern Arizona to follow the season of a high school basketball team from the Navajo reservation, where the game is a way of life.
THE MYSTERIOUS AFFAIR AT OLIVETTI: IBM, the CIA, and the Cold War Conspiracy to Shut Down Production of the World’s First Desktop Computer, by Meryle Secrest. (Knopf, $30.) In the 1950s the Olivetti company, famed for its typewriters, seemed poised to capture the nascent computer market. Did politics and murder intervene?
BEAUTIFUL ALIENS: A Steve Abbott Reader, edited by Jamie Townsend. (Nightboat, paper, $19.95.) Poet, journalist, critic, cartoonist and queer radical, Abbott burned bright in the Bay Area scene of the 1970s and ’80s. This vivid collection samples his generous, rangy talents.
RACE MAN: Selected Works, 1960-2015, by Julian Bond. Edited by Michael G. Long. (City Lights, paper, $22.95.) Bond’s essays, speeches and interviews were powerful weapons in his lifelong fight for civil rights.
This year, readers interested in the history of India have rightly turned to the masterly “The Anarchy: The East India Company, Corporate Violence, and the Pillage of an Empire,” William Dalrymple’s account of the British East India Company’s behavior in the colonial era.
But for my recent (and first) trip to India, prompted by a friend’s wedding in New Delhi, I enjoyed another book by Dalrymple, one that should be on any traveler’s reading list. CITY OF DJINNS: A Year in Delhi is a love story to the capital. The memoir offers an almost contemporary take on Delhi, but deftly weaves in events from the city’s momentous history even as it details the eccentricities of daily life. Deserving special acknowledgment — in fact, demanding it — are the folks in Dalrymple’s immediate circle, like the Sikh landlady who cuts off the water to his apartment after too many toilet flushes and negotiates rent to be paid in part with ladies’ underwear, sent from Britain.
