In a report intended to counter Democrats’ impeachment case against President Trump, Republicans argued his efforts to get Ukraine to investigate his rivals had nothing to do with politics.
WASHINGTON — House Democrats pressed forward on Monday with the next phase of their impeachment inquiry, putting the final touches on an Intelligence Committee report expected to form the basis of their case that President Trump’s effort to pressure Ukraine to announce investigations of his political rivals was an abuse of power that warrants his removal from office.
Lawmakers from the panel reviewed the staff-written report for the first time on Monday evening, ahead of its public release and a scheduled Tuesday evening vote to transmit it to the Judiciary Committee. It will conclude that Mr. Trump, working with allies inside and outside his administration, used the power of his office to pressure Ukraine to do his bidding in order to gain an advantage in the 2020 presidential race.
Though the factual conclusions are likely to closely track public witness testimony in recent weeks, key elements of the majority report remained shrouded in mystery on Monday night. It was not yet clear, for instance, whether Democrats would use the document to call for specific impeachment charges against Mr. Trump, or whether it would simply outline evidence of presidential wrongdoing and leave it to the Judiciary Committee, the arbiter of impeachment proceedings past, to make that judgment.
Either way, the vote on Tuesday will largely bring to a close more than two months of investigation by the intelligence panel and shift the case against Mr. Trump into the judiciary panel, which will oversee the drafting and debate of articles of impeachment in what is likely to be a messy public spectacle suffused with partisan rancor.
“You get to a point in an investigation where you can tell it is going to be a long time before you get the next valuable increment of information, and you’re at a decision point,” Representative Adam B. Schiff, the California Democrat who leads the Intelligence Committee, said on MSNBC. Mr. Schiff added that his committee would continue to investigate and could file supplemental information to the Judiciary Committee if appropriate.
The House Intelligence Committee has given its report on President Trump to the Judiciary Committee. What comes next will look very different.
Today: The House Intelligence Committee has released its impeachment report to the Judiciary Committee, signaling the end of one phase of impeachment and the beginning of another. Julie Davis on why those two phases will look so different.
It’s Wednesday, December 4.
Julie, tell me about these two phases of the House impeachment inquiry.
Committee has been extensively briefed on these efforts over a regular basis as a part of our ongoing oversight responsibility.
— it attracts the workhorse members who are into dealing with long reports, really meaty, substantive issues, oftentimes behind closed doors, not in front of the news cameras.
Ranking member and I believe it is important to hold an open hearing today, and we don’t do a tremendous amount of those.
Dilatory tactics, parliamentary stunts — that sort of thing just doesn’t happen that often in the Intelligence Committee, because that’s just not what they’re about.
The Judiciary Committee will come to order, and without objection, the chair is authorized to declare recesses of the committee at any time.
The Judiciary Committee, on the other hand, is kind of known for that. And the Judiciary Committee oversees the federal courts and the Justice Department, but it also has jurisdiction over cultural hot button issues.
I ask my colleagues on this committee, both Republicans and Democrats, to stand up with me in supporting this legislation. We have to save lives.
— some of the things that typically draw the most fervent responses from both parties. And so it attracts members who want to engage in that level of really partisan debate — people who really seek out the spotlight, who want to engage in culture war type of subjects that come before the Judiciary Committee, they sort of excel in these very highly partisan public debates. These debates that happen in the Judiciary Committee are typically much more raucous, much more freewheeling, and it’s a much more partisan place.
So crude summary here. The Intelligence Committee is dominated by rule-oriented leaders, the workhorses. The Judiciary Committee is more dominated by cultural warriors, the show horses.
That’s right. And to be clear, there is some overlap between the two committees. There are people who serve on both committees. And it’s not like everyone on the Judiciary Committee is guns blazing, culture warrior, and everyone on the Intelligence Committee is a dry consumer of long intelligence reports.
But that is the profile of these two committees, and those tend to be the sorts of people who seek out seats on the Intelligence and the Judiciary Committee, so there is kind of a cultural difference there.
So explain how these different roles of these two committees are actually playing out in this impeachment inquiry. Let’s start with the Intelligence Committee, since its work has just been completed. How has its broader role, its rules and its mission reflected in the work of the impeachment inquiry over the past few weeks?
Well, the Intelligence Committee is used to working in secret, working in a setting where you’re controlling the flow of information. Because by definition, they’re dealing with intelligence matters, and that can’t be debated freely on the House floor in the halls. And its procedures also reflect that. There is less opportunity for the minority party to shut down the proceedings, because if they were allowed to do that, that could be dangerous. I mean, that has actual implications, potentially, for national security. So the very rules of the committee they’re used to operating under are just tighter by definition. And you saw Adam Schiff, the chairman of the committee, really using that to his advantage when it came to controlling the witness list, having a say in who Republicans would be able to call as public witnesses.
So Republicans, for instance, wanted to call Hunter Biden, the son of former Vice President Joe Biden, which — Democrats knew that that would be a red herring. And so they did not sign off on calling Hunter Biden. They did allow Republicans to call some witnesses. We saw them call Kurt Volker, the former special envoy to Ukraine, and Tim Morrison, who was a former National Security Council official. So they didn’t shut them down altogether, but again, the committee operates in this way where the rights of the minority are proscribed such that they can’t just do anything they want whenever they want.
And what about the witnesses who the Democrats wanted to call? How did they use the Intelligence Committee’s rules to their advantage?
We’ll now move to the 45-minute rounds. I recognize myself and majority counsel for 45 minutes.
I know, Ms. Stefanik, you had a few quick questions for the ambassador. I’ll yield to you, Ms. Stefanik.
Thank you, Mr. Nunes. Ambassador Yovanovitch, thank you for being here today.
The gentlewoman will suspend.
— Schiff really shut them down. There was a moment, a couple of hearings in, where Elise Stefanik, Republican congresswoman from New York, who Republicans wanted to spotlight, particularly because that day, they were hearing from a female witness, the former Ukraine ambassador, Marie Yovanovitch. And they knew they were going to be accused of berating her and hammering at her, and she’s a woman and sort of mansplaining her. And so they really wanted Stefanik to have the spotlight.
Under the House Resolution 660, you are not allowed to yield time except to minority counsel.
The ranking member yielded time to another member of Congress.
They tried to yield time to her, and Schiff just shut it down.
You’re gagging the young lady from New York?
That is accurate. Ambassador Yovanovitch, I want to thank you for being here today.
Gentlewoman will suspend. You’re not recognized.
Right, and the rules would protect this sort of thing, theoretically, so that a member of the minority party on the Intelligence Committee wouldn’t, say, bring up the location of American C.I.A. agents overseas.
Right. And granted, these issues that were coming up in the impeachment hearings were not strictly intelligence matters. There wasn’t necessarily a risk that anyone was going to go blabbing about black sites, but the rules that they were using were designed for those sorts of things. And so we saw Chairman Schiff take pretty good advantage of that.
Right. Not that a bookish member of the Intelligence Committee would ever do such a thing, but just in case.
So the Republicans kind of get sidelined in this process because of these rules and the way the committee enforces them. What was the outcome for the Democrats who were overseeing this?
Well, the outcome was very much as they had hoped it would be. They really were able to use the process to get what they needed out of the witnesses that they called.
Was there a quid pro quo with regard to the requested White House call and the White House meeting? The answer is yes.
It would be funny if it wasn’t such a graphic betrayal of the president’s oath of office.
— accusing the president of having abused his power.
Can we also agree that it’s just wrong?
And narratives from people who were there at key moments.
Colonel Vindman, what was your real-time reaction to hearing that call?
Hearing his phone call with the president of Ukraine.
I knew that I had to report this to the White House counsel. I had concerns, and it was my duty to report.
This came directly from the president.
At the express direction of the president of the United States.
We were following the president’s orders.
So we followed the president’s orders.
And basically got the information that they needed and the predicate for laying out a case against President Trump that could be grounds for impeachment.
We are going to House Intelligence Committee Chair Adam Schiff with a news conference on the impeachment committee report.
Which brings us to Tuesday.
— goes to the press gallery in the Capitol and lays it all out.
This report chronicles a scheme by the president of the United States to coerce an ally, Ukraine, that is at war with an adversary, Russia, into doing the president’s political dirty work. It involves a scheme in which Donald Trump withheld official acts, a White House meeting, as well as hundreds of millions of dollars of needed military assistance, in order to compel that power to deliver two investigations that he believed would assist his re-election campaign.
And he raises this question again of whether people should have to accept that this is conduct that the president is allowed to engage in, and essentially lays out the predicate for what they’re going to give to the Judiciary Committee.
With that, I’m happy to respond to your questions.
Then Schiff takes questions from reporters, and the first question is about, essentially, the only really new thing that is not familiar to people who watched the hearings.
When did you obtain the cell phone records that are in this report?
And that is the cell phone records that show contact between Rudy Giuliani, President Trump’s personal lawyer, and various White House officials, including John Bolton, the former national security adviser, but also Devin Nunes, who is the senior Republican on the House Intelligence Committee, and his contacts with Lev Parnas, who is an associate of Rudy Giuliani, who was also pushing for the ouster of the Ukrainian ambassador, who the president wanted gone.
But certainly the phone records show that there was considerable coordination among the parties, including the White House.
You’re telling me, though, that we just learned in this report that the leading Republican on the Intelligence Committee was communicating, and perhaps coordinating, with the White House and the president’s lawyer months ago, and communicating with key figures involved in the pressure campaign that that very committee he’s on is supposed to be investigating?
Correct. It’s pretty stunning information, although we don’t know what was discussed in those calls. All we have is timestamps and phone numbers, and so it’s tough to reconstruct what the substance of those calls were. But it’s a pretty unusual situation all around.
It is, I think, deeply concerning that at a time when the president of the United States was using the power of his office to dig up dirt on a political rival, that there may be evidence that there were members of Congress complicit in that activity.
Julie, what’s your understanding of why, given the juiciness of what you just described, the House Intelligence Committee is kind of closing shop and handing all its work over to the Judiciary Committee, rather than continuing to figure out what just happened with Nunes and with everything else in the report?
There was more investigative work to be done. Even as we believe that we cannot wait because the president’s efforts to secure intervention in the next election persist, we continue our investigation and we will.
The president’s efforts to get a foreign power to interfere in the 2020 election are ongoing. And so we need to move. We need to get this thing going. And what he doesn’t say, but what is also the case, is that the outcome here is pretty much known, at least in the House. They are very likely to draft articles of impeachment, to vote them through, to send the matter to the Senate. And Democrats believe that they have the evidence that they need to do that, and so this is the moment, they think, to get this thing moving.
And so now the work of the Judiciary Committee begins.
Right. And on paper, they have a very simple and very somber task of taking this lengthy report and deciding whether this rises to the level of impeachable offenses, whether, under the Constitution, this is something that warrants the president’s removal. But remember, this is the Judiciary Committee. This is the messier, more partisan culture war committee, and nobody expects for this to be a very orderly or buttoned-down process.
Julie, the impeachment inquiry is now in the hands of the Judiciary Committee. What makes it a messier place than the Intelligence Committee?
Well, the rules of the Judiciary Committee are written for very different reasons than the rules of the Intelligence Committee are. They’re written to facilitate these freewheeling debates about policy and legislation and various matters that are of great interest to the public. So the minority has a lot of ability to interrupt the proceedings, to make points of order, to use parliamentary tactics to essentially make itself heard. Given that, and also given the members of the committee, it’s culturally a place of much more backing and forthing, and a pretty lively one.
It feels like you’re saying that the best days of the impeachment inquiry for Democrats are now behind them.
Well, it depends on your perspective. I think for some lawmakers, they have been waiting with great anticipation to have their moment to publicly say their piece about what they think about President Trump’s conduct, whether they’re Democrats and want to outline how egregiously horrible they think this has been, or Republicans and want to defend everything that the president has done. And for the rest of the Democratic caucus, I do think that there is some degree of worry that now is the part where things get really messy, where all of the talk of somber state debating goes out the window, and here we are in the Judiciary Committee having a food fight.
Right. Nancy Pelosi is forever using this phrase. This is a “somber,” “prayerful” moment and process. And you’re saying it’s not going to be prayerful in that committee room.
Probably will not look like most people’s image of prayerful.
And what, specifically, will the Judiciary Committee be doing when it comes to determining the constitutionality of this impeachment inquiry?
They don’t write like that anymore.
No, for better or for worse.
And is this always how the Judiciary Committee functions during an impeachment? I mean, calling constitutional scholars, professors, historians to basically ruminate on the very nature of what is impeachable?
The purpose of today’s hearing is to receive testimony from legal and constitutional scholars on the background and history of impeachment.
Well, the Judiciary Committee did do this same thing, back just before they started impeachment proceedings against President Bill Clinton.
The most important question to this committee is the meaning of “high crimes and misdemeanors.” It is important to remember that the word “high” in high crimes and misdemeanors was used to emphasize that it was a crime or misdemeanor against the commonwealth.
And part of it is just laying out the reference points for them to be able to go back to to say, remember when these people who studied the Constitution and told us what it was all about and told us what impeachment was for said about what we should be considering? And so it’s a way for them to kind of give the public a concept of why they would be doing this.
I get how the rules vary here in ways that would make the Judiciary Committee a messier process than the Intelligence Committee, but I’m honestly having a hard time imagining how interviewing constitutional scholars gets all that messy.
Well, it has to do with what they’re interviewing the scholars about and the very, very different places that the Republicans and Democrats on the committee are coming from about that issue. They’re essentially going to be arguing over the Constitution and trying to compete with one another to elicit from these constitutional scholars the most favorable interpretation of what impeachment means and what the standard is for their side. So rather than arguing over who said what in a phone call with the Ukrainian president, or whether civil servants’ view of what President Trump did is legitimate or not legitimate, they’re actually going to be arguing over the Constitution itself and what those words, those few words that are in the Constitution about impeachment, actually mean in the context of what President Trump has done.
Julie, you’ve said that it’s widely understood that the House is going to vote to impeach the president. That’s one of the reasons Schiff was in such a hurry to move this from the Intelligence Committee over to the Judiciary Committee. So what are these two different phases that you’ve been describing? Why do they ultimately matter? I mean, why does it matter that the Intelligence Committee ran this as a tightly controlled, buttoned-up process, and that it’s likely to get a lot messier in the Judiciary Committee, if we know the outcome of all this basically beforehand?
Because I think there is a broader question of what does impeaching a president look like when it’s a purely partisan exercise? The Democrats opened this process with what was essentially a partisan vote to begin an impeachment inquiry. And if they engage now in a spectacle, in a sort of war, on the public stage over impeaching the president, they are very aware that they could lose whatever public support they do have for going forward with this, and that people could come away thinking that they have not been conscientious about what their constitutional duty is, that they’ve abused their positions and treated impeachment just like another partisan fight that they have with President Trump that essentially would trivialize the process, both in the eyes of the public and in the eyes of history. This is, after all, a process that’s enshrined in the Constitution, and Democrats don’t want to be the ones who are blamed with tainting that process and undermining it. So there is a real risk for them that in this realm that they’re about to enter, that they’re going to come off looking like less than they should.
Right. They could undermine what the Intelligence Committee seemed to have pulled off, in part because of the rules that allowed for it, that gave the power to the majority, and therefore allowed them to conduct that first phase in a way that seemed kind of high-minded and, as Nancy Pelosi would say, prayerful.
Right. They largely hit their mark in the first phase of this inquiry, and now they are keenly aware that, having demonstrated to the public that they are taking this seriously, that they’re being disciplined about how they’re going about it, that they’re honoring the process, that it could all unravel.
I’ve taken stock and I’ve looked at this from every angle, and over the last few days, I have come to one of the hardest decisions of my life.
So here’s the deal, guys. My campaign for president simply does not have the financial resources to continue.
— saying that she no longer has the money required to remain competitive.
In good faith, I cannot tell you, my supporters and volunteers, that I have a path forward if I don’t believe I do.
Would you like some nice ISIS fighters? I could give them to you. You can take everyone you want.
For 45 minutes on Tuesday, President Trump and French President Emmanuel Macron engaged in a series of tense televised exchanges about their approach to ISIS, NATO and trade policy during a meeting in London.
It is true that you have foreign fighters coming from Europe, but it is a tiny minority of the overall problem we have in the region.
Unlike many foreign leaders who quietly endure Trump’s taunts, Macron repeatedly jabbed back at Trump, resulting in several testy back and forths.
This is why he’s a great politician, because that was one of the greatest non-answers I’ve ever heard. And that’s O.K.
As the Democrats prepared their case, House Republicans moved to seize the narrative and spin it in the president’s favor, releasing their own report arguing against impeachment based on the facts both parties have reviewed.
In a 123-page document that echoed the defiant messaging that Mr. Trump has employed in his own defense, the Republicans did not concede a single point of wrongdoing or hint of misbehavior by the president. Instead, they concluded that Mr. Trump was acting on “genuine and reasonable” skepticism of Ukraine and “valid” concerns about possible corruption involving Americans, not political self-interest, when he pressed the country for investigations of his Democratic rivals.
Mr. Trump, who spent much of the day traveling to Britain to celebrate the 70th anniversary of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, appeared to be preoccupied with the coming fight. He posted on Twitter from Air Force One about the weakness of the Democrats’ case and the strength of Republican unity. Not long after landing in London, the president lavished praise on the Republicans’ report, which he said he had read, and raised the prospect of unilaterally asking the Supreme Court to stop the House impeachment proceedings, a process enshrined in the Constitution, in its tracks.
The Constitution puts the chief justice of the Supreme Court in charge of overseeing any impeachment trial in the Senate, but empowers the House and the Senate to carry out the proceedings as they see fit. The Supreme Court has no purview over the process.
As Washington re-engaged in the impeachment drama after Thanksgiving, the timetable for the process remained unclear. House leaders announced they would remain in session until Dec. 20, more than a week longer than initially planned, leaving open the possibility of a vote to impeach Mr. Trump days before Christmas. But with the Judiciary Committee scheduling only one hearing for this week, Democrats were facing a calendar squeeze that could make it difficult for them to complete the intricate impeachment process before year’s end.
The Judiciary Committee unveiled the list of constitutional scholars its members plan to question on Wednesday, when they convene their first formal impeachment session to help inform the debate over whether Mr. Trump’s conduct was impeachable.
The witnesses are Noah Feldman of Harvard Law School, Pamela S. Karlan of Stanford Law School, Michael J. Gerhardt of the University of North Carolina Law School and Jonathan Turley of the George Washington University Law School. Mr. Turley was invited by Republicans on the panel.
The Justice Department filed a brief before the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, seeking to block impeachment investigators from gaining access to secret grand jury evidence gathered by Robert S. Mueller III, the special counsel who investigated Russia’s 2016 election interference and the Trump campaign.
Lawyers for the House have argued that they need to see that material in part because it could further illuminate the question of whether Mr. Trump lied to Mr. Mueller, a matter they have said is part of their impeachment inquiry. But the House is likely moving too quickly for the courts to settle the case before an impeachment vote.
In the Republicans’ dissenting views, they argued that after two months of investigation, the evidence “does not support” that Mr. Trump withheld a coveted White House meeting for Ukraine’s president or nearly $400 million in security assistance for the country as leverage for securing the investigations.
Republicans on three House committees on Monday finalized a report documenting their impeachment defense of President Trump. The Democrats are expected to release their own report in the near future.
The conclusion is at odds with sworn testimony from senior American diplomats and White House officials who said they believed Mr. Trump sought to use American influence over Ukraine to suit his domestic political purposes, repeatedly pressing President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine to announce investigations into former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and an unproven claim that Ukraine conspired with Democrats to interfere in the 2016 election.
Rather than take those assertions at face value, the Republicans charged that they came from civil servants who dislike Mr. Trump’s agenda and style and are therefore allowing themselves to be part of a push by Democrats to undo the results of the 2016 election and thwart Mr. Trump’s re-election chances in 2020.
Ms. Conway also dared Mr. Schiff to testify publicly during the Judiciary Committee’s proceedings about his handling of the case. If he did, she promised to “show up on behalf of the White House,” which on Sunday declined to participate in the hearing scheduled for Wednesday.
Democrats are expected to argue the virtual opposite of the Republican report.
The Democrats’ case centers on a July phone call in which Mr. Trump pressed Mr. Zelensky to investigate Mr. Biden and the claim that Ukraine worked with Democrats to subvert the 2016 election. It is also likely to charge that Mr. Trump conditioned the White House meeting and military assistance money on a public commitment to the investigations.
It essentially formalized a range of defenses Republicans road-tested last month during two weeks of public impeachment hearings in the Intelligence Committee. For members of the Judiciary Committee and the larger Republican conference in the House, it provided several alternative tacks for defending Mr. Trump or at least arguing against impeachment.
Democrats do not see it that way, and have prepared a catalog of all of the ways that Mr. Trump has obstructed their inquiry that could form the basis for its own article of impeachment.
Michael D. Shear and Charlie Savage contributed reporting.