In this lesson, students will learn about key discoveries related to the internment camps in the Xinjiang region of China.
In November 2019, The Times published leaked documents that expose details of China’s mass detention of Muslims in the Xinjiang region. In this lesson, you will learn about the significance of the information in those documents. Then you will be asked to reflect on the information contained in them and take action in response to the situation in Xinjiang.
Since 2014, the Chinese government has employed sophisticated surveillance technology in the Xinjiang region, primarily to monitor China’s Uighur ethnic minority. China has also created internment camps where it has detained one million Uighurs, Kazakhs and other predominantly Muslim minorities in the region.
A million ethnic minority Uighurs have been detained in “re-education camps.” Here, three young people recall how their parents vanished overnight.
Last time I talked with my mom was Dec. 31, 2017. My mom told me, don’t try to contact with us. We will contact with you. He said, let’s talk next time. Let’s talk next time. That was the last time we ever talked to my father. She left a message over the WeChat saying that she’s going to Beijing. That’s the last message she left for me. Almost everyone that I know was taken into camps. It felt like our entire social circle was just evaporated like that overnight. My friend told me my parents are studying. But I know the word studying means re-education camp. In the one night, I lose everything. It’s torturing me of not knowing whether my mother is alive or not. I don’t know what she is eating right now. I don’t know what she’s doing right now. Does she have enough clothes? Does the people inside of the camp or detention centers are torture her? More than a year after my father’s arrest, we received the news that he was sentenced to 15 years in prison. They fear that Uighur people learn their own culture too much. And they fear that we have this kind — we have this kind of ethnic pride.  Just because we were Muslim. I feel scared. Like I had nightmares of me being sent to China and got caught up into the detention centers. Instead of being a normal human being, I turned into — I was forcibly turned into a political being. When I feel homesick nowadays, the best thing I think I can do is try to do something to help my father, try to do something to help millions of Uighurs that are locked up in concentration camps. People who are watching this video, please call your senators. Ask U.S. government to help the Uighur peoples. It’s not the re-education camp. It’s a jail.
What moments in this video stood out for you? Why?
What messages, emotions or ideas will you take away from this video? Why?
What questions do you still have?
1. According to the writer, Austin Ramzy, what is significant about the information in the documents?
2. What was the difference in how the Chinese government talked publicly about the internment camps versus how the camps were referred to in the leaked government documents?
3. What is the connection between the words of President Xi Jinping and the creation of the internment camps? Why did he refer to the “war on terror” in the United States?
4. How are Mr. Xi’s policies in Xinjiang different from those of his predecessor, Hu Jintao? According to Mr. Xi, why has he taken a different approach?
5. How did Chen Quanguo, a “zealous” new party boss for the region of Xinjiang, respond to officials who pushed back against the mass roundups he ordered?
6. How did the position and actions of a county leader, Wang Yongzhi, change over time?
In your own words, what was significant about the information in the leaked documents?
What is your emotional response to reading about the situation in Xinjiang?
If you were to explain what is happening to someone who has never heard about the internment camps, what would be the three most important things for them to understand?
What action do you think can be taken by young people, schools and local governments?
In the Op-Ed video from the warm-up, Akeda Pulati, Kamalturk Yalqun and Adili Yilihamu call on concerned Times readers to take action through the Uyghur Human Rights Project. If you have the time, transform your above responses into a letter and send it to one of your elected officials or another individual or organization from this list created by the Uyghur Human Rights Project.