Mr. Tubbs had reason to feel kinship with Mr. Bloomberg. Last year, he graduated from a mayoral training program that Mr. Bloomberg sponsors at Harvard University. Mr. Tubbs had attended a conference co-sponsored by Mr. Bloomberg’s philanthropic foundation in Paris in 2017, and was featured in its 2018 annual report. And this past June, Mr. Bloomberg’s foundation donated $500,000 to an education reform group based in Stockton, a struggling inland city in Northern California.
As Mr. Bloomberg traverses the country as a presidential candidate, he is drawing on a vast network of city leaders whom he has funded as a philanthropist or advised as an elder statesman of municipal politics. Bloomberg Philanthropies, which has assets totaling $9 billion, has supported 196 different cities with grants, technical assistance and education programs worth a combined $350 million. Now, leaders in some of those cities are forming the spine of Mr. Bloomberg’s campaign: He has been endorsed so far by eight mayors — from larger cities like San Jose, Calif., and Louisville, Ky., and smaller ones like Gary, Ind., representing a total of more than 2.6 million Americans.
For all of those endorsers, Mr. Bloomberg has been an important benefactor. All have attended his prestigious boot camp at Harvard that gives the mayors access to ongoing strategic advice from Bloomberg-funded experts. More than half have received funding in the form of grants and other support packages from Mr. Bloomberg worth a total of nearly $10 million, according to a review of tax documents and interviews with all eight mayors.
The money he has given to cities underscores the extraordinary nature of Mr. Bloomberg’s candidacy. More than any presidential candidate in recent history, Mr. Bloomberg has established himself — through philanthropic giving, political endorsements and campaign spending — as a singular ally for a large cross-section of American politicians, many of whom feel a deep sense of loyalty in return. And there is no group to whom he is more tightly bonded with than his fellow mayors.
Mayor Steve Benjamin of Columbia, S.C., a co-chairman of the Bloomberg campaign, said Mr. Bloomberg’s philanthropy had earned him trust and consideration from mayors.
“It’s given him a great, great deal of credibility with people who, but for his philanthropy or altruism, he never would have interfaced with,” Mr. Benjamin said.
That credibility could be particularly important in the 2020 presidential race, which Mr. Bloomberg entered late last month. After an onslaught of self-funded television ads, he reached 5 percent support in two national polls this week.
Mayors have historically played an influential role in Democratic primary politics, lending their local political organizations to national candidates. And as a former Republican with relatively conservative views on business regulation and law enforcement, Mr. Bloomberg has been eager to demonstrate that mayors and other hands-on leaders in the party, particularly black elected officials, are willing to embrace his candidacy.
His decision last month to apologize for stop-and-frisk policing in New York was informed by feedback from these officials, people familiar with Mr. Bloomberg’s conversations said.
In Stockton, that shift helped earn Mr. Bloomberg a forceful ally in Mr. Tubbs, who this week invoked his own identity as a young black man with an incarcerated parent to vouch for Mr. Bloomberg. He said that Mr. Bloomberg’s willingness to use his wealth for public purposes was a strength in the race, pointing to his extensive spending for Democrats in the 2018 elections.
The Stockton mayor said he had urged Mr. Bloomberg to support voter-registration and voting-rights groups, including Fair Fight, the national organization led by Stacey Abrams. Ms. Abrams’s aides were also appealing to Mr. Bloomberg: He has committed to donating $5 million to Fair Fight, according to an Abrams adviser.
Mr. Tubbs and other mayors say they are endorsing Mr. Bloomberg because of his platform and ideas, not because of any pressure, but some acknowledged that his wealth and philanthropy were an unavoidable factor.
Like other mayors in the Bloomberg orbit, Mr. Williams has been involved with numerous programs sponsored by Bloomberg Philanthropies, on everything from tackling an obesity epidemic to a love-your-block neighborhood program. The Appalachian city won a $1 million grant to create a wellness program for emergency medical workers.
Victoria Woodards, the mayor of Tacoma, Wash., attended the Harvard program and two CityLab conferences, gatherings focused on urban issues co-sponsored by Bloomberg Philanthropies. At the most recent one in Washington, she sat next to Mr. Bloomberg at a dinner at the National Museum of African American History and Culture.
At a city summit in San Antonio last month she had coffee with James Anderson, formerly the head of government innovation at the Bloomberg foundation. He told her that Mr. Bloomberg had jumped into the presidential race and asked her to join their team; she did weeks later, after her first choice, Senator Kamala Harris, dropped out.
Mayor Greg Fischer of Louisville began working with Mr. Bloomberg’s team within a few months of taking office in 2011, and his city received about $4.7 million in grants during his first three years in office. Now, Mr. Fischer is helping lead Mr. Bloomberg’s outreach to other mayors struggling with their budgets.
Now, some of the same people who aided these mayors from Mr. Bloomberg’s foundation are the ones asking for their political support. Mr. Anderson, who several mayors described as the most vital point of contact at Bloomberg Philanthropies, is now directing the campaign’s “Mayors for Mike” coalition. He and Patricia E. Harris, the foundation’s longtime chief executive, have both moved over to the campaign, changing email addresses and phone numbers but not their relationships with mayors and other leaders.
Mr. Williams, the Huntington mayor, recalled a phone call from Mr. Anderson, “wanting to have a separate conversation from the foundation, asking, ‘Can we switch gears?’” he said.
Mayor Lori Lightfoot of Chicago, a current participant in the Bloomberg Harvard program, said that Mr. Bloomberg’s foundation was “deeply entrenched in Chicago” and that she and her staff had discussed how to keep its work separate from her political considerations.
“We view them as valued partners but that’s got to be separate and apart from any presidential considerations,” said Ms. Lightfoot, who has not endorsed any candidate in the Democratic race.
But Mr. Reich, the Stanford expert, was skeptical about the effect of logistical steps like separating email addresses. “It’s a detail that seems to miss the point of the exercise, which is to erect a wall between the activities of a philanthropist and the political interests of the donor,” he said.
Mr. Anderson, in an email, said local leaders were supporting Mr. Bloomberg because of his record of work helping communities.
“We’ve been working very hard to make our case to each and every mayor — nothing expected, nothing owed,” he said.
One graduate of the Bloomberg program at Harvard is a leading opponent in the presidential race — Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind., whose city also received $1 million from a Bloomberg program in 2018.
Every week in Mr. Bloomberg’s late-starting campaign has showcased, in one way or another, his donations to cities and the mayoral alliances he has created.
One of Mr. Bloomberg’s first campaign events was in Jackson, Miss., where he appeared with Chokwe Lumumba, the city’s 36-year-old mayor. A progressive Democrat who hosted Mr. Bloomberg but did not endorse him, Mr. Lumumba also attended the Harvard program and received from Bloomberg Philanthropies a $1 million grant to his city as a winner of the Public Art Challenge.
“It’s up to the leaders negotiating those things to be disciplined and principled enough that their decision-making isn’t unduly swayed,” Mr. Lumumba said.
Earlier this month, Mr. Bloomberg flew to Augusta, Ga., to announce the endorsement of the city’s mayor, Hardie Davis Jr., who had graduated from the Harvard program and had traveled to a CityLab conference in London where he met with Mr. Bloomberg. And his city received support from a Bloomberg program, What Works Cities, that deployed experts to Augusta for six months.
“You can’t put a price on that,” Mr. Davis said.
Before his visit to Stockton, Mr. Bloomberg announced he had also won the endorsement of Mayor Sam Liccardo of San Jose, Calif., who had previously supported Ms. Harris. San Jose won a substantial award through Mr. Bloomberg’s American Cities Climate Challenge — a package worth about $2.5 million, a city spokeswoman said. Mr. Liccardo said there had been “no string attached” to any of the money.
Ms. Woodards, the Tacoma mayor, described an enduring connection for city leaders inducted into Mr. Bloomberg’s network.
Astead W. Herndon contributed reporting from New York City, and Kitty Bennett contributed research.