Caroll Spinney, who portrayed Big Bird for decades, died on Sunday. But the lessons he shared on “Sesame Street” live on.
Beyond alphabet recitals and numerical countdowns, everybody’s favorite feathered friend had valuable things to say to both children and grown-ups about the value of cooperation and the best ways to navigate complex emotions. Life can be tough, he told us, but it’s going to be all right. Here are a few of the tricky topics Big Bird broke down for viewers young and old.
In 2000, Big Bird had a small chat with the actor Christopher Reeve that had big implications. By asking a few polite questions, Big Bird demonstrated that directly addressing a friend’s new reality and independent living skills — how does the wheelchair work? — allowed them to move on and to explore other activities (such as going to the library). Children are naturally curious, and the conversation was a good guideline for how to ask sensitive questions without being rude.
Big Bird had a tough time getting grown-ups to believe him. They dismissed his super-reclusive pal Mr. Snuffleupagus as an imaginary friend — or maybe even an elaborate lie. And after 14 seasons, Big Bird’s insistence otherwise was beginning to call his general credibility into question. One grown-up did believe his stories — Mister Rogers, during a crossover episode in Season 12. But was it too late? Even Mr. Snuffleupagus was a skeptic, doubting Big Bird several times. (“Et tu, Snuffy?” Big Bird moaned). It all made Big Bird question his ability to distinguish fantasy from reality. Finally, though, inspired by a string of high-profile (but ultimately problematic) child sex abuse cases, “Sesame Street” allowed Big Bird to rally support for his claims in Season 16 and prove them in Season 17 — showing kids that grown-ups would believe them when they actually did tell the truth.
Big Bird had his share of minor accidents — that’s the point of “Everybody Makes Mistakes.” But in Season 32, over the course of five episodes, Big Bird had to deal with the wreckage of his nest by a hurricane. (“My home, my nest, my everything!”) The grown-ups pitch in to restore his modest digs — a process only made possible through friendship and cooperation. When the job is done, Big Bird is deeply grateful for all their help and tells them so (“I Want to Thank You for Being My Friends”). The lesson: Disasters will sometimes happen, but possessions are replaceable — people are not.
When the actor Will Lee, who played the grocer Mr. Hooper, died in 1982, “Sesame Street” was unsure how to deal with his loss. Should the story line have his character retire to Florida? Instead, his absence became a lesson for Big Bird — and the children watching — about understanding death and dealing with grief. After consulting with child psychologists, the show decided on a direct approach, and the result was the first “Sesame Street” episode to treat a difficult topic in a profound but age-appropriate way. Big Bird had to process an array of conflicting feelings — shock, confusion, frustration, regret, anger. Big Bird’s portrait of Mr. Hooper still hangs on the wall, even though an art dealer offered to buy it in a later episode. Out in the real world, Big Bird expressed his grief over the death of the Muppet master Jim Henson by singing at his memorial service, a moving way to send off his very best friend.