The Trump administration will allow the $105 million aid package to flow after freezing the funding without explanation.
WASHINGTON — The Trump administration told Congress on Monday that it had lifted a hold last week on $105 million of military aid to Lebanon that budget officials had imposed without explanation.
In recent weeks, lawmakers and reporters had asked administration officials about the mysterious monthslong hold, which echoed the freeze of military aid to Ukraine over the summer, but got no answers. On Monday, a senior State Department official said the Lebanon aid was good to go.
The freeze on Ukraine aid by President Trump is at the heart of the House impeachment inquiry. Mr. Trump, his personal lawyer and aides pressured Ukrainian leaders for personal political favors while holding up $391 million of military aid.
Administration officials said that in the cases of Ukraine and Lebanon, the Office of Management and Budget, part of the White House, had shut off the aid. Two congressional officials said on Nov. 1 that members of the National Security Council staff had asked the budget office for the freeze on aid to Lebanon.
Administration officials halted the funding to the Lebanese Armed Forces, which Congress, the Pentagon and the State Department had approved, at a critical time. Lebanon has been shaken by the country’s largest street protests since its independence in 1943 and a change in leadership forced by the demonstrations.
Analysts said the holdup could give Iran and Russia an opening to exert greater influence over the Lebanese military, and perhaps even allow the Islamic State and Al Qaeda to gain greater footholds in the country. Iran and Russia are giving military support to the brutal government of President Bashar al-Assad of Syria, which borders Lebanon.
Although administration officials notified Congress on Monday that they had reversed the decision on Lebanon, according to two congressional aides, it was still unclear why the aid had been frozen in the first place.
Some congressional officials have said foreign policy specialists sought to cut off the aid out of fear that the funding could end up helping Hezbollah, the Iran-backed Shiite group. In some right-wing circles, concern has been growing over Hezbollah’s influence in the Lebanese government and possibly the military.
Several Republicans in Congress, led by Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, have backed a measure that would withhold 20 percent of American military assistance to Lebanon unless the president can certify that the Lebanese military is taking “necessary steps to end Hezbollah and Iran’s influence” over the Lebanese Armed Forces, Mr. Cruz said.
