The federal investigation of an Iowa facility is said to focus on experiments on hydration and sexual arousal.
In 2017, state regulators found a pattern of suspicious injuries and a failure to report allegations of possible abuse and mistreatment. This year, The Des Moines Register reported that 14 severely disabled residents of the center died between June 2018 and April 2019, more than twice the usual rate of deaths there. Three more residents of the center, which is home to about 200 people, have died in the last eight weeks, state officials said.
“It is not acceptable, it is not adequate and we are making changes,” Gov. Kim Reynolds, a Republican, told local reporters this week.
News of the Justice Department investigation, described in a November letter and previously reported by The Register, has rocked state government.
The Glenwood center’s superintendent, Jerry Rea, was placed on administrative leave this month, and officials said more changes were possible. Dr. Rea, who at another job listed as a research interest “deviant sexual behavior in persons with developmental disabilities,” did not respond to an email requesting comment.
It was unclear exactly what had led federal authorities to investigate the possibility that human experiments were taking place inside the center. A spokeswoman for the Justice Department declined to comment on Friday, and the Iowa Department of Human Services, which runs the Glenwood center, provided limited information about the investigation’s scope.
“We have not reached any conclusions about the subject matters of the investigation,” Mr. Dreiband wrote.
A spokesman for the Iowa Department of Human Services said federal officials were investigating studies related to “‘optimal hydration’ under the ‘Perfect Care Index,’ and ‘sexual arousal studies.’” The Perfect Care Index is a metric sometimes used in the medical community to evaluate the outcomes and efficiency of a treatment.
Ms. Reynolds’s office said medical staff from the University of Iowa would be visiting the Glenwood center to review residents’ health and medical treatment.
Though the details of the studies being investigated were unknown, it was not clear whether the residents of the Glenwood facility would have been able to agree to take part in research. Residents of the center often have “behavioral or medical conditions that are complex and chronic,” a state website said.
Residential treatment centers for the disabled have fallen out of favor in recent decades. Instead, states have tried to move as many people as possible into group homes and other settings in their communities.
Doug Cunningham, executive director of the Arc of Iowa, an organization that supports people with intellectual and developmental disabilities, said Glenwood had long been seen as a “place of last resort.” He said that the series of problems at Glenwood underscored the reasons for phasing out such centers, and that there was no context under which the residents there should have been experimented on.
“To subject people with severe intellectual disabilities to this type of treatment is absolutely appalling and cannot be tolerated,” Mr. Cunningham said.