New York|Can ‘Scooby Doo’ and the Rest of the Dollar Vans Go High-Tech?
Can ‘Scooby Doo’ and the Rest of the Dollar Vans Go High-Tech?
A shadow network of mini school buses that serves riders largely neglected by New York’s transit system has a new app.
They go by names like Jerk Chicken, Lizard, Scooby Doo and Young Blood. They hustle across Brooklyn and Queens seven days a week, some risking arrest, in order to serve tens of thousands of customers who rely on them.
They are dollar van drivers, and they ferry commuters largely neglected by New York City’s vast public transit system — people who live in neighborhoods beyond the subway’s reach, where buses are often late and Uber and Lyft are too expensive.
The dollar vans — mini school buses with tinted windows that roll through the streets blaring reggae or R&B — make up a loosely organized industry and many drivers operate illegally without the required city permits. The vans have at times drawn scrutiny because of collisions, and have been criticized for contributing to congestion by sometimes blocking bus lanes to pick up passengers.
The developers of a new app are hoping to generate more business for these modern jitneys and challenge the public bus system in the way that Uber has taken on the yellow taxi industry.
The app, Dollaride, allows users to see where licensed vans are operating within a one-mile radius, as well as where they are headed, helping commuters decide whether taking a van might be faster than waiting for a bus.
For drivers, the app enables them to spot passengers more easily — while the vans follow designated routes, there are no marked stops so riders must flag drivers. For the operators of van companies, the app could allow them to more easily identify demand and plan future routes.
Though the app currently only includes licensed vans, its developers hope it will encourage unlicensed vans to register with the city.
Rising rent and gentrification means “there’s a class of people getting pushed farther and farther away from the epicenter, where all the resources are and where public transportation is strongest,” said Sulaiman Sanni, a 34-year-old Nigerian-American, who developed the app.
The first dollar vans are thought to have appeared on the streets of New York around 1980, when drivers offered rides to strangers for $1 during a transit strike. After the Sept. 11 attack and another transit strike in 2005, city officials encouraged people to ride dollar vans.
Lisa Sargeant, who works for the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which operates New York’s subway and buses, says she prefers to commute by dollar van from Flatlands, in southeast Brooklyn, to work.
The concept was imported from West Africa and the Caribbean, where informal minibuses like the bright yellow danfo in Nigeria or the robot-taxis in Jamaica are the de facto modes of public transport.
The nationalities of dollar van drivers reflect recent waves of immigration to New York — West Indians, who were followed by West Africans, and, most recently, Haitians, many of whom arrived after the 2010 earthquake.
About 120,000 people take dollar vans in New York City every day, about double the number from two decades ago, according to industry estimates. There are roughly 2,000 drivers, three-quarters of them operating illegally.
Many van owners say stringent licensing requirements and high insurance costs have led them to choose to stay underground.
One major route connects Chinatowns in Manhattan, Brooklyn and Queens. Another slices through Brooklyn, while a number of smaller routes flow east from Jamaica, in Queens, like rivulets. Some routes also link Manhattan and New Jersey.
One of the aims of Dollaride is to help identify areas in Brooklyn and Queens that are ripe for new routes because they are in so-called transit deserts. The service will also work with companies seeking to provide alternative means of transportation to their employees.
Gateway JFK, a business improvement district near Kennedy Airport, is working on a pilot with Dollaride to create a route to ferry employees to and from subway stations.
Mr. Sanni said he was also working with the city’s Department of Transportation to determine where Dollaride can create new routes that do not conflict with public transit.
Dollar van operators believe the Dollaride app will make their system easier to use and will entice new riders.
Winston Williams, who was born in Jamaica and runs Blackstreet Van Lines in Brooklyn, said passengers generally learn about dollar vans through word-of-mouth and it can take years to build enough trust with customers so that they became regular riders.
Dean Harris, an electrician, said dollar vans were virtually the only alternative to a car in southeastern Queens, where he lives and works.
Mr. Sanni said the idea for Dollaride germinated when he was growing up in East New York, Brooklyn, in the 1990s, where his family had moved from Lagos.
