A documentary about the British synth-pop band Duran Duran debuts on Showtime. And the latest “Men in Black” movie airs on Starz.
DURAN DURAN: THERE’S SOMETHING YOU SHOULD KNOW 9 p.m. on Showtime. The British synth-pop band returns to a format that helped make them stars — television — in this made-for-TV documentary, which debuted last year on BBC Four and will make its stateside debut on Showtime Friday night. The program revisits the band’s breakout years, in the 1980s, when their danceable beats, big hair and fashionable music videos (long a ubiquitous presence on MTV) made them household names. It also looks at the group’s work in the decades since. Telling the story are Duran Duran’s four current members (Simon Le Bon, Nick Rhodes, John Taylor and Roger Taylor) and interviewees like Cindy Crawford and Boy George. “The ’80s were fabulous to us as a group,” Le Bon told The New York Times in 1995, “then it went down a bit.” Expect him to elaborate on both of those experiences here.
MEN IN BLACK: INTERNATIONAL (2019) 7 p.m. on Starz. Tessa Thompson and Chris Hemsworth wear sharp suits and use the memory-erasing stick once wielded by Will Smith and Tommy Lee Jones in this most recent entry in the “Men in Black” franchise. While the movie adds in some fresh locales (Marrakesh and London provide backdrops, in addition to the series’ native New York), “Men in Black: International” basically relies on the same combination of shape-shifting aliens, half-kidding action and creative weaponry that were the calling cards of the first three movies.“‘Innocuous!’ would be my pull quote,” Manohla Dargis wrote in her review for The Times.
QUEEN OF KATWE (2016) Stream on Disney Plus; rent on Amazon, Google Play, iTunes, Vudu and YouTube. “If there is anyone out there capable of remaining unmoved by this true-life triumph-of-the-underdog sports story, I don’t think I want to meet that person,” A.O. Scott wrote in his review of this biographical drama for The Times. Part of the backlog of movies available on Disney’s new streaming service, “Queen of Katwe” is a sports biopic about the Ugandan chess prodigy Phiona Mutesi, who develops into a world-class player while pushing back against poverty and discrimination. She’s played by Madina Nalwanga, who made her film debut here alongside two seasoned performers: Lupita Nyong’o, who plays Phiona’s mother, and David Oyelowo, who plays Phiona’s coach. The film, directed by Mira Nair, “has a richness and unpredictability that separates it from other, superficially similar movies,” Scott wrote.
PAWN SACRIFICE (2015) Stream on Hulu; rent on Amazon, Google Play, iTunes, Vudu and YouTube. For a very different portrait of a chess prodigy, see this drama about the American chess master Bobby Fischer’s famous, politically freighted match against the Soviet grandmaster Boris Spassky. The film casts Tobey Maguire as Fischer, a mastermind whose talent lands him in the center of what is essentially a Cold War battle between nations — and whose mental well-being gets caught in the crossfire. Liev Schreiber plays Spassky.