The president frequently injects his own words into statements he claims his supporters said on Fox News or elsewhere. They rarely publicly correct him.
WASHINGTON — Watching Fox News ahead of Wednesday’s impeachment vote, President Trump gave a Twitter call out to one of his most combative allies in the House.
But in fact, Mr. Collins never made the claim that “abuse of power and abuse of Congress” were common practices of past administrations.
The Wednesday morning post was just the latest example of Mr. Trump, who rails against the “Fake News,” doing his own kind of editing of comments made by top administration officials and other prominent allies.
Mr. Trump has made a habit of injecting his own words into the comments of people he sees on television and then publishing them as direct quotes on Twitter, where he has more than 67 million followers. In some instances, he simply omits a part of the quote he doesn’t like.
When Ken Starr, the former independent counsel, appeared on Fox News last month, he noted that Gordon D. Sondland, the ambassador to the European Union, had testified that efforts to pressure the Ukrainians to conduct investigations into Mr. Trump’s rivals did amount to a quid pro quo.
But when Mr. Trump quoted Mr. Starr on his Twitter feed, he replaced that part with a phrase suggesting just the opposite.
“Ambassador Sondland’s testimony stated that President Trump said the Ukraine President should just do the right thing (No Quid Pro Quo),” Mr. Trump wrote.
Mr. Starr did not respond to a request for comment about Mr. Trump’s tweet.
While Mr. Meister did talk about the Islamic State and the death of Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, its leader, he never mentioned the president’s efforts to build a wall across the southwestern border.
More often than not, the allies who Mr. Trump misquotes do little to publicly contradict him. Sometimes a lawmaker’s office will simply point reporters to the transcript when asked about the disconnect. They rarely call out Mr. Trump for spreading falsehoods or altering the meaning of their words.
Not all of Mr. Trump’s misrepresentations come from watching TV. Sometimes he attributes something to a private conversation that may not have ever occurred.
Mr. McConnell later denied making the comment, saying at a news conference that he had “not had any conversations on that subject” with Mr. Trump.
But other Republicans have said nothing when Mr. Trump appeared to have wrongly quoted them. The president said, for example, that Senator Rick Scott, Republican of Florida, had described the call as “perfect” — a word the president uses repeatedly to describe his own conduct.
If Mr. Scott also used that word, it wasn’t in public.
Mr. Scott’s office did not respond to a request for comment. The White House also did not respond to a request for comment.
Mr. Trump’s habit of putting words in the mouths of others are not just limited to impeachment.
While Mr. Esper said similar things at the time, he never uttered those exact words privately or publicly, according to administration officials.
Mr. Esper’s spokeswoman, Alyssa Farah, declined to comment about the presidential tweet.
“Thank you @GOPLeader,” Mr. Trump added, using Mr. McCarthy’s Twitter handle.
While the comments were similar to something Mr. McCarthy said in an appearance on Laura Ingraham’s show on Fox News, he never said anything on the show about Republicans supporting tariffs “all the way,” or holding a “veto-proof” level of support.
His spokesman did not respond to a request for comment about the disconnect. At the time, a McCarthy spokesman simply referred Politico to the transcript of Mr. McCarthy’s remarks, which did not match up with Mr. Trump’s tweet.
The false quotes attributed to those who generally go on television to praise the president and his policies are particularly jarring given Mr. Trump’s recent weekslong attack on Representative Adam B. Schiff, Democrat from California and the chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, over a statement in which he mocked Mr. Trump’s July 25 conversation with Mr. Zelensky.
In his remarks during a committee hearing, Mr. Schiff said he would be laying out the “essence of what the president communicates,” and made it clear his reading was not an “exact transcribed version of the call.” But Mr. Trump has repeatedly accused Mr. Schiff of inventing the conversation, going so far as to claim he committed “treason” for how he presented it. Mr. Trump has also suggested that he only released a reconstructed transcript of the call in response to Mr. Schiff’s comments about it. In fact, Mr. Schiff’s comments came after the White House had released the transcript.
Mr. Trump’s attacks on Mr. Schiff was another way the president bends the facts to fit his own narrative, according to Jennifer R. Mercieca, a historian at Texas A&M University who specializes in American political rhetoric and has studied Mr. Trump’s use of language.