Education|Screens in the Classroom: Tool or Temptation?
Screens in the Classroom: Tool or Temptation?
Smartphones and other devices have long been maligned as distractions in university classrooms. But when employed strategically, many educators find them useful.
This article is part of our continuing Fast Forward series, which examines technological, economic, social and cultural shifts that happen as businesses evolve.
Karen Huxtable-Jester, who teaches in the School of Behavioral and Brain Sciences at the University of Texas at Dallas, knows technology’s distractible downside. Once, while observing a lecture, Professor Huxtable-Jester discovered that a group of students had been watching a movie instead of their instructor.
Many professors and education professionals are discovering that rather than distract, strategically applied devices increase engagement with students, especially those with learning disabilities, who are on the autism spectrum and for whom English is a second language.
“Using technology in the classroom really enhances the whole class,” Professor Stemberg said.
On her own, Ms. Rahimova said, she had used her smartphone to look up words she did not understand, sometimes seeking out translations into Uzbek or Russian. “This helps me define it in English, to know this word,” she said.
Such participatory methods make education “meaningful and authentic,” said Christine Greenhow, an associate professor of counseling, educational psychology, and special education at Michigan State University.
Would students’ attention still wander if they had a device in their hand? Professor Greenhow acknowledged that it could still happen, but added that educators had a say in the matter.
The app lets students give anonymous feedback answered in real time by teaching assistants as he lectures. Professor Samson also consults with the educational video technology platform company Echo360, which records, streams and captions live academic lectures, among other features. The company placed the back channel he developed into its Active Learning Platform.
While Ms. Esposito emphasized that a specific example cannot apply to everyone, useful and readily available smartphone, tablet and laptop features include notes to write out questions before speaking and calendar reminders. She also mentioned universities creating centers to help autistic students, including the Kinney Center at St. Joseph’s University in Philadelphia.
Echoing this sentiment, Sean Smith, a University of Kansas professor of special education and a consultant with Understood, a nonprofit for people with learning issues, explained that “students with disabilities are definitely attending at a higher rate than in the past,” so universities need to make education accessible in real time. “This is the advantage of using smartphones in the classroom,” Dr. Smith said, mentioning that laws like the Americans with Disabilities Act require accommodations, which readily embedded smartphone technology can do.
Joseph Bavazzano, the director of Montclair State University’s ADP Center for Learning Technologies, works with college students who will become teachers.
