I nestled into bed with a paperback copy of “The Things They Carried,” by Tim O’Brien. It had belonged to my dad. He thought the 1990 collection of short stories was the most realistic portrayal of the Vietnam War he had ever read. My father, Jack Reilly, died five years ago, and this book was one of the pieces I had left of him.
I handled the book like a precious artifact. It was something that he once held; proof that he existed. With each page turn, I anticipated a sign of him: a dog ear, a highlight, a scratch under a word. I thought about what each sentence meant to him and what motivated him to make each blue inked underline. “The act of writing had led me through a swirl of memories that might otherwise have ended in paralysis or worse,” my father underlined. I wondered if he would have written more about Vietnam if he had lived longer.
The only writing that he ever did about his Vietnam service was a two-page essay in a memoir-writing class that a friend persuaded him to join in 2012 at American University. I’ve dissected each sentence of the essay so that I could feel his words. I wanted to know their weight, and in some small way, I thought this would help me hold on to a part of him. But his writing only left me feeling more distant than before. The more I learned, the more I realized how little I knew about his military service.
My father was 6 feet 3 inches tall, with black hair and piercing blue eyes. He grew up in a small coal-mining town in Pennsylvania, the grandson of Irish immigrants. He was the only dad in my elementary school to volunteer in our library in Washington, D.C.; he couldn’t fit into any of the reading chairs. He attended almost every soccer game I played in high school, driving at least two hours to watch away games. He was the steady, calm presence in our home when my mother traveled for work, which was often. “What will the weather be like today?” my sister Sarah and I used to ask each morning before school. In all areas of my life, I trusted what he said as if no other possibilities existed. If he predicted rain, I packed an umbrella.
My father’s Vietnam service was not a secret in our house, but most of my knowledge of it came from small discoveries. As a young girl, I loved to explore his home office in the attic. One day, I found an old mahogany box perched on the top shelf of a bookcase. I climbed onto his desk chair to examine it. “Let me grab that for you,” he said with a closed-mouth grin as he reached for the box, brought it down and opened it.
I quickly spotted his dog tags and grabbed them. “A buddy of mine made those,” he said, gently prying them from my hands.
From these little glimpses into his past, I knew the bare facts. Shortly after graduating from college in 1964, he enlisted in the Navy. He arrived in Vietnam as a supply officer in June 1965 without any combat training. He was 22 and had never fired a gun. During the war, Dad participated in combat situations, but often said — and included in his essay — that his participation “was the equivalent of a fart in a hurricane when compared to the experience of an infantry platoon leader.” He mostly shared the same three or four stories socially, which appeased the audience while moving the conversation on from Vietnam. I never questioned why his service remained in the backdrop of our lives.
The weekend I graduated from law school in 2009, my mother told me she had amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or Lou Gehrig’s disease. I deferred my start date at a New York law firm for a year and moved back in with my parents to help care for her. My father and I became spectators to her death.
A year later, she ended up in the hospital where she could no longer function physically on her own. Hours before she took her last breath it was clear from my dad’s blank stare that he had hit a limit. He did not have the emotional bandwidth to watch her slowly die any longer. He left the room and I sat down next to Mom and held her hand. I had hit my limit, too, but it didn’t matter. In that moment, I looked up and saw him in the doorway watching me. By tending to the woman my father loved when he couldn’t, I had earned new admiration from him.
A year and a half after my mother died, I organized a dinner so that my father could meet my partner’s family. I don’t know if it was the pain of losing his wife or his aging body, but by the end of the night, dad was drunker than I had ever seen him. I helped him up to his hotel room, his arm wrapped around my back. I was barely able to lift him into bed. I began to fear losing him too.
Weeks later, he was diagnosed with non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. “I came down with a mild cancer that recently has been traced to Agent Orange exposure in Vietnam,” he wrote in the essay for his memoir class. It wasn’t an uncommon diagnosis for Vietnam War veterans: It is estimated that some 2.6 million American military personnel were exposed to Agent Orange and the other powerful herbicides that were sprayed to clear vegetation, but there is still no reliable count of how many have since died from diseases caused by those toxins. Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma is one of 14 diseases that the Department of Veterans Affairs presumes to be a result of military service in Vietnam.
My father went to see an oncologist at the V.A. to learn more about effective treatments and to serve as a record of another veteran afflicted. “I feel that my generation may be the most vivid demonstration that America has not faced responsibility for returning veterans,” my dad wrote. He told me he was sent to an area of the hospital for the wounded where he passed veterans from Iraq missing limbs. The experience, he said, “intensified” his silenced memories. He did not share the details of those memories with me. I don’t think that he fully shared them with anyone. “Your mother doesn’t like it when I talk about Vietnam,” he often said. Dad’s socially acceptable soundbites protected him from negative responses to the war and kept his own memories at a distance.
Now carrying him up to bed after he had too much to drink began to happen again and again. When we went out for dinner, I became his designated driver. I tried to talk to him about his drinking, and his memories, but the conversations ended quickly. I knew he was having a hard time emotionally and deteriorating physically, but I had no idea how to help or what to ask. He said he could handle it — his memories, his cancer, losing my mom — and I wanted to believe him.
For a while it seemed like he had beaten the cancer. But when it came back less than two years later, it moved fast, and his body shut down within four months of his relapse. One night I was visiting him alone in the intensive care unit. He was weak, swollen and connected to so many machines I lost count. Before heading out, I asked him, “Dad, is there anything else you need?” He didn’t respond, so I turned to leave, assuming that he either didn’t hear or didn’t need anything. Before I walked out of the room, he sat up in bed and said, “Toots, is there anything I can do for you?” Just don’t leave me, I thought to myself as I headed out the door.
He never left the I.C.U. He died in the early morning hours on Aug. 12, 2014 — my mother’s birthday. One evening after his death, it started pouring rain on my walk home from work. As my suit slowly drenched with rain, I realized it was the first time I’d been unprepared for a storm.
My sisters and I devoted days to sorting his belongings. When we came upon the box that I discovered in his office, my sisters let me keep it. One day, in my own home, I mustered the courage to open it. I pulled out his dog tags and I read what was engraved — “48. . 49. . 50. . I [expletive] HATE THIS PLACE. JOHN D. REILLY.” A knot tightened in my stomach as I slowly put the dog tags back in the box, where they remain.
I want to learn about the things that he carried so that, for a short while, I can carry them, too.