President Trump’s executive order targeting anti-Semitic and anti-Israel speech on campuses might be framed as a narrow legal matter, but it has touched on a defining issue of our time: Who belongs, and who decides?
The order is ambiguous as to whether it sees Jews as a distinct nationality or a minority race, but either interpretation aligns with Mr. Trump’s preoccupation with defining, and policing, the boundaries of identity.
And the order’s creation of special status for Jews, but not other religious minorities, follows Mr. Trump’s habit of welcoming some demographic groups into the rights and protections of American identity and excluding others. Tellingly, the singling out of Jews for special protection in the order left some feeling still more exposed.
Such preoccupations with identity have animated not just the Trump administration but much of the global populist backlash. Leaders and movements across the democratic world are increasingly focused on enforcing narrow national identities of the sort that defined the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
The era of hardening national identities includes the rise of far-right parties in Europe, white nationalism in the United States and a campaign for Hindu dominance in India.
Mr. Trump’s order, however narrow its intentions, underscores the degree to which the problems and contradictions of national identity — a distinctly modern invention that remade the world before almost destroying it — remain unresolved.
The dilemmas of the new nationalist era are especially surfaced by the order’s focus on Jews, whose relationship to conceptions of race and nationality has always been fraught. It touches on some of the most sensitive questions of Jewish identity — questions that are extensions of ways that national identity both made the modern world and never quite put it back together.
In an effort to tackle anti-Semitism, President Trump has stretched the legal definitions of Jewish identity.
Today: The president has issued an executive order cracking down on anti-Semitism on college campuses. Why some Jewish Americans fear that the logic behind it could provide a rationale that ultimately furthers anti-Semitism.
It’s Wednesday, December 18.
So Max Fisher, tell us what happened last week at the White House.
So last Wednesday, Trump, as part of his annual Hanukkah party, announced that he was going to sign an executive order targeting what he described as anti-Semitic speech on college campuses.
Which seems like a worthwhile goal.
Right. It seems totally straightforward. But it has set off — because of the kind of way it has touched on this, the way it presented it, the politics of it — what has been this really big, divisive debate, especially among American Jews, about basically how to receive this and whether this is a good or a bad thing.
And why has it touched off this debate?
So you can actually see the complications in this order, what makes it so sensitive, in the event where President Trump announced it.
At that Hanukkah party, the way that he kind of starts it is he starts talking about the scourge of anti-Semitism.
As we gather this afternoon, our thoughts turn to the grieving families in New Jersey. Yesterday, two wicked murderers opened fire at a kosher supermarket and killed four innocent souls, including a brave police officer.
When he talks about this recent shooting in Jersey City, he promises to crush anti-Semitism.
My administration will never tolerate the suppression, persecution or silencing of the Jewish people.
My wife, a blessed memory, would be smiling now. Because she loved America first, and Israel, and wanted to build bridges between the two places and have tikkun olam. And I think this, more than anything, is going to help do that. So thank you.
This is the owner of the Patriots?
— moving the American Embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem.
I’ve also recognized Israel’s sovereignty over the Golan Heights.
Recognizing Israel’s annexation of a region called the Golan Heights, which Syria considers part of its territory.
And I said to Bob, so what — Bob Kraft — I said, so what was bigger, Bob? What we did for Israel in terms of Jerusalem and moving the embassy to Jerusalem, becoming the capital of Israel, or the Golan Heights, which you’ve been looking to do? For 52 years, they’ve been having meetings on the Golan Heights. Nothing happened until I came along. I said, Bob Kraft, which is bigger? Which is more important to the Jewish people? He said, neither. I said, what does that mean? He said, what you did by terminating the Iran nuclear deal is bigger than both. [APPLAUSE] I think that’s true.
Withdrawing from the Iran nuclear deal, which had been a big request of the Israeli government. So this is kind of his big windup to introduce the executive order that he’s there to announce.
Before I sign the executive order, I’d like to ask Oscar to say a few words. And Jonathan will light the menorah.
And what’s notable to you about this framing from the president, this list that he wraps this into?
Famously, he criticized Jewish Democrats who are critical of Israel by saying that they were disloyal to Israel.
And I think any Jewish people that vote for a Democrat — I think it shows either a total lack of knowledge or great disloyalty.
So, you know, while it’s not unusual for a president to kind of tout their pro-Israel policies as something they think the American Jewish committee will like, for Trump, the way that he leans into it does a little bit leave the suggestion that he sees Israel and the Jewish community as kind of one and the same.
Right, that he conflates them.
That he conflates them, yes. So then, from there, he moves to this new executive order.
This action makes clear that Title VI of the Civil Rights Act, which prohibits the federal funding of universities and other institutions that engage in discrimination, applies to institutions that traffic in anti-Semitic hate.
Hm. What exactly does that mean?
So the way that it works is that Title VI of the Civil Rights Act allows the federal government to withhold money from colleges that are deemed as not protecting people based on nationality, race or color. So it means that if your local college did nothing to stop the student K.K.K. from holding a big rally with racist banners saying horrible racist things against black people, then the federal government could intervene to withhold federal funding from that college in order to pressure them to act against the student K.K.K. and tell them, no, you’re not allowed to hold your racist rallies on our campus. And what it does is it adds Jews to that. It says, we now consider Jews to be under the consideration of foreign nationality, race or color for the purposes of this act. And then we also have this definition of anti-Semitism that has a few specific phrases and accusations that we’re going to consider discriminatory. And so colleges and universities are now required to basically stop students from saying these things.
— to include Jews.
That’s right. It kind of reinterprets it to say Jews are now — but not other religious minorities — are now included under this.
So what’s the significance of these protections now including Jews? And what does this have to do with your point that this is the latest example of the president equating Israel with American Judaism?
— the way that he describes it is a firm stance against B.D.S. B.D.S. refers to Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions. It is an activist movement, including on campuses, that is aimed at pressuring the Israeli government over its policies towards the Palestinians.
He describes the executive order as targeting what he calls the anti-Semitic campaign against the state of Israel.
— state of Israel and its citizens.
The way that it’s written actually includes calling Israel a racist state as one of the banned anti-Semitic phrases.
It really pitches this as something that is about promoting and protecting the Israeli state from this activist movement. And that is really controversial among American Jews because it happens to overlap very neatly with this division, kind of, among the American Jewish community, where there are some who consider B.D.S. to be beyond the pale anti-Israel, consider it to be anti-Semitic, and so have been asking for this for a long time.
Why does B.D.S. single Israel out alone for condemnation? There is only one word for it: anti-Semitism. Let us call out the B.D.S. movement for what it is.
The main reason why I just say I support B.D.S. and I don’t pick and choose is the point is that this comes from a very, very broad cross-section of Palestinian civil society, with very, very few tactics at their disposal.
— and finds the idea of kind of hard-line pro-Israel policies generally and curbs on anti-Israel activism specifically to be something that don’t really align with their values and with what they want. And so I think for them, pitching this as something that is serving American Jews when a lot of American Jews, even if they don’t like or agree with B.D.S. itself, are not that comfortable with a lot of Israeli government policy so might be sympathetic towards student activists who are critical of Israel, and maybe just generally don’t love the idea of the federal government curbing anti-Israel activism, just as a matter of free speech. I mean, this is the Civil Rights Act. You know? This is meant to stop Southern universities that allowed students to systematically harass black students. It’s strong protections that are meant to protect students from really severe discrimination. But that is what is kind of so complicated about putting Jews into that set of categories and into that bucket of protected race, color and nationality. Because on the one hand, Jews — for a long time, a lot of Jews have considered themselves to be a distinct race, a distinct nationality. Certainly, that is how Jews have been treated. So setting aside Jews and not other religious groups, in a sense, and I think for a lot of Jewish groups, feels like recognition in this really powerful way. And the fact that it’s recognition in a protected class is kind of granting Jews a little bit of a special status in American life. But on the other hand, that’s also really sensitive. Because there has been this longstanding Jewish sensitivity towards being deemed as foreigners within, which obviously is this very longstanding anti-Semitic trope. And so the threat that some Jews feel is embedded in this is that it chips away at their identity that American Jews fought really hard for as full Americans and as fully white.
Jews, like Italians, like Irish, were not considered white for a long time. And that obviously came with a lot of discrimination. It wasn’t really until after World War II that Jews, again, like Irish, like Italians, were accepted as white, at a time when that was a condition for being seen as fully American.
I was the rabbi of the Jewish community in Berlin under the Hitler regime. I learned many things.
And it’s part of why Jews developed this tradition of getting really involved in the civil rights movement, which was partly about expanding that kind of full cultural and social citizenship to nonwhites.
But that whiteness has been valuable to Jews since then, because it’s something that says you’re safe and welcome as Americans.
And this, to some Jews, puts that at risk.
It puts that at risk because it highlights them as racially or nationally distinct at a time when there is this really big, rising white nationalist movement that is saying the exact same thing in a very threatening way, that says that Jews are foreigners in our midst working to undermine the United States, and that uses that narrative to justify really serious rising anti-Semitic violence.
We begin this hour with a developing story, a shooting at a synagogue in California. It happened in the town of Poway. That’s northeast of San Diego.
Here is a young man standing with a rifle, pointing right at me.
A disturbing discovery, just steps from the Holocaust Memorial.
Here you see the headstones that were toppled at a Jewish cemetery in Fall River.
Two bloody swastikas on a retaining wall, about two feet by two feet each.
What it does is it dredges up what’s happening in the United States today. That kind of thing is not hidden anymore, that it’s out there.
A group of men assaulting a victim in traditional religious attire on Saturday.
A second victim was randomly slapped in the face by his attacker.
We believe that the suspects held views that reflected hatred of the Jewish people.
And what happened at the Tree of Life synagogue is the deadliest attack on Jewish Americans in U.S. history.
And so this kind of irony to this is this order that is principally written as about curbing and addressing anti-Semitism also is written in a way that echoes this white nationalist worldview that says that Jews are other, that they’re racially other, that they’re not American, and specifically that they are these kind of clandestine secret Israelis, and these agents of Israel. Nobody intended that worldview to end up in this executive order. And it’s not that it’s written into it. But the way that it others Jews, even if that was clearly just a legal mechanism, ends up echoing that. And I think that that is a real fundamental irony, and a source of a lot of people’s discomfort with it.
Max, thank you very much.
It appears that the most rushed, least thorough, and most unfair impeachment inquiry in modern history is about to wind down after just 12 weeks, and that its slapdash work product will be dumped on us over here in the Senate.
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has rejected demands from Democrats to call four White House officials as witnesses during President Trump’s impeachment trial in the Senate. Such a trial is expected to begin in January, following an impeachment vote in the House. McConnell said that calling such witnesses was the roll of the House, not the Senate, despite the fact that the president blocked White House officials from testifying before the House throughout the impeachment inquiry.
If House Democrats’ case is this deficient, this thin, the answer is not for the judge and jury to cure it over here in the Senate. The answer is the House should not impeach on this basis in the first place.
What Is National Identity?
The concept, scarcely 200 years old, holds that humanity is divided among fixed communities, each defined by a common language, ethnicity and homeland. Those communities are nations; membership is one’s national identity. The core tenet of nationalism so pervades today’s world that it feels almost self-evident: Any nation of people should have a country, and any country should consist of a nation.
The concept of an overarching identity tied to one’s country was invented not by ancient poets or warriors but by 19th-century European governments. As monarchies teetered and the church declined, governments saw engineering common languages and ethnic heritages as a way to justify their rule over polyglot empires, as well as an opportunity to marshal their populations for collective pursuits like industry or war.
“Nations as a natural, God-given way of classifying men, as an inherent though long-delayed political destiny, are a myth,” the British-Czech political theorist Ernest Gellner wrote.
But this way of thinking reshaped 19th-century Europe, leading to the creation of modern Italy and Germany. It later spread to the rest of the world, inspiring independence and liberation movements on the basis that all people belong to national groups awaiting their nation.
National identity’s rise, however, also turned minorities and migrants into second-class citizens — or even into perceived threats within. It turned racial purity into a matter of ethnic, and therefore national, survival. It defined nations as irrevocably divided from one another by race and heritage.
The world, unable to unwind a global order built on national identity, sought to manage its worst tendencies by promoting cultural pluralism, international integration and protections for minorities and migrants. These values did not so much replace national identity as sit uneasily alongside it, eventually leading to a backlash.
Mr. Trump’s order, for purposes of monitoring educational institutions’ handling of discrimination, places Jews under Civil Rights Act protections based on race, color or national origin. The order also draws on a 2005 definition of anti-Semitism, one of whose authors has since said is overly broad, conflating hatred of Jews with criticism of Israel.
Jewish groups are sensitive to implications that their religion carries a distinct nationality. Centuries of European anti-Semitism were built on the belief that Jews were foreigners within. As late as the 1980s, Soviet passports designated “Jewish” as a nationality akin to Russian or Ukrainian.
In the late 19th century, as modern national identity took hold, some Jewish leaders arrived at a position that hinted at the contradictions of the era. They embraced the notion that European Jews really were ethnically distinct from their non-Jewish neighbors — and that all Jews belonged to a unified people.
In what was then an era of national self-determination, this also made Jews a nationality that, like many liberation movements of the time, sought a nation of their own.
Serbian or Armenian nationalists placed their nations where ethnic Serbs and Armenians lived. But, with Jews dispersed across a half-dozen empires, Zionism’s leaders settled on the ancient biblical land of Judea.
Mr. Trump’s order, by treating anti-Israel protests as a form of anti-Semitism, hits on long-running Jewish debates over whether or not Israel is an extension of a shared identity.
The Israeli national narrative, of a long-forgotten homeland waiting to be rediscovered by a citizenry scattered by history, implies a Jewish identity that is innately ethnic and national. Still, American Jewish attitudes toward Israel are cooling; national fealty, for many, is a stretch.
The executive order also suggests that the government may see Jews as a distinct race.
Since World War II, American Jews have been on a generational drift from Jewishness as a national identity, which no longer felt as necessary. But a series of political and cultural changes have called that postwar identity into question.
Rising white nationalism increasingly targets Jews as unwelcome outsiders. Conspiracy theories, some entering the mainstream, portray them as nationless cosmopolitans bent on undermining Western countries’ racial purity.
Mr. Trump’s order raises anew a question that has faced Jews throughout the 200-year era of national identity: whether such identities offer them security or only peril. It is an echo of late 19th-century debates, when some urged embracing national identity and forming a state, while others argued for casting it off and integrating into multicultural democracies instead.
The wider democratic world asked itself this same question in the wake of World War II. It declared old-style national identity a curse and pluralistic democracy the only path to peace, but the argument has raged off and on ever since — as it has, in parallel, for Jews.
In a twist of history, the creation of Israel put Jews on the opposite side of the question: Now they had to decide whether a Jewish national identity had room for minorities.
Early Zionist leaders insisted that it did. But more recent Israeli leaders have promoted Israeli identity as exclusively Jewish and have imposed severe restrictions on Palestinians.
Mr. Trump’s order sharpens this matter as well, offering Jews greater protections by curbing anti-Israel activism that is sometimes animated by Palestinian demands for national self-determination.
In a sign of how much the world has changed, the new nationalists, from Mr. Orban to Narendra Modi of India, have rallied around Mr. Netanyahu as an ally and model. In a sign of how much it has not changed, all three have invoked ancient ethnic heritage in deploying distinctly modern controls on their country’s religious minorities.
Mr. Netanyahu, like Mr. Trump, has emphasized hard-line policies as necessary to preserve Jewish identity.
Perhaps as a result, intra-Jewish debates, whether over Israel’s direction or Mr. Trump’s order, have become something of a microcosm of the global nationalist moment. They have divided American Jews, like much of the world, over whether the movement toward hardened, national-style identities is the solution to their problems — or the problem itself.