Mr. Marron began his Wall Street career as a teenager before leading some of its most powerful firms and becoming a force at the Museum of Modern Art.
Donald B. Marron, a prominent Wall Street financier and philanthropist and a major figure in the New York art world, died on Friday in Manhattan. He was 85.
Catherine Marron, his wife, confirmed the death. She said he had been en route to a colleague’s holiday cocktail party and was getting out of a car when he had what appeared to be a heart attack. He lived on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
Mr. Marron’s influence ranged across the disparate worlds of high finance, art and government policy. He led some of Wall Street’s most powerful firms, played a shaping role in the expansion of the Museum of Modern Art in New York and delved into policy issues as a member of the Council on Foreign Relations and other organizations.
Early in his career, as president and chief executive, Mr. Marron oversaw the transformation of Mitchell Hutchins from a predominantly retail-oriented outfit into one of Wall Street’s premier stock research firms. He sold it to PaineWebber, the investment bank and stock brokerage firm, in 1977.
In 1968, Mr. Marron and the Harvard economist Otto Eckstein founded Data Resources Inc., which became what was said to be the largest nongovernmental source of economic data in the world. Mr. Marron served as chairman until McGraw-Hill purchased the firm for $103 million in 1979.
He was named chairman and chief executive of the PaineWebber Group in 1980. During his 20-year tenure there, it grew to become one of the nation’s largest full-service securities firms before being acquired by the Union Bank of Switzerland, better known as UBS.
When UBS and PaineWebber merged in 2000, Mr. Marron was named chairman of UBS America, a position he held for several years. He founded Lightyear Capital LLC, a New York-based private equity firm focused on financial services investing, in 2000 and became its chairman.
Mr. Marron became a trustee of the Museum of Modern Art in 1975 and a key figure in the museum’s expansion in the early 1980s. He was elected president of the museum’s board of trustees in 1985.
He spent more than three decades compiling a vast collection of postwar art that included paintings, drawings and sculpture by Andy Warhol, Roy Lichtenstein, Lucian Freud, Jasper Johns and others. He developed close relationships with some of his favorite artists, among them Brice Marden, Ed Ruscha and Mark Grotjahn.
As a supporter of art in the workplace, Mr. Marron lined the walls of UBS PaineWebber’s offices nationwide with works from his collection.
Mr. Marron donated part of the UBS-owned collection — which was valued at about $15 million — to the Museum of Modern Art, where it was exhibited in 2005.
As the art market exploded in recent years, attracting dabblers and speculators, Mr. Marron remained an old-fashioned collector — passionate about the art itself, rather than looking to flip it for a profit.
He recently opened his own private gallery in Midtown Manhattan, which he filled with works from his own collection. He had no interest in making it public, however, preferring to enjoy the art on his own or with friends.
Donald Baird Marron was born on July 21, 1934, in Goshen, N.Y., the son of Edward J. Marron, a writer, and Ethel Baird Marron, a homemaker. He grew up in New York City.
He later received honorary law degrees from Baruch and Long Island University, according to a biography posted by New York University’s Marron Institute of Urban Management, which was established with a large donation from him.
Mr. Marron, who stood 6-foot-6, began his Wall Street career as a teenager, taking a trainee’s job for less than $50 a week at the New York Trust Company, which later merged with Chemical Bank. At New York Trust, he moved into the investment research department.
As a philanthropist, Mr. Marron was active in government and public policy. In addition to being a trustee of New York University, he was a member of the board of overseers and managers of Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center and a director of the Partnership for New York City. He was also involved with the Coalition for the Homeless.
Mr. Marron was a member of the President’s Committee on the Arts and Humanities, the chairman emeritus of the Center for the Study of the Presidency, a member of the Council on Foreign Relations and a trustee of the Center for Strategic and International Studies, where he helped developed the framework for Social Security and pension reform legislation, according to his New York University biography.
He was a former director of the New York Stock Exchange, governor and vice chairman of the Securities Industry Association and governor of the National Association of Securities Dealers.
Ms. Marron said she met Mr. Marron at a cocktail party at the Museum of Modern Art; they were married in 1985. She later served as chairwoman of the New York Public Library and was a contributing editor at Vogue magazine.
A previous marriage, to Gloria Swope, ended in divorce.
Besides his wife, Mr. Marron is survived by their two children, William and Serena Marron; two children from his first marriage, Jennifer Marron and Donald Jr., an economist who served on the Council of Economic Advisers under President George W. Bush; his sister, Carol Ray; his brother, Kenneth; and four grandchildren.
Robin Pogrebin contributed reporting.