Prosecutors accused Jesus Manuel Menocal Jr., a police sergeant in Hialeah, of sexually abusing two females, one a minor, in 2015.
A police officer in Florida was charged Friday with violating the civil rights of two women, one of them a minor, in separate episodes in 2015 that federal prosecutors said involved kidnapping, sexual abuse and threats of physical harm.
F.B.I. agents arrested the officer, Jesus Manuel Menocal Jr., 32, a police sergeant in Hialeah, Fla., outside Miami, at that city’s Police Department, a bureau spokesman said.
The indictment, which was returned by a federal grand jury on Thursday, said he violated the rights of a minor in June 2015 when, “for his own sexual gratification,” he ordered her “to remove her shorts and underwear and turn around,” according to a statement from the United States attorney for the Southern District of Florida, Ariana Fajardo Orshan.
Prosecutors also accused Sergeant Menocal of kidnapping and “the use and threatened use of a dangerous weapon” in his encounter with the girl, then 17, which happened while he was “acting under color of law,” according to a statement.
In a separate matter, prosecutors said Sergeant Menocal exposed his penis to a woman, placed her hand on it and kissed her. The indictment accuses him of “the use and threatened use of a dangerous weapon” in that episode as well, which it said took place sometime between Jan. 1 and March 31, 2015.
Lawyers for Sergeant Menocal did not respond to messages seeking comment on Friday. A spokesman for the Hialeah Police Department also did not respond to messages seeking comment on Friday.
The charges involving a minor closely match allegations contained in a lawsuit filed in October by Maley DaCosta, 21, who accused Sergeant Menocal of stopping her car in June 2015. She sued Sergeant Menocal and the City of Hialeah, which she said had “created and tolerated an atmosphere of lawlessness” among law enforcement officials.
“The criminal indictment that the feds have filed basically mirrors our civil case,” Anthony M. Georges-Pierre, a lawyer for Ms. DaCosta, said in an interview.
Ms. DaCosta said in her suit that Sergeant Menocal took her into custody while she was out with her girlfriend. He took her to a police station, entering through a back door, and ordered her to remove her clothes while he touched himself and asked her questions about lesbianism.
The Miami-Dade State Attorney’s Office investigated Ms. DaCosta’s allegations against Sergeant Menocal soon after they are alleged to have happened, but declined to prosecute him in 2016. The Miami Herald wrote about the case last month, revealing that four women had accused Sergeant Menocal of sexually abusing them. Only one was interviewed by the state attorney’s office.
In a statement on Friday, the state attorney, Katherine Fernandez Rundle, said her office had provided information from its investigation to the Justice Department’s Civil Rights Division in 2016.
She celebrated the federal indictment and said the case had been “a very challenging fact scenario” for state investigators.
