Politics|Who Won the Democratic Debate? Experts Weigh In.
Who Won the Democratic Debate? Experts Weigh In.
There was little consensus on winners and losers, but political strategists had strong opinions on the biggest moments of the night.
Twitter can’t tell us how, or if, Thursday’s PBS/Politico debate might have changed voters’ minds. But it can give us the perspectives of some people with expertise on primary races: veteran campaign strategists and consultants from both parties.
In most of the previous debates, there was at least some consensus on who did well and who didn’t. This time, there was little agreement.
Almost every candidate received some form of “their best debate yet” commentary from at least one strategist, some of whom argued that the smaller lineup gave each candidate more room to stand out. And in some of the most contentious exchanges, the pundits differed on which contender did best.
In the absence of any agreement on winners and losers, here is a brief look at how the strategists reacted to the biggest moments of the debate.
Former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. — often criticized by the progressive wing of the Democratic Party for his insistence that, if elected, he could find common ground with congressional Republicans — defended himself more forcefully than usual on that point, saying he refused to believe that bipartisan cooperation had become permanently impossible.
Strategists were divided, however, on who came out on top.
Early in the debate, Senator Bernie Sanders was asked to comment on the lack of racial diversity onstage: Six of the seven candidates are white. Mr. Sanders pivoted back to the previous topic, climate change, and several commentators expressed frustration.
“While I’m happy that @SenSanders can tie race to environmentalism, the fact that he refused to answer the question about the lack of diversity at this #DemDebate shows he still hasn’t learned the lessons he should have in 2016,” tweeted Andra Gillespie, a political scientist at Emory University.
Mr. Sanders did, however, bring his answer back around to race, emphasizing the disproportionate effects climate change has on minority communities.
Ms. Warren also had a tense, and memorable, exchange with Mr. Buttigieg over campaign finance. But the strategists tended to agree that her strongest moments came elsewhere.
Ms. Warren also drew significant praise for her pithy retort to a question about her age — a moderator said she would be the oldest woman elected president, to which she replied, “I’d also be the youngest woman ever elected” — and for her call, in response to a question about transgender rights, to say the names of transgender women of color who have been murdered.
Andrew Yang — who, as an Asian-American, was the only nonwhite candidate onstage — was asked what message his presence sent to people of color. He received good reviews for his response, in which he said it was “both an honor and disappointment to be the lone candidate of color on the stage tonight” and argued that his universal basic income proposal would give members of minority groups more power in campaigns.
Tom Steyer drew applause during a discussion of immigration policy when he said President Trump does not oppose all immigration, only immigration by people of color.
“‘This is a president who only wants white immigration’ was his high-scoring line of the night,” Mr. Luntz said, referring to the results of his focus group.
