The rampage in the New York suburbs wounded five people and traumatized the Jewish community in the region.
MONSEY, N.Y. — When he was caught, the intruder was still covered in the blood of his victims — five Hasidic Jews he had stabbed wildly with a machete at a rabbi’s home while candles on the Hanukkah menorah still burned.
But the toll might have been worse had those assembled not fought back, hitting the intruder with pieces of furniture, forcing him to retreat.
He had concealed his face with a scarf when he burst into the home in this Hasidic community in the New York suburbs at about 10 p.m. on Saturday, the police and witnesses said.
“At the beginning, he started wielding his machete back and forth, trying to hit everyone around,” said Josef Gluck, 32, who was at the home of the Hasidic rabbi, Chaim Rottenberg, for the celebration of the seventh night of Hanukkah.
Mr. Gluck said the assailant screamed at him, “Hey you, I’ll get you” during the attack.
In terror, people fled the living room. Mr. Gluck recalled dashing into the kitchen, scooping up a small child and then going down a back porch. Mr. Gluck returned, saw an older victim bleeding heavily and then tried to confront the attacker.
“I grabbed an old antique coffee table and I threw it at his face,” Mr. Gluck said.
A suspect, Grafton Thomas, 38, was later arrested in Harlem after police traced his license plate using a photo Mr. Gluck had taken of the intruder’s car as he fled the scene.
On Sunday afternoon, two family friends of Mr. Thomas said he had struggled with mental illness, including schizophrenia.
The violence further traumatized the Jewish community in the New York region, coming after a string of anti-Semitic incidents in recent weeks. It occurred weeks after an anti-Semitic mass shooting at a kosher supermarket in Jersey City, N.J., left three people dead, including two Hasidic Jews, and after an ultra-Orthodox man was stabbed in Monsey on his way to a local synagogue.
The New York Police Department had already said on Friday that it was stepping up patrols in Jewish neighborhoods after a series of anti-Semitic incidents last week.
The five victims of Saturday’s attack were taken to the hospital, and four of them were treated there and released. By Sunday afternoon, one remained there with a skull fracture, officials said.
That person, according to Abe Rosenberg, captain of Hatzalah E.M.S., the local emergency response service, is elderly and recently underwent heart surgery. “We are praying for him. But a person this age with critical medical condition, anything can go bad,” he said.
Yossi Gestetner, a co-founder of the Orthodox Jewish Public Affairs Council, a group that covers New York and New Jersey, said one of the victims was the rabbi’s son.
On Sunday, members of the Hasidic community said they took some solace in the way people at the Hanukkah party did whatever they could to repel the attacker, with some throwing furniture at him.
After the attacker left the rabbi’s home, he tried to enter a synagogue next door, Congregation Netzach Yisroel, which is led by the rabbi, witnesses said.
But people inside had heard the commotion and locked the door, so he left in a car.
Hours later, in a show of resilience, members of the ultra-Orthodox community gathered in the synagogue to continue the religious celebration and offer support to the attack’s victims.
The Police Department officers who confronted and detained Mr. Thomas in Harlem, about 30 miles from Monsey, on Saturday night found him covered with blood, officials said. The smell of bleach, possibly used to clean up the blood, wafted from his car.
The police then turned him over to the authorities in Rockland County, northwest of New York City, where the attack took place.
Rockland County has one of the largest concentrations of ultra-Orthodox Jews outside of Israel.
Mr. Thomas, who prosecutors said they believed acted alone, is facing five counts of attempted murder and one count of first-degree burglary.
At his arraignment on Sunday morning, Mr. Thomas, who was wearing a white prison suit, pleaded not guilty to all charges. Mr. Thomas, who is tall and often had to crouch down to speak to his attorney, appeared calm and mostly kept his head down during the arraignment.
In 2018, he had been charged with fourth-degree criminal possession of a weapon, second-degree reckless endangerment and menacing a police or peace officer, according to a police report in a local paper. He was released on $1,000 bail, the report said.
Some neighbors said Mr. Thomas, who is from Greenwood Lake, N.Y., about 20 miles from Monsey, was an unassuming person who often played basketball at a local park and did not appear troubled.
But on Sunday afternoon, a family friend, Taleea Collins, and Mr. Thomas’s pastor, the Rev. Wendy Paige, said that he had struggled with mental illness for two decades and had repeatedly sought help over the years.
In a phone interview on Sunday night, Ms. Paige said Mr. Thomas had been diagnosed with schizophrenia and that she had struggled for years to understand why he wasn’t institutionalized.
“There hasn’t been anyone who has given a real solution to deal with a grown man who is dealing with schizophrenia, other than ‘Go home and call us if something happens,’” Ms. Paige said.
She said police had removed a computer from his mother’s home, where he lived.
Mr. Thomas is scheduled to appear in court again on Friday. The statement issued Sunday night by Mr. Sussman said the family would ask for a mental health evaluation.
Mr. Cuomo said he had ordered the State Police hate crimes task force to investigate the stabbings.
In a letter to Mr. Cuomo, four Orthodox Jewish elected officials from New York implored the governor to declare a state of emergency and deploy the New York National Guard to protect Jewish enclaves across the state. They also urged him to appoint a special prosecutor to investigate anti-Semitic violence.
“Simply stated, it is no longer safe to be identifiably Orthodox in the State of New York. We cannot shop, walk down the street, send our children to school, or even worship in peace,” they wrote.
In the wake of the attack, photos of its aftermath circulated on social media and in WhatsApp groups, showing blood smeared across the floor of the rabbi’s home and on the wooden stage where the Hanukkah ceremony had taken place.
Rockland County, a collection of five towns northwest of New York City, has more than 300,000 people, and 31 percent of the population is Jewish, according to the state. In recent years, the area’s ultra-Orthodox population has surged as Hasidic families from Queens and Brooklyn, priced out of their neighborhoods, have moved to the suburbs.
Hundreds in that community gathered on Sunday to continue the Hanukkah celebrations that were postponed after the attack and to lend their support for Rabbi Rottenberg. In a parade that stretched from the synagogue to the rabbi’s home, children wearing paper crowns ran down the street and men danced to Hebrew songs.
During morning services on Sunday, several people who had been at the house during the attack offered blessings in thanks that so many lives had been spared the night before.
“During the days of Hanukkah we celebrate miracles, and we believe that this is a great miracle because it could have been disastrous,” said Chaim Lefkowitz, a member of Netzach Yisroel.
Johnny Diaz, Malachy Browne, Haley Willis and Sydney Ember contributed reporting.