They did not rule out future participation, but said they would not appear at the Judiciary Committee’s first public hearing, featuring legal experts who will offer assessments on impeachment.
Representative Jerrold Nadler, Democrat of New York and the chairman of the committee, had given the White House a Sunday deadline for the president or his lawyers to take up the opportunity to appear at the hearing, where a panel of legal experts will offer an assessment of whether Mr. Trump committed impeachable offenses.
He did not rule out participation in future hearings, though many of his complaints about the process would apply to those proceedings as well. Mr. Nadler had informed the administration on Friday that the president and his lawyers had a week to tell the committee whether they would call witnesses or present evidence as part of their defense against possible impeachment articles stemming from allegations that Mr. Trump pressured Ukraine to help him in his re-election campaign, and Mr. Cipollone said he would respond to that request separately.
The refusal to send lawyers Wednesday continues a pattern of stonewalling by Mr. Trump, who has sought to block witnesses and documents, as he and his allies call the proceedings “deranged” and a “witch hunt.” People familiar with the president’s legal strategy have said privately that his lawyers are deeply suspicious of taking part in a process they view as unfair to Mr. Trump.
That was one of many points Mr. Cipollone cited as he assailed the committee for a failure to establish what he deemed to be a fair process — an argument that has quickly gained resonance among Mr. Trump’s allies as a way to undermine the inquiry.
It is unclear whether the Democratic majority would be willing to acquiesce to any conditions set by the White House. Democrats have stood by their process, saying that Mr. Trump is being given ample opportunities to defend himself and that the White House would not have blocked Mr. Trump’s inner circle from testifying if officials had exculpatory information.
During his Thanksgiving vacation at Mar-a-Lago, his Palm Beach estate, Mr. Trump remained relatively quiet about the inquiry, except for a few Twitter posts sharing articles late Saturday night that asserted Mr. Trump’s innocence.
Without White House representation, Mr. Trump’s defense will most likely materialize among some of the committee’s most fiery Republicans — including Representatives Jim Jordan of Ohio and John Ratcliffe of Texas, both of whom engaged in impassioned defenses during witness testimony, and Matt Gaetz of Florida, who joined Mr. Trump for a rally last week.
A number of Mr. Trump’s allies appeared on television shows Sunday morning before the letter was released to aggressively condemn the process outlined by the House.
Maggie Haberman contributed reporting from New York.