As the billionaire’s defamation trial in Los Angeles entered its third day, a professor testified that the Twitter message had generated hundreds of articles.
The billionaire Elon Musk’s Twitter post calling the cave explorer Vernon Unsworth “pedo guy” led to hundreds of articles online, a Penn State University professor testified on Thursday.
The professor, Jim Jansen, a web analytics researcher, said that according to his research, from July to September 2018, 490 articles from 361 websites representing 33 countries were published in English referring to “pedo guy” and “pedophilia.” They represented major companies, such as The New York Times, The Los Angeles Times, Time, Fox News and Breitbart. Mr. Jansen said that Mr. Musk never referred to Mr. Unsworth as a pedophile but that the word might have appeared in those articles.
The testimony came on the third and final day of the trial over Mr. Unsworth’s defamation lawsuit against Mr. Musk in Los Angeles. Jury instructions and final arguments were scheduled to be given on Friday.
The trial has centered on a bitter exchange between Mr. Musk and Mr. Unsworth from summer 2018, as each separately sought to help rescue a group of boys trapped in a cave in Thailand.
As international attention on the trapped children intensified, Mr. Musk, the billionaire founder and chief executive of Tesla, sent a team of engineers to the scene and proposed an unusual rescue strategy: a minisubmarine.
Mr. Musk, who at the time had 22 million followers on Twitter, responded with the “pedo guy” post.
On Thursday, lawyers for Mr. Musk argued that the comment, however impolite, did not cause Mr. Unsworth any reputational damage.
Bill Price, one of Mr. Musk’s lawyers, pointed to a photograph of Mr. Unsworth standing next to the British prime minister at a ceremony at 10 Downing Street, as well as a Daily Mail video of a smiling Mr. Unsworth celebrating the cave rescue.
Since the Twitter exchange, the lawyer said, Mr. Unsworth has been approached by a music producer seeking to represent him in book or movie deals and has participated in two documentaries about the rescue. “Nothing Mr. Musk tweeted got in your way,” Mr. Price said.
So far, Mr. Musk’s defense has rested largely on the claim that “pedo guy” is a generic insult common in his childhood home of South Africa rather than an actual accusation of pedophilia.
The final witness on Thursday was Vanessa Unsworth, Mr. Unsworth’s wife, who appeared in a recorded deposition. While they are still married, the two separated in 2013 and they have only limited contact. She said Mr. Unsworth might have come across as aggressive during the Thai rescue effort because “he was extremely concerned about getting the kids out” of the cave.
After the jury was excused, the judge said that it could find negligence even without malice.
Mr. Musk deleted the tweets in July 2018, explaining in a subsequent post that he had written them in anger.
Still, Mr. Musk later told a BuzzFeed News reporter in an email that Mr. Unsworth was a “child rapist” who had married a 12-year-old — claims that Mr. Unsworth vehemently denies.
Mr. Musk has had plenty to say. On the stand this week, he lamented the chain of events that his tweets had set in motion. “It should’ve just been, ‘Here’s a rescue, and that’s great,’” he testified.
