Hans Abrahamsen’s work, starring the fearless soprano Barbara Hannigan, is opening at the Bavarian State Opera in Munich.
MUNICH — You could be forgiven for assuming the composer Hans Abrahamsen has an obsession with winter.
He did, after all, once write a piece called “Winternacht” (“Winter Night”), and perhaps his most famous work is “Schnee” (“Snow”). His song cycle “let me tell you” evokes a landscape as wintry as one in a Bruegel painting. And there is no metaphor more apt to describe Mr. Abrahamsen’s music than a snowflake: pleasantly soft and simple from a distance, mathematically precise and complex under a microscope.
Children’s stories, though, are meant to be read in any number of ways, and though it’s brand-new, Mr. Abrahamsen’s “Snow Queen” has already been filtered through the sensibilities of two directors. Rarely does this happen, but the opera is being rolled out in different languages, and different stagings, in quick succession. A commission from the Royal Danish Opera in Copenhagen, it premiered there in October, in Danish, directed by Francisco Negrin.
Nearly simultaneously, an English-language version has been prepared in Munich. But the Bavarian State Opera, which rarely imports productions from elsewhere, started from scratch, with its own director and conductor. And a new star: Barbara Hannigan, a reigning soprano of contemporary music, for whom the opera was originally written.
The fairy tale concerns a mirror that reflects only the world at its worst and, once shattered, shoots dangerous splinters. A boy named Kay, the friend of a girl named Gerda, gets one in an eye and his heart; he is also abducted by the Snow Queen and presumed dead. Gerda, hopeful he’s alive, searches for him, a journey that brings her from innocence to experience.
So Gerda and Kay, in Mr. Kriegenburg’s production, are a middle-aged couple. The mirror splinters have always suggested psychological trauma; here, Kay’s condition is an actual mental illness. Being taken away by the Snow Queen is rendered as being admitted to an institution — where Gerda remains by his side, physically close yet at an unbridgeable distance. One day she falls asleep, and the adventure of the fairy tale — meeting crows, a princess and prince, and an old woman on the way to the Snow Queen — unfolds as a journey deep into Gerda’s subconscious hopes and fears, blurring fantasy and reality.
When talking about the opera early on with Ms. Hannigan, they agreed the Snow Queen wouldn’t be an “agitated soprano” like the Queen of the Night from Mozart’s “The Magic Flute.” Maybe, to put it in “Magic Flute” terms, she would be like the high priest Sarastro, and would thus make sense sung by a mellow bass (in Munich, Peter Rose).
So it was clear from the start that Ms. Hannigan wouldn’t be playing the title character. But Mr. Abrahamsen did want to give her the biggest role, especially after their collaboration on “let me tell you,” which traveled the world and won ovations, critical acclaim and the prestigious Grawemeyer Award for Music Composition, in 2016. The Bavarian State Opera wanted to work with her again, too; she had starred in Bernd Alois Zimmermann’s “Die Soldaten” there in 2014, in another production by Mr. Kriegenburg.
Ms. Hannigan wasn’t comfortable with the prospect. “If I join a Danish production, there’s going to be so much focus on whether I can sing in Danish or not,” she remembered thinking. “It would be distracting.” Sofie Elkjaer Jensen ended up singing Gerda for the premiere, in October.
The coming premiere has set off a miniature Abrahamsen festival around town. Recently, the Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra, under the baton of Franz Welser-Möst, presented Mr. Abrahamsen’s left-hand piano concerto, “Left Alone,” with Alexandre Tharaud. And the opera company hosted a concert featuring early Abrahamsen solos at the Deutsches Museum’s collection devoted to antique transportation.
Most challenging in Mr. Abrahamsen’s music is the rhythm. In “Left Alone,” the tempo oscillates from measure to measure between two speeds that are nearly the same. On the page, the directions seem comically controlling. But if they’re ignored, the piece doesn’t work.
In “The Snow Queen,” singers and instrumentalists are given hyperspecific tempos and time signatures, as well as ratios that indicate each part’s meter compared with the rest of the orchestra. At times, the score calls for two conductors.
Here, that type of vibrato sounds like shivering in the snow. Mr. Abrahamsen said he had been experimenting with the effect since before even “Schnee,” he said. He described it as “a friction” that comes from his body: He was born with cerebral palsy and walks with a limp, relying heavily on his left side.
Satisfied with how that ornamentation — and other hallmarks of Mr. Abrahamsen’s style — have scaled to the level of opera in “The Snow Queen,” he is already considering another project. “Frozen 2” has been a huge box office hit so far; could there be another snow-themed opera on the way?
