Style|What Happens When a Weddings Influencer Gets Divorced?
Ms. Guy secured $250,000 in investment from her brother-in-law, Peter Shapiro, the owner of Brooklyn Bowl. She rented a retail and studio space on Broadway in the NoHo section of Manhattan and started cold-calling designers to make samples for the store. Many of them, including Ohne Titel and Ryan Roche, said yes.
“There was a lot of mental and emotional gymnastics that I was doing to sort of keep the brand afloat,” she added.
On Mother’s Day in 2018, she announced her divorce to her followers on Instagram. To her surprise, they were supportive. In fact, the post got more “likes” than any wedding photos she’d shared before.
As has become the case with many influencers who built their brands with aspirational images, Ms. Guy began posting more “real” images and captions about her messy personal life and her anxieties. She changed her Instagram handle to @stonefoxride, dropping the “B,” and started another account, @mollyrosenguy, where she wrote letters to her late father. On @stonefoxride, she stopped sharing the #stonefoxrings stories. Instead, she recently offered her followers a very different engagement ring story, involving an art deco diamond and a trip to the E.R.
Now, Ms. Guy said she is working on a memoir, tentatively titled — what else? — “Blood and Diamonds.” Her brand, she said, has evolved to represent “women in transition.” As it turns out, she is not the only woman who had a perfectly-imperfect, bohemian wedding in the 2010s that ended in divorce.
In the brand’s heyday, Ms. Guy featured wedding photos from many of her clients on Stone Fox Bride’s website. A few years later, she started to get calls from brides who wanted to get the photos taken down.
With her wedding-dress business all but shuttered, Ms. Guy wondered how she might connect with these clients again. She still had her Instagram following, which included a new set of women drawn to her long, confessional captions about life after death and divorce. And so last year, she asked them if they would be interested in taking a writing class about “love and loss” in Williamsburg.
In a syllabus from this past summer, she described the course as a “crash course writing workshop” for “foxes in flux.” She shares some of her students’ best work on, yes, Instagram.
Ms. Guy said she created the class as a way for women to tell the kind of stories that are not easily represented with a diamond ring or a white dress. But she may find a way to do that in the future, too: Women have started to approach her to make rings and dresses fit for a stylish and spiritual divorce.