A suspect in the deadly attack on a kosher market in Jersey City was connected to the Black Hebrew Israelites, which has been labeled a hate group.
In a news conference a day after the attacks, Steven Fulop, the mayor of Jersey City, said that Mr. Anderson had expressed hate in messages on Facebook. The mayor did not elaborate.
There are several Hebrew Israelite offshoots in the New York region. Mathath Lawya, a founder of the Apostles of New Jerusalem, a prominent New Jersey congregation, disavowed the pair’s actions.
Ms. Graham’s beliefs are as yet unclear. Her brother, Frederick Graham, said he was not aware of links to the movement on her part.
A neighbor of Ms. Graham’s in a tidy housing development in Elizabeth, N.J., said she was nice and polite when she moved there in 2011.
The neighbor said he could hear Mr. Anderson shouting at night that his religion was the only true religion, while others — specifically Catholicism and Judaism — were false. Soon, he said, Ms. Graham joined in the chants.
Ash Yasharahla, who lives in New York City and is part of a Hebrew Israelite congregation known as I Am Israel (No Division), called Mr. Anderson’s and Ms. Graham’s actions “wicked,” adding that the movement’s aggressive street preaching should not be conflated with a call to violence.
It reflects anger, he said, at what he described as the systemic oppression of minorities.
In January, a video of a confrontation involving students from Covington Catholic High School in northern Kentucky at the Lincoln Memorial in Washington went viral. It appeared to show the students yelling at a Native American activist.
The students later said they had been responding to a group of Hebrew Israelites, and further video footage showed the group had begun screaming invective at them and the activist.
Mr. Yasharahla lamented that his community seemed to only make headlines when it was swept up in negative events. “What that couple did,” he said, “is not the determining factor of who we are."
Michael Gold, Edgar Sandoval, Nate Schweber, Tracey Tully and Ali Watkins contributed reporting.