Opinion|We No Longer Expect Privacy. You Can Change That.
We No Longer Expect Privacy. You Can Change That.
Here’s a way for you to make a difference.
Mr. Warzel is an Opinion writer at large.
Since the start of the Privacy Project, the most common response I have gotten from readers is a request for some kind of solution. They’re slightly freaked out and hoping for tips to shore up their digital hygiene or for a guide that might help them navigate the internet without giving away their personal data. For months I’ve included a Tip of the Week feature for this very reason, but I’ve always felt conflicted about it, because the hard truth is that our data is leaking and trading all the time, in places we might not even know to look. Each privacy tip you follow is undoubtedly helpful (and you should follow them!), but it’s a bit like a single sandbag in a hurricane: You need to amass so, so many and be extremely vigilant to make a difference.
I have argued previously that the personal-responsibility frame for privacy is unfair. And I believe that the only way to fully transform privacy is if data protection moves from individuals to institutions. But that said, I was moved over the holiday weekend by an argument that gave me a bit of hope that there are small ways we individuals can make a difference.
“We can’t just blame the Big Five [Apple, Google, Facebook, Microsoft and Amazon] and the surveillance they do and the N.S.A., because we are constantly using these tools on each other and thinking it’s O.K. Whether it’s getting email receipts, whether it’s parents surveilling their kids, even at college. Whether it’s spouses surveilling each other through their smartphones — all the spying people do on each other. People surreptitiously taking photos of each other because it’s so easy now and you always have a high-level camera in your hands. I think that we don’t necessarily realize how quickly we’ve evolved and how quickly we have superseded our idea of our right to privacy by our right to know.
We’ve evolved to the point where our ideas of privacy have evolved or our value of it is almost completely gone. I think there’s a few square feet and our skulls that we still retain. There’s the bathroom, the bedroom after a certain hour and there’s the space in our brain. But nowhere else do we expect privacy. And I think that’s a radical shift in evolution, and it happened in a few years.
Writing about technology for roughly a decade, I’ve felt this strongly at times. I noticed it first watching Reddit threads after a mass shooting in 2012 inside a movie theater in Aurora, Colo. — a kind of online vigilante detective emerged, powered by the idea that almost any piece of information could be found and that, by virtue of being online, we were entitled to it. Since then, the behavior has embedded itself into the dark soul of the internet. The hunt for the Boston bombers, Gamergate, the 4chan culture of doxing — some of it is predicated on a behavior to want information that, 15 years ago, we might not have felt entitled to.
These are extreme examples, of course. But there are countless, mundane ways in which we use technology to demand information from one another, as Eggers points out. We track emails and snap pictures of unknowing individuals in public. Even a small act like sending a late-night work email that could wait until morning is an invasion of our private time. We rarely think about it that way because it’s so easy to fire off a quick message and we’re so eager for an immediate response — for more information. It’s not that we don’t value privacy (we care about it more than we think); it’s that we no longer expect it for ourselves or for others.
Which brings us back to that quest for solutions. Without a comprehensive privacy bill or some meaningful regulation of Big Tech, we’re not going to change the way our data is siphoned away. But we can hope to change what we demand from ourselves and others when it comes to those small, everyday privacy invasions. We can be more respectful of others’ desires to unplug by giving them space to do so. We can give space to friends and family by not monitoring them just because we can. We can make small choices not to demand information solely because we feel entitled to it. Perhaps most important, we can give ourselves both the space to disconnect and the permission to say “no” when others demand more information from us (from read receipts to social network prompts).
This might feel like a marginal change, but shifting our expectations can have a profound impact on ourselves and others. Nothing about technological change is inevitable. As my Opinion colleague Annalee Newitz wrote last week, “a better internet is waiting for us.” That we’ll eventually find it isn’t certain. And the process will be extremely difficult, but it will start with us reimagining what we expect of one another.
The most surprising thing I leaned while researching the book was that the founders of Google, Sergei and Larry, had basically predicted the key problems with surveillance capitalism and where they would lead us back in their original paper on search, written while they were Stanford grad students. At the very end, in the appendix, there’s a paragraph where they admit that the targeted advertising business model could be misused by companies or other entities in ways that would hurt users. This is kind of a bombshell revelation given that search engines say everything they do is for users. The fact that this paper hasn’t gotten more attention makes me think people aren’t reading.
The goals of the advertising business model do not always correspond to providing quality search to users. … We expect that advertising funded search engines will be inherently biased toward the advertisers and away from the needs of the consumers.
The whole paper is worth your time, but you can read the entirety of what I quoted from by scrolling down to Appendix A.
