She was also a publisher and an author whose memoir affirmed that her father, the theologian Reinhold Niebuhr, had popularized the Serenity Prayer.
Elisabeth Sifton, a widely respected book editor and publisher who burnished manuscripts by many of the 20th century’s literary lions, died on Friday at her home in Manhattan. She was 80.
Her son Sam Sifton, the food editor of The New York Times and a columnist for The New York Times Magazine, said the cause was complications of metastatic breast cancer.
Since the prayer began circulating during World War II, various theories have emerged about its derivation — did Niebuhr actually write it or cobble it together from historic precedents? — and about its precise wording. Ms. Sifton made it her mission to demystify both questions.
With her husband, Fritz Stern, who was a leading historian of Germany, she also wrote “No Ordinary Men: Dietrich Bonhoeffer and Hans von Dohnanyi, Resisters Against Hitler in Church and State” (2013).
Her other authors included Isaiah Berlin, Don DeLillo, Ann Douglas, Susan Eisenhower, Carlos Fuentes, Philip Gourevitch, Michael Ignatieff, Stanley Karnow, Stephen Kinzer, J.R. MacArthur, Robert MacNeil, Peter Matthiessen, Jules Witcover and Victor S. Navasky.
“I can’t recall a single author who wasn’t over-the-moon grateful for the work she did on their manuscripts,” said Altie Karper, the editorial director of Schocken Books.
Barbara Elisabeth Niebuhr was born on Jan. 13, 1939, in Manhattan. Her mother, Ursula (Keppel-Compton) Niebuhr, founded the religion department at Barnard College and was its chairwoman.
“My mother was extremely English in a high Oxonian way, and my father was this, as he put it, yahoo from Missouri,” Ms. Sifton recalled in 2003 in an interview with the weekly San Diego Reader.
Raised on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, she graduated from the private Chapin School and went on to Radcliffe College.
Ms. Sifton graduated magna cum laude from Radcliffe with a bachelor’s degree in history and literature and then studied at the University of Paris as a Fulbright scholar. In 1962 she married Charles Proctor Sifton, a lawyer and later a federal judge. Their marriage ended in divorce.
In addition to their son Sam, she is survived by two other sons, Toby and John, and four grandchildren. Professor Stern, whom she married in 1996, died in 2016.
After working for the State Department in Washington, Ms. Sifton began her literary career in 1962 with Frederick A. Praeger Publishers. In 1968, after the company was sold, she joined the Viking Press as an editor; she was named editor in chief in 1980. She was executive vice president of Alfred A. Knopf from 1987 to 1992 and then joined Farrar, Straus & Giroux as senior vice president and publisher and editor at large of its subsidiary Hill & Wang.
She retired from editing full time in 2008.
In the late 1980s Ms. Sifton was among the first 20 women admitted for membership in the Century Association, the venerable New York private club, after it lost its legal challenge to a city human rights law that prohibited discrimination on the basis of gender.
In 1998 she began exploring the derivation of the Serenity Prayer, which had been widely attributed to Niebuhr and popularized by Alcoholics Anonymous and other 12-step programs.
“I honestly do believe that I wrote it myself,” he said.
As an editor, Ms. Sifton “had read deeply enough in literature and history that she could immediately see what was fresh, or why the question investigated or thesis proposed was urgent and necessary,” Dan Frank, the editorial director of Pantheon, said in an email.
“There was no area of inquiry or idea that did not engage her curiosity and intellect,” he added.
