Despite the damage inflicted by Hurricane Dorian, investment dollars continue to flow into the Atlantic Ocean archipelago.
This three-bedroom house sits on the banks of a canal in Old Fort Bay, a gated community of 250 homes on the northwest coast of New Providence, the most populous island in the Bahamas.
The property, which includes a guest cottage and a detached two-story garage, has a total of 8,914 square feet of interior space on two-thirds of an acre, with 150 feet of canal frontage. Known as Conchrest, it was built in 2009 by Ferguson & Shamamian, New York architects, said Nick Damianos, the chief executive and managing broker of Damianos Sotheby’s International Realty, which has the listing.
A tree-lined paver courtyard leads to the 5,806-square-foot villa, which features ogee arches, columns and relief work. “Their hope was to create a Venetian-style villa, so it has beautiful detailing,” Libby Cameron, a New York-based decorator who handled the interior design, said of the owners. Inside, the expansive foyer has 12-foot ceilings and the same patterned custom-tile floor that runs throughout the first level.
To the left are a powder room and a cornflower-blue library with a cypress-beamed ceiling, built-in bar and pocket doors that open to a pale-peach living room. The entertaining spaces and the dining room on the other side of the foyer have double-paned French doors leading to verandas with arched colonnades and travertine floors.
The kitchen was designed to replicate one the homeowner saw at a cooking school in Italy, Ms. Cameron said. Custom multicolored Moroccan-style tiles cover the floor. Countertops, including on the center island with stainless steel sink, are brown Caesarstone, and a blue-and-yellow backsplash accents the 48-inch Viking range. In place of upper cabinetry, there is recessed shelving; the bottom cabinets have lattice fronts.
Upstairs, a large landing provides a seating area and opens to a Juliet balcony. Twin master bedrooms on either side of the landing have dressing rooms, closets and en suite baths with soaking tubs, separate showers and double vanities. Each bedroom has a Juliet balcony and a side door to a sun deck with a scallop-edged surround.
Along the west veranda are a garden, an outdoor shower and a rectangular pool. The guesthouse, overlooking the pool, has a living room, galley kitchen and full bath on the first floor, with an en suite bedroom and an office upstairs.
The Old Fort Bay community opened in 2003, anchored by a club set in a restored 18th-century fort on a ridge above a New Providence beach. The property is two and a half miles from Lynden Pindling International Airport and 15 miles from downtown Nassau, with a population of about 275,000.
After Hurricane Dorian struck the islands of Abaco and Grand Bahama in September, there was a “slight lull” in the real estate market across the Bahamas, said Gavin G. Christie, the managing partner of C.A. Christie Real Estate.
Beyond Abaco and Grand Bahama, which are being redesigned and redeveloped, prices “have not been affected,” Mr. Damianos said, citing data collected by Sotheby’s International Realty.
The luxury market — homes starting at $5 million in American or Bahamian dollars (the Bahamian dollar is kept at a one-to-one exchange rate with the American dollar) — “is where most of the growth is happening,” he said.
Sotheby’s saw transactions from $500,000 to $5 million drop “marginally from 2018 to 2019,” Mr. Damianos said, but “the number of transactions at $5 million or more increased threefold.” The average sales price in that market has climbed 14 percent since 2014, he said, with an average 8 percent year-over-year increase in transactions during that period.
More full-service luxury condos flush with amenities, centered around Nassau, are “coming on the market in the next 24 months than we ever had in the history of the Bahamas,” Mr. Christie said. On Paradise Island, over the bridge from Nassau, Hurricane Hole, a mixed-use development expected to be completed next fall, will offer residences, a marina, commercial office space and restaurants.
Most buyers in the Bahamas come from Britain, western Europe, Canada, the United States and, more recently, Brazil, Argentina, South Africa and Mexico, agents said.
A Bahamian lawyer, who will typically charge 2.5 percent of the sale price, must be engaged to handle the transaction.
Since July 2018, a value-added tax of 10 percent is split between buyer and seller; the VAT also applies to legal fees, appraisals and title search fees. The broker’s commission — 6 percent on homes and 10 on vacant land — is paid by the seller.
A real estate purchase of $1.25 million or more entitles a buyer to a fast-tracked residency card; a purchase of at least $750,000 allows you to apply for permanent residency, Ms. Wallace-Whitfield said.
The annual property tax on this home is $41,562, and the homeowners association’s dues at Conchrest are $14,110 a year. The initiation fee at the Old Fort Bay club is $40,000, plus $5,000 in annual dues.
