The 300-page report lays out Democrats’ case that President Trump abused the power of his office to solicit political help from a foreign power and obstructed the inquiry into his actions.
WASHINGTON — The House Intelligence Committee released a 300-page impeachment report on Tuesday accusing President Trump of trying to enlist Ukraine to help him in the 2020 presidential election and obstructing the congressional inquiry by trying to cover it up.
The committee released the report on the eve of a public hearing in the House Judiciary Committee as the panel begins considering whether to draft articles of impeachment that could lead to a Senate trial and Mr. Trump's removal from office.
Here are five takeaways from the report.
The “Trump-Ukraine Impeachment Inquiry Report” was a sweeping indictment of Mr. Trump’s behavior, concluding that the president orchestrated a “scheme” to pressure Ukraine to announce investigations into former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and other Democrats, while withholding nearly $400 million in military assistance and a White House meeting.
The report stopped short of explicitly calling for the president’s impeachment and removal from office. But Representative Adam B. Schiff, Democrat of California and the chairman of the Intelligence Committee, made it clear he viewed the document as a road map to impeachment for the House.
“The founding fathers prescribed a remedy for a chief executive who places his personal interests above those of the country: impeachment,” the report said.
Mr. Schiff, in a preface to the report, warned that the clash between the two parties about Mr. Trump’s actions reflects the kind of factionalism that the country’s founders believed would be dangerous to the republic.
“Today, we may be witnessing a collision between the power of a remedy meant to curb presidential misconduct and the power of faction determined to defend against the use of that remedy on a president of the same party,” Mr. Schiff wrote.
New evidence emerges of calls between Giuliani and others about a smear campaign on an ambassador.
The report largely recounts information already made public during testimony from administration officials. But it also indicated that Democrats have collected more raw evidence than previously known, including call records produced by AT&T and Verizon showing a series of phone calls between Mr. Trump’s personal lawyer Rudolph W. Giuliani and his associates and several government officials.
The calls came as Mr. Giuliani was executing a smear campaign against the American ambassador to Ukraine at the time, Marie L. Yovanovitch, and pressing Ukraine to begin investigations that would benefit Mr. Trump. The records show calls between Mr. Giuliani and others, including Representative Devin Nunes of California, the top Republican on the Intelligence Committee.
Mr. Schiff declined to say whether he believed Mr. Nunes should recuse himself from the remainder of the inquiry, but suggested the records were not flattering.
The release of the report largely concludes the investigation by the Intelligence Committee and moves the impeachment inquiry into a new phase led by the House Judiciary Committee, which plans to hold its first hearing on Wednesday.
That hearing will include four legal scholars for a discussion about the constitutional standards for impeachment. Representative Jerrold Nadler, Democrat of New York and the chairman of the Judiciary Committee, has said the hearing will also focus on whether Mr. Trump’s behavior rises to the level of those standards.
A second hearing is expected to provide a forum for Intelligence Committee lawyers to formally present their report to the Judiciary Committee members. And a third hearing could offer Mr. Trump or his lawyers the opportunity to defend himself, though the White House counsel has so far indicated that he is unlikely to take part in what they deem an unfair process.
