Weather: A warm, foggy morning gives way to rain in the afternoon, then the temperature begins dropping sharply until it starts snowing overnight.
Alternate-side parking: In effect until Dec. 25 (Christmas Day).
Democrats have described him as an enabler of abuse of presidential powers. Republicans have countered that he was providing legitimate advocacy for President Trump.
Either way, the impeachment hearings have made clear that understanding Rudy Giuliani — the crime-fighting Republican that New York City elected mayor twice — helps to explain how Mr. Trump operates.
My colleague Jim Dwyer, who has covered Mr. Giuliani for decades, co-wrote a recent article detailing how Mr. Giuliani led Mr. Trump to the brink of impeachment.
Below is a lightly edited interview with Mr. Dwyer.
Mr. Giuliani was a federal prosecutor. In a tragic instant, he became America’s mayor. He was a failed presidential candidate and then a surrogate for a successful presidential candidate. He is now Mr. Trump’s unpaid personal counsel.
Has he always been the same person?
It doesn’t seem to me that he has changed. You can find some quotes from him saying he’s the same person as he always was.
What characteristics has Mr. Giuliani exhibited in the 35 years you’ve covered him?
He thinks he can do no wrong, and he wants to be in the spotlight. He was the first federal prosecutor who really put himself on television. He never missed a television appearance if he could manage it.
How did being a surrogate for Mr. Trump help Mr. Giuliani get back into the spotlight?
After 2012, he was on the outskirts of national politics. Then, in the 2016 race, the Trump campaign couldn’t find anyone to defend them after the “Access Hollywood” tape came out, in which Mr. Trump made vulgar comments about women.
Mr. Giuliani did. That helped forge a new closeness with Mr. Trump.
In 2001, Mr. Giuliani’s endorsement helped Michael Bloomberg win New York’s mayoral race. Can Mr. Giuliani influence the city anymore?
I don’t think being Donald Trump’s — what’s a polite word for it — being Mr. Trump’s man Friday is going to help him politically in New York.
How does Mr. Giuliani feel about New York?
The offices of his business are fairly modest. When he’s in town, the Grand Havana Room is practically his office.
Last year, he went to Yankee Stadium for his birthday and got heavily booed.
If you spy a blue-and-yellow Blockbuster store in SoHo this week, don’t scramble to return those epically overdue VHS tapes.
It’s a pop-up store at 13 Crosby Street that doesn’t offer rentals, but rather clothing and other items from Dumbgood, a lifestyle and streetwear brand.
The store, which opened last week, is free to visit from 11 a.m. to 7 p.m. daily through Sunday. It is decorated to resemble a real Blockbuster store, with film posters and videotapes on display.
Clothing and merchandise is available with Blockbuster themes, including “Be Kind Rewind” shirts, socks and totes.
There are also replicas of the Blockbuster rental boxes, along with smaller versions that serve as iPhone cases.
At Blockbuster’s peak, it had some 1,700 stores nationwide. The company filed for bankruptcy protection in 2010 after losing its customers to DVDs by mail, and then to online streaming.
Today one Blockbuster store remains — not in SoHo, but in Bend, Ore.
It’s Tuesday — do something retro.
I was on a crowded rush-hour train. A man pulled out a violin and started to play.
There was a moment of silence. And then a voice spoke.
