Her essay in The New York Times drew a wide readership; she also chronicled her life with terminal cancer in a blog, finding humor amid despair.
Josie Rubio, an editor and writer who chronicled her life with cancer in a long-running blog and whose Op-Ed essay in The New York Times in August about dating while terminally ill drew a wide readership, died on Tuesday at a hospice facility in Brooklyn. She was 42.
Her friend Joselin Linder said the cause was complications of the cancer. It was first diagnosed as Hodgkin’s lymphoma in 2013; she later developed neuroendocrine tumors.
That wry sensibility infused her Times Op-Ed essay, titled “Dating While Dying,” part of the Opinion section’s continuing Disability series, which explores the lives of people living with disabilities. In her article she detailed her breakup with her boyfriend of 12 years and her re-entry into the dating pool, sometimes writing in disarming fashion.
In the article, Ms. Rubio quoted the forthright opening line of her online dating profile: “‘I have cancer so if you want to hang out, act now!’” She also described daunting treatments that, she said, paled in comparison with any anxieties about a romantic outing.
The online version of Ms. Rubio’s article, published on Aug. 24, garnered more than 225,000 page views; it appeared in print the next day in the Sunday Review section. That same weekend she learned that her prognosis was grimmer than she had thought.
Josefina Maria Ana Rubio was born to Salvador and Kathy (Varga) Rubio in Brownsville, Tex., on Oct. 12, 1977. The family moved to Solon, Ohio, a suburb of Cleveland, where she grew up. Her father died while she was young.
She earned a journalism degree from Ohio State University in 1998, then spent about a decade as a staff writer at Columbus Monthly magazine in Ohio.
Ms. Rubio later worked as a writer and editor at VIVmag, a digital women’s magazine; as a social media director and writer at ih8exercise.com, a website dedicated to turning couch potatoes into gym rats; and a contributing writer for dealnews.com, a comparison shopping, consumer news and product-review site. In recent years she was an interactive producer for the Guggenheim Museum and a freelance writer.
Ms. Rubio, who lived in the Red Hook section of Brooklyn, is survived by her mother and boyfriend.
