In a building on West 147th Street, the mail carriers know apartment 1A.
Every few weeks, Ms. Wade stuffs her luggage with goods and hauls them across the Atlantic to the people who actually made the purchases: customers in Dakar, Senegal, in West Africa, who pay her a fee.
Ms. Wade, a former car saleswoman, is part of a thriving low-tech solution to a problem that continues to bedevil high-tech shopping in places where mail delivery is unreliable and street addresses are rare: Getting stuff to the people who ordered it.
Informal couriers like Ms. Wade, 34, are known in Senegal and other French-speaking countries as G.P.s.
The term, many people say, has its origins in an Air France policy that offered family members of airline employees a reduced airfare called gratuité partielle, or partially free. The G.P.s would often bring hard-to-find goods home from abroad for friends.
Today, G.P.s have formed their own cottage industry, charging fees — as little as $8 a pound for some bulk items; more for things like cellphones or computers — that are typically well below what most online retailers charge for shipping.
Jumia, a Pan-African e-commerce start-up once hailed as the “Amazon of Africa” that tried to use local expertise to solve the last-mile conundrum, began closing operations in almost half a dozen countries in the past few months.
Amazon ships goods to Senegal and 128 other countries, where it assumes the risk and responsibility for deliveries, much as it does in the United States, according to the company.
Marietou Seck’s house, like many in the Senegalese capital, has no street number. So Ms. Seck, 34, a sustainability consultant who orders things online for her two small children has cultivated a stable of G.P.s.
Alioune Sine’s sister has been delivering American goods to Senegalese clients for two decades. Mr. Sine, 44, a filmmaker who helps with his sister’s business, said that they had gotten busier with the rise of e-commerce and recruit friends and cousins to help transport more suitcases.
G.P.s often operate on slim profit margins. They hunt for low-priced tickets: Up to $1,300 is viewed as acceptable for a round-trip flight from New York to Senegal. But to retain customers, many of the couriers continue to fly even when prices spike during the holidays, and the economic math becomes precarious.
On Delta, Mr. Sine said, his family company’s shippers take the maximum number of bags: 10.
“When we get to the airport, we get one big hand truck, and it’s back and forth, back and forth,” Mr. Sine said on a recent morning at a barbershop in Harlem where the company rents an office. He was sorting through bundles of brightly colored African clothing, calling the phone numbers of customers written on each, telling them to come pick up their packages.
G.P.s tend to carry fewer bags, and make less money, on return trips, when they carry mostly lighter items like custom traditional boubou dresses.
Many Senegalese people do not have credit cards, so some couriers like Mr. Sine will buy products for their customers, and accept cash on delivery as repayment. Most of his sister’s clients are friends or distant family members.
G.P.s are not foolproof: Luggage can get lost, and couriers sometimes have to reimburse clients from their own pockets when that happens. After losing a suitcase of expensive electronics, Ms. Wade said that she now ferries just one or two iPhones at a time.
As each departure date nears, his apartment in North Smithfield, R.I., is jammed with Apple Watches, piles of trendy women’s outfits and car bumpers that he stuffs into long duffel bags.
