Resurrecting a childhood tradition enables a woman to find her chosen family.
In my preteens, I was not yet above going into a toy store. And since these were the days before video games, my eyes were drawn to the puzzles on the shelves: 500 pieces, 1,000 pieces, 1,500 pieces. Mostly beautiful scenery and travel destinations.
As an only child in a very close-knit family, I was drawn to jigsaw puzzles because they were an activity that we could enjoy together. We moved from Germany to the United States when I was not quite 7 years old. My parents wanted to ensure that we kept all of our family traditions. And in Germany, games and puzzles are not just for children. Adults engage in board games, card games and puzzles of all kinds.
Solving jigsaw puzzles was my family’s way to connect to each other. The more complicated the puzzle, the better. The motifs we chose depicted places we had visited as a family. It was always amazing to see how my dad’s logical, engineering mind, combined with my mom’s more creative mind, usually had us solving a 1,000-piece puzzle fairly quickly. And solving a puzzle also gave us time to talk and laugh together. Often, we would even eat dinner sitting on the couch, because the dining room table was scattered with pieces of the yet-unfinished puzzle.
Our tradition continued even after I moved away to go to college. I always came back home for Christmas, and there were summer visits to celebrate my birthday. My boyfriends at the time never really understood our family unit. They scoffed at our traditions and called them juvenile, so we certainly did not try to merge those pieces of our lives. I was not going to give up on this or any other family tradition.
Fast forward about 40 years. My parents had passed away within six years of each other.
Enter Kathy, my best friend.
Kathy knew about the loss of my parents, and she knew the holidays would be difficult for me. She invited me to spend Christmas with her family, and I could not have been more grateful.
We were diving into new territory, exploring how we would create our own traditions in this new constellation. Both Kathy and her husband lived quite a distance from their own parents. Her idea was to spend Christmas on a mini vacation, away from our homes, to start a brand-new way to celebrate the holidays.
She chose wine country, only a short drive from our homes in Northern California. So off we went to our new adventure in northern Sonoma County. After picking up the keys to a rented house, we hit a few wine tastings and purchased a few bottles for the holiday.
And here’s the best surprise: Without knowing about my family’s tradition, she suggested starting a jigsaw puzzle on Christmas Day. We settled around the table, opened a bottle of wine, and focused our attention on the 500-piece puzzle.
I was excited beyond belief. Maybe she was just familiar with German culture — she had studied and lived there, and her husband is German. For me, it was a sign: This was my new chosen family.
I was also grateful. Not only did I not have to give up a tradition, but we also were definitely establishing a new one. We spilled the puzzle pieces onto the largest table in the rental house and turned them over so that the picture side was visible.
Kathy and I agreed that we should find the outside edges first, and we collected pieces that seemed to go together in little groups. The blues of the lake went in one pile, the parts of the houses went in another.
It was not an easy puzzle. We thought we would have it nailed before dinner, but we did not. We took a break to eat, and just as I had done with my parents, my friends and I ate sitting on the couch, since the dining room table was home to the unfinished puzzle. After dinner, solving the puzzle became a mission. We were not willing to let it go without completing it. And we did!
We had found a new holiday tradition. The following year, our trip was to Paso Robles, and the year after that, we traveled to Palm Desert. Every year, we ritualistically cleared a space for our puzzle. By this time, the puzzle mania was well established, and eventually Kathy’s son picked out a puzzle for me as a Christmas present. Even in a subsequent year when we decided to forgo the road trip, Kathy still invited me to her home and, of course, the main activity of the evening was completing another puzzle. We noted with pride that our solving was getting quicker each year.
We have chosen many different motifs over time. The ones that look easy are almost always the most difficult. One red car as the central image can yield many nuances; there are different shades and shadows on the doors, the rear of the car has contours that are different from the front. In another puzzle, different ways that sunlight hits bodies of water can make each body of water look a bit different.
I have learned to train myself to identify such very subtle differences, and that mirrors something I need to do in other areas of life. I need to work on understanding the nuances of situations and personalities to be able to best act on them. I need to collaborate and to continue moving forward, just as when my new family and I solve a puzzle.
This year, Kathy and her family will be traveling for Christmas, so we have postponed our tradition until New Year’s Eve. That’s the thing about traditions: They can be flexible. We define them as a family of choice.
So for this holiday, it means I will clear off my dinner table and do a puzzle on my own. Because I won’t let certain traditions go out the window. And everyone will be with me in spirit.
Birgit Starmanns is a freelance writer living in Mountain View, Calif.
Illustration by Noa Snir.