Opinion|Would You Open Your Home to an Ex-Prisoner?
Would You Open Your Home to an Ex-Prisoner?
A new effort in Oakland, Calif., matches hosts with people who were recently incarcerated to help them reintegrate after they’re released.
Dr. Haas, a journalist and author, regularly writes about social justice, resilience, and environmental innovations.
That is because their relationship has no precedent.
Ms. Crocette, 52, took in Ms. Croudy, 32, just before Christmas last year through the Homecoming Project, an effort by the nonprofit Impact Justice in Alameda County, Calif. According to the Prison Policy Initiative, a public policy think tank, people who have been released from prison are 10 times more likely than the general public to become homeless. Few can afford astronomical rents in California’s Bay Area, and the stigma against the formerly incarcerated is persistent. But when ex-prisoners end up homeless, the recidivism rates increase.
Since it began in August 2018, the Homecoming Project has matched 15 newly released prisoners with hosts. “We prioritize people who are homeless and who have been in jail for more than 10 years,” Ms. Lawyer said. Perhaps surprisingly, these prisoners are unlikely to reoffend. So far, all the participants and alumni have steady jobs or are pursuing degrees, Ms. Lawyer said. None is on the streets or jobless. Nobody has gotten in any trouble with the law. The Homecoming Project would be prepared to hold a conflict resolution session “to break through communication barriers if there are any,” Ms. Lawyer said, but so far there haven’t been.
One reason for that success is that the program looks for people with good records — Ms. Croudy, for instance, said she has had no violations in prison. She emphasizes how invested she is now in a spiritual and healthy lifestyle.
The three women regularly cooked together, shared meals and got to know one another. “You don’t have to ask my permission to go out,” Ms. Crocette had to remind Ms. Croudy in the beginning.
So that the hosts are not left on their own to deal with such complex issues, each client is connected to an innovative LifeLong Medical Care clinic in Berkeley, where they get health care and can request counseling. Hosts and guests regularly take workshops on topics ranging from practical help to self-care. “They need to be educated about the challenges,” Ms. Lawyer said. “For instance, one host didn’t understand why privacy was such a big issue for his participant. Once he understood the setting in institutions where you even use the bathroom in front of other people, it resolved the confusion.” The Homecoming Project’s community navigators stop by as often as needed to help.
“It’s safer than if I took in a renter from Craigslist,” Ms. Crocette said.
Like many hosts, Ms. Crocette is an activist who wants to improve what she sees as a racially biased justice system. She continues to rent the room privately to Ms. Croudy since the six months’ support by the Homecoming Project ended. “People need security for two years to plan and build a new life,” Ms. Crocette said.
The Homecoming Project has a waiting list of more than 100 ex-prisoners, but only 20 hosts. Ms. Lawyer said they are ready to expand — but a lack of money stands in the way.
The Tipping Point, an anti-poverty group, is piloting a home-sharing program for foster youth, another stigmatized group. Many of its hosts, too, are motivated by their desire to give people a second chance. But there’s another reason, said Mitch Findley, a senior planner with the group’s Chronic Homelessness Initiative: the region’s astronomical housing prices affect hosts as well as guests. “Things are so expensive that people are willing to open their homes to help solve our community’s housing challenges,” he said.
Ms. Crocette wants to persuade friends and neighbors to take in Homecoming Project clients.
Michaela Haas, Ph.D., is the author, most recently, of “Bouncing Forward,” and a Solutions Journalism Network contributor.
To receive email alerts for Fixes columns, sign up here.