U.S.|How Much Damage Do Atmospheric Rivers Cause?
How Much Damage Do Atmospheric Rivers Cause?
Thursday: A new study finds that it’s roughly $1 billion per year — but there’s more to it. Also: A look back at a decade of change in the Bay Area.
It rained in Southern California again on Wednesday.
The storm, Marty Ralph told me, was caused by an atmospheric river, a meteorological phenomenon you have been hearing more about lately as climate change drives bigger swings between tinder dry conditions and pounding rain.
And although the rain caused the usual traffic headaches and advisories against swimming at the beach, this particular atmospheric river was actually “primarily beneficial,” according to a scale that Mr. Ralph, the director of the Center for Western Weather and Water Extremes at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography, helped develop.
In other words, there was significant rainfall, but not nearly enough to cause dangerous flooding.
The same could not be said of all atmospheric rivers, however: They’ve caused almost $51 billion in flood damages across the West over 40 years, a new report by Mr. Ralph’s colleagues found.
In fact, atmospheric rivers cause an average of $1 billion of damage per year in the West, according to the report, published this week in the journal Science Advances — although the average smooths out the reality that most of the damage was done during a smaller number of more severe events.
He and his team looked at flood insurance data from 1978 to 2017 and connected it with information about atmospheric rivers over that period.
Sonoma County, which bore the brunt of floods in February that essentially turned the town of Guerneville into an island, sustained the most damage among top counties from atmospheric rivers: $5.2 billion.
Mr. Corringham said his team’s report built on Mr. Ralph’s work to better understand atmospheric rivers, which haven’t been studied as much as, say, hurricanes.
But he said that atmospheric rivers were expected to become wetter, longer and wider as the climate warms, and that translating the ravages of climate change into dollars and cents was often a useful tool for encouraging policymakers to work to reduce emissions.
Next, Mr. Corringham said he hoped to create models to predict how much damage future storms could cause. He also hopes to study possible benefits of the additional rainfall, if it can be captured and stored.
“If we don’t act now, we risk severe damage to the economy,” he said.
As you’ve probably heard, the end of the decade is nigh.
It’s tough to think of a place whose culture has shifted as fundamentally as the Bay Area’s in the past 10 years. But, as KQED lays out in an expansive project, the changes have been more complicated than the simple influx of fleece-vest-clad tech wealth.
For each year of “Our Turbulent Decade,” there’s an essay examining how one moment shaped the Bay’s cultural landscape going forward.
And while the devastation of 2016’s Ghost Ship warehouse fire was compounded by the displacement of local arts communities that took place in the aftermath, this piece traces the ways that some have been able to gradually rebuild — and adapt.
