Sent from my iPhone.
There’s nothing like doing a story about email to make you feel really, really insecure about your own digital correspondence.
While I’ve spent plenty of time worrying about whether to close with a “most defiantly yours” or an “xoxo,” that was where my thoughts about signing emails stopped (and I usually chose “best”). Signature blocks always felt a step too far: Pretentious or presumptuous (who was I to tell people who I was or what I’d done?), they seemed just not “cool” or “me.” They were trying in a way that appeared very much to be trying. For most of my working life, I didn’t use one.
But I’d been missing out on a world of opportunity.
More than a decade ago, the Macmillan editor Will Schwalbe and his friend David Shipley — then the deputy editorial page editor and Op-Ed page editor of The Times, now senior executive editor at Bloomberg Opinion — sat down over a couple of beers at the Oyster Bar in New York’s Grand Central Terminal and began to hash over their daily working woes. Most of their problems, it turned out, had to do with email.
“No one had given instructions to do it in a way that treats others with respect and encourages us to do so,” Mr. Schwalbe said.
People — and their emails — are different, of course, and so are the ways we use the technology, and why. As with much in life, it depends on what you’re trying to accomplish. If you’re selling something, for instance, it’s “perfectly fair to put a link to whatever you’re selling,” Mr. Schwalbe said. Ditto if you’re very active on social media: Include a link. You may pick up a new follower or two, but you’re also giving people an opportunity to know more about you in a way that matters to you.
But can you go too far with links and addenda trailing down the page after your last goodbye? Is anyone really reading to the bottom of the email anyway? Yes, and sometimes.
Charlie Grosso, an entrepreneur who includes links to her website and Instagram as well as her phone number, urges finding a balance.
Samantha Ettus, founder and C.E.O. of Park Place Payments, includes her title, her phone number and a link to her company.
“It’s an opportunity to highlight who you are, and it’s the most personal part of an email,” she said. Even if no one gets that far, what do you have to lose?
Ms. Fineman practices what she preaches in her signature, which includes a preorder link to her book; links to her website, company and podcast; her phone number; and links to her (and her dog Bean’s) Instagram accounts, all accentuated with emojis. As you might expect, she feels strongly that it’s a missed opportunity not to have an email signature.
She’s aware of the criticisms, though.
Inspired, I crafted my own simple signature: “Jen Doll, author and freelance journalist. You can find out more about my work here!” It was easy as pie, and I don’t even grimace when I press send (at least, not usually). Are people reading to the end? I have no idea. But no one’s complained about it, either.
These notes may seem extraneous in an iPhone-saturated society.
There’s research to back that up, Dr. Austern said. One 2012 study examined reactions to emails that had been deliberately manipulated to include typos. Some also included the line “sent from my iPhone,” while others did not. People were much more forgiving of mess-ups when the iPhone line was included. But, Dr. Austern said, with the speed of technology and the proliferation of spell-check, that could change too. And, in the place of “Sent from my iPhone,” you could always include something a lot more interesting.
Jay Blotcher, co-founder of Public Impact Media Consultants, wanted his signature to “add some levity to exchanges which could sometimes be either intense or politically heated.” He tried a few options, and his favorite was, “Vain attempts at profundity via Jay’s iPhone.” When some people commented on his self-deprecating humor, he felt he’d made the right move.
“I’d occasionally switch the wording, but keep the same sentiment,” he said. “This went on for more than five years.” But when he got a new iPhone a few years ago, the signature reverted to the generic “Sent from my iPhone.” No one noticed — not even Mr. Blotcher himself, who realized the change only after I asked him about his signature.
