For Jennifer and Charanpaul Singh Gill, chance, luck, and an acceptance of strangers characterized their 20-year marriage.
The way you meet your future spouse sets the tone for everything to come, some people believe, much like the opening music in a movie. This has definitely been true for Jennifer and Charanpaul Singh Gill who recently celebrated their 20th wedding anniversary (and appeared in the Vows column on Oct. 31, 1999).
The two met late one night in Manhattan in September 1994, when Ms. Gill called a car service for a ride home from her job as an editor at Newsweek magazine. Mr. Gill, who is known as Paul, was her driver. It was so dark in the car they could barely see each other. “It was almost like when people go for confession and they don’t know what’s on the other side,” said Mr. Gill, whose family is from India and emigrated first to Britain and later to the United States when he was a teenager.
By the end of the 15-minute ride, though, they had discussed their favorite books and music (he kept a guitar in the trunk for practicing between fares) and he had gotten her phone number. Nearly five years later, they were married in two ceremonies, one Sikh in honor of his background and one Catholic for Ms. Gill, who grew up in Torrington, Conn.
Many of the elements of their meeting — chance, luck, an openness toward strangers, and the experience of making an instant connection — have characterized their marriage.
They now live in Rahway, N.J., in a 1930s house with beautiful woodwork, colorful walls and furniture and several vintage guitars collected by Mr. Gill, 51. There’s a calm, unpretentious feeling in the house that matches their personalities. Even their dog, Scout, seems to have a gentle temperament.
They traveled to China and waited with several other couples in a bland hotel conference room as the babies were brought in one by one. “They would come in and say, ‘This is so-and-so and she’s matched with you,’” Ms. Gill said. The babies ranged in age from 13 months to 18 months and were all dressed alike, in fleece coveralls the bright yellow color of newborn chicks.
Mr. Gill no longer works as a driver — he now specializes in implementing software for financial companies — but driving is still a big part of his life. Along with guitars, he collects muscle cars from the ’60s and ’70s and also created a website, guessthefinalbid.com, where people can predict the final auction price for vintage or rare vehicles.
It turns out, June is interested in cross-country running and making tiny sculptures like a balsam wood typewriter the size of a petit four. Kean is into math, origami and tap dancing. The Gills just laugh in their gentle, accepting manner because they are adept at none of those things.
In their everyday life, the Gills are more comfortable than most with uncertainty and chance. They adopted Scout, a rescue dog from Mississippi, sight unseen. They found June and Kean’s beloved babysitter by tacking a note on a bulletin board in an Asian supermarket near their house.
