Ted Simmons and Dale Murphy are among 10 candidates for election by the Veterans Committee, whose choices will be announced on Sunday. The former pitcher Ron Darling offered his thoughts on the seven he faced.
Ted Simmons after hitting a homer for the Milwaukee Brewers in the 1982 World Series.Credit...
Baseball’s winter meetings are all about the future — players changing teams, leagues changing rules — except for the first order of business. On Sunday night in San Diego, a committee of executives, historians and former players will announce its verdict on the 10 candidates it is considering for the Hall of Fame.
One candidate is Marvin Miller, the pioneering union leader; another is Thurman Munson, the Yankees catcher who died in a plane crash in 1979; and a third is Tommy John, a standout lefty before and after the groundbreaking elbow surgery that came to bear his name.
The seven others are position players with at least one thing in common: They all faced Ron Darling, the Mets broadcaster who pitched in both leagues from 1983, when Dale Murphy and Ted Simmons started in the All-Star Game, to 1995, when Don Mattingly and Lou Whitaker retired. Murphy, Simmons, Mattingly and Whitaker are up for election this weekend, with Dwight Evans, Steve Garvey and Dave Parker rounding out a fascinating ballot.
The 16-person committee, which includes the Hall of Famers George Brett, Rod Carew, Dennis Eckersley, Eddie Murray, Ozzie Smith and Robin Yount, is charged with evaluating managers, executives, umpires and players who did not receive 75 percent of the vote from the Baseball Writers’ Association of America. It has sent two 1980s stars to Cooperstown in each of the last two elections: Jack Morris and Alan Trammell in December 2017, Harold Baines and Lee Smith last year.
This election is intriguing for what it will say about the evolving notion of fame. Five players on the ballot (Garvey, Mattingly, Munson, Murphy and Parker) won a Most Valuable Player Award and were unquestionably viewed as superstars in their time. Seven (all but John and Simmons) won at least three Gold Gloves, meaning that defense, which is hard to quantify, was a big part of their game.
Some other players from this era with at least 60 WAR, as calculated by Baseball Reference, are not on the ballot, like Buddy Bell, Bobby Grich, Keith Hernandez, Willie Randolph and Rick Reuschel.
Jaffe, who writes for Fangraphs, is the author of “The Cooperstown Casebook,” in which he makes compelling arguments for Simmons and Whitaker, who each failed to get 5 percent of the vote in his only appearance on the writers’ ballot.
Jaffe said the timing could be right for both of them now, with Simmons having missed by one vote in 2017 and Whitaker fitting so snugly in history with Trammell, his longtime double-play partner with the Detroit Tigers.
The Hall seems likely to get a little bigger on Sunday, with more members from an era whose stars were underappreciated.