Meanwhile, “Marriage Story,” “The Irishman” and “Once Upon a Time … in Hollywood” also did well in the film categories.
When it comes to Oscar precursors, the SAG Awards, handed out by the Hollywood actors’ guild SAG-Aftra, always give us the most to chew over. This guild is comparable to the academy in terms of size and membership, and most of the five actors nominated in each individual category will go on to be nominated for Oscars, too.
But where will the two groups differ? And are there contenders who missed with SAG but can still pull off an Oscar victory, as Regina King, from “If Beale Street Could Talk,” did last year when she won the supporting actress Academy Award? Let’s take a closer look at the nominations announced on Wednesday to see who’s got the heat to go all the way.
This nomination is a major coup for “Parasite,” which will contend for SAG’s top award despite the fact that none of its individual actors were nominated. This is not an awards body given to nominating foreign films — “Parasite” is the first such movie since the 1998 film “Life Is Beautiful” to score a SAG cast nod — and it’s proof that “Parasite” will have the large academy contingent of actors on its side when mounting a best-picture bid at the Oscars.
“Once Upon a Time … in Hollywood” and “The Irishman” were expected picks in this category, but “Jojo Rabbit” was an on-the-bubble contender and “Bombshell” was a big surprise: Female ensemble casts can have trouble popping through at SAG, as Greta Gerwig found out when her take on “Little Women” was snubbed across the board.
Though “The Irishman” is a strong awards contender, it’s notable that star Robert De Niro keeps missing out on a best-actor nomination: First the Golden Globes overlooked him, and now SAG. De Niro’s performance is muted, but can “The Irishman” really win best picture if its legendary lead is left out in the cold?
Nyong’o is coming on strong this month after winning laurels from the New York Film Critics Circle. That second wind will be necessary since “Us” came out so long ago and, unlike Jordan Peele’s “Get Out,” isn’t expected to be an across-the-board Oscar contender. The other four women in this category are strongly positioned to repeat with Oscar, but do keep an eye on “The Farewell” star Awkwafina as well as Saoirse Ronan if “Little Women” overperforms at the box office.
On paper, “Just Mercy” (due at Christmas) is the kind of star-studded social-issues drama that awards voters love, but it hasn’t quite worked out that way: After a wan Toronto International Film Festival premiere, the film has drifted out of most pundits’ predictions. Wednesday’s SAG nomination for Foxx, then, is a shot in the arm for the actor, whose performance as a wrongly incarcerated man is the film’s standout.
The dual nods for the forthcoming “Bombshell” are another sign that actors went gaga for the film about sexual harassment at Fox News, and Johansson’s nomination is a sign that “Jojo Rabbit” has real best-picture heat: It will be hard for Taika Waititi’s World War II satire to launch a major play for the top Oscar without at least one nomination for its cast. Ultimately, though, this category is going to come down to Dern vs. Lopez. Can the latter squeak out a win here over Dern, who’s more of an academy favorite?
The SAG Awards will be handed out on Jan. 19.