Economy|A Few Cities Have Cornered Innovation Jobs. Can That Be Changed?
A new report documents the concentration of cutting-edge industries in a few coastal areas and why lawmakers ought to be alarmed.
Boston, Seattle, San Diego, San Francisco and Silicon Valley captured nine out of 10 jobs created in these industries from 2005 to 2017, according to a report released on Monday. By 2017, these five metropolitan regions had accumulated almost a quarter of these jobs, up from under 18 percent a dozen years earlier. On the other end, about half of America’s 382 metro areas — including big cities like Los Angeles, Chicago and Philadelphia — lost such jobs.
America’s deepening inequality has become a cause for alarm. The picture of a country cloven between a small set of prosperous urban “haves” and a large collection of “have-nots” has come sharply into focus as an opioid epidemic has overtaken vast swaths of the country. It gained the attention of the political class in 2016, when voters across the industrial heartland embraced Donald J. Trump’s populist message.
gained innovation jobs . . .
have lost them.
innovation jobs . . .
Data are the change in jobs from 2005 to 2017 in 13 industries including scientific research and development services, Aerospace product and parts manufacturing and Software publishers.
Expanding the knowledge economy across all of America might indeed be a fool’s errand. As Mr. Atkinson noted, Erie, Pa., and Flint, Mich., might never attract the Googles or Apples of the world. But midsize cities like St. Louis, Pittsburgh and Columbus, Ohio, could feasibly transform into hubs of technological entrepreneurship.
“They keep the core team in Silicon Valley or Seattle but put the other stuff in Shenzhen or Vancouver or Bangalore,” Mr. Atkinson said. Shenzhen, China, may not be much cheaper than Indianapolis, he added, but Shenzhen is already a tech hub in its own right.
are the most productive.
of employment in each sector.
For metro areas in the bottom 75% of employment in each sector.
What’s more, not trying also entails risks. In his book “Jump-Starting America,” Mr. Gruber and his co-writer, M.I.T.’s Simon Johnson, argue for a sustained national effort to seed new technology clusters widely. Without federal government support, Mr. Gruber said, the United States is unlikely to produce many new high-tech hubs.
