His family business is marking a milestone. But the industry says Lee Siegelson’s influence has spread far beyond sales.
Next year will mark the 100th anniversary of Siegelson, the New York estate jewelry dealer that has established a reputation for offering some of the world’s finest masterpieces of 20th-century design.
Earlier this year, it sold a 1935 aquamarine and ruby belt necklace — a bold American Art Deco piece designed by Fulco di Verdura for the New York jeweler Paul Flato, and originally owned by Cole Porter’s wife, Linda Lee — to the actress Jennifer Tilly. An altogether more ethereal jewel, a pastel plique-à-jour Art Nouveau brooch once owned by the turn-of-the-20th-century actress Ada Rehan, was sold in 2013 to the Newark Museum of Art.
Representing the third generation of his family to operate the business, Lee Siegelson works from his private showroom on Fifth Avenue and counts museums around the world and the likes of Cartier and Van Cleef & Arpels among his clients. Since he took over the family business in 1994, he has succeeded in changing not only the way it operates but the wider industry as well.
Stellene Volandes, editor in chief of Town & Country magazine, echoed the praise. “Lee has been one of my great jewelry teachers,” Ms. Volandes said. “I love sitting by his desk and watching him pick up the phone. You sort of expect him to order a coffee and then he asks instead for Art Deco Cartier.
Mr. Siegelson, 49, champions an approach that focuses on a piece’s design value and intensive research of its background and provenance rather than merely the financial value of a jewel’s precious parts. “A fabulously sleek Fouquet bracelet deserves the same attention as a great painting,” he said in a recent telephone interview after his company’s annual participation in the Tefaf New York Fall fair.
When the company attends such fairs, its wares are showcased in carefully lit, free-standing cabinets that command attention. And just as a museum might expound on the history and meaning of the art it displays, Siegelson entices clients with scholarly research and archival images. For example, before he sold Claudette Colbert’s 1937 Boivin starfish brooch to the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston this year, it was displayed with a glamorous black and white photograph of the Hollywood star wearing the piece accompanied by the tale of its genesis.
And the approach clearly produces results. Though Mr. Siegelson would not disclose precise financial details of the family-owned company, he said annual sales in recent years have reached 10 figures and the company sells about 100 pieces a year. Most of them are priced from $15,000 to $50 million. They regularly include work by pre-eminent designers and important gemstones, clocks and Siegelson’s own contemporary creations.
The company’s origins, however, were more humble.
Its story is an American tale of an immigrant’s self-made success, the kind of tale heard often in New York City. Little is known about the early life of Louis Siegelson, the company’s founder and Mr. Siegelson’s grandfather, other than that he came to the United States from Russia and opened a watch and watch repair shop in 1920 in the working class predominantly Jewish neighborhood of Brownsville, in Brooklyn.
In 1946, Louis’s son, Herman — or Hy as he was known in the trade — exchanged the company’s entire stock for a single diamond and moved the business to the bustling heart of Manhattan’s Diamond District, the strip of West 47th Street between Fifth and Sixth avenues. Owning what the family says was the largest independent store on 47th Street at the time, he dealt in diamonds, precious and semiprecious colored gems, and estate jewels.
Mr. Siegelson, by contrast, said he never considered a career in jewelry while he was growing up. His parents divorced when he was 3 years old and, after his mother remarried, he grew up in Michigan. “The business was always a bit of a mystery to me when I used to visit my father during college,” he said.
Things quickly changed after he graduated in 1992 from the University of Colorado Boulder with a bachelor’s degree in economics and decided to try working alongside his father, who had cancer. Mr. Siegelson said he was forced to become a quick and independent learner when his father went into the hospital shortly afterward.
The antique jewelry trade was a very different business in those days, he said. The district was ruled by its traders, who had unspoken but stringent laws of honor.
Feeling pressured by the dealers waiting for decisions, Mr. Siegelson said, “I would have to ask them to leave it overnight, then sit down with my father in the hospital and see what he thought we should pay for it.” Once a price was offered, there would be no going back on the deal.
His father died in 1994 and, in 1998, Mr. Siegelson moved the business to the more upmarket environs of Fifth Avenue and 48th Street, where it operates today, and honed his offering to the jewelry houses and designers of the 1920s and ’30s. “I was trying to figure out what were the great masterpieces of the 20th century,” he said.
An art moderne ruby and diamond bib necklace, circa 1935, from the French jewelry designer Suzanne Belperron.
Mr. Siegelson was one of the first to appreciate the renewed appeal of Ms. Belperron, whose work was largely forgotten after her retirement in the 1970s. Her creations often had average gems, but their powerful designs, metalwork and silhouettes appealed to him. “A great jewel is the complete package: the gemstone, the sculptural aspect and the craftsmanship,” he said.
These days, the kind of pieces he handles are hard to come by; their value and desirability have increased significantly. But he still does uncover treasures from time to time.
At the Tefaf fair last month, he sold a 1950s Belperron platinum bombé ring peppered with baguette diamonds, which he acquired from one private client and sold to another. He also sold a striking Art Deco Cartier double-faced partner’s clock in chrome with a black face.
