DeAdra Lee and her son, Dacian, fled Chicago for Florida with virtually nothing. Though they are still struggling, they are now volunteering at the community dinner that saved them.
BRADENTON, Fla. — Three years ago, DeAdra Lee sold nearly everything she owned and packed what remained into a cargo van. Then she and her infant son, Dacian, left Chicago for Florida’s Gulf Coast.
Ms. Lee needed a change. Chicago, her hometown, harbored too many bad memories, including a bad relationship and the death of an infant daughter who was born prematurely.
After a lifetime of Chicago winters, Ms. Lee, 48, who has four grown daughters, also wanted to raise her son somewhere warm.
Once they reached Florida, Ms. Lee decided she wanted to settle in Sarasota because it was close to the water and more peaceful than their first stop, the Tampa Bay area. She struggled to find a place to live before renting a house in Bradenton, just north of Sarasota.
The first two months in Florida were tough. Ms. Lee had planned to get a job and place Dacian, now 3, in day care, but he had struggled for much of his short life. He hardly slept, and he needed to be held constantly or he would cry intensely. He required specialized care that she felt she was in the best position to provide.
It was only after they arrived in Bradenton that Ms. Lee learned that Dacian had sensory processing disorder and that he was exhibiting some behaviors associated with autism. She had fed him organic baby food, but it was impossible to get healthy food with no income. They were surviving on boxed macaroni and cheese, chips and cookies — a diet that she knew was negatively affecting Dacian’s health.
Pushing her son’s stroller, Ms. Lee had happened upon the Freedom Gathering, a church-affiliated dinner that serves as many as 200 people every Thursday in a small vacant lot. Clothing and free to-go lunches are offered there as well.
From the Freedom Gathering, Ms. Lee was referred to a pair of nearby food pantries: Hunger’s End, which provides groceries, clothing and hygiene products to more than 500 families a month, and Our Daily Bread, which serves meals to about 250 people a day, seven days a week. They are among the 200 food banks affiliated with Feeding America, a beneficiary agency of The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
Our Daily Bread’s self-serve pantry has provided Ms. Lee with essentials like diapers as well as coffee, canned soup and peanut butter. When fresh produce or organic macaroni and cheese comes through, Ms. Lee said, volunteers often set it aside for her. In 2018, Feeding Tampa Bay, part of Feeding America’s national network, began delivering organic food to Hunger’s End and other pantries in the Bradenton area. Twice a month, an outdoor pantry is assembled and opened to anyone in need. Ms. Lee returned from her most recent visit to the Hunger’s End fresh market with organic butter, coconut milk, mangoes, brussels sprouts and raspberries.
Because she cares for Dacian full time, money is tight. The $146 she receives in food stamps each month covers just one week’s groceries; she pays for another week out of her $700 monthly Social Security check. Utilities run about $300, leaving little for Ms. Lee to save or spend on herself.
Ms. Lee knew it was imperative to remove processed foods and refined sugars from her son’s diet. Once his diet improved, Dacian’s symptoms subsided significantly and he started sleeping through the night for the first time in his life.
The hunger Ms. Lee still feels some nights does not compare to the months she spent starved for her son’s voice.
A local couple gave her a car recently, but the cost of getting it on the road — including insurance and gas — is out of her reach. If she could use it, she could take Dacian to school. And maybe then Ms. Lee, who had studied health and fitness with an emphasis on nutrition before dropping out of college, could find a job and finish her bachelor’s degree. And then, just maybe, she could take what she has learned and start a small business devising healthy snack alternatives for children like her son.
Though they are still struggling themselves, Ms. Lee and Dacian volunteer at the Freedom Gathering dinner, where the sound of a preacher’s voice drew them from their home three years ago.
Dacian, who turns 4 in January and wears his long blond hair in a ponytail, pours juice and water while his mother sorts donated clothing. Once they sat at these very tables. They are happy to find themselves on the other side, giving back when they can.
Donations to the Neediest Cases may be made online, or with a check or over the phone.