An article on Oct. 8 about voters in a swing county in western Pennsylvania who supported Donald Trump in 2016 featured comments from Mark Graham, who said he no longer supported Mr. Trump. Local news media reported this week that Mr. Graham did not vote in the 2016 election; The Times has confirmed those reports. While Mr. Graham acknowledged misspeaking about his voting record, he said the article accurately reflects his feelings about the 2016 race and President Trump’s performance in office.
Corrections that appeared in print on Saturday, Dec. 7, 2019.
An article on Friday about Mayor Pete Buttigieg’s career at McKinsey misstated the number of tax returns Senator Elizabeth Warren had released. She has released 11 years of returns, not eight.
Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about NASA’s discovery of India’s moon lander crash site misstated where NASA identified the impact point of the Vikram lander. It was 2,500 feet to the southeast of a piece of debris spotted by an Indian programmer, not 2,500 feet from the spacecraft’s planned landing site.
A picture caption with an article on Friday about the rapper Tekashi69’s willingness to cooperate with prosecutors misstated where Tekashi69 was and in what context when the picture was taken. He was in state court in Manhattan in connection with a case involving sexually explicit videos that he admitted making with an underage girl. He was not in federal court in connection with his role as a cooperating witness.
A theater review on Friday about “Jagged Little Pill” misspelled the given name of Alanis Morissette’s songwriting partner. He is Glen Ballard, not Glenn.
An article on Page 11 about a father and son watching “Jeopardy!” together misstates how long Alex Trebek has been the host of “Jeopardy!” It is 35 years, not 25.
An article on Page 32 about the writer and translator Ken Liu misspells the name of a Chinese self-publishing platform. It is Douban, not Daoban.
An article on Page 58 about rage in Asian cinema misidentifies the country of origin of the novel “The Vegetarian”; it is South Korean, not Vietnamese.
An article on Page 124 about the artist Andrea Fraser misspells her husband’s surname. He is Andy Stewart, not Steward.
