DABABY at Terminal 5 (Dec. 12, 8 p.m.). A member of this year’s XXL Freshman Class, this North Carolina-based artist is quickly rising through the rap ranks; for proof of his rapidly accumulating clout, check the roster of artists who have tapped him for guest verses in recent months — Chance the Rapper, Lil Nas X and Lizzo, to name a few. But DaBaby, born Jonathan Kirk, doesn’t just make hits for other people: Riding momentum from his breakout hit “Suge,” he has delivered two chart-topping albums of his own since March. On Saturday, a few days ahead of his concert in Hell’s Kitchen, he makes his debut musical appearance on “Saturday Night Live,” sure to be one of the highest-profile performances of his career.
THE HOLD STEADY at Brooklyn Bowl (Dec. 5, 8 p.m.; Dec. 6-7, 9 p.m.). Though their Minnesota roots lend them a certain Midwestern scrappiness, this six piece has long been a Brooklyn institution. Founded in the early 2000s when the New York indie scene was dominated by brooding atmospherics, the Hold Steady instead drew from straightforward classic-rock influences and brought the party, with their frontman, Craig Finn, spit-singing from a place of triumphant, booze-fueled revelry. The group has pulled back on their release schedule and touring commitments. “Thrashing Thru the Passion,” from August, is their first album in more than five years, and is backed by just a handful of dates across the country, including this run in their adopted hometown.
LOMELDA at Union Pool (Dec. 12, 8 p.m.). In 2019, “empathy” teeters on the verge of buzzword status, its meaning hollowed out by the frequency of its use. Hannah Read, the indie-folk singer and songwriter from Texas who performs as Lomelda, has the means to fill it back in. On “M for Empathy,” a set of short but sweeping tracks released in March, her musings on the inner workings of intimacy, depression and existential uncertainty are marked by consideration and compassion. The emotional richness of Lomelda’s work finds a worthy match in the yearning dream-pop tunes of Long Beard, who will play an opening set at this haunt in Williamsburg, Brooklyn.
IDINA MENZEL at Carnegie Hall (Dec. 11, 8 p.m.). This veteran singer-actress’s voice is celebrated in households across the country, particularly those with young children: As Elsa, the animated snow queen of Disney’s “Frozen,” Menzel powers the inescapable pop-culture juggernaut that is “Let It Go.” Though the song is by far the biggest hit of her career, Menzel is no stranger to the anthemic. As Elphaba in Broadway’s “Wicked,” she belted out tunes about empowerment; as Maureen in “Rent,” she preached self-respect. This week, Menzel is playing a trio of shows around the New York area in support of her new Christmas record. Given its seasonal relevance, odds are she’ll sneak a bit of “Frozen” material into her performance at Carnegie Hall.
SHE & HIM at Kings Theater (Dec. 6, 8 p.m.). Holiday music is, almost invariably, laden with nostalgia; this folk-pop pair are natural proprietors of the stuff. Together, the duo of M. Ward and Zooey Deschanel sing and play in sepia tones, drawing from a repertoire that includes both originals and classics culled across decades. She & Him’s penchant for covers has led them to record two albums’ worth of Christmas standards, on which they pay homage to holiday giants from Irving Berlin to Mariah Carey. Their renditions of these festive tunes wouldn’t sound out of place piping from an antique radio; in lieu of that option, you can see them performed live on Friday at this palatial theater in Flatbush, Brooklyn.
SUMMER WALKER at Terminal 5 (Dec. 7-8, 8:30 p.m.). Titled “Over It,” this Atlanta-based singer’s debut album, which has racked up more streams than any other by a female R&B artist, teases a breezily apathetic outlook. Instead, the release delivers a glimpse at a messy, moody interior life, packaged in slow-burning, ’90s-inspired grooves. Walker is currently on tour behind the album, but has been open about ongoing mental health issues that pushed her to ax most of the scheduled dates. Luckily for New York fans, her back-to-back shows at Terminal 5 were spared. Melii, a Harlem-born rapper and singer whose debut album, “Phases,” delivers both sweet melodies and hard-charging flows, will open.
STEVEN BERNSTEIN at Dizzy’s Club (Dec. 11-12, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Many of jazz’s most engaging figures have a way of finding what resonates in the past — a style, a method, a spirit — and giving it new life without trying to preserve or conspicuously modernize it. (Think of Jason Moran, Cecile McLorin Salvant, Christian McBride: Each has a way of doing this.) Bernstein, a trumpeter who sprang from New York’s experimental-jazz scene in the 1980s, is one of those musicians. On Wednesday he will perform at Dizzy’s with his nine-piece Millennial Territory Orchestra — which romps through a repertoire ranging from Fats Waller to Ray Charles to the Beatles — with the vocalist Catherine Russell joining as a special guest. On Dec. 12 Bernstein will bring his longtime quartet Sexmob, featuring the saxophonist Briggan Krauss, the bassist Tony Scherr and the drummer Kenny Wollesen.
‘DIASPORA SONGS’ at Carnegie Hall (Dec. 6, 8 p.m.). The Beninese vocalist Angélique Kidjo curated this major concert, and put the trumpeter Terence Blanchard in charge of its musical direction. The program that these two Grammy-winning artists have assembled addresses the broad range of music that has emerged from the African diaspora in roughly the past century: jazz, gospel, Afrobeat, Afro-Caribbean, hip-hop and much more. Performers will include Blanchard’s quintet, the E-Collective; the breakout New Orleans band Tank and the Bangas; the pianist and “The Late Show With Stephen Colbert” bandleader Jon Batiste; and members of the RAREdancework performance group.
IKUE MORI at the Stone (Dec. 10-14, 8:30 p.m.). An improvising drummer and laptop musician, Mori first arrived in New York from Japan over 40 years ago, becoming a major player on the no-wave scene centered in downtown Manhattan. Over the ensuing decades she has cut a path through the worlds of jazz, contemporary classical, noise and experimental electronic music. In the coming week at the Stone, she will work in a different group each night. Highlights include Tuesday’s show — with the saxophonist (and Stone proprietor) John Zorn, the harpist Zeena Parkins, the pianist Sylvie Courvoisier and various special guests — and a performance on Dec. 13 featuring Mori’s Mahobin Trio (with Satoko Fujii on piano and Kappa Maki on trumpet) and Nate Wooley on second trumpet.
HARISH RAGHAVAN QUINTET at Jazz Standard (Dec. 11, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). A bassist with as much lyrical sensitivity as he has resounding power, Raghavan is best known for his work in the trumpeter Ambrose Akinmusire’s esteemed quintet. But he has recently begun to emerge as a protagonist in his own right, leading a five-piece group at clubs around New York and showcasing his book of soaring, neatly woven compositions. At this show he and the members of his quintet (Immanuel Wilkins on alto saxophone, Joel Ross on vibraphone, Micah Thomas on piano and Kweku Sumbry on drums) will celebrate the release of their fine debut album, “Calls for Action,” out last month.
BUSTER WILLIAMS QUARTET at Smoke (through Dec. 7; 7, 9 and 10:30 p.m.; Dec. 8, 7 and 9 p.m.). Among the most storied living jazz musicians, this bassist has performed with the likes of Nancy Wilson, Herbie Hancock, the Jazz Crusaders and countless others. At 77, he often appears nowadays as a bandleader, funneling his decades of broad-ranging experience into a style that’s firmly rooted in straight-ahead jazz but deeply flexible and funky. He performs this weekend with the same all-star quartet featured on his 2018 album, “Audacity”: Steve Wilson on saxophone, George Colligan on piano and Lenny White on drums. The group will likely play some of Williams’s pithy, melodic originals featured on that album.
