His “Paco’s Story” was the surprise winner of the National Book Award for fiction in 1987, beating books by Toni Morrison and Philip Roth.
Larry Heinemann, a Vietnam veteran who drew on his war experiences in two well-received novels — one of which, “Paco’s Story,” startled the literary world when it won the National Book Award for fiction in 1987 — died on Dec. 11 in Bryan, Texas. He was 75.
His daughter, Sarah Heinemann, said the cause was chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
“Paco’s Story,” published in 1986, was an unexpected winner not only because Mr. Heinemann was not well known — he had published only one previous novel — but also because of the daunting competition it beat out. Other nominees that year included “Beloved,” by Toni Morrison (which won the Pulitzer Prize for fiction a few months later), and “The Counterlife,” by Philip Roth (which won the National Book Critics Circle Award for fiction). It had been widely expected that one of them would win the National Book Award.
Among those surprised was Mr. Heinemann himself, who had traveled from Chicago for the awards ceremony at the Pierre Hotel in Manhattan.
The selection of “Paco’s Story,” about the war and its aftermath for the lone survivor of a battle, set off hand-wringing in the literary world.
A week after the award presentation, Michiko Kakutani, chief book critic of The Times, wrote an essay pointing out what she thought were the weaknesses of “Paco’s Story” and all but saying that “Beloved” should have won. Two months later (but before Ms. Morrison and “Beloved” had been awarded the Pulitzer), 48 black writers and critics published a statement deploring the fact that Ms. Morrison, an African-American and by then one of the country’s leading writers, had never won a National Book Award or a Pulitzer Prize.
Mr. Heinemann’s novel “Paco’s Story” won the National Book Award for fiction in 1987, to the surprise of many people — including Mr. Heinemann himself.
Some theorized that in picking Mr. Heinemann’s book, the three-judge panel was seeking to reaffirm the award’s reputation for recognizing out-of-the-mainstream talent. Certainly one of the remarkable things about Mr. Heinemann and his writing was that his was a voice not often found in refined literary circles.
Larry Curtis Heinemann was born on Jan. 18, 1944, in Chicago. His father, John, owned a small bus company, and his mother, Dorothy (Denton) Heinemann, was a homemaker who also owned a babysitting business.
Mr. Heinemann received an associate’s degree at Kendall College in Chicago in 1966, the year he was drafted into the Army. He was sent to Vietnam in 1967 as part of an infantry battalion.
He served a year in Vietnam. After leaving the Army in 1968 he returned to Chicago and earned a bachelor’s degree at Columbia College Chicago in 1971.
Then he wrote the story.
His first novel, “Close Quarters,” was published in 1977. It was the tale of an ordinary soldier in Vietnam, starkly told. In Newsweek, Peter S. Prescott reviewed it along with “A Rumor of War,” a memoir by another Vietnam veteran, Philip Caputo, that had come out at the same time.
“Paco’s Story” largely focused not on the war but on the return to civilian life of its title character, who washes dishes at a diner.
In addition to his 2005 memoir, Mr. Heinemann wrote “Cooler by the Lake” (1992), a lighter novel about a family of hustlers in his native Chicago. He also wrote reviews, magazine articles and short stories and held academic posts. He had been writer in residence at Texas A&M University since 2005.
Mr. Heinemann married Edie Smith in 1968; they divorced in 2014. In addition to his daughter, he is survived by his partner, Kathy Favor; a son, Preston; and a granddaughter.
Mr. Heinemann was critical of the line of argument that emerged after the war holding that the conflict had been winnable, and of airbrushed versions of warfare in general.
