A 14-year-old was among the casualties this year in a Queens neighborhood ravaged by gun violence.
Delano Martin recalls how he felt in September as he stood next to the coffin of a friend who had been shot dead a few days earlier, one of three people in his inner circle gunned down in a single day. One thought ruled his mind: Shoot the man who had put his friend there.
“All I’m thinking is hate, and anger and revenge, honestly,” Mr. Martin recalled.
But the thirst for revenge, he said, was the driving force behind a recent cycle of gang violence in his neighborhood in Queens — Southeast Jamaica — resulting in 32 shooting victims so far this year, double the number of last year. Murders have more than doubled as well, to 12 from five.
Crime may be at a low ebb in New York, the nation’s biggest city, but gun violence has flared up in some pockets of the metropolis, focusing attention on youth gangs with access to firearms — a combination that often turns deadly.
The danger was brought into sharp relief in October when a bullet shot at another target struck Aamir Griffin, a beloved 14-year-old who was playing basketball on a playground near his apartment building.
His death became a rallying cry for youths caught in crossfire in neighborhoods that face a dearth of resources for young people. Days later, a second teenager was wounded by the same group of gang members shooting at each other, the police said.
Gunfire has become a familiar sound in several neighborhoods anchored by public housing projects with street crews, including parts of the South Bronx, Upper Manhattan, Northern Brooklyn and Southeast Queens, police officials said.
The gangs driving the recent rise in shootings are informal groups based on geography, investigators said, with some members as young as 14. They often adopt the names of more established gangs, and some change their names on a whim. Once part of a crew, the members find it hard to escape turf wars defined by street boundaries.
The crews have no trouble getting their hands on illicit guns, and often share a “community gun,” the police said. Investigators said gang members do not have to buy guns; firearms can be rented on the street for as little as $100.
Erica Ford, who runs Life Camp, an organization that is trying to stem gun violence out of an unassuming storefront in a shopping center in Jamaica, Queens, said there is a direct link between lack of resources and increased street violence.
Ms. Ford and others who call themselves “violence interrupters” visit schools, parks, and even hospital and funerals, trying to persuade young people not to turn their petty grievances and rivalries into street warfare.
Mr. Martin, the man who saw three of his friends gunned down in two separate incidents on Aug. 26, joined Life Camp after he was talked out of taking revenge. Now he warns troubled teens that street clashes can lead to incarceration or death, and despair for their family members.
Aamir died because a gang known as the Mac Ballers had come to his housing project, the Baisley Park Houses, to confront the local crew there. The two groups had been feuding since April, when a fight left a member of one group with a stab wound, officials said.
On Oct. 26, investigators said, some members of the Mac Ballers came to the intersection of Foch Boulevard and Long Street at about 8 p.m. and fired a pistol at rivals from the Baisley crew. One bullet sailed 100 yards toward the houses’ basketball court and hit Aamir in the torso, killing him.
Two days later, members of the same gangs clashed on a city bus. One group chased a youth off the bus and then fired at him outside the Baisley houses, though he escaped unharmed, the police said.
Later the same day, the feud resumed when the two groups ran into each other outside New Dawn Charter High School II, about two miles away, the police said. Again, shots were fired. This time a bullet struck a 16-year-old bystander, Ashley Armoogan, in the left shoulder.
Ms. Armoogan remembered telling her father over the phone, “I think I got shot,” then urging him not to come to the school because she feared shots were still being fired.
Doctors were unable to remove the bullet, which is stuck near a delicate artery, her parents said.
Police arrested a 16-year-old on charges that he had fired the bullet that hit Ashley. Aamir’s shooter, however, remains at large.
A few days after Aamir’s murder, Chief Harrison returned to the Baisley houses’ basketball court and looked solemnly at a makeshift memorial for the teenager.
Chief Harrison, too, had been a young black teenager in the same neighborhood. Like Aamir, he played basketball on the court and every weekday took two buses to attend Benjamin N. Cardozo High School, 15 miles away. Aamir was a freshman there when he was killed.
The Police Department, he said, had responded to the murder by increasing police presence in the area.
Police officers are visible during school arrivals and dismissals, for instance, to help prevent rival groups from confronting each other, Chief Harrison said. Neighborhood coordination officers reach out to known and prospective gang members before they commit violence. And Strategic response groups have been patrolling hot spots since the shootings.
Aamir had been a fixture in the complex’s tight-knit community. When not attending classes, he practiced tirelessly on the local courts, dreaming of the day he would make it to the N.B.A., friends said. His deep-set dimples and wide grin earned him many nicknames, including Prince Charming and Buddy.
But on Nov. 4, Aamir lay in a black coffin at the Greater Allen A.M.E. Cathedral of New York in Jamaica. A heart-shaped flower arrangement adorned the altar.
The church was packed with hundreds of sobbing teenagers, along with their parents and grandparents. Many remembered Aamir as a promising athlete who seemed mature beyond his years.
Mr. Naclerio said he had no doubt that had Aamir lived, he would have lived up to the examples set by his basketball idols: Kyrie Irving, Kevin Durant, Stephen Curry and LeBron James.
Aamir’s aunt, Desiree Walston, choked on tears as she told mourners that the Knicks had named him as an honorary player and had given the family a jersey with his name.
