Dismayed by inequality and injustice, a white woman from the Midwest devoted her abbreviated career to helping poor blacks and Latinos in the Bronx.
As a teenager, she searched for a racially integrated church to join — “which in Kansas City was not easy to find,” her mother, Michele Schloegel, said — and one year Heidi even desegregated the holiday decorations.
All of which may help explain why Ms. Hynes, after attending the Jesuit-run Fordham University in the Bronx in the 1980s and majoring in philosophy, stayed in the borough and devoted her career to improving the lives of her mostly nonwhite and poor neighbors.
From 1997 through mid-2018, when she developed the rectal cancer that led to her death at her home in the Bronx on Nov. 29 at 51, Ms. Hynes was the executive director of the Mary Mitchell Family and Youth Center in the Crotona section of the South Bronx, which runs after-school classes, a self-defense program, a fresh produce cooperative called La Canasta (the Basket) and community gardens. The center was founded in 1997 and named after an early organizer of youth and employment programs in the Bronx.
An alumnus of the Catholic Worker Movement on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, Ms. Hynes served for a year with the Franciscan Friars of Atonement at its mission in Jamaica. She then worked as a tenant and housing community organizer for the Northwest Bronx Community and Clergy Coalition before joining the Mary Mitchell Center.
“She fell in love with the community, and she never left,” Lurgen Guzman, the center’s program director, said.
Ms. Hynes was indefatigable in her advocacy.
Demanding that the government help homeowners swamped by debt accumulated in the subprime mortgage crisis in the 2000s, she picketed the home of Ben S. Bernanke, the Federal Reserve chairman at the time, and joined a small group that met with him privately.
Complaining that local teenagers often risked their lives by joining the military only because they had few other options, she vigorously opposed the Iraq war and protested against it with Bronx Action for Justice and Peace, one of a number of antiwar groups formed across the country after the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.
Neither Kansas City nor New York neighborhoods were models of racial integration, and while Fordham had taken steps to commingle with the community, the campus that greeted her in the mid-1980s was a largely white enclave surrounded by poor black and Hispanic neighbors.
By then the Bronx had hemorrhaged non-Hispanic whites. Landlords had often abandoned or even burned down their buildings, deciding that the rents they charged, though too high for many tenants, were insufficient to make continued ownership profitable.
Income inequality and concomitant barriers to affordable housing meant less mingling of the poor with the rich, Ms. Hynes said.
Ms. Hynes was determined, her husband said, to direct her energy, optimism and middle-class prerogatives toward concrete progress.
Heidi Marie Schloegel was born in Kansas City on Jan. 19, 1968, to Frank J. Schloegel III and Ann Michele (McGrath) Schloegel. Her father pioneered a dental health maintenance plan in Kansas City and later opened a restaurant, Woodyard Bar-B-Que. Her mother was a homemaker and is now chief financial officer of the dental plan.
The family moved to Windsor, Ontario, then returned to Missouri when Heidi was 10. She graduated from St. Teresa’s Academy in Kansas City. After receiving her bachelor’s degree from Fordham in 1990 and serving as an aid worker in Jamaica, she took a $10-a-week social service job on the Lower East Side and moved into the Catholic Worker House, where she met her future husband.
The couple married in 1995. In addition to Mr. Hynes, who confirmed the death, and her mother, Ms. Hynes is also survived by their daughter, Frieda; her father; her sister, Theresa Scott; and her brother, Frank IV.
In the Bronx, she worked with Astin Jacobo, a community organizer who established the Mary Mitchell Center in 1997.
Those who knew Ms. Hynes best praised her as selfless (“People would become better if they stopped trying to be better off,” she said) and courageous.
“She had no fear, or didn’t let it stop her from doing what she thought needed to be done,” her mother said in an interview.
In 2009, after a stray bullet whizzed into the outdoor basketball court of the Mary Mitchell Center, she protested gun violence by transplanting the center’s after-school program to the steps of City Hall.
