New York|Just a Quarter of New York’s Wi-Fi Kiosks Are Up. Guess Where.
Five years later, many New Yorkers regard the nine-and-a-half-foot panels as little more than miniature billboards and a source of amusing city trivia. (Did you know Einstein’s eyeballs are kept in a safe box in the city?) But for some, the LinkNYC kiosks are a vital way to remain connected.
Alhassan Mohammed, a former professional soccer player from Ghana who sells tickets for a sightseeing bus near Times Square, told me he uses Wi-Fi from a kiosk to make free calls to his family on WhatsApp.
Yet users like these may be the very ones that the network of kiosks leaves out.
The company behind LinkNYC, CityBridge, has installed just 1,774 of the 7,500 promised kiosks. LinkNYC’s map shows that kiosks are most densely clustered in Manhattan and in its bordering neighborhoods — places where people are not particularly desperate for their services, but where it may be easier for the company, which relies on advertising revenue, to sell ads. Many of the city’s poorest areas have few kiosks, or none at all.
But this year saw concerns over data privacy grow, and some residents say they don’t want LinkNYC to spread any further into their neighborhoods, fearing that the kiosks, which are equipped to collect all manner of data, could be misused. “I wouldn’t want to support the expansion of this project until we can feel confident that our community’s privacy is being respected,” said Kristen Gonzalez, an organizer in Queens who also sits on her community board, which covers the neighborhoods of Elmhurst and Corona.
This year, privacy concerns returned to the fore. In April, a man smashed 42 kiosks over several days. The Police Department shared video of the so-called “smash spree,” which had clearly been captured by a kiosk, alerting the public to built-in cameras (each kiosk has three) — and raising questions about what other data CityBridge was gathering and who might be able to access it.
CityBridge has repeatedly assured the public that it is committed to privacy. The company does collect email addresses, a spokesman for the company said, but it does not store or track what people do on the Wi-Fi or employ user data to create targeted ads.
Video footage is intended to deter vandalism and is kept for only a week. The company also said it is not using facial recognition software. And no audio is being recorded or stored, they say.
In May, however, a college student discovered code on GitHub, a platform for sharing software code, that appeared to indicate that LinkNYC was collecting location data. CityBridge denied it, saying the code was intended for research and development purposes, and contained employees’ data only. But the discovery further stoked fears about LinkNYC.
Yet the city has not verified that CityBridge is complying with the privacy piece of its franchise agreement. At a public hearing about the state’s proposed consumer privacy bill on Nov. 22, Assemblywoman Linda B. Rosenthal, a Democrat from Manhattan, asked Michael Pastor, general counsel of the city’s Department of Information Technology and Telecommunications, which oversees LinkNYC, about the kiosks. He said the city had not conducted a privacy audit of CityBridge, but that it would.
Of course, many companies openly harvest and sell user data. The difference, according to Schuyler Duveen, a programmer and a member of Rethink Link, is that in the LinkNYC project “the city is complicit.” Mr. Duveen called it a “Faustian bargain” if New Yorkers are “paying with their data” for free services.
And what is clear is that the promise that brought kiosks into existence has not been fulfilled. Pay phones, which were to be replaced by kiosks, still litter the landscape, almost all of them unusable and stuffed with trash. And we still do not have municipal Wi-Fi.
Instead, around the city, I watched ads for “Frozen 2” and Dagne Dover handbags playing to empty streets in wealthy neighborhoods where the kiosks were barely noticed. Occasionally, I saw someone sleeping under one, or stooping over, speaking to a loved one far away in the glow of a screen.
The mayor spoke of a city more united by LinkNYC. Instead, the kiosks seem to point to an enduring divide.