Jacqueline Green has hit a new level this season, elevating premieres and shining in classic repertory.
Jacqueline Green was a shy 13-year-old when her mother, considering possible schools in Baltimore, observed two qualities that her daughter possessed.
She was accepted. That Ms. Green, now a supremely elegant member of Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, began training so late is remarkable, but her facility is as natural as her poise. Regal and soft-spoken, she has delicate, feline bone structure and willowy limbs — she’s 5-foot-9 — which adds to her unaffected elegance. She can be soft, she can be unyielding, but her intensity radiates across the stage, pulling your gaze like a magnet.
It has also been revealing to see Ms. Green in older works like “Memoria,” which Ailey choreographed after the death of a friend. Moving from a place of sorrow to one of joy, Ms. Green was almost a spirit — ethereal and stately — as she floated inside Keith Jarrett’s shimmering score.
Ms. Green, who turns 30 the day after Christmas, was part of a group of nine dancers who Mr. Battle hired when he became artistic director in 2011. At the time she was a member of the second company, Ailey II.
When she returned to New York, she was ready for the audition — and, of course, got in. But Mr. Battle said he knew he wanted her for the main company even before she auditioned. She had impressed him in an Ailey II performance of “Shards,” another work by Mr. Byrd.
Ms. Green was introduced to the company while still at Baltimore School for the Arts; Linda-Denise Fisher-Harrell, then an Ailey dancer — and a ravishing one at that — had also trained there and took a class with the students. “I still remember exactly what she did,” Ms. Green said. It was an exercise at the barre in which the extended leg folded until the foot reached the knee.
It got better. She learned how to rehearse and how the company works. “The scheduling and the rules and the contracts — it’s really like you need a course,” she said.
And it felt close to home. Sandra Bland, arrested on a traffic violation in Texas and later found hanging in her cell, was a childhood friend of Ms. Green’s fiancé.
Mr. Roberts’s “Ode” is more than just a dance.
