Mr. Schwartz, a climate reporter, holds a law degree from the University of Texas. He has worked at The Times since 2000.
It was the third court victory in the case for the environmental group Urgenda, which filed the lawsuit in 2013 against the Dutch government with nearly 900 co-plaintiffs.
In 2015, The Hague District Court ordered the government to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by at least 25 percent from 1990 levels in the following five years. The lawsuit had demanded reductions of between 25 percent and 40 percent.
The government appealed that decision as well, this time to the Supreme Court of the Netherlands. In September, the procurator general and advocate general, who advise the court, published an opinion urging the justices to reject the government’s arguments.
In the ruling Friday, Justice Streefkerk said the argument that a cut in emissions in the Netherlands would not have a big effect on a global level did not absolve a country from taking measures to reduce its own emissions. “Every country is responsible for its share,” he said.
In practical terms, the decision Friday will very likely require the government to take stronger action to reach the 25 percent reduction. That might include closing coal-fired power plants, some of which opened as recently as 2016.
The Dutch government had already committed to reducing emissions, and the country’s environmental agency has estimated that its efforts will reduce emissions between 19 and 26 percent by the end of 2020.
Since the decision requires reductions of at least 25 percent, the estimates at the lower end are now unacceptable, said Dennis van Berkel, legal counsel for the Urgenda Foundation.
The Dutch case has already inspired similar suits against national governments in Europe — including in Belgium, France, Ireland, Germany, New Zealand, Britain, Switzerland and Norway — and from plaintiffs around the world against the European Union, part of a larger trend of citizens seeking action from the courts on climate issues.
In the United States, climate policy has been influenced by the courts numerous times, and the number of lawsuits against the federal government has grown.
In a 2007 case, Massachusetts v. Environmental Protection Agency, the Supreme Court supported the state’s argument that the Clean Air Act empowered the government to regulate greenhouse gases. A federal suit on behalf of young people awaits trial in Oregon after a labyrinthine path of pretrial filings and appeals that have reached the Supreme Court twice already.
Global governmental action on climate change has lost momentum since the 2015 Paris climate agreement was reached. President Trump has begun the process of withdrawing the United States from the agreement, and the most recent climate talks to move the process forward, which were held in Madrid, were widely considered a disappointment.
