Senator Lisa Murkowski of Alaska revealed the first public qualms with Mitch McConnell’s vow to coordinate with the White House on a quick impeachment trial for President Trump.
Ms. Murkowski’s views could prove important. She rarely speaks publicly against Republican leadership, but when she does, she tends to stick with her positions, as when she opposed the confirmation of Justice Brett M. Kavanaugh and helped torpedo a repeal of the Affordable Care Act. She also tends to bring Senator Susan Collins of Maine, a fellow moderate Republican with her. Only a handful of defections would force the majority leader, Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, to switch course on the upcoming impeachment trial.
“If the House truly believed that they had information that was going to be important, they subpoena them, and if they ignore the subpoena as they did, at the direction of the White House, then that next step is to go to the courts,” she said.
Senate Democrats are pressing to include testimony at the trial from Mr. Bolton and Mr. Mulvaney, and support from Ms. Murkowski would be critical.
On December 10, a federal judge pushed off a decision on such testimony, responding to a lawsuit by Charles M. Kupperman, another White House official, who asked the courts to decide whether the House could compel him to testify after he defied a House subpoena in October. The case was expected to provide clarity on whether other officials such as Mr. Bolton would have to testify as well.
Instead of prolonging the process, House Democrats moved forward with articles of impeachment based on evidence already collected, formally accusing Mr. Trump of abuse of power and obstruction of Congress. In a Senate trial to consider removing Mr. Trump from office, the evidentiary standards would be considerably higher than impeachment, which is akin to an indictment.
Democrats argue that Mr. Bolton and Mr. Mulvaney have firsthand knowledge of the president’s efforts to force Ukraine’s president to help his re-election by publicly announcing an investigation of Mr. Trump’s Democratic rivals. Mr. Bolton described the machinations around military aid to Ukraine as a “drug deal,” while Mr. Mulvaney would likely understand how Mr. Trump’s desire for a Ukrainian investigation of former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and his son Hunter was connected to a suspension of military assistance for the country’s ongoing war with Russia-backed separatists.
Ms. Murkowski also said she felt that Mr. McConnell, who has been meeting privately with the White House counsel, Pat A. Cipollone, in preparation for the trial, had himself contributed to what she sees as the larger problems with the way Mr. Trump’s impeachment has been conducted.
In a Christmas message sent out on Wednesday, Mr. Trump wished Americans well, briefly ignoring the impeachment drama after lamenting his treatment by Democrats throughout the process for much of Christmas Eve.
“While the challenges that face our country are great, the bonds that unite us as Americans are much stronger,” Mr. Trump said in the letter.
As the Senate moves ahead with a trial, Ms. Murkowski is one of a small number of Republicans who have not publicly dismissed the case against the president, and says she remains open to considering the case on its merits.
“If it means that I am viewed as one who looks openly and critically at every issue in front of me rather than acting as a rubber stamp for my party or my president, I’m totally good with that,” she said.