ALVIN AILEY AMERICAN DANCE THEATER at New York City Center (Dec. 27, 8 p.m.; Dec. 28, 2 and 8 p.m.; Dec. 29, 3 and 7:30 p.m.; Dec. 31, 7 p.m.; Jan. 1-2, 7:30 p.m.; through Jan. 5). Ailey’s winter season rolls into the new year with programs that feature company classics (you can see the timelessly rousing “Revelations” on Saturday afternoon, on Sunday afternoon and evening, and on Tuesday and Thursday) and works recently added to the repertory. Among those are “Ode,” a profound statement on gun violence by Jamar Roberts, a company dancer and the resident choreographer (on Sunday afternoon, Wednesday and Thursday); “Fandango,” a demanding duet by Lar Lubovitch not performed by this company in a decade; and works by Camille A. Brown, Aszure Barton and Donald Byrd.
DORRANCE DANCE at the Joyce Theater (Dec. 27, 8 p.m.; Dec. 28, 2 and 8 p.m.; Dec. 29, 2 p.m.; Dec. 31, 7:30 p.m.; Jan. 2, 8 p.m.; through Jan. 5). On Tuesday, the final week of this company’s winter residency begins, and it is again anchored by “The Nutcracker Suite,” Michelle Dorrance, Hannah Heller and Josette Wiggan-Freund’s festive new work set to the effervescent rendition of Tchaikovsky’s holiday soundtrack by Duke Ellington and Billy Strayhorn. Joining it is “Lessons in Tradition,” a dialogue between Dorrance and the renowned clown performer Bill Irwin, with the singer and jazz bassist Kate Davis; “Harlequin & Pantalone,” a duet between Irwin and the beguiling Warren Craft; and “Basses Loaded,” which brings together four tappers and four bass players.
NEW YORK CITY BALLET at the David H. Koch Theater (Dec. 27, 8 p.m.; Dec. 28, 2 and 8 p.m.; Dec. 29, 1 and 5 p.m.; Dec. 30, 2 and 7 p.m.; Dec. 31, 2 p.m.; Jan. 2, 7 p.m.; through Jan. 5). In the real world, Christmas is over, the gifts are already unwrapped and Christmas trees around town prepare for the sidewalk. Onstage at Lincoln Center, the holiday endures for another 10 days with the magnificent conifer in “George Balanchine’s The Nutcracker” growing nightly to impressive heights. Through the tale of Marie’s triumph over the Mouse King, her eventful tour through the Kingdom of Sweets and her enchanting encounter with the Sugar Plum Fairy, this top-notch production continues to celebrate childhood wonder into the new year as it has since 1954.
‘NUTCRACKER ROUGE’ at Theater XIV (Dec. 27, 8 p.m.; Dec. 28, 5 and 10 p.m.; Dec. 29, 4 and 9 p.m.; Dec. 31, 10 p.m.; Jan. 2, 8 p.m.; through Jan. 26). In Santa’s annual performance review of whether the choreographer and director Austin McCormick has been nice or naughty, McCormick is clearly gunning for the latter with his scintillating, scantily clad riff on “The Nutcracker” for adults only (21 and older). Singers, dancers and aerial artists spread holiday cheer — and their legs — in this glittery and flamboyant production that incorporates elements of burlesque, circus and opera. A special New Year’s Eve party, which includes a 10 p.m. performance and post-show dancing with the cast, would be a decadent way to greet the new year.
