In the mountains of Transylvania, residents hoped visitors would flock to spas and resorts to bathe and heal in the cold, clear waters. The dream has faded, but the taps still flow.
One morning in the small Transylvanian mountain resort of Baile Homorod, in Romania, travelers and residents gathered under the shade of a wooden canopy near three streams of sparkling spring water to fill up a row of empty bottles.
Balint Vencel, 36, a frequent visitor, says the water helps with his kidney issues.
The naturally fizzy water is slowly filtered through layers upon layers of volcanic rock, making it crystal clear and sparkling most of the time. In villages like Baile Homorod, dotted with cottages in sight of a single ski slope in the easternmost region of the former Austro-Hungarian Empire, residents once hoped to monetize the springs — turning the region into the Switzerland of the east. They expected visitors to flock to spas and resorts and bathe and heal in the waters, as wealthy tourists did in the Alps.
After World War I, the empire collapsed, and the balneotherapy industry — natural healing based on therapies like cold and warm baths — eventually went out of fashion. The end of World War II brought Communism, and most of the private spas and resorts were nationalized, closed or mismanaged under state officials.
Communist Romania was late to invest in tourism, and it focused not on the mountains but on the Black Sea Coast. In the 1980s, the dictator Nicolae Ceausescu’s repressive regime, along with increasing shortages, made the country an austere and unattractive destination for foreign tourists.
The mineral water is deeply embedded in the local culture and mythology. It’s Romanians’ favorite drink, advertised on billboards and television. Most shops sell local varieties — sparkling, mild and still — stocked next to internationally known brands.
Water is also part of many ancient local rites: On Easter Monday in some villages, young men visit girls to “sprinkle” them with ice-cold water — a ritual holding the promise of youth and fertility.
Ms. Tompa, who hails from the region’s Hungarian-speaking community, now lives in Budapest. Her grandparents owned a small spa in the village of Zizin, where alleys in the shade of pine trees led to wooden pavilions with mineral water bubbling up from the earth. They specialized in water-based health treatments, one of hundreds of such enterprises in the wider region.
But then the war came. “Healing with water faded away, and with it the world whose lifestyle included the bathing culture,” Ms. Tompa said.
That included her grandparents’ spa, which exists now only on black-and-white greeting cards.
In Barzava, a village that lies on a plateau near the regional capital, Miercurea Ciuc, villagers renovated the old “peasants spa.” Just outside Miercurea Ciuc itself, a couple of concrete pools filled with amber water stand as unlikely survivors of a long-gone era. The water bubbles up in one corner of the pools in periodic bursts, direct from the mountain, ice-cold and sparkling.
From there, the final 20 miles across the mountain to Miercurea Ciuc, where my grandmother lived, seemed like a breeze, as the rising sun shone through the pine forests.
My grandmother herself swore by the water’s curative qualities, mainly for the stomach.
Erzsebet Janosi, 61, who lives in Tusnad, a farming village, holds the keys to the local mineral-water museum, a single circular room holding old bottles, labels and other memorabilia.
Next door is the water source, with slightly sparkling water flowing from two taps poking out of a wooden statue of an owl. Ms. Janosi’s father had the idea to drill for water in the village, in 1957.
Travelers stop by on their way through Tusnad to drink or to take the water home. But Ms. Janosi has her own view of its rich taste.
