Working for the high-end gym chain seems glamorous, but for many trainers the schedule is unforgiving, the pay low and the turnover high.
Since its founding in the 1990s, Equinox has become the nation’s premier high-gloss gym chain by selling itself as a kind of luxury product with a progressive culture. Its gyms dot the cities of blue-state America, and the company proclaims its support for environmental sustainability, professional growth and community building. In August, Equinox explicitly distanced itself from President Trump when Stephen Ross, the chairman of the company that owns a controlling stake in the gym chain, held a fund-raiser for his re-election campaign.
Upon hiring, Equinox trainers begin a process called “ramping”: roughly 15 to 20 hours a week putting away weights on the gym floor, plus some additional hours of educational sessions, all paid at or slightly above minimum wage. During those floor shifts, trainers are expected to pitch their services to Equinox members working out in the gym. As they start accumulating clients, trainers can convert floor hours into better-compensated training sessions — $26 an hour for beginner trainers and as much as $62 per session for more experienced employees. Trainers who succeed at Equinox pick up enough clients to move from floor shifts to coaching members full time. A complex bonus system allows top earners to make six-figure salaries.
In practice, however, many beginner trainers struggle to recruit enough clients to live comfortably and end up spending unpaid hours at the gym in a bid to improve their numbers. A trainer who worked at an Equinox in Los Angeles said she could not afford to pay her electricity bills during the ramping period and left after five months. Eric Hannah, who worked at Greenwich Avenue in 2014 and 2015, said he sometimes earned only a little over $200 a week. Omar Kharroub, who trained clients at an Equinox in Northern California until August, said he had worked as a DoorDash delivery driver on the side to support himself.
Over the years, trainers have sued Equinox in state and federal courts for unpaid overtime. In 2013, Equinox settled two overtime suits in California for $5.65 million.
