THE JESUS LIZARD at Brooklyn Steel (Dec. 31, 10 p.m.). Though they haven’t released an album since 1998’s “Blue,” this raucous noise-rock group from Chicago has yet to fall entirely dormant; for signs of life, look to the reunion tours they’ve scheduled sporadically over the past 11 years. While no plans for new material have been announced, fans at these shows seem perfectly content to hear decades-old cuts like “Then Comes Dudley” and “Puss,” which showcase the band’s signature blend of pungent guitars and pummeling drums topped with the deliberately grating vocals of their frontman, David Yow. The post-punk quartet Protomartyr will open this New Year’s Eve gig at Brooklyn Steel.
PHISH at Madison Square Garden (Dec. 28-31, 7:30 p.m.). Of the city’s many New Year’s offerings, this annual residency by America’s quintessential jam band is among the most mellow, though they do have a habit of pranking the audience with nonsensical gags during the New Year’s Eve gig (past antics have involved golfers driving balls into the crowd and cat and dog inflatables falling from the ceiling like rain). Whether you opt for the main event or the lower-profile warm-up shows, expect multiple sets of extended, improvised grooves and psychedelic visuals. All four shows are sold out, but tickets are available from resellers. Homebodies may also purchase passes to live-stream any (or all) of the performances from the comfort of their couches.
PNB ROCK at Brooklyn Steel (Dec. 27, 8 p.m.). One of Philadelphia’s brightest new hip-hop stars, this 28-year-old artist comes from a city steeped in a battle rap tradition that rewards sharp rhymes and quick wit, but he is just as nimble with melody. Born Rakim Allen, he broke out in 2014 with “My City Needs Something,” an emotive track about Philly’s gun violence epidemic that paired trap production with R&B-inspired vocals — a winning combo that he returned to for “Selfish,” his hit from 2016. In titling his latest album “TrapStar Turnt PopStar,” Allen has signaled a full embrace of his singing abilities, which will be on display at this Friday night performance.
SLEIGH BELLS at Brooklyn Bowl (Jan. 1, 12:15 a.m.). When this Brooklyn-based duo released their debut album, “Treats,” in 2010, its immediate success was largely due to its novelty. The singer Alexis Krauss, who once fronted a teen girl group, and her partner Derek Miller, a former hardcore guitarist, smashed together sounds sourced from disparate genres, producing unexpected pairings like jangly Funkadelic samples with sing-songy vocals (“Rill Rill”) and distorted, punk-inflected guitar with cheerleader chants (“Infinity Guitars”). That spirit of eclecticism will come in handy when the pair plays a New Year’s D.J. set in their home borough. Doors are scheduled to open when the ball drops.
ST. PAUL & THE BROKEN BONES at Brooklyn Bowl (Dec. 30, 8:30 p.m.; Dec. 31, 9 p.m.). This eight piece from Birmingham, Ala., has benefited from a compelling founding myth (their singer, Paul Janeway, went from accounting student to dynamo frontman) and an underdog spirit. But the star ingredient in their recipe for success is nostalgia: Janeway takes vocal cues from the likes of Al Green and Sam Cooke, backed by brass-laden arrangements that hark back to Southern soul of the 1960s. The band’s down-home roots provide thematic as well as sonic inspiration: Their most recent album, “Young Sick Camelia,” from 2018, confronts the fraught politics of their home state. Expect to hear selections from that album during the group’s two-night stand in Williamsburg, Brooklyn.
THE STROKES at Barclays Center (Dec. 31, 8:30 p.m.). An ill-timed downpour prevented this headlining band from taking the stage at this year’s Governors Ball, much to the chagrin of fans hoping to catch a rare performance. The onetime fixtures of New York’s indie-rock scene, which their seminal 2001 album “Is This It” helped revitalize, have made themselves scarce over the past several years, releasing no new music and playing only a handful of gigs. Those disappointed by the cancellation should be placated by this New Year’s performance, at which the band is expected to play their hits — many of them odes to drunken revelry and thus perfectly suited to the occasion.
KENNY BARRON TRIO at the Village Vanguard (through Dec. 29, 8:30 and 10:30 p.m.). At age 76, this piano eminence and National Endowment for the Arts Jazz Master remains an exemplar of pianistic intellect and poise. Last year Barron put out a collection of new originals and diverse covers in “Concentric Circles,” his (belated) debut as a leader for Blue Note Records; in March he will release “Without Deception,” a fine new album on which he is joined by the bassist Dave Holland and the drummer Johnathan Blake. At the Vanguard this weekend he is appearing with an equally redoubtable rhythm section: the bassist Buster Williams and the drummer Jeff Watts, known as Tain.
PETER BERNSTEIN at Mezzrow (Jan. 1-2, 7:30 and 9 p.m.). Few guitarists put as much care, sensitivity and subtle strength into every single note as Bernstein does. Among the finest melodists in jazz, he has a full-breadth command of his instrument, but his biggest assets are his knack for crisp understatement and simplicity. At Mezzrow Bernstein will be joined by the bassist Omer Avital, whose playing verges more toward the rambunctious and ecstatic. On the first evening, the piano chair will be held by the pianist Aaron Goldberg, and on the second by Miki Yamanaka.
CHET DOXAS TRIO at Smalls (Jan. 2, 7:30 and 9 p.m.). A Canadian-born tenor saxophonist on the rise in New York, Doxas boasts a tonally rich, flexible style of improvising and a willingness to blend influences from jazz, Western classical and prog rock. You can get a sense of the breadth of his interests by listening first to “Landline” — the self-titled debut of a collective quartet that features Doxas and came out this fall — and then to “Rich in Symbols,” his own surging jazz-rock fusion effort from 2017. Here Doxas leads a trio with two expert musicians of similarly diverse proclivities: the bassist Michael Formanek and the pianist Ethan Iverson.
EDDIE HENDERSON AND ERIC REED at Smoke (Dec. 26-28, 7, 9 and 10:30 p.m.). Henderson, a trumpeter, and Reed, a pianist, are a generation apart — but both play with understatement and grace, placing an emphasis on where funk and swing converge. Here they perform as part of Smoke’s annual John Coltrane Festival in a quintet featuring the tenor saxophonist Eric Alexander, the bassist John Webber and the drummer Joe Farnsworth.
HYPNOTIC BRASS ENSEMBLE at the Knitting Factory (Dec. 30, 8:30 p.m.). This group consists of seven brothers from the South Side of Chicago whose father was the influential organizer, educator and multi-instrumentalist Kelan Philip Cohran. Hypnotic’s work stretches the brass-band sound, often exploring the junction between classic hip-hop, greased-up funk and traditional jazz. Elsewhere, the band works in a quieter, more abstract tone-painting style. At this concert, Hypnotic — which has a new album, “Bad Boys of Jazz,” coming in early 2020 — will share the bill with D.J. Pudgemental and the electronic musician, singer and multi-instrumentalist Thomas Piper.
GRETCHEN PARLATO at the Jazz Gallery (Dec. 27-28, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Few vocalists have as distinctive a sound as Parlato, whose sibilant, sighing soprano and querying, half-spoken inflection — influenced by Brazilian bossa nova, folk and romantic crooners past — have made her one of the most immediately recognizable figures in jazz. She won the Thelonious Monk International Jazz Competition in the mid-2000s, then put out a run of acclaimed releases, but Parlato has not made a new album under her name in years. Maybe that will soon change: Here she will debut a work commissioned by the Jazz Gallery titled “The Stars or Space Between.” Camila Meza will join in on guitar, Chris Morrissey on bass and Mark Guiliana on drums.
