Readers assess Nancy Pelosi’s decision not to send the articles of impeachment to the Senate right away.
I think putting off sending the impeachment to the Senate is a brilliant move by Nancy Pelosi. To allow the articles of impeachment to go to trial when the outcome is preordained would make a mockery of the impeachment process and offer an opportunity for President Trump to claim exoneration.
I would favor leaving the outcome of his impeachment in limbo indefinitely and letting the voters decide his fate in the 2020 presidential election.
Why exactly does Nancy Pelosi think she’s entitled to dictate terms to the Senate? The Constitution says the House has the sole power to impeach, and the Senate the sole power to hold a trial. Ms. Pelosi, Adam Schiff, etc. didn’t seek consultation or permission from Mitch McConnell for their proceedings, including the star chamber tactics of anonymous accusations and secret evidence!
Now she is holding off on sending the articles of impeachment to the Senate. If this “impeachment” does not mean a trial in the Senate can commence, how is it impeachment? Some of the questions raised by Ms. Pelosi and the Democrats are manipulative games for political advantage.
The latest delay tactic by the Democrats is distressing because I think it plays into the hands of the Republicans and gives them a platform to argue that the Democrats are afraid to pull the Senate trial trigger because the articles of impeachment are weak.
Donald J. Trump is, of course, the subject of the upcoming Senate impeachment trial — but the essence of the impeachment is not the president but our country itself.
Mitch McConnell described the House hearings as “rushed and rigged.” Anyone who watched them knows that was not the case. But partisanship prevails. Those who support Donald Trump watch certain TV stations, listen to their chosen broadcasters, and read publications that reflect their viewpoints. Those who oppose the president make very different choices, and never the twain shall meet.
The Senate trial must not be “rushed and rigged.” It must be a fair trial. Chief Justice John Roberts must ensure that the process is comprehensive and just. Witnesses must be mandated to testify under oath and previously withheld documents must be submitted. Senators, regardless of party, must judge the evidence as individuals of conscience — not as Republicans or Democrats.
“Can the Senate hold a fair trial?” The answer must be “Yes.” Senators, you hold in your hands the future of this country.
The courageous editorial in Christianity Today calling for the removal of President Trump is a small fissure in his important evangelical bloc of support. That bloc has been holding its nose over the obvious amorality of Mr. Trump as the price of gaining conservative judges who support positions they favor. When they realize that if Mr. Trump is convicted, they will still have Mike Pence in place to continue judge appointments, their fervor in support of the epitome of moral turpitude may wane, and they may urge their senators to at least allow witnesses to corroborate the claimed innocence of Mr. Trump.
I have now, in sadness, witnessed my third impeachment proceeding against a president of the United States, and I commend Speaker Nancy Pelosi for the way she handled the process with strength, courage, grace and integrity. Not only is Ms. Pelosi the highest-ranking woman in Washington and the second in line to the presidency, she has become the most powerful woman in the world. Brava, Madam Speaker, brava.
