New York City Ballet invited 4,500 students to see the show. We hung out with third graders from Girls Prep Bronx and talked ballet.
The red velvet seats at the David H. Koch Theater were quickly filling up — not with the usual ballet audience, but with squirming, shrieking and giggling elementary school students.
On a Tuesday morning in December, the day after the first snow of the season, a couple thousand students spilled out from school buses and marched single file into the theater, where the New York City Ballet would perform “George Balanchine’s The Nutcracker” just for them.
Sitting in the front row of the orchestra’s center section, their feet dangling above the floor, third graders from Girls Prep Bronx Elementary School, a charter school, discussed which parts of “The Nutcracker” they were most excited to see come to life onstage.
“To see how the tree grows and how the Nutcracker gets bigger and how the mouses move,” said Yerelyn Arana, 9, who brought her hands up to her chin to imitate a mouse’s paws.
“When Fritz throws the Nutcracker and spins it around and breaks it,” another girl said.
“When the Sugarplum Fairy comes out!” another said.
The students from Girls Prep already knew plenty about the ballet, having been introduced to the characters and story as part of the Nutcracker Project, an in-school curriculum that City Ballet offers each year to about 100 classrooms in more than 20 public schools, many of which have a shortage of arts programming. The program, which celebrated its 40th anniversary this year, dispatches dance teachers to run workshops in which students learn basic ballet technique, collaborate on writing a poem inspired by “The Nutcracker” and experiment with their own choreography.
At the Tuesday matinee, City Ballet performed for an unusually responsive audience. The students laughed raucously when the Mouse King toppled to the floor (“like a dead cockroach,” one later said). There were oohs and aahs of recognition when the first notes of “Dance of the Sugarplum Fairy” rang through the theater. And when the Christmas tree grew, more than tripling in size, one audience member wondered aloud if it was flying.
After their warm-up, the students sat cross-legged on the stage of their school auditorium in the southeast Bronx to discuss the show they had seen the previous day. They loved, they said, the vibrant dancing sweets and Mother Ginger’s absurdly wide skirt. But the part of the show that captivated these 8- and 9-year-olds the most was entirely unplanned: One of the young dancers, dressed as an angel in a long white dress and a golden halo, tripped on her skirt and fell onstage.
The next week, after the sixth and final session of the workshop, the third graders would perform movement they learned in the workshop for their schoolmates and family members. The dance included ballet basics, as well as choreography of their own design, like back bridges and diva poses.
