From articles on climate change to a review of a Brooklyn institution, the most popular stories this year were ones that prompted reader discussion.
The Impossible Burger replicates the beefy look and taste of a traditional hamburger.Credit...Con Poulos for The New York Times. Food Stylist: Simon Andrews.
Julia Moskin, Melissa Clark and Pete Wells try the new fake meats.
The Impossible Burger bested the competition in a blind tasting of six national brands. The taste test replicated the experience of a home cook: Each burger was seared in canola oil and served in a potato bun.
And she shares her opinions on pumpkin pie and canned cranberry sauce.
Our columnist pulled out all the stops for this nine-course dinner cooked in the kitchen of her Brooklyn apartment. Procrastinators, take note: Nothing gets done more than three days before the holiday in Ms. Roman’s house.
This is for the millions of people that struggle trying to prepare a traditional Thanksgiving dinner, for family and friends, helping them fight their way through logistical limitations. I really think that this is a great, inspiring piece for many of the readers. Mark Somerville, Mass.
In this collaboration between the Food and Climate desks, our reporters looked at the steps consumers can take with our food choices to combat climate change. Beef, lamb and cheese have a significantly bigger climate footprint than plant-based foods.
As a vegetarian, I had no idea that some cheeses have a higher environmental impact than pork and poultry! Now that I know, I’ll have less cheese. Farnaz, Orange County, Calif.
Sam Sifton collects his favorite no-recipe recipes.
See all the no-recipe recipes.
Melissa Clark meets the former vegans and vegetarians who now sell meat.
They became butchers with the aim of revolutionizing the food system in America. Their shops, across the nation, sell meat from ethically raised animals.
For our weeknight cooking issue, 18 families on six continents opened their homes to The Times to show us how they cook and eat on a typical weeknight.
J. Kenji López-Alt tests his way to the best egg: perfectly peelable and tender throughout.
There needs to be a German word that expresses the satisfaction and the delight one experiences after a perfectly peeled egg. Seth Sadis, Ann Arbor, Mich.
The drinks writer Rebekah Peppler with a hot take on a popular summer cocktail.
Mr. López-Alt on the wonder that is mayonnaise.
Sous-vide enthusiasts have known that adding some mayo to meat before searing improves the browning. But put that mayo in your meat marinade, and you’ll have a better sear in less time, with more marinade flavor sticking to the meat. Don’t knock it till you try it.
Julia Moskin on a very messy restaurant divorce.
In March, more than a year after reports that Mario Batali sexually assaulted and harassed women, the celebrity chef was bought out by his partners at the Batali & Bastianich Hospitality Group. In May, Mr. Batali pleaded not guilty to charges that he groped a woman in a bar in Boston.
John Eligon on how black America has reacted to the popular sandwich.
The clamor for the sandwich led to very long lines. Our national correspondent reported that many African-Americans say Popeyes fried chicken reminds them of home cooking.
“It tastes like Louisiana. Louisiana is a melting pot of cultures and that is what this tastes like. I am glad that the rest of the country is seeing what the food in nearly every family is like, whether white, black or a combination of the two. … We don’t use food to divide us, in Louisiana, it unites us.” Mark, Baton Rouge, La.
1. Peter Luger Used to Sizzle. Now It Sputters.
Pete Wells gives a New York institution a zero-star review.
Peter Luger Steak House in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, is known for its porterhouses, its curt wait staff and its sizable bills. Our restaurant critic found it has fallen in recent years. “After I’ve paid, there is the unshakable sense that I’ve been scammed,” he wrote. More than 2,000 readers chimed in.
I didn’t see this piece as a takedown but as a lament. A friend on Facebook slammed the review simply because Peter Luger is “an institution.” But institutions often rest on their laurels, get complacent, and take their reputation for granted. Sounds like this may have happened here. Wells wasn’t vague in his criticisms. He pointed to specific ways in which the quality of the food had declined, observed in multiple visits: uneven cooking, cold potatoes, the flavor of the meat. There was a note of sadness in this article that it looked like Peter Luger was past its prime. MsC, Weehawken, N.J.