He told a judge that he “sold his soul” in working as President Trump’s lawyer.
Mr. Cohen, the disgraced former lawyer and fixer for President Trump, made the comments in a letter to a federal judge on Wednesday in which he portrayed himself as a broken man and asked the court to allow him to serve the remainder of his sentence in home confinement.
Mr. Cohen, 53, began serving his sentence in May and is in a minimum-security camp at the Federal Correctional Institution in Otisville, N.Y., about 75 miles northwest of New York City.
Mr. Cohen’s lawyers supplemented his request to the judge, William H. Pauley III of Federal District Court, with strongly written attacks on Attorney General William P. Barr and the United States Attorney's Office for the Southern District of New York, which prosecuted Mr. Cohen.
Mr. Adler offered no evidence to support his claim about the prosecution’s motives.
Mr. Cohen’s lawyers also asked Judge Pauley to order a hearing “to explore, evaluate and quantify the cooperation” that they say Mr. Cohen has provided to the government.
A Southern District spokesman declined to comment on Wednesday; the office is expected to respond to Mr. Cohen’s motion in a court filing. A representative for Mr. Barr also declined to comment. The White House did not immediately respond to an email requesting comment.
Mr. Cohen had pleaded guilty to campaign finance violations, tax evasion and other crimes in connection with a scheme to pay hush money to buy the silence of two women who said they had affairs with Mr. Trump. The president has denied the affairs.
The Southern District, in a court filing in July, said it was unlikely it would file additional charges in the hush-money investigation and that it had “effectively concluded” the inquiry.
In their motion on Wednesday, Mr. Cohen’s lawyers said Mr. Cohen had been a model prisoner and could ordinarily be expected to serve about one more year in prison before he would be transferred to a halfway house or other form of community confinement.
But they said they had not provided him with a formal cooperation deal because he “specifically declined to be debriefed on other uncharged criminal conduct, if any, in his past.” He had also “declined to meet with the office about other areas of investigative interest,” they said.
In his request to the judge on Wednesday, Mr. Cohen listed cooperation he had provided to offices like the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, and, more recently, congressional committees.
Defendants can seek reduced sentences based on new information they provide to the government after they are sentenced.
Mr. Cohen’s lawyers said in the court filing that they had met and spoken by phone with Southern District prosecutors repeatedly this year, to explore how Mr. Cohen might cooperate and earn the office’s support for a post-sentencing reduction.
They said Mr. Cohen was offering “valuable information” about alleged misconduct related to Mr. Trump and the Trump Organization. The prosecutors ultimately rejected their proposal, they said.