If only Daisy Dunn’s book had been around back when I was an aspiring classicist. There were actually two Roman writers named Pliny — the Elder and the Younger, as they were known; an uncle and his nephew — and I could never keep them straight, let alone understand why they were worth studying. Dunn makes a persuasive case for both. Her ostensible subject is the Younger, about whom more is known, but she toggles back and forth between the two, and, perhaps without her intending it, the uncle even steals the show for a while. How do you compete with someone so intrepid that he dies while trying to inspect an active volcano?
Pliny the Elder, born around A.D. 24, was a polymath, the sort of person who rarely slept and could never sit still. He was a naturalist and a philosopher, a soldier and an admiral, and a tireless writer, who turned out close to 100 books. Of these, only one survives, “Natural History,” a 37-volume encyclopedia that purported to contain all that was then known about the world. It’s from this magpie-like collection of facts that we get the notion of information “in a nutshell” (Pliny had heard of a complete manuscript of the “Iliad” that could fit in one) and the idea that elephants are afraid of mice. (Like a lot of Romans, he was fascinated by elephants, and thought that of all animals they were the most like humans in sensibility.) “Natural History” also talks about headless people with eyes in their chests and dog-headed people who communicate by barking. And you learn from it that blood from a lamb’s testicles is a good deodorant, ground millipedes heal ulcers, and mouse poop cures baldness.
It was his insatiable curiosity that got him killed. When Mount Vesuvius erupted in A.D. 79, he and his 17-year-old nephew were at Misenum, about 30 miles away, where the elder Pliny was in charge of the imperial fleet. Fascinated by a strange cloud that had suddenly appeared on the horizon, he decided to sail closer and investigate, but what began as a scientific expedition quickly turned into a rescue mission. He put in at a port called Stabiae, hoping to reassure the panicky townspeople, and eventually perished, suffocated by falling ash and pumice, while trying to pretend there was nothing to worry about.
We know all this because the nephew wrote about the eruption and its aftermath some 30 years later in a pair of letters to the great Roman historian Tacitus. These letters are often anthologized, and rightly so: They’re vivid, suspenseful and filled with poignant detail about the suffering of the survivors. The younger Pliny lived to write them because, characteristically, he had his nose in a book and declined to join his uncle’s expedition. Pliny the Elder was bold and imaginative. The Younger, as even Dunn admits, was a plodder and a bit of a pedant. He prospered as a lawyer, winning his cases not with eloquence, as Cicero did, but with sheer doggedness, piling up details and wearing down his opponents by speaking for hours on end. He yearned to be a love poet on the order of Catullus (about whom Dunn has written a very good book), but had neither the talent nor the courage to reveal his eroticism so nakedly. His literary reputation rests mostly on his letters, 247 of which survive. (The less said about his “Panegyricus,” an endless speech sucking up to the Emperor Trajan, the better.) Pliny claimed to have taken no care in collecting and arranging these letters, but he almost certainly polished and tweaked them after the fact to make himself look good for posterity. As a result, they’re sometimes a little stuffy, with none of the spontaneity and depth of feeling in Cicero’s letters, which were often dashed off right in the thick of things. But Pliny’s letters nevertheless provide a valuable, in-depth look at Roman life in the late first and early second centuries, when the empire was at its height but also in the throes of political instability and succession crises. Many of the letters are to Trajan himself, and the most arresting ones deal with the problem of what to do about Christianity. Appointed imperial legate to Bithynia, in what is now northern Turkey, Pliny was taken aback by how many Christians were there and decided to round them all up, relying on secret informers, and eradicate them or make them recant. The emperor counseled moderation — punishment maybe, but no informers, no roundups — in part, it seems, because he wasn’t exactly sure what Christians were guilty of.
Except for his time as legate, and for an ongoing feud with a notorious scoundrel named Regulus, the younger Pliny did not lead an especially eventful life. He wasn’t a war hero, like his uncle; he didn’t have a love life like Catullus’ or a significant political career like Cicero’s. He mostly divided his time between the courts and tending to his many estates, and worked his way up the senatorial ranks by keeping his head down. Dunn gets around this by arranging her biography not chronologically but thematically, in sections corresponding to the Roman year.
This occasionally results in awkward transitions of the “Oh, and that reminds me” sort, and for some out-of-nowhere digressions of a kind that would have pleased the elder Pliny. We learn, for example, in a passage about the Vesuvius eruption, that the Renaissance scholar Francis Bacon died not long after stuffing a disemboweled hen with snow. But Dunn is a good writer, with some of the easy erudition of Mary Beard, that great popularizer of Roman history, and her translations from both Plinys are graceful and precise. Ultimately her enthusiasm, together with her eye for the odd, surprising detail, wins you over, and the younger Pliny gradually emerges as a mostly sympathetic character, interesting for his ordinariness and for the ways he resembles us today. He almost seems familiar, in a way the elder Pliny could never be. He was house-proud, for example, forever embarking on renovation projects. He fussed over his finances, keeping close tabs on his harvests of grapes and grain, which supplied most of his wealth. As Dunn points out, he was a detail man, not a big thinker like his uncle. But he was also decent and generous, secretly aiding those persecuted by the tyrannical Emperor Domitian and giving away a lot of money for education in his hometown of Comum. He was — by Roman standards, anyway — an exceptionally loving and attentive husband to his second wife, Calpurnia.
Even Pliny’s failures are sort of endearing. He was obsessed with his mortality and desperate to leave behind some great work like his uncle’s. But he couldn’t decide what it should be and, even if he knew what he wanted, was fearful of never completing it. “Those who live from day to day immersed in pleasures see their reasons for living completed every day,” he wrote, “whereas those who think of posterity and prolong the period for which they will be remembered through their work, for them death is always sudden since it interrupts something before it’s finished.” So he dithered and procrastinated, enjoying some of those day-to-day pleasures, but probably not enough to make him truly happy.