Crosswords & Games|A-O.K.
Julian Lim returns to the fold at full strength.
SATURDAY PUZZLE — Today’s strongly geometric grid is from Julian Lim, a constructor who was prolific in The Times in the earlier 2010s. This puzzle has an average word count for a Saturday (68), but the arrangement of entries is really interesting, with the two cutoff corners and the two crosses.
The solve is solidly Saturday and quirky to boot, seeming to require a subtle adjustment in my internal dictionary to conjure up alternative definitions for some very straightforward clues. Gotta stretch those lexicographical legs sometimes, right?
1A: This unsavory guy popped up a bunch of times in the grid earlier this century. He’s been dead for more than 20 years, and I would never have figured him out, given this vague clue, without plenty of crosses. On the other hand, JOE CAMEL makes for an interesting top entry on a stack of Middle-East-centric entries, above SULTANATE and SANDALWOOD (a much nicer fragrance than cigarette smoke, also interestingly near CLOVE).
28A: This is an example of one of those entries that I thought meant something different. Am I conflating “hot to trot” with this entry, HOTSY TOTSY? I never would have pegged it to mean “all right, just fine,” let alone “comfortably stable or secure” (according to Merriam-Webster). This is on me, not Mr. Lim; this entry debuted in 1976, clued as “Swell!” and has never had a racy connotation in the puzzle, so I don’t know — hey, wait! According to the Cambridge Dictionary, this term means “very sexually attractive.” Its origin is a cartoonist, Billy DeBeck, who coined the term in the cartoon “Barney Google,” which, in turn, is apparently the origin of the coining of Google. Not to go off on a tangent. I plan to expand my definition of HOTSY TOTSY to apply to most situations in the coming decade — feel free to do the same.
42A: Did you know that there are no animals that currently gather into a group known officially as a squad? I mean, we have parliaments, obstinacies, caravans and destructions; there is a petition to rename a “shoal” of squids to a “squad,” but it’s not making many waves. But that has nothing to do with this entry, SQUAD GOALS, unless that petition was created by squids (dubious). This term is one of those “hashtags!” that you have to say aloud in a very MTV VJ voice while making air quotes, but there have been virtual reams written about various usages. It really just turns out to be a modern expression for that primal longing for community that must be satisfied to attain true human happiness and societal wellness. #SQUADGOALS.
53A: If you’re perspicacious enough to have followed him for years, this entry referring to the multilingual brilliance of TREVOR NOAH won’t be a challenge. I didn’t know! On the record, he speaks English, Xhosa, Zulu, Sotho, Tswana, Tsonga, Afrikaans and German; there are plenty of clips of him bantering with people in other tongues as well, though. He seems to be one of those really unique people who’s like a great multipurpose athlete, for whom languages are sports. He does amazing accents too, unsurprisingly.
11D: This entry and its neighbor at 12D were off-kilter in my mind’s glossary. “Really fancy” would indicate either a verb, like “adore,” or an adjective, like “showy”; the entry here, CRAVE, makes me think of a slightly different type of desire, but it works. Similarly, “Bewitched” makes me think of lovely enchantments, rather than someone being HEXED by darker magic.
43D: In this corner, QUORA is the question-and-answer site referred to here. I believe it’s a well-known thing online, but it makes its debut in the puzzle today and might be new to some people. Next to it is UCONN, which was subjected to the oddest clue of the day (I think).
Is this the last straw?
