In its sixth year on Broadway, “The Illusionists” serves up familiar routines, but two smaller shows deliver egghead charm and brainy sleight-of-hand.
When you consider the Twitter bots, the Facebook ads, the phishing expeditions, the password hacks, the phone scams and the deepfakes, we are a nation of dupes. At least, at a magic show, we can possibly enjoy it. We can even abet it.
Magic shows proliferate around the holiday season, maybe because the whole notion of a holiday season that needs celebrating is one more con. Since 2014, each winter has brought a new iteration of “The Illusionists” to Broadway. A glitzy act with a rotating cast, the company has managed one lovely show, 2016’s “The Illusionists: Turn of the Century,” and several silly ones.
This year’s entry, “The Illusionists: Magic of the Holidays,” at the Neil Simon Theater, has a few nifty tricks. Mostly it’s as festive as a sprained ankle. Still, the child behind me, who rustled candy wrappers and walloped my chair throughout, seemed to enjoy herself.
Hosted by Paul Dabek, an English magician who wears jaunty plaids and tells groaner jokes, “The Illusionists” uses haze effects, loud music and lurid light cues to pep up familiar routines and some that haven’t scaled up for Broadway, like Eric Chien’s card and coin magic. Chien, a Taiwanese magician, has an original and elegant close-up technique. If you sit in the balcony and bring binoculars, you can see him do it live. Otherwise, you’ll have to watch it on the screen above.
Kevin James, the lone American, performs two of his tricks in a pornified version of Santa’s workshop. Each involves him dismembering an assistant. Other routines involve children.
Dom Chambers, an Australian magician, makes beers appear out of thin air, a very Australian thing to do. Invite him to your holiday party. Enzo Weyne can teleport a light bulb, which seems less helpful, but he is French and darkly handsome, so invite him, too.
Chris Cox, an antic English mentalist who resembles a hyperactive Harry Potter, knows what you’re thinking. If you have seen “Derren Brown: Secret,” particularly the bit with the envelopes, you will know what Cox is thinking, too. Despite a few odd flourishes toward the end — Cox in a body suit, Dabek making shadow puppets dance to Sinatra, a minor blizzard — I wasn’t sorry when it was time to make like Weyne’s bulb and vanish.
Curated by Todd Robbins, a gentlemanly carnival huckster who sips candle wax as a digestif, and co-hosted by a femme fatale in a trim suit (Whitney Sprayberry, who bills herself as Jack McKittrick), “Speakeasy Magick” is, as Jack puts it, an evening of “lying, cheating, stealing and drinking.” At each performance, as patrons sip expensive cocktails, many of them purple, prestidigitators rove from table to table, performing close-up routines.
Robbins calls it magic speed-dating: “Someone is going to sit down and lie to you for 15 minutes. You’ll never see them again.” Rings disappear, coins reappear, cards find their way into wallets and fruit and under watches. Miracles abound.
If you’re very lucky, Boyce, a classically trained actor who looks like a sophisticated preteen, will return to the stage with a jazzy dove act set to “Fly Me to the Moon.” His feathered co-stars: Uno, Airplane, Jake, Cameron and Bebe.
Shared bewilderment, it turns out, can really bring a room together. I’ve seen the show twice now. Each time, tables that began as discrete pairs and trios ended as friends, walking out together into the night — poorer, depending on how many drinks they downed, but giddier, and more mystified.
Prefer the kinds of mysteries you can explain without recourse to Reddit boards? Try David Kwong’s “The Enigmatist,” at the High Line Hotel. An evening of tricks and brainteasers, it’s like a spin class for the frontal lobe, with drinks available.
Generously, he wants us to feel smart, too. To enter the performance, you first have to solve four puzzles distributed throughout the anteroom. (There are hints available.) Inside, Kwong, dapper in a pigeon-grey suit, unveils the strange history of the research facility Riverbank Laboratories. Google away: It’s real. As framing devices go, Riverbank isn’t especially necessary — Kwong’s egghead charm is ample and sufficient. But cryptography fans will dig it.
Throughout the evening, Kwong sets puzzles for the audience, interspersing them with more traditional tricks, like one involving an audience member’s phone number and a Boggle set that was unbearably good. Full chicanery!
By the time he had finished, the room, which sat 90 or so, was loopy with delight. Maybe that was just the brain fatigue talking, or maybe it was the pleasure that comes from being bamboozled. Either way, I saw several people, my date included, hug Kwong on the way out.
“Every magic trick has an explanation,” he had told us. “Every puzzle has a solution. There’s no magic in magic.” Could have fooled us.
Through Jan. 11, 2020 at the High Line Hotel, Manhattan; enigmatistshow.com. Running time: 1 hour 30 minutes.
Through Jan. 11, 2020 at the McKittrick Hotel, Manhattan; mckittrickhotel.com. Running time: 2 hours.
Through Jan. 5, 2020 at the Neil Simon Theater, Manhattan; theillusionistslive.com. Running time: 2 hours.