The Senate Democratic leader wants to seek testimony from Mick Mulvaney, John Bolton and other White House officials, and subpoena documents the White House has withheld.
WASHINGTON — As the House prepared to make President Trump only the third president in American history to be impeached, the Senate’s top Democrat on Sunday laid out a detailed proposal for a Senate trial “in which all of the facts can be considered fully and fairly” — including subpoenas for documents the White House has withheld and witnesses it has prevented from testifying.
Senator Chuck Schumer, the Democratic leader, presented the proposal in a letter to his Republican counterpart, Senator Mitch McConnell, in an opening move to force Republicans to negotiate over the shape and scope of the proceedings. Mr. McConnell had said last week that he was “taking my cues” from the White House, prompting Democrats to accuse him of abandoning his duty to render “impartial justice” in the trial.
In the letter, Mr. Schumer proposed a trial beginning Jan. 7 that would give each side a fixed amount of time to present its case, and called for four top White House officials who have not previously testified — including Mick Mulvaney, Mr. Trump’s acting chief of staff, and John R. Bolton, the president’s former national security adviser — to appear as witnesses.
“Senate Democrats believe strongly, and I trust Senate Republicans agree, that this trial must be one that is fair, that considers all of the relevant facts, and that exercises the Senate’s ‘sole power of impeachment’ under the Constitution with integrity and dignity,” Mr. Schumer wrote.
The Senate’s top Democrat laid out his proposal for President Trump’s impeachment trial.
Mr. McConnell, of Kentucky, has voiced support for a short trial, even though Mr. Trump has privately pushed for a longer process that would allow him and his allies to mount an aggressive defense against what he has repeatedly called “a hoax” being perpetrated on the American people.
Mr. McConnell met on Thursday with Pat A. Cipollone, the White House counsel, to lay the groundwork for the proceedings, though no agreement has been reached. In comments on Fox News after the meeting, Mr. McConnell said that he would be working closely with Mr. Cipollone as the trial moved forward.
Those comments prompted outrage among Democrats, including Mr. Schumer, who said that Republicans were not preparing for a fair trial in which the senators — who will eventually render a judgment on Mr. Trump’s actions — remain open-minded about the outcome.
Some demanded that Mr. McConnell recuse himself.
“The moment Senator McConnell takes the oath of impartiality required by the Constitution, he will be in violation of that oath,” Representative Val B. Demings, Democrat of Florida, said on Friday.
A spokesman for Mr. McConnell said the majority leader also planned to meet with Mr. Schumer in the days ahead.
There are effectively two paths Mr. McConnell can take in setting the parameters of the trial: He can strike an agreement with Mr. Schumer, or he can push through a resolution so long as he has the votes of 51 senators. But with just 53 Republicans in the Senate, Mr. McConnell has a narrow margin; he can only afford two defections.
Mr. McConnell has yet to reach out directly to Mr. Schumer. However, on Twitter over the weekend, Senator John Cornyn of Texas, who until this year was the Senate’s No. 2 Republican, said he was certain Mr. McConnell would work with the Democratic leader.
In trying to force Mr. McConnell to the negotiating table, Mr. Schumer is betting that centrist and independent-minded Republicans like Senators Susan Collins of Maine, who is facing a tough race for re-election in 2020, and Lisa Murkowski of Alaska will not go along with a trial devised solely by Mr. McConnell and Mr. Trump.
The debate over the shape of the trial came as House Democrats barreled ahead with their plan to hold a vote to impeach the president on two charges: abuse of the powers of his office and obstruction of Congress. A vote is likely on Wednesday.
The vote will be a tough one for moderate House Democrats, especially the so-called front-liners in Trump-friendly districts who flipped Republican seats in 2018. One of those front-liners, Representative Jeff Van Drew of New Jersey, told aides over the weekend that he intends to become a Republican next week. Others were starting to announce their plans.
Representative Collin C. Peterson of Minnesota — who was the only Democrat, other than Mr. Van Drew, to vote against formalizing an impeachment inquiry — announced Saturday that he would most likely vote against impeachment. Representatives Jason Crow, Democrat of Colorado, and Antonio Delgado, Democrat of New York, said they would support impeachment.
At the same time, a group of more than two dozen freshman Democrats in the House is quietly lobbying for Representative Justin Amash of Michigan, an independent who left the Republican Party this year, to serve as one of the six or more impeachment managers to present the case against Mr. Trump during the Senate trial.
Mr. Amash has been an outspoken proponent of the president’s impeachment, and the freshman lawmakers believe his selection would be a sign of bipartisanship. The idea, which was first reported by The Washington Post, appeals to moderate Democrats from conservative-leaning districts where the president is popular who are wary of joining in a one-sided impeachment vote and looking for ways to show they pushed for a fair process.
“If he would be willing to do it, it would send all the right signals to have a principled constitutional conservative front and center in a process that is not supposed to be partisan,” said Representative Tom Malinowski, Democrat of New Jersey, who flipped a Republican seat and is facing a tough re-election race.
Speaker Nancy Pelosi will have the final say on who serves as managers, which are high-profile, coveted spots for Democratic lawmakers. A final decision is likely early this week, but Ms. Pelosi, who has kept tight control over the impeachment process so far, has given no indication that she would be willing to invite anyone but a loyalist to serve as the face of the House impeachment investigation.
A spokesman for Ms. Pelosi declined to comment about the possible selection of Mr. Amash as an impeachment manager. A person close to the impeachment inquiry said it would be highly unlikely that the speaker would risk appointing Mr. Amash when several of her own members are eager to be managers.
As party leaders looked ahead to a trial in the Senate, lawmakers of both parties took to the airwaves on Sunday.
Two Republican senators said they had already decided they would vote to acquit Mr. Trump. Senator Ted Cruz, Republican of Texas, predicted that the president would be cleared of the charges against him in the Senate, a view widely shared among members of both parties.
Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, said he hoped the Republican-led Senate would conduct a short impeachment trial that could be over quickly, without calling numerous witnesses on both sides.
Representative Adam B. Schiff of California, the Democratic chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, on Sunday condemned Mr. McConnell and others for seeking to conduct a trial without demanding testimony and documents that the White House refused to provide to House investigators.
Senator Chris Coons, Democrat of Delaware, said that if the Senate proceeding was “dismissed on the first day, obviously that’s not a full and fair trial.” And he said he was worried about what the president would do if he was not removed from office.
Republicans defended Mr. Trump, insisting that after a nearly three-month investigation, Democrats had failed to prove that the president committed a crime. Representative Will Hurd, a Texas Republican who has criticized the president’s behavior in the Ukraine matter, nonetheless said he would vote against impeaching him.
