Although an inquiry into Michigan State University’s handling of the sexual abuse scandal has stalled over records and other evidence, the attorney general’s office said it had not been suspended.
A yearslong criminal investigation that ensnared Michigan State University’s former president over her role in the Larry Nassar sexual abuse scandal, as well as a onetime dean and an ex-gymnastics coach, is at an impasse as prosecutors and the university clash over the release of documents, the state attorney general said on Wednesday.
The status of the inquiry had been thrown into confusion after an announcement a day earlier that it had been suspended.
The spokeswoman for the attorney general’s office also told The Associated Press on Tuesday that prosecutors wanted to interview the university’s former interim president, John M. Engler, who has not been charged.
It was not clear how the investigation, which began in 2016 under Ms. Nessel’s predecessor, Bill Schuette, might proceed or whether there had been a formal request for the documents.
A Michigan State spokeswoman, Emily Guerrant, said in a statement on Tuesday that the university, in East Lansing, had complied with numerous investigations.
Ms. Guerrant said in an email that the university would maintain its lawyer-client privilege with respect to the documents, which she noted were reviewed by a third-party judge to determine relevant facts to the Nassar case that were then turned over to the attorney general.
Michigan State’s handling of sexual abuse complaints against Mr. Nassar, the longtime team doctor for the Spartans gymnastics team and for U.S.A. Gymnastics, drew scrutiny from the state attorney general’s office, as well as federal authorities.
Mr. Nassar, 56, is serving several life sentences in prison for sexually abusing scores of women under the guise that he was administering medical treatment to them. The scandal rocked the Olympic movement and Michigan State, costing the state’s largest university hundreds of millions of dollars in settlements and fines.
As a result of the attorney general’s investigation, three prominent former university employees have been charged for what prosecutors say was their role in the scandal, including Lou Anna K. Simon, the school’s onetime president. She is awaiting trial on charges that she lied to the police about her knowledge of the abuse committed by Mr. Nassar.
In August, a Michigan judge sentenced William D. Strampel, the former dean of the College of Osteopathic Medicine at Michigan State and Mr. Nassar’s former boss, to a year in prison for misconduct in office and willful neglect in the scandal.
Investigators also charged Kathie Klages, a former gymnastics coach at the university, with lying to investigators.
