In his traditional holiday benediction, Francis renewed his call to resolve conflicts and to help those who have fled them.
ROME — As Christians around the world celebrated Christmas, Pope Francis called on Wednesday for a softening of “stony and self-centered hearts,” once again directing the world’s attention to the plight of migrants and people living in areas plagued by conflict, social and political upheaval, injustice, or natural disasters.
Making his annual Christmas speech, Francis lamented the miseries of several trouble spots, urging the rest of the world to take responsibility for healing those places and to embrace the refugees who leave them. It has been one of the most powerful and consistent messages of his papacy, at a time when many nations have shown little interest in resolving foreign conflicts or taking in migrants and have often blamed newcomers for economic and social ills.
Francis spoke after military marching bands had played the Vatican and the Italian national hymns. “Brothers and sisters, Merry Christmas,” he began, to cheers.
Warm applause greeted his address, and the pope then blessed the thousands in the square, and the thousands more who packed the broad avenue that leads to the basilica. “Hurray for the pope,” rose a cheer from the square.
Earlier Wednesday, Francis was one of three religious leaders who appealed directly to the leaders of South Sudan to end the violence there and form a transitional power-sharing government. Peace talks between the government and rebels stalled this week.
At a Christmas Eve Mass in St. Peter’s, Francis spoke of God’s unconditional love.
 Whether he had in mind priests who have sexually abused children was not clear, but his message might not be welcomed by victims and other critics who say the church has been far too forgiving of those priests and the prelates who have protected them.
Over the past year, Francis has strengthened the church’s stance in fighting the scourge of sexual abuse, convening a meeting in February of bishops from around the world to address the issue.
In May, the Vatican mandated that those suspected of abuse be reported to their superiors. This month, it removed the high level of secrecy applied to such cases, which was often cited as a reason not to cooperate with the secular authorities, and which critics said had helped conceal the problem and let it fester in the church.
Anna Momigliano reported from Rome, and Elisabetta Povoledo from Verbania, Italy.