‘CAPE FEAR’ at Film Forum (through Dec. 24). This isn’t Martin Scorsese’s 1991 remake, but the 1962 original, directed by J. Lee Thompson and starring Robert Mitchum at his most coolly menacing as Max Cady, a released convict who terrorizes a lawyer (Gregory Peck) and the lawyer’s family while shrewdly skirting arrest. The Scorsese version added ambiguities that aren’t present here, but the original is chilling in its own right, and Bernard Herrmann’s score, used in both films, remains one of the composer’s greatest.
CURATORS’ CHOICE 2019 at the Museum of the Moving Image (Dec. 20-Jan. 12). Quentin Tarantino’s “Once Upon a Time … in Hollywood” reimagined 1969. This museum’s series — which includes seven screenings of the Tarantino film from Friday through Dec. 29 — in essence reimagines 2019, providing a showcase for many of the best-loved films of the year while offering a second chance to catch potentially overlooked titles like Roberto Minervini’s “What You Gonna Do When the World’s on Fire?” (on Friday) and Bi Gan’s “Long Day’s Journey Into Night” (on Dec. 29). Minervini’s film presents an impressionistic portrait of life in New Orleans; Bi’s dreamlike feature, partly in 3-D, demands to be seen in a theater.
A FACE IN THE CROWD: REMEMBERING LEE REMICK at the Quad Cinema (Dec. 20-26). The theater celebrates Remick (1935-91), who received an Oscar nomination for her performance in “Days of Wine and Roses” (on Friday and Dec. 25) as a teetotaler who descends into alcoholism, lured by the public relations man (Jack Lemmon) she loves, who is already in the depths of the condition. Remick is also at the center of “Anatomy of a Murder” (on Sunday and Monday), Otto Preminger’s epic trial film from 1959, playing a woman whose husband (Ben Gazzara) stands accused of a murder that he apparently committed after she told him she was raped.
THE FILMS OF STUDIO GHIBLI at IFC Center (Dec. 20-Jan. 16). The celebrated Japanese animation house that gave us classics by Isao Takahata (best known for “Grave of the Fireflies,” on Jan. 6, 12 and 13) and Hayao Miyazaki (“My Neighbor Totoro” and “Princess Mononoke,” among others; both will screen many times from Dec. 20 through mid-January) gets an in-depth retrospective. Showings starting at 6 p.m. or later in the evening will be of Japanese-language versions with English subtitles. Most matinee screenings will be of English-dubbed versions.
SILENT MOVIE DAY at the Museum of Modern Art (Dec. 20, 10 a.m.). Walk and in out of this full day of silent shorts, a grab bag filled with comedy, newsreels, animation, travelogues and plenty else besides. Screenings will start at 10 a.m. and conclude at 6:30 p.m. Four pianists will take turns providing the music in the accompanist’s equivalent of a relay event.
