A 1925 stone house in Philadelphia, a pueblo-style home in Santa Fe and a historic mansion near Lake Michigan.
This home is in the Chestnut Hill neighborhood, less than half a mile east of Wissahickon Valley Park, with its 57 miles of trails, and a short walk from Germantown Avenue, a cobblestone corridor lined with shops and restaurants. The nearest SEPTA station is a two-minute walk, and the train trip south to downtown Philadelphia takes less than 30 minutes.
Indoors: The original house was designed by the G.W. & W.D. Hewitt architecture firm, known for Philadelphia’s 1904 Bellevue-Stratford Hotel. In 2014, the interiors were overhauled by John S. Andrews Architects: The front entrance hall was opened up, the kitchen was moved and a family room, first-floor powder room and mudroom were created. Improvements also included new hardwood flooring, a new roof, all new wiring, a new high-efficiency natural gas heating system and an updated cooling system.
The elegant, high-ceilinged foyer leads through an interior colonnade to a dining room with a fireplace and walls covered in a silver-patterned chinoiserie paper designed by Meg Braff. French doors open to a sunroom that wraps around a corner of the house and connects to the long, covered front porch. Another door leads to the former galley kitchen, now a sitting room with grasscloth-covered walls, a built-in corner bookcase, a fireplace and French doors that open to the back terrace.
On the other side of the foyer is a living room with a bay window hung with custom silk draperies, gray walls with white picture-rail molding, a gas-burning fireplace and built-in bookshelves. Beyond it is the new eat-in chef’s kitchen, which has radiant-heated floors, a breakfast nook with an L-shaped banquette that seats 10, a wet bar and a marble-topped island that seats four and incorporates a wine refrigerator.
The new powder room has radiant-heated floors and Cole & Son botanical wallpaper. The rear mudroom includes open and closed storage areas; it leads to the backyard and to the detached two-car garage.
On the second floor is a master suite with sea-foam-green fabric wallcovering and a wood-burning fireplace. A walk-in closet is lined with custom shelving and includes an island. The master bathroom is surfaced in Porcelanosa porcelain tile and has a walk-in glass shower and a vanity with twin sinks. This floor also has two guest bedrooms with fireplaces, a new hall bathroom with a combined tub and shower, and a new laundry room.
An additional three bedrooms, including a guest suite, are on the third floor. A new hall bathroom has a walk-in glass shower.
Outdoor space: The property was recently improved with pebble patios, a row of trees, a fishpond with a fountain and outdoor lighting.
Katherine Stinson Otero (1891-1977), a stunt pilot who is credited with being the first woman skywriter and went on to practice as an architect in Santa Fe, designed this adobe home (or the original carriage house that was expanded into this home) after retiring from aviation in 1920. Part of a compound she designed in Plaza Chamisal — in a historic area that is a 10-minute walk south of the Santa Fe Plaza and even closer to the art galleries on Canyon Road to the east — it was remodeled in 2004 by Lloyd Martinez, a builder, working with Wayne Lloyd, an architect, and a number of local artisans. The furniture, including an outdoor patio table made of jade, is being sold with the property; the artworks will not remain.
Indoors: Wisteria vines frame the shaded entrance. The original Dutch front door opens to a foyer that steps down to a living room with plaster walls, viga beams and a kiva fireplace with a decorative plaster finish. The living room continues into a separate dining room with a brass-and-crystal chandelier. The new kitchen is the last in the sequence of rooms, up two steps, behind a plaster wall with a pass-through. It has a pine-cone fireplace, wood-paneled cabinets with stone-tile countertops and a mural painted around a back door leading to the garden.
Turning right from the foyer you find a large guest bedroom with knotty-pine finishes and furnishings and whipstitch detailing on one of the plaster walls. The en suite bathroom has russet-colored stucco walls and Mexican tile squares on the vanity top and in the combined tub and shower.
A staircase with risers inlaid with patterned mosaics ascends to the second level, where there are two bedroom suites. The master bedroom has a private outdoor balcony. The stone-tile-clad master bathroom includes a side-by-side soaking tub and shower in arched niches, as well as double sinks and a kiva fireplace.
Outdoor space: The property has adobe walls surrounding lush gardens and three outdoor entertainment zones. A heated, covered terrace runs alongside the house, next to an outdoor kitchen with a barbecue grill. There is also a fieldstone-paved terrace that the owners built in an adjacent lot they acquired; in that area is the jade dining table, under a pergola. Off-street parking is in front of the house, and to the side.
The owners bought this brick house steps from Lake Michigan in 1999 and undertook an extensive renovation that doubled its size. They added a wing to the west side, extended the back of the building and constructed a detached three-car garage with a one-bedroom apartment.
The property is in northeast Evanston, on Sheridan Road, a sinuous, tree-lined thoroughfare that takes you south to Chicago (the Loop is about a 40-minute drive). Shopping districts are about a mile southwest along Central Street, and in downtown Evanston, about a mile and a half south. The nearest public elementary school is three blocks away, and Northwestern University’s campus is less than a mile away. The home is very close to Lighthouse Beach.
Indoors: Terraced front steps take you to custom-made steel front door with circular windows that match the new porthole windows on the facade. The two-story foyer introduces the walnut-stained oak floors and traditional molding found throughout the home. The living room is to the left; it has the original marble fireplace with a carved mantel. Casement windows topped by half moons of glass line the walls and extend into an adjacent music room with new French doors leading to a side terrace.
A swinging door connects the living room to a 15-by-17-foot dining room. From there, you enter a butler’s pantry with marble-topped counters, a glass-mosaic-tile backsplash and stainless steel appliances, including a dishwasher, wine cooler and ice maker.
The kitchen that follows has the same finishes, as well as a custom zebrawood island, and occupies one end of a family room that is almost 19 by 26 feet. (A gas fireplace is at the other end.) Three sets of glass doors along one wall of this room open to an attached screened porch with bluestone flooring and skylights set into a wood ceiling. The owners also created a first-floor office in the addition, facing front, with a trio of arched windows.
There are four bedrooms on the second floor. The master suite takes up the entirety of the addition and includes a 388-square-foot bedroom with a wall of open cabinetry, a 181-square-foot closet fitted out with racks, cubbies and drawers and, between them, a bathroom with marble finishes, heated floors, a jetted tub and a steam shower. The three guest bedrooms have use of two hall bathrooms, and each has a walk-in closet.
A fifth bedroom and a bathroom with a marble shower are on the walkout lower level, which has radiant-heated floors throughout. This level also includes a rec room, a gym, a bonus room, a wine cellar and a combined laundry room and mudroom with slate floors and six large storage cubbies.
Outdoor space: A double-tiered deck reached from the family room includes a 700-square-foot upper level with an outdoor kitchen and a hot tub, and a 430-square-foot lower level. The vaulted garage apartment, which is rentable, has a bedroom, a full bathroom, an eat-in kitchen and a 615-square-foot bonus space currently used as an office.
