The Canadian broadcaster said it removed the cameo for the sake of time five years ago. President Trump, his son and some supporters suggested the omission was politically motivated.
Canadians were momentarily pondering that unlikely question over the Christmas holidays after the CBC broadcast the 1992 film without a cameo by Mr. Trump. In the scene, the character Kevin McCallister, played by Macaulay Culkin, asks Mr. Trump how to get to the lobby of New York’s ornate Plaza Hotel (which Mr. Trump owned at the time).
A few minutes later, Mr. Trump tweeted a different headline, reporting claims that the incident was an example of censorship.
But those Canadians worrying that the perceived slight had undermined relations with Canada’s most important ally felt relief on Thursday evening when Mr. Trump injected a note of humor to his commentary. “The movie will never be the same! (just kidding),” he wrote on Twitter.
On Friday, Mr. Trudeau’s office declined to comment on the incident.
The CBC, for its part, said the scene with Mr. Trump had been cut in 2014, before he declared his candidacy for president in 2015, and thus was not politically motivated.
Mr. Trudeau, a progressive known for his advocacy of women’s rights and the fight against climate change, has had a somewhat rocky relationship with Mr. Trump, who last year called him “very dishonest and weak.” More recently, he called Mr. Trudeau “two-faced” after the prime minister had been caught on video apparently gossiping about Mr. Trump with other world leaders at a NATO reception at Buckingham Palace.
Before the latest brouhaha, Mr. Trump said this week that it had been an honor to be in the film. He mentioned the movie during a video conference call from his Mar-a-Lago resort in Florida with members of the United States military.
Some of Mr. Trump’s supporters lashed out at the Canadian broadcaster.
But others commended the cut, including George Conway, a lawyer who is a vociferous critic of Mr. Trump and the husband of his adviser Kellyanne Conway.
“You see, Senators? It’s not that hard,” he wrote on Twitter, apparently alluding to Congress’s impeachment proceedings against Mr. Trump. Mr. Trump is expected to face a trial early next year in the Senate, where his acquittal in the Republican-controlled chamber appears likely.
Michael Crowley contributed reporting from West Palm Beach, Fla.