You move from the cascade of Ellison’s thinking about art and ideas, for example, to one of the funniest and warmest letters I’ve ever read. It too is to Murray, the influential critic; these two men found something deeply congenial in each other. It’s about the problem of finding the ingredients Ellison needs to cook pigs’ trotters while a fellow at the American Academy in Rome in 1956. He misses home cooking amid all the highbrow pasta.
Ellison (1913-1994) was born in Oklahoma City, the grandson of slaves. His father delivered ice and coal. He died when Ellison was 3, and his mother worked odd jobs to hold the family together. Ellison attended Tuskegee University in Alabama as a music major, and his letters home were typical collegiate ones: He tended to need money or a new pair of pants. He played the trumpet, and thought he might become a composer.
Ellison moved to Harlem in 1936 and fell in with a bohemian crowd that included the writers Langston Hughes and Richard Wright. (In this book’s later letters, Ellison works to disentangle his legacy from Wright’s.) He began writing “Invisible Man” at a friend’s farm in Vermont.
In Vermont he was often without a car, miles from a grocery store, and he begged friends to send items like coffee and sharp cheese. Ellison suffered throughout his life from what appears to be irritable bowel syndrome, and many letters lay bare his gastric distress after consuming things (onions, garlic) he perhaps should not have.
“Invisible Man” found so many white readers that, in a later letter, Ellison thanked Murray for turning more black readers onto it.
These letters offer more than a few clues. Fame struck Ellison like lightning after the publication of “Invisible Man.” He was invited everywhere to speak, and he mostly accepted. A single letter from 1957 mentions Rome, Karachi, Tehran and Hong Kong.
He recalls adventures in Rome with John Cheever in Cheever’s Fiat. He attended Robert Penn Warren’s black-tie parties. He lived for a while in Saul Bellow’s upstate New York house. He drank and argued with Norman Mailer and Dwight Macdonald.
This collection has so many incidental pleasures that I nearly always felt lucky to be reading it while the rest of the world had to make do with Twitter. He writes about his love of hunting, his anxiety over going bald, how to cope with aggressive cats. (To Bellow: “I know about dogs; but how, pray, does one kick a cat’s ass?”) There’s a sorrowful letter about pulling porcupine quills from his beloved dog’s snout.
There’s too much of John F. Callahan, Ellison’s literary executor and co-editor of these letters, in this collection. His introductions to each decade of letters are overly long, not especially perceptive and spill too many details.
Collections of letters, like biographies, build narrative momentum — how will Ellison get out of this jam? — momentum that Callahan dashes by too often emerging in the narrative to tell you what is going to happen and to pre-empt the best lines.
