A musician in need of a New York landing pad opts for a shared bedroom in a co-living apartment.
Though Craigslist and Facebook have been the go-to places to find a room share for years, Kira Hooks, a 26-year-old musician who moved to the city from Nashville this August, quickly ruled out them out.
“Broker fees are crazy here and all the qualifications you have to go through are really hard,” said Ms. Hooks, who was also conducting her housing search remotely from Tennessee and had to rely on FaceTime to meet people and tour spaces.
Instead, she opted for a co-living apartment in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, run by Outpost Club, a company that has 17 locations in New York and — crucially — shared bedrooms that brought the cost of co-living into an affordable range for her. Ms. Hooks pays $1,090 a month for her room, on top of a one-time membership fee of $690.
Co-living, wherein vetted tenants rent space in all-inclusive furnished apartments in co-living “houses” or apartment buildings, has become increasingly popular in recent years, due in part to the difficulty many newcomers have in navigating the city’s complicated rental market. But as the rent for a room with everything from internet to basic cooking supplies and weekly housekeeping bundled in can be steep, some co-living purveyors have started offering shared dorm-style rooms with twin beds. Outpost Club even offers triples in some of its locations.
Occupation: Musician. She also teaches at the School of Rock in the Whitestone section of Queens and does social media work for Food For All, an app that aims to reduce food waste.
What her rent includes: Wi-Fi, furniture, olive oil, coffee, cups, hair dryers and paper towels, among other basics; Ms. Hooks also paid a one-time membership fee of $690.
How big the “house” is: 17 bedrooms spread across six apartments.
The guest policy: Residents can have guests between 10 a.m. and 10 p.m. and out-of-town guests can stay free of charge for up to a week each month in open beds in other apartments. Overnight guests require at least a week’s notice. There is no couch crashing.
Since moving into a three-bedroom apartment this August, Ms. Hooks has had three bedroom-mates. One of the appeals of co-living is flexible lease terms that can be as short as 30 days. The downside, at least for those who like their roommates, is high turnover. Her most recent roommate, a Brazilian event planner here for three months to practice her English and take a bartending class, arrived this November.
In addition to Ms. Hooks’ shared bedroom, the apartment also has two single rooms — which rent for about $1,700 each, depending on length of stay and level of membership — and each bedroom has an en-suite bath. One of the occupants, Kari Lebby, a 29-year-old South Carolinian who moved to New York to attend a program for directing at the New School this summer, is, like Ms. Hooks, a longer-term fixture, having lived there since August, but is planning to start looking for a studio or one-bedroom at the end of the fall semester.
Anthony Nickele, a 26-year-old traveling nurse, occupies the other room. He’s lived in the apartment since November, when a pipe burst in his bedroom upstairs, forcing him to switch rooms.
Ms. Hooks was born in Houston, but her father’s work — he was in oil — took the family to the Netherlands, Scotland, China and a number of other countries.
She attended college in Los Angeles before moving to Nashville. New York, she said, felt very much like home, filled with people from all over the world forging connections.
In January, Ms. Hooks said she hopes to find a cheaper apartment nearby that can double as a practice space for four musicians. “I’m in a phase of my life where I like the feeling of making a home and I want to be in New York for a longer time,” she said.
But though six months may be a relatively brief stay, Ms. Hooks, like her housemates, said she appreciated the comfortable, companionable atmosphere that co-living provided. Adjusting to life in New York can be challenge, and it’s nice to be surrounded by a bunch of other people who are also figuring out the M.T.A, discovering the delights of late-night bodega food and learning where to buy basics like tissues without spending a fortune. “There’s this camaraderie of ‘This is such a crazy town,’ ” said Ms. Hooks.
