Sam Trabucco takes us for a very nice ride.
FRIDAY PUZZLE — Now this is the way to slide into a weekend, particularly the last one of the year. Sam Trabucco debuts a whopping 10 entries and even the stuff we’ve seen before is delightful.
It’s not the most difficult Friday puzzle I’ve ever solved, but that’s meant to encourage new solvers rather than to brag. All I’m saying is that new solvers can sink their teeth into this one and, while they might not finish — or maybe it would take extra time to finish, which is also fine — they would have a very good time while they were nibbling.
1A. Excellent wordplay. “Cracker boxes?” are not Ritz cracker packages; they are SAFES for robbers to crack.
27A. You can open a lot of things in a bar (bottles, for one), but you can also start or open TABS.
55A. A veiled capital clue! “Hill on the Hill, once” is ANITA Hill. Her name is placed at the beginning of the clue to hide the fact that it is a proper name and therefore has a capital H.
60A. A “Forum troublemaker” is a TROLL. Thank heavens we don’t have any of those here.
1D. We don’t see many long entries ending in U, do we? That “1918 pandemic” ends with “FLU,” and the answer is the SPANISH FLU.
2D. The “Jurassic creature whose name means ‘different lizard’” is the ALLOSAURUS. I got that by working the crossings, by the way. I’m not an expert on dinosaur names, although now I know this one.
4D. “Key material” does not refer to keys that go into locks. It hints at piano keys, and the answer is EBONY.
8D. Nicely done. A “Father figure?” is a DAD BOD.
46D. The clue “Wedding circle?” sounds as if it might be hinting at a wedding ring, but not in this puzzle. This is a Jewish wedding, and we are dancing the HORA, which is performed in a circle.
52D. I love this clue. I’ve seen it before, but if you haven’t, I want to point it out to you. At first, the clue “It’s right there on the map!” sounds a bit demanding, but focus on the word “right.” What direction is “right” on a map? You’ve got it: The answer is EAST.
One night while out with some of my best friends, we ordered a round of FROZEN MARGARITAs, and, “cool, relatable person” that I am, I couldn’t recover from the observation that FROZEN MARGARITA was 15 letters long.
In no real condition to type, I added something like “froze marinara” to my phone’s Notes app (thanks, autocorrect) — luckily I pieced it together the next day and made this grid.
I don’t get to see those friends very often, but I will for New Year’s — FROZEN MARGARITAs on me!