Credit...Photo illustration by Mike McQuade. Sources from left: John Lamparski/Getty Images; Elijah Nouvelage/Bloomberg via Getty Images; Joe Raedle/Getty Images.
Last month, after polls showed Pete Buttigieg vaulting unexpectedly to the lead in Iowa’s Democratic caucus, he aired an ad introducing his plan for higher-education reform: a proposal to make public-college tuition free for households earning up to $100,000 a year and reduce it on a sliding scale for those making up to $150,000. “Some voices,” he says in the ad, want to make college “free, even for the kids of millionaires” — a swipe at his rivals to the left, Elizabeth Warren and Bernie Sanders, who had each called for free college for all.
But that would describe many of Buttigieg’s critics, too. The Buttigieg backlash, just like this spring’s first flush of Buttigieg mania, has a dorm-room atmosphere about it; it is most intense within his own cohort of young, mostly white, college-educated liberals, who are torn between a mounting discomfort with their own privilege and an instinctive comfort with their own class. Buttigieg is his demographic’s most natural avatar in the 2020 race, and that is precisely his problem.
Buttigieg has occasionally reached for Obama’s mantle, but what he more readily calls to mind is a type of young person who flooded eagerly into politics in the early Obama years: the emotive, irony-deficient millennial, shaped by generational traumas (the financial crisis, Iraq and Afghanistan) but not embittered or radicalized by them, excited by abstractions like hope and change. To see Buttigieg on the stump, evoking the spirit of that moment, is to realize with a shock just how far away it feels now. In the intervening decade, his demographic has undergone a pair of profound shifts. One is the emergence of a vigorous left-wing policy vision informed by the perceived failures of the Obama presidency: its misplaced trust in compromise, its deference to Wall Street, its faith in the system. The other is a radical leap in how the same cohort thinks about race, social justice and immigration.
This new left didn’t rise up in opposition to the old Obama base; it evolved out of it. And this has placed it in direct conflict with Mayor Pete, one of their own who seems not to have evolved much at all. He is weirder, in this respect, than a candidate like Joe Biden, who is very clearly a man of another era. Buttigieg, by contrast, often seems as if he fell into a crevasse on his way to vote in the 2010 midterms and climbed out recently to find that his old friends had forgotten Panic! At the Disco and discovered socialism.
What unites Buttigieg’s heresies is how recently they would not have been heresies. Even five years ago they would have been, for better or worse, unremarkable — and it’s possible they still are. The gravitational center of the rage against Buttigieg has been Very Online, as has the maximalism of its tone — its insistence that Buttigieg, by thriving within the American architecture of capitalism and privilege, must personally embody all its worst qualities. On left Twitter, it is axiomatic that Buttigieg is not merely a relentlessly ambitious striver but an actual “sociopath.” But offline, in Iowa and New Hampshire, he is gaining in the polls, at the expense of an online-left favorite, Warren. He has been confronted with legitimate questions about his mayoral record on race and policing and has struggled with black voters. But so far, those voters aren’t backing a candidate with a stronger record on racial justice; they are, by a vast margin, supporting Biden.
The same internet ecosystem that has accelerated the shifts within Buttigieg’s own demographic can also distort the extent of those changes’ impact. A survey conducted this year by the Hidden Tribes project found that Democrats who were politically active on social media were far more likely to be white, college-educated and leftward-moving than Democrats who weren’t. The intensity of the Buttigieg backlash feels like a response to the vast gulf that lies between the internet and the Iowa caucuses. It is a disorienting moment: one in which Democratic politics seem at once to have changed completely and to have not changed at all.