The deaths, in December 2018, provoked outrage, particularly among critics of the Trump administration who saw them as evidence of cruelty toward young migrants.
The Department of Homeland Security’s Office of Inspector General said Friday that it had found “no misconduct or malfeasance” by department officials in the deaths of two Guatemalan children who died in the custody of the United States Border Patrol last year.
The office announced the finding in two brief reports. The reports did not name the children, but the details listed match the deaths of Jakelin Caal Maquín, 7, and Felipe Gómez Alonso, 8, both of whom died in December 2018.
The deaths provoked outrage, particularly among critics of the Trump administration who saw them as evidence of the administration’s cruelty toward young migrants fleeing Central America.
“The men and women of Border Patrol are committed to the highest standards of professionalism and care and have the full support of the department,” a spokesperson said.
Jakelin, who died in an El Paso hospital a few days past her 7th birthday, was detained, along with her father, in Antelope Wells, N.M., on Dec. 6, 2018, the inspector general’s report said.
On Dec. 7, as the two were being transported to another border patrol facility in Lordsburg, N.M., her father reported that she had a fever and was vomiting. Then she started to have seizures. After arriving in Lordsburg, she was flown to a hospital.
On Dec. 8, she was pronounced dead.
Jakelin had an advanced infection, said several physicians who reviewed her autopsy report earlier this year.
Felipe and his father were detained by immigration authorities on Dec. 18, the report said.
Days later, on Dec. 24, a border patrol agent “noticed that the child appeared ill and interviewed the father, who requested medical treatment for his son,” the report said.
For the second time, the boy was taken to the hospital.
“Upon arrival, the child was unresponsive and pronounced dead,” the report said, which states that the cause of death was “sepsis caused by Staphylococcus aureus bacteria.” An autopsy report for Felipe, who died on Dec. 24, also mentioned complications from the flu as a cause of death.
It was not immediately clear why the flu was not listed in the inspector general’s report.
In February, caucus members introduced legislation directing Customs and Border Protection to implement a set of minimum humanitarian standards for the treatment of people in the agency’s custody.
This week, President Trump met with Guatemala’s president, Jimmy Morales, at the White House, where the two discussed illegal immigration.
Mr. Trump praised Guatemala’s efforts to curb the flow of migrants and spoke of his push to build a “very big wall” on the United States’ border with Mexico.
Mr. Morales also spoke about immigration.
“We have been able to work with migration, and we’re trying to make it legal, because by no means we can endanger minors or populations, who are vulnerable, to coming to the border illegally,” he said, according to a White House transcript.