A good book can confirm your sanity. A good book can make you feel a bit less alone. In 2019, there was no escaping a sour and scalded national mood, and good books were necessary.
Top 10 lists, including my own, have mercifully come and gone. What remains for this critic, after a year of purposeful reading, are remembered scenes and moments and observations. This column is about a few favorites.
People who read are not happy.
People who do not read are not happy.
People are not very happy.
This year’s most conflicted and conflicting book was the Mueller Report. It contained a scene that, I suspect, we’ll see in more than one film, play and opera before we are all gone from earth. The president learned from Jeff Sessions that a special prosecutor had been appointed and, according the report, “slumped back in his chair and said, ‘Oh my God. This is terrible. This is the end of my presidency.’” He followed this with an expletive describing his likely fate.
In preparation to review a new translation of the Italian writer Elsa Morante’s 1957 novel “Arturo’s Island,” I read Lily Tuck’s excellent biography of Morante, “Woman of Rome.” In 1938, Tuck tells us, Morante prepared a pot of boiling oil, intending to pour it on the heads of Hitler and Mussolini, who were about to pass in a convertible limousine under her apartment window. Her future husband, the novelist Alberto Moravia, talked her out of this suicide mission at the last minute.
A case could be made that it was a bad year to stop sniffing glue, and a good year to start smoking again. A new collection of Gabriel García Márquez’s journalism, “The Scandal of the Century and Other Writings,” was published. He remarked that smoking is good for writers, if bad for their bottom line.
In her book “Higher Etiquette: A Guide to the World of Cannabis, from Dispensaries to Dinner Parties,” Lizzie Post wrote about vape pens at weed-centric dinners: “They may be placed to the right of the setting or across the top of the setting either between the place card and dessertware or behind the place card.” End of days?
