CROSSING THE RUBICON: Caesar’s Decision and the Fate of Rome, by Luca Fezzi. Translated by Richard Dixon. (Yale University, $35.) An Italian historian traces the rise of Roman autocracy to Pompey’s baffling acquiescence when Caesar defied Senate orders to disband his troops.
YELLOW EARTH, by John Sayles. (Haymarket, $28.) In his densely textured, overtly political fifth novel, the acclaimed director and screenwriter recounts what happens when shale oil is discovered beneath an Indian reservation in the North Dakota badlands and crowds of outsiders descend.
THE AMERICAN PEOPLE, VOLUME 2: The Brutality of Fact, by Larry Kramer. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $40.) Kramer’s sequel to his queered, fictionalized take on American history stands alone as another gleeful poke at the nation’s id. “My biggest customer base is Republican,” a brothel madam announces at a conference.
ONCE MORE TO THE RODEO: A Memoir, by Calvin Hennick. (Pushcart, paper, $16.95.) A white father drives his young biracial son from Boston to Iowa to attend a rodeo in the author’s hometown, along the way confronting questions of race, masculinity, addiction and more.
THE COMPLETE GARY LUTZ. (Tyrant Books, paper, $19.95.) “There are only two things, really, to ever say to anyone,” Lutz writes. “Try: ‘I’m very happy for you.’ Or: ‘This is just not done.’” 
I do a lot of my reading on New Jersey Transit, rubbing shoulders with fellow journalist types heading to the burbs. Needless to say, you get judged when your literary choices don’t measure up. I get it: You’re reading Proust and I’m reading “Starship Troopers,” and I’m very impressed. Recently, though, I picked up Ted Chiang’s new book of short stories, EXHALATION, having already read his prior collection, “Stories of Your Life and Others,” and seen the movie “Arrival,” which is based on one of his stories. Chiang is sci-fi at its classiest. Colson Whitehead has a blurb on the front cover of “Exhalation,” and Barack Obama has one on the back, so this is rarefied air. And it’s a joy to read. Chiang has lamented that he writes slowly, but there aren’t many B-sides in his inventive books, and his writing is spare with a whiff of otherworldliness. He’s the most important story writer in the genre this side of Philip K. Dick. And you can read it on the train with your head held high.
