Researchers in Britain found that people who go to museums, the theater and the opera were less likely to die in the study period than those who didn’t.
Numerous studies have shown that art and music can help soothe chronic pain, stave off symptoms of dementia and Alzheimer’s disease and accelerate brain development in young children.
Now, there is evidence that simply being exposed to the arts may help people live longer.
Researchers in London who followed thousands of people 50 and older over a 14-year period discovered that those who went to a museum or attended a concert just once or twice a year were 14 percent less likely to die during that period than those who didn’t.
The chances of living longer only went up the more frequently people engaged with the arts, according to the study, which was published this month in The BMJ, formerly The British Medical Journal. People who went to a museum or the theater once a month or even every few months had a 31 percent reduced risk of dying in that period, according to the study.
The study controlled for socioeconomic factors like a participant’s income, education level and mobility, said Andrew Steptoe, a co-author of the study and the head of University College London’s research department of behavioral science and health.
“Even if you take those things into account, we still found that there is a difference in the survival of people who are involved in the arts,” Professor Steptoe said in an interview on Friday.
The study did not examine what kind of music, art or theater led to a longer life, he said.
But Professor Steptoe said researchers theorized that people who expose themselves to the arts are likely to be more engaged in the world.
The study also noted that engaging in the arts can reduce loneliness, promote empathy and emotional intelligence, and keep people from becoming sedentary — all factors that contribute to a longer life.
“This study raises a number of future research questions,” the authors wrote.
For example, future studies could consider how engagement in the arts from a young age might affect a person’s life span.
The study also did not examine whether there was any overlap with participants who actively participated in art, as by playing music, dancing or painting.
Still, the results of the study excited art and theater advocates who said they hoped the research would motivate a push to restore arts and music programs that have been cut from schools in New York and around the country over the years.
“So much of that has been destroyed,” said Heather A. Hitchens, chief executive of the American Theater Wing, which funds a wide range of productions and programs.
Advocates said the study was also a reminder of how critical it is for the arts to be more accessible to Americans of all incomes.
Gabriella Souza, a spokeswoman for the Walters Art Museum in Baltimore, said the study’s results were not surprising.
“In terms of finding peace and tranquillity in galleries, that is one of the reasons people come to our museums,” she said.
The museum, which offers free admission and gets about 160,000 visitors a year, recently surveyed visitors about why they come. Twenty percent of them said for “peace and rejuvenation,” Ms. Souza said.
