A new group founded by three former Fox News employees sent a letter to all presidential campaigns on Wednesday asking them to publicly condemn nondisclosure agreements that deal with workplace environment issues.
The group, called Lift Our Voices, was formed by Gretchen Carlson, Julie Roginsky and Diana Falzone. All three women a few years ago sued Fox News Channel or its chief executive at the time, Roger Ailes, and as part of their settlements were forced to sign nondisclosure agreements.
While the letter is asking for a public condemnation on the policy from the next or current president, it is in effect pressuring current campaigns that may be employing the practice to end it as well. It is unclear how many current presidential campaigns have forced employees to sign nondisclosure agreements as part of their employment, but the tactic has been used by campaigns in the past, including for some members of both Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump’s presidential campaigns in 2016.
The group is not necessarily calling for an end to all nondisclosure agreements, understanding the need on a political campaign to protect trade secrets like self-research and internal polling. Instead, it is focused on nondisclosure agreements solely dealing with workplace environment issues, like sexual harassment.
The letter comes as nondisclosure agreements and discussions of sexual harassment in the workplace have become points of contention in the Democratic primary campaign.
In late November, lawsuits discovered by Business Insider found that multiple women had stated in legal filings that Michael R. Bloomberg, the former New York City mayor who announced his presidential run last month, fostered a toxic, frat-like culture at his company during the 1990s (Mr. Bloomberg has repeatedly denied these allegations).
ABC News on Sunday published its own report on the lawsuits, which found that five were settled out of court, and likely included nondisclosure agreements.
Lift Our Voices highlighted Ms. Warren’s response in their letter as support for their cause.
The Yang campaign later said that it had fired a staffer before Ms. Milano had sent her tweet, though they denied the misconduct was sexual.
Reports of sexual harassment from the 2016 presidential campaign of Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont emerged earlier this year before Mr. Sanders announced his 2020 campaign. In interviews with The New York Times, staffers from the 2016 campaign discussed episodes of sexual harassment and demeaning treatment as well as pay disparity.
Mr. Sanders apologized earlier this year and ensured that three top advisers from the 2016 campaign either will not return for the 2020 effort, or would serve in different roles.
A nondisclosure incident also ensnared another candidate, though it was not the type that Lift Our Voices is focused on. Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind., worked for McKinsey & Co., a consulting firm, after he graduated from Harvard. When other candidates began to demand that he release his client list, Mr. Buttigieg said he was bound by a nondisclosure agreement from doing so.
Eventually, after publicly calling on McKinsey to release him from the NDA, the company complied, and Mr. Buttigieg released his clients.