Representative Elissa Slotkin, a moderate Democrat from Michigan, announced Monday that she would vote to impeach President Trump — and quickly faced the consequences.
Yet there she was at midnight Sunday, holed up in her farmhouse at a desk that had belonged to her grandfather — and, before that, President Woodrow Wilson’s secretary of war — clicking the “send” button on a newspaper op-ed article explaining why, after months of resisting impeachment, she would vote to charge the president with high crimes and misdemeanors.
The blowback was quick and intense. Dozens of angry Trump supporters bearing “Impeach Slotkin, Keep Trump” signs shouted down Ms. Slotkin, a first-term Democratic congresswoman who represents a Republican-leaning district, at a packed town hall-style meeting on Monday morning in a university ballroom in the city of Rochester.
“Hey, hey! Ho, ho! Elissa Slotkin has got to go!” they chanted, amid intermittent cries of “One-term congresswoman!” and “C.I.A. Hack!” — a reference to Ms. Slotkin’s past work as a C.I.A. analyst.
But the voices on the other side, though not nearly as loud, were present in force. Most in the crowd of about 400 people leapt to their feet and applauded when Ms. Slotkin — plowing through her prepared statement as her pleas for civility were ignored — announced her intention to vote “yes” on Wednesday when the House holds historic votes on two articles of impeachment.
So it has been all year for Ms. Slotkin, who served in Iraq as a C.I.A. analyst and in the Obama Defense Department before she ran for Congress in 2018, winning a seat that had been held by Republicans for nearly 20 years. Caught in the middle of the United States’ red-blue divide, she resisted impeachment for months, even after Robert S. Mueller III, the special counsel, issued a report detailing at least 10 instances of potential obstruction of justice by Mr. Trump.
The story of how she arrived at her impeachment decision is the story of so many moderate Democrats in this year’s historic freshman class. Moved to run for public office to counter the rise of Mr. Trump, they flipped Republican seats and are now in danger of becoming one-term members of Congress — possibly costing their party control of the House — over a decision they tried mightily to avoid.
Ms. Slotkin’s opinion article published Monday morning in The Detroit Free Press made instant headlines in her district northwest of Detroit. She had spent much of the weekend poring through a thick, leather-bound binder containing the House Intelligence Committee’s report on Mr. Trump’s dealings with Ukraine and a thick tome containing the House’s manual of rules, procedures and precedents.
In Washington, Ms. Slotkin is part of a tight-knit group of moderate Democrats, some with national security or military backgrounds like herself. She is not the only centrist thinking, “If impeachment costs me my seat, so be it.” Several other moderate Democrats also told their constituents on Monday that they would be voting “yes,” many of them issuing statements that were equally frank about the political risk they knew they were taking in doing so.
And Ms. Slotkin knew what to expect on Monday. In September, after she and six other so-called national security freshmen wrote an opinion article in The Washington Post calling for an impeachment inquiry, she faced much the same reception. She has already drawn several Republican challengers, including Paul Junge, a former TV anchor in Lansing, Mich., who worked for the Trump administration before moving back to Michigan to run.
“She ran on the issue of getting together in unity, and she’s not doing that,” said Christina Fitchett-Hickson, a retired teacher who is campaigning to unseat another Democrat from Michigan, Representative Dan Kildee.
Dressed in a red and white Santa hat with the word “TRUMP” spelled in red glitter, Ms. Fitchett-Hickson was protesting in the parking lot at Oakland University in Rochester, the site of Monday’s meeting. Behind her, a truck bearing the words “Trump Unity” blared Christmas carols, altered with pro-Trump lyrics.
But inside the crowded hall, another retired teacher, Barbara Tymrakiewicz, brought a sign bearing the opposite message.
“We’ve got your back, Representative Slotkin,” it said.
For Ms. Slotkin, Monday’s meeting — and Wednesday’s impeachment vote — will be the culmination of an extraordinarily tumultuous first year on Capitol Hill. She arrived in January, a long-shot candidate having been swept into office on a Democratic wave, eager to make good on her central promise: to lower the cost of prescription drugs. She had avoided talk of impeachment, promised to be bipartisan and voted against Nancy Pelosi for speaker of the House.
But the impeachment question hovered in the background. On her first day in office, Ms. Slotkin’s fellow Michigan freshman, Representative Rashida Tlaib, was caught on video using a vulgarity to describe how she wanted to impeach Mr. Trump. Ms. Slotkin was asked what she thought.
“I didn’t love it,” she said.
Soon the Republican “tracker” who follows Ms. Slotkin with a video camera during her public events began trying to goad her into addressing impeachment. She ignored him.
But the pressure really began to build in the spring, she said, when Mr. Mueller released his report on Russian interference in the 2016 election, and outlined at least 10 instances in which Mr. Trump tried to obstruct the investigation. Progressive activists and even some Democratic colleagues pushed her to call for an impeachment inquiry.
Instead of seizing on the obstruction issue, she focused on the election interference, convening a task force to draft legislation aimed at securing the 2020 balloting. So when news broke that the president had tried to enlist a foreign power, Ukraine, to investigate his political rivals in a way that could affect a future election, Ms. Slotkin said, she could no longer avoid the topic.
When she read the anonymous whistle-blower’s complaint that touched off the inquiry — written in careful, methodical language — Ms. Slotkin said she knew instantly that it had been submitted by a C.I.A. officer.
“The writing style is exactly what we’re taught when we do analytic pieces at the agency,” she said.
The House Intelligence Committee hearings that followed were painful for her at times, she said. Ms. Slotkin has worked under two presidents — George W. Bush and Barack Obama — and she said it was difficult to see Mr. Trump attack the civil servants who testified.
Over the past several months, Ms. Slotkin said, she has held four town hall-style meetings — Monday’s was the fifth — and her offices have received more than 1,500 phone calls and more than 6,500 emails and letters on impeachment.
Ms. Slotkin did not convey her decision to Ms. Pelosi, who has said a vote for impeachment is a vote of conscience, and not one that she plans to pressure any Democrat to cast.
But Ms. Slotkin did share her decision with the other members of her freshman group with whom she wrote her original opinion article coming out in favor of an inquiry. Some of them are still trying to make their own decisions on the final vote.
Ms. Slotkin did what she could to keep Monday’s session a cordial affair. It was hosted by the Oakland University Center for Civic Engagement, which is devoted to improving public discourse. It began with a military honor guard and the singing of “The Star Spangled Banner.” Much of her prepared statement was devoted to other issues: the high cost of prescription drugs and a new trade agreement with Canada and Mexico.
But try as she might — “Guys, lets try to have a civil conversation,” she said at one point — she could not contain the angry voices in the back of the room. “MAGA! MAGA!” attendees shouted, using the abbreviated version of the president’s campaign slogan, “Make America Great Again.” “Four more years! Four more years!” they cried.
So she forged ahead, calmly talking through them, though she said later it was hard to hear herself speak. She said she was encouraged that there were a number of Trump supporters in the audience who were listening quietly.
Only once did she feel “my blood pressure go up.” It happened, Ms. Slotkin said, when she was talking about her deep concern about foreign interference American elections, and the heckling would not stop.
