The House Intelligence Committee, led by Representative Adam B. Schiff, concluded in a 300-page report that President Trump tried to solicit foreign interference in the 2020 election.
This is not about Ukraine. This is about our democracy. This is about our national security. This is about whether the American people have a right to expect that the president of the United States is going to act in their interests, with their security in mind and not for some illicit personal or political reason. So Americans should care deeply about whether the president of the United States is betraying their trust in him, betraying that oath that he took to the Constitution to protect our country and defend its institutions. So, we should care about this. We must care about this. And if we don’t care about this, we can darn well be sure the president will be back at it doing this all over again. This is the result of a president who believes that he is beyond indictment, beyond impeachment, beyond any form of accountability and, indeed, above the law. And that is a very dangerous thing for this country.
The report by the House Intelligence Committee was a sweeping indictment of the president’s behavior, concluding that he sought to undermine American democracy and endangered national security, then worked to conceal his actions from Congress. Democrats left it to another committee to decide whether to recommend Mr. Trump’s impeachment, but their report presented what are all but certain to be the grounds on which the House votes to formally charge him.
“The founding fathers prescribed a remedy for a chief executive who places his personal interests above those of the country: impeachment,” it said.
The intelligence panel adopted it, strictly along partisan lines, hours after its release.
Though the committee indicated it would continue investigative work, the report’s release set in motion the next phase in the impeachment of Mr. Trump, accelerating a constitutional clash that has happened only three times in the nation’s history. Both parties are poised for a raucous debate in the House Judiciary Committee over whether to charge the president with high crimes and misdemeanors, the Constitution’s threshold for removal, and a likely partisan vote by the House to do so before Christmas.
Explosive testimony. News media frenzies. A trial in the Senate. Here is how impeachment works — and how it has played out in the past.
The 300-page report provided some new details of Rudolph W. Giuliani’s frequent calls to the White House. But for the most part, it described the account that emerged over more than two months of sworn testimony from diplomats and other administration officials of how the president and his allies pressured Ukraine to announce investigations of former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and other Democrats, while withholding nearly $400 million in military assistance and a White House meeting for Ukraine’s president.
“The impeachment inquiry into Donald J. Trump, the 45th president of the United States, uncovered a monthslong effort by President Trump to use the powers of his office to solicit foreign interference on his behalf in the 2020 election,” the report said.
And it detailed how officials at the highest levels of his administration — including Vice President Mike Pence; Secretary of State Mike Pompeo; Rick Perry, the energy secretary; and Mick Mulvaney, the acting chief of staff — either knew of the president’s efforts or were deeply involved in carrying them out.
The House Intelligence Committee has given its report on President Trump to the Judiciary Committee. What comes next will look very different.
Today: The House Intelligence Committee has released its impeachment report to the Judiciary Committee, signaling the end of one phase of impeachment and the beginning of another. Julie Davis on why those two phases will look so different.
It’s Wednesday, December 4.
Julie, tell me about these two phases of the House impeachment inquiry.
Committee has been extensively briefed on these efforts over a regular basis as a part of our ongoing oversight responsibility.
— it attracts the workhorse members who are into dealing with long reports, really meaty, substantive issues, oftentimes behind closed doors, not in front of the news cameras.
Ranking member and I believe it is important to hold an open hearing today, and we don’t do a tremendous amount of those.
Dilatory tactics, parliamentary stunts — that sort of thing just doesn’t happen that often in the Intelligence Committee, because that’s just not what they’re about.
The Judiciary Committee will come to order, and without objection, the chair is authorized to declare recesses of the committee at any time.
The Judiciary Committee, on the other hand, is kind of known for that. And the Judiciary Committee oversees the federal courts and the Justice Department, but it also has jurisdiction over cultural hot button issues.
I ask my colleagues on this committee, both Republicans and Democrats, to stand up with me in supporting this legislation. We have to save lives.
— some of the things that typically draw the most fervent responses from both parties. And so it attracts members who want to engage in that level of really partisan debate — people who really seek out the spotlight, who want to engage in culture war type of subjects that come before the Judiciary Committee, they sort of excel in these very highly partisan public debates. These debates that happen in the Judiciary Committee are typically much more raucous, much more freewheeling, and it’s a much more partisan place.
So crude summary here. The Intelligence Committee is dominated by rule-oriented leaders, the workhorses. The Judiciary Committee is more dominated by cultural warriors, the show horses.
That’s right. And to be clear, there is some overlap between the two committees. There are people who serve on both committees. And it’s not like everyone on the Judiciary Committee is guns blazing, culture warrior, and everyone on the Intelligence Committee is a dry consumer of long intelligence reports.
But that is the profile of these two committees, and those tend to be the sorts of people who seek out seats on the Intelligence and the Judiciary Committee, so there is kind of a cultural difference there.
So explain how these different roles of these two committees are actually playing out in this impeachment inquiry. Let’s start with the Intelligence Committee, since its work has just been completed. How has its broader role, its rules and its mission reflected in the work of the impeachment inquiry over the past few weeks?
Well, the Intelligence Committee is used to working in secret, working in a setting where you’re controlling the flow of information. Because by definition, they’re dealing with intelligence matters, and that can’t be debated freely on the House floor in the halls. And its procedures also reflect that. There is less opportunity for the minority party to shut down the proceedings, because if they were allowed to do that, that could be dangerous. I mean, that has actual implications, potentially, for national security. So the very rules of the committee they’re used to operating under are just tighter by definition. And you saw Adam Schiff, the chairman of the committee, really using that to his advantage when it came to controlling the witness list, having a say in who Republicans would be able to call as public witnesses.
So Republicans, for instance, wanted to call Hunter Biden, the son of former Vice President Joe Biden, which — Democrats knew that that would be a red herring. And so they did not sign off on calling Hunter Biden. They did allow Republicans to call some witnesses. We saw them call Kurt Volker, the former special envoy to Ukraine, and Tim Morrison, who was a former National Security Council official. So they didn’t shut them down altogether, but again, the committee operates in this way where the rights of the minority are proscribed such that they can’t just do anything they want whenever they want.
And what about the witnesses who the Democrats wanted to call? How did they use the Intelligence Committee’s rules to their advantage?
We’ll now move to the 45-minute rounds. I recognize myself and majority counsel for 45 minutes.
I know, Ms. Stefanik, you had a few quick questions for the ambassador. I’ll yield to you, Ms. Stefanik.
Thank you, Mr. Nunes. Ambassador Yovanovitch, thank you for being here today.
The gentlewoman will suspend.
— Schiff really shut them down. There was a moment, a couple of hearings in, where Elise Stefanik, Republican congresswoman from New York, who Republicans wanted to spotlight, particularly because that day, they were hearing from a female witness, the former Ukraine ambassador, Marie Yovanovitch. And they knew they were going to be accused of berating her and hammering at her, and she’s a woman and sort of mansplaining her. And so they really wanted Stefanik to have the spotlight.
Under the House Resolution 660, you are not allowed to yield time except to minority counsel.
The ranking member yielded time to another member of Congress.
They tried to yield time to her, and Schiff just shut it down.
You’re gagging the young lady from New York?
That is accurate. Ambassador Yovanovitch, I want to thank you for being here today.
Gentlewoman will suspend. You’re not recognized.
Right, and the rules would protect this sort of thing, theoretically, so that a member of the minority party on the Intelligence Committee wouldn’t, say, bring up the location of American C.I.A. agents overseas.
Right. And granted, these issues that were coming up in the impeachment hearings were not strictly intelligence matters. There wasn’t necessarily a risk that anyone was going to go blabbing about black sites, but the rules that they were using were designed for those sorts of things. And so we saw Chairman Schiff take pretty good advantage of that.
Right. Not that a bookish member of the Intelligence Committee would ever do such a thing, but just in case.
So the Republicans kind of get sidelined in this process because of these rules and the way the committee enforces them. What was the outcome for the Democrats who were overseeing this?
Well, the outcome was very much as they had hoped it would be. They really were able to use the process to get what they needed out of the witnesses that they called.
Was there a quid pro quo with regard to the requested White House call and the White House meeting? The answer is yes.
It would be funny if it wasn’t such a graphic betrayal of the president’s oath of office.
— accusing the president of having abused his power.
Can we also agree that it’s just wrong?
And narratives from people who were there at key moments.
Colonel Vindman, what was your real-time reaction to hearing that call?
Hearing his phone call with the president of Ukraine.
I knew that I had to report this to the White House counsel. I had concerns, and it was my duty to report.
Everyone was in the loop.
This came directly from the president.
At the express direction of the president of the United States.
We were following the president’s orders.
So we followed the president’s orders.
And basically got the information that they needed and the predicate for laying out a case against President Trump that could be grounds for impeachment.
We are going to House Intelligence Committee Chair Adam Schiff with a news conference on the impeachment committee report.
Which brings us to Tuesday.
— goes to the press gallery in the Capitol and lays it all out.
This report chronicles a scheme by the president of the United States to coerce an ally, Ukraine, that is at war with an adversary, Russia, into doing the president’s political dirty work. It involves a scheme in which Donald Trump withheld official acts, a White House meeting, as well as hundreds of millions of dollars of needed military assistance, in order to compel that power to deliver two investigations that he believed would assist his re-election campaign.
And he raises this question again of whether people should have to accept that this is conduct that the president is allowed to engage in, and essentially lays out the predicate for what they’re going to give to the Judiciary Committee.
With that, I’m happy to respond to your questions.
Then Schiff takes questions from reporters, and the first question is about, essentially, the only really new thing that is not familiar to people who watched the hearings.
When did you obtain the cell phone records that are in this report?
And that is the cell phone records that show contact between Rudy Giuliani, President Trump’s personal lawyer, and various White House officials, including John Bolton, the former national security adviser, but also Devin Nunes, who is the senior Republican on the House Intelligence Committee, and his contacts with Lev Parnas, who is an associate of Rudy Giuliani, who was also pushing for the ouster of the Ukrainian ambassador, who the president wanted gone.
But certainly the phone records show that there was considerable coordination among the parties, including the White House.
You’re telling me, though, that we just learned in this report that the leading Republican on the Intelligence Committee was communicating, and perhaps coordinating, with the White House and the president’s lawyer months ago, and communicating with key figures involved in the pressure campaign that that very committee he’s on is supposed to be investigating?
Correct. It’s pretty stunning information, although we don’t know what was discussed in those calls. All we have is timestamps and phone numbers, and so it’s tough to reconstruct what the substance of those calls were. But it’s a pretty unusual situation all around.
It is, I think, deeply concerning that at a time when the president of the United States was using the power of his office to dig up dirt on a political rival, that there may be evidence that there were members of Congress complicit in that activity.
Julie, what’s your understanding of why, given the juiciness of what you just described, the House Intelligence Committee is kind of closing shop and handing all its work over to the Judiciary Committee, rather than continuing to figure out what just happened with Nunes and with everything else in the report?
There was more investigative work to be done. Even as we believe that we cannot wait because the president’s efforts to secure intervention in the next election persist, we continue our investigation and we will.
The president’s efforts to get a foreign power to interfere in the 2020 election are ongoing. And so we need to move. We need to get this thing going. And what he doesn’t say, but what is also the case, is that the outcome here is pretty much known, at least in the House. They are very likely to draft articles of impeachment, to vote them through, to send the matter to the Senate. And Democrats believe that they have the evidence that they need to do that, and so this is the moment, they think, to get this thing moving.
And so now the work of the Judiciary Committee begins.
Right. And on paper, they have a very simple and very somber task of taking this lengthy report and deciding whether this rises to the level of impeachable offenses, whether, under the Constitution, this is something that warrants the president’s removal. But remember, this is the Judiciary Committee. This is the messier, more partisan culture war committee, and nobody expects for this to be a very orderly or buttoned-down process.
Julie, the impeachment inquiry is now in the hands of the Judiciary Committee. What makes it a messier place than the Intelligence Committee?
Well, the rules of the Judiciary Committee are written for very different reasons than the rules of the Intelligence Committee are. They’re written to facilitate these freewheeling debates about policy and legislation and various matters that are of great interest to the public. So the minority has a lot of ability to interrupt the proceedings, to make points of order, to use parliamentary tactics to essentially make itself heard. Given that, and also given the members of the committee, it’s culturally a place of much more backing and forthing, and a pretty lively one.
It feels like you’re saying that the best days of the impeachment inquiry for Democrats are now behind them.
Well, it depends on your perspective. I think for some lawmakers, they have been waiting with great anticipation to have their moment to publicly say their piece about what they think about President Trump’s conduct, whether they’re Democrats and want to outline how egregiously horrible they think this has been, or Republicans and want to defend everything that the president has done. And for the rest of the Democratic caucus, I do think that there is some degree of worry that now is the part where things get really messy, where all of the talk of somber state debating goes out the window, and here we are in the Judiciary Committee having a food fight.
Right. Nancy Pelosi is forever using this phrase. This is a “somber,” “prayerful” moment and process. And you’re saying it’s not going to be prayerful in that committee room.
Probably will not look like most people’s image of prayerful.
And what, specifically, will the Judiciary Committee be doing when it comes to determining the constitutionality of this impeachment inquiry?
They don’t write like that anymore.
No, for better or for worse.
And is this always how the Judiciary Committee functions during an impeachment? I mean, calling constitutional scholars, professors, historians to basically ruminate on the very nature of what is impeachable?
The purpose of today’s hearing is to receive testimony from legal and constitutional scholars on the background and history of impeachment.
Well, the Judiciary Committee did do this same thing, back just before they started impeachment proceedings against President Bill Clinton.
The most important question to this committee is the meaning of “high crimes and misdemeanors.” It is important to remember that the word “high” in high crimes and misdemeanors was used to emphasize that it was a crime or misdemeanor against the commonwealth.
And part of it is just laying out the reference points for them to be able to go back to to say, remember when these people who studied the Constitution and told us what it was all about and told us what impeachment was for said about what we should be considering? And so it’s a way for them to kind of give the public a concept of why they would be doing this.
I get how the rules vary here in ways that would make the Judiciary Committee a messier process than the Intelligence Committee, but I’m honestly having a hard time imagining how interviewing constitutional scholars gets all that messy.
Well, it has to do with what they’re interviewing the scholars about and the very, very different places that the Republicans and Democrats on the committee are coming from about that issue. They’re essentially going to be arguing over the Constitution and trying to compete with one another to elicit from these constitutional scholars the most favorable interpretation of what impeachment means and what the standard is for their side. So rather than arguing over who said what in a phone call with the Ukrainian president, or whether civil servants’ view of what President Trump did is legitimate or not legitimate, they’re actually going to be arguing over the Constitution itself and what those words, those few words that are in the Constitution about impeachment, actually mean in the context of what President Trump has done.
Julie, you’ve said that it’s widely understood that the House is going to vote to impeach the president. That’s one of the reasons Schiff was in such a hurry to move this from the Intelligence Committee over to the Judiciary Committee. So what are these two different phases that you’ve been describing? Why do they ultimately matter? I mean, why does it matter that the Intelligence Committee ran this as a tightly controlled, buttoned-up process, and that it’s likely to get a lot messier in the Judiciary Committee, if we know the outcome of all this basically beforehand?
Because I think there is a broader question of what does impeaching a president look like when it’s a purely partisan exercise? The Democrats opened this process with what was essentially a partisan vote to begin an impeachment inquiry. And if they engage now in a spectacle, in a sort of war, on the public stage over impeaching the president, they are very aware that they could lose whatever public support they do have for going forward with this, and that people could come away thinking that they have not been conscientious about what their constitutional duty is, that they’ve abused their positions and treated impeachment just like another partisan fight that they have with President Trump that essentially would trivialize the process, both in the eyes of the public and in the eyes of history. This is, after all, a process that’s enshrined in the Constitution, and Democrats don’t want to be the ones who are blamed with tainting that process and undermining it. So there is a real risk for them that in this realm that they’re about to enter, that they’re going to come off looking like less than they should.
Right. They could undermine what the Intelligence Committee seemed to have pulled off, in part because of the rules that allowed for it, that gave the power to the majority, and therefore allowed them to conduct that first phase in a way that seemed kind of high-minded and, as Nancy Pelosi would say, prayerful.
Right. They largely hit their mark in the first phase of this inquiry, and now they are keenly aware that, having demonstrated to the public that they are taking this seriously, that they’re being disciplined about how they’re going about it, that they’re honoring the process, that it could all unravel.
I’ve taken stock and I’ve looked at this from every angle, and over the last few days, I have come to one of the hardest decisions of my life.
So here’s the deal, guys. My campaign for president simply does not have the financial resources to continue.
— saying that she no longer has the money required to remain competitive.
In good faith, I cannot tell you, my supporters and volunteers, that I have a path forward if I don’t believe I do.
Would you like some nice ISIS fighters? I could give them to you. You can take everyone you want.
For 45 minutes on Tuesday, President Trump and French President Emmanuel Macron engaged in a series of tense televised exchanges about their approach to ISIS, NATO and trade policy during a meeting in London.
It is true that you have foreign fighters coming from Europe, but it is a tiny minority of the overall problem we have in the region.
Unlike many foreign leaders who quietly endure Trump’s taunts, Macron repeatedly jabbed back at Trump, resulting in several testy back and forths.
This is why he’s a great politician, because that was one of the greatest non-answers I’ve ever heard. And that’s O.K.
Democrats on three House committees on Tuesday released a report documenting the impeachment case against President Trump.
Making a case for urgent congressional action, Democrats tried to place Mr. Trump’s conduct in a broader context of wrongdoing that they said dated to the 2016 presidential campaign. Mr. Trump, they argued, first accepted help from one foreign power, Russia, to win the presidency, and then turned around and tried to enlist another, Ukraine, to bolster his 2020 re-election campaign.
“We do not intend to delay when the integrity of the next election is still at risk,” Representative Adam B. Schiff of California, the chairman of the Intelligence Committee, said after the report’s release.
The report laid out what it called an “unprecedented campaign of obstruction of this impeachment inquiry” by Mr. Trump, based on his refusal to release a single document from agencies including the State Department, the Defense Department and the White House budget office, and his directive that potential witnesses not cooperate. Even President Richard M. Nixon, whom the Judiciary Committee charged with contempt of Congress during the Watergate inquiry, produced voluminous records and allowed aides to testify voluntarily, the report noted.
It also showed that Democrats have collected more raw evidence than previously known, including telephone company records showing dozens of phone calls this spring among Mr. Trump’s personal lawyer, Mr. Giuliani, his associates and senior White House and administration officials, along with Representative Devin Nunes of California, the senior Republican on the Intelligence Committee.
Mr. Schiff told reporters that the call records showed “considerable coordination among the parties, including the White House” related to elements of the pressure campaign.
The calls came as Mr. Giuliani was executing a smear campaign against Marie L. Yovanovitch, then the ambassador to Ukraine, and pressing Kyiv to begin investigations that would benefit Mr. Trump. The records show calls between Mr. Giuliani; Lev Parnas, his business partner; Mr. Nunes; Mr. Nunes’s former aide Kash Patel, who works on the National Security Council; as well as unmarked numbers at the White House and the Office of Management and Budget that Democratic investigators suspect could be Mr. Trump or Mr. Mulvaney.
The report was a watershed moment for Mr. Schiff’s months-old inquiry, opening what promises to be a divisive phase in which the two parties will feud publicly over constitutional questions while competing to frame their own political narratives. Anticipating the split, Mr. Schiff used the report to lament the disconnect between the parties and warn that it amounted to precisely the kind of intensive polarization that worried the framers of the Constitution.
Still, he told reporters, Republicans’ dismissal of the case did not relieve Democrats of an obligation to press it forward. Indeed, House Democrats planned to huddle in the Capitol basement on Wednesday morning without aides to hear from Mr. Schiff and discuss next steps, according to Democratic officials.
The Judiciary Committee is scheduled to begin its debate on Wednesday with a public hearing that features four constitutional scholars discussing the historical standards for impeachment and their assessment about whether Mr. Trump’s actions meet the bar for removing him from office.
Lawyers for the Intelligence Committee are expected to formally present the report to the judiciary panel and answer questions from its members in the coming days, though no hearing has been scheduled.
Mr. Trump’s Republican allies on Capitol Hill released their own report on Monday, condemning the Democratic impeachment effort as illegitimate, and asserting that the president was not seeking personal political advantage when he pressed Ukraine’s leaders to investigate his rivals, but was instead urging the country to address corruption.
The Judiciary Committee will also consider potential evidence presented by other investigative committees and Robert S. Mueller III, the former special counsel, who documented Mr. Trump’s attempts to thwart his investigation into Russia’s interference in the 2016 election.
In the Senate, where it is increasingly apparent to leaders of both parties that the chamber is going to conduct an impeachment trial, Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, made clear that he has been studying up on how to run one. He said he and Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, could work out a bipartisan agreement governing procedures for a trial, or failing that, that “51 senators of any particular persuasion” could set the tone.
“There is no answer at the moment,” Mr. McConnell told reporters. Two-thirds of senators would have to vote to convict Mr. Trump to end his presidency.
Speaker Nancy Pelosi formally announced the impeachment inquiry after a whistle-blower submitted a complaint in August that detailed a July 25 telephone call in which Mr. Trump urged President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine to “do us a favor” by pursuing investigations into Mr. Biden and other Democrats.
But the impeachment inquiry quickly moved beyond the whistle-blower complaint as Democrats secured testimony — first behind closed doors and later in public hearings broadcast live on television — from more than a dozen Foreign Service officers, budget officials and senior staff at the National Security Council.
Written in narrative form, the report painted a portrait of a president eager to use the power of his office for personal gain, and a foreign policy establishment that watched with alarm as Mr. Trump’s allies exerted pressure on Mr. Zelensky to do the president’s bidding.
That language appeared meant to serve as a basis for the Judiciary Committee to argue either that Mr. Trump had committed bribery or that he otherwise abused his power — both impeachable offenses.
Citing sworn testimony, the report accused Mr. Trump of forcing out Ms. Yovanovitch, and putting his personal lawyer and others in charge of Ukraine policy. It said the president froze vital military assistance to Ukraine and blocked a meeting with the country’s president, then used both as leverage to secure the investigations he wanted.
And it recounted how Mr. Pence, who would become president should Mr. Trump be removed, was told by an ambassador that the military aid “had become tied to the issue of investigations” that Mr. Trump wanted announced.
Mr. Trump has repeatedly denied all of the accusations against him, describing the call with Mr. Zelensky as “perfect” and insisting that he has done nothing wrong. Republicans in Congress have embraced the president’s defiant message as they assail the Democratic impeachment inquiry as deeply unfair and without merit.
The report’s authors spent more than 90 pages on the accusation that the president illegally tried to obstruct the congressional inquiry, arguing that Mr. Trump ignored the Constitution.
They cited Mr. Trump’s categorical refusal to cooperate with the investigation or comply with demands for documents. They said his refusal to allow top aides to appear violated the law. And they accused him of engaging in “a brazen effort to publicly attack and intimidate” witnesses who agreed to testify before the Intelligence Committee.
Sheryl Gay Stolberg contributed reporting.