Everyone already has the dresses, the tuxedos, the champagne. Is New Year’s Eve the one holiday it’s not rude to have a wedding?
When Douglas Parr proposed to Nadine Christensen a year ago, the two knew almost immediately that they would get married in their home in Brisbane, Australia and that they would get married on New Year’s Eve 2019.
The end of the year and the start of the new one marks the end of what has been the most challenging decade for them and the start of something new. In 2011, Mr. Parr was struck by a car in a hit-and-run and his rehabilitation became a “full-time effort for both of us,” Ms. Christensen said.
Over the next seven years, Mr. Parr would relearn to walk, drive, and do many of the things that came naturally to him before the accident, all with Ms. Christensen by his side. In the last 12 to 18 months, their lives have begun to normalize, the couple said in a phone interview.
This year, Ms. Eid’s assistant is getting married on New Year’s Eve and Ms. Eid is running point during the event.
In Tallahassee, Fla., when the clock strikes midnight and the new year and decade begin, Mary Margaret Earnhart and her fiancé Heath Purvis will be dancing with friends and family.
The couple met on New Year’s Eve seven years ago and wanted to keep their anniversary the same. The 31st also has sentimental value to Ms. Earnhart because it was her maternal grandmother’s birthday.
“As an events designer and producer, it’s more challenging than usual because to get people to work on that night and because a lot of hotels and venues are having their own events,” Mr. Bailey said.
Macy Urrutia, a physical therapy student in Arizona, and her fiancé Alec Basterrechea, a medical student in Texas are getting married on Dec. 31 2020 and have already booked their wedding venue — the Grove Hotel in Boise, Idaho because they knew that other couples were eyeing it 16 months ahead of the date.
Kelly Timmons, who planned Ms. Christensen and Mr. Parr’s wedding in Brisbane, echoed the sentiment, noting that she would be working only until 8 p.m. and then she planned to leave the wedding to attend a party.
