Mr. Redish is a professor of constitutional law at Northwestern.
Roger Stone, President Trump’s longtime confidant, was recently convicted on seven counts of criminal behavior. Other associates of Mr. Trump’s were previously convicted of crimes. Under the pardon power granted to him by Article II, Section 2 of the Constitution, Mr. Trump could pardon all of them at any point during his term in office. With one important exception, the president’s power to pardon for violation of federal laws is unqualified.
The pardon power was designed to permit the nation’s leader, at his discretion, to correct the mistakes of the judicial process. Like much of the Constitution, it was designed to enable one branch to check one or both of the other branches. In this instance, it gave the executive a check on the judiciary. In enacting the pardon power, Alexander Hamilton wrote, the framers intended to place this authority in the hands of “a single man of prudence and good sense.” But constitutional history is also dominated by the framers’ obsession with the prevention of tyranny; and of the three branches, the most likely to degenerate into tyrannical rule is the executive, which is headed by the president, the military’s commander in chief.
It is likely for that reason that the framers inserted an important qualification concerning a process that has dominated the news for months: The president could exercise the pardon power, “except in cases of impeachment.” In its narrowest form, both textually and historically, this means that the president cannot pardon an executive or judicial officer — including himself — from impeachment conviction. But perhaps this reading doesn’t go far enough, for the president is capable of undermining the impeachment check in indirect but equally dangerous ways.
Presidential suborning of perjury is itself most likely an impeachable offense. But the impeachment remedy for such presidential misdeeds may well prove to be insufficient for checking a president’s guerrilla warfare on the impeachment process. For example, what if Congress is unable to unearth persuasive evidence of such behavior, even though it actually took place, or what if the president preemptively pardons perjuring witnesses as a means of stopping any investigation into their behavior? What if witnesses friendly to the president choose to perjure themselves, assuming that the president will pardon them? In other words, even the mere possibility of presidential pardon in such situations presents a serious threat to the effective use of the impeachment power. It is reasonable, then, to find presidential pardon of witnesses in an impeachment proceeding automatically invalid. Otherwise, exercise of the pardon power seriously threatens the effective use of the impeachment power as a constitutional check.
The obvious means of avoiding such a troubling situation is to establish a prophylactic barrier to presidential pardon of any impeachment witness convicted of perjury or contempt. Can the Constitution be construed as establishing such a barrier? The answer is yes, if we choose to construe the pardon power’s impeachment exception to prohibit not only presidential pardons of impeachment convictions but also pardons of those convicted of criminal undermining of the impeachment process.
Is this expansion of the impeachment qualification on the pardon power consistent with the framers’ understanding? Technically, perhaps not, though slavish adherence to the framers’ understanding has by no means always limited modern constitutional interpretation. Indeed, much of modern constitutional law has evolved without concern for what the framers did or did not intend. It is also important to note that this reading of the pardon power’s impeachment exception is linguistically consistent with the text: “except in cases of impeachment” arguably refers to any crime related to the impeachment, as much as it does to the narrow conviction. This relatively expansive reading of the impeachment exception better fulfills the framers’ goals in adopting the impeachment exception to the pardon power in the first place — to prevent the president from undermining the impeachment power’s check of abuse of political or judicial authority.
As Justice Joseph Story, one of the great legal scholars of the early Republic, wrote, the Constitution has imposed the impeachment qualification on the president’s pardon power “so that he cannot, by any corrupt coalition with favorites, or dependents in high offices, screen them from punishment.” This concern would be most significant when the impeachment was of the president himself. It seems reasonable, then, to construe the impeachment exception to the presidential pardon power to prevent any subversion, direct or indirect, of so fundamental a check on executive abuse.
Martin H. Redish is a professor of constitutional law at Northwestern.