Ms. Warren will meet with several tribes in the state where she grew up, part of her continuing outreach efforts in the wake of the controversy over her past claims of Native heritage.
Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts will meet with several Native American tribes in Oklahoma on Sunday morning, continuing her efforts to reach out to tribal communities during her presidential campaign and further quell the controversy she ignited years ago by claiming Native American ancestry, for which she has apologized.
The meeting, first reported by The Washington Post, will take place during Ms. Warren’s first campaign trip to Oklahoma, the state where she grew up. Most of the state’s federally recognized tribes were invited, according to a campaign official, and Ms. Warren plans to further discuss her policy vision, including a proposal she released in August to protect tribal lands and bolster funding for programs that serve Native people.
The controversy reignited before she announced her presidential run, most notably when Ms. Warren took a DNA test last year to provide evidence that she had a Native American ancestor.
The decision immediately backfired, angering many Native Americans and drawing criticism from a progressive political base that has rarely disagreed with Ms. Warren. Tribal leaders said the DNA test helped further an idea they reject: that tribal citizenship can be determined by blood.
“If she wants to be considered the leader of our party or the leader of the progressive movement, she needs a reconciliation,” Jennifer Epps-Addison, co-director for the Center for Popular Democracy, said at the time.
Since her presidential announcement, Ms. Warren has apologized for taking the test, and for her previous claims of Native heritage. Her campaign has pointed to an exhaustive analysis by The Boston Globe, which showed no evidence that she received an advantage or preferential hiring treatment because of her claims.
Ms. Warren is rarely asked about the issue on the campaign trail with Democratic voters, and her policy-driven candidacy has won over many progressive leaders. If she is successful in securing the party’s nomination, President Trump will surely attempt to seize on the issue; he has already mocked her with a racial slur, “Pocahontas,” at many of his rallies.
Ms. Warren has incorporated meetings with Native leaders at several campaign stops. According to a campaign official, she has met with tribal leaders in Detroit, Seattle, Phoenix, and Los Angeles. She has also spoken at the National Indian Women’s Honoring Luncheon in Washington and the Frank LaMere Native American Presidential Forum in Sioux City, Iowa.
