Book Review|A Poltergeist Who Adores Apricots and Cat-Loving A.I.
A Poltergeist Who Adores Apricots and Cat-Loving A.I.
Now is the winter of our list content, with Top 10s and Best-ofs declaring the most notable works of the year published between January and October. But I’m here to share a few fascinating releases flying under the radar in the final three months of 2019, one of which has turned out to be among my most loved books of the year.
Kacen Callender’s QUEEN OF THE CONQUERED (Orbit, 358 pp., paper, $15.99) takes us to the islands of Hans Lollik, a Caribbean-inspired setting akin to the Danish West Indies. There the Scandinavianish colonists called the Fjern have enslaved and brutalized the dark-skinned islanders for generations, partly through the use of “kraft,” magical powers that range from inflicting pain and fear to compelling truth to speaking with the dead. Sigourney Rose is the last surviving child of an islander family that succeeded against all odds in amassing wealth and power among the Fjern aristocracy — and, consequently, were massacred by them. Grown to adulthood, possessed of a powerful desire for vengeance as well as an unusually potent ability to read and influence minds, Sigourney uses her powers to manipulate her way into the social circles of her family’s murderers in order to play a dangerous game: to compete with them for the attention and favor of their heirless king and destroy his empire from within.
Callender’s prose style is sharp and unflinching, with sinuous shifts in point of view that give this book a fierce, unsettling elegance. Sigourney, a black woman whose power comes at the expense of her people — whom she has also enslaved — is constantly, painfully aware of her complicity and is poisoned by self-loathing. The book is written from her perspective, but Sigourney’s ability to read minds means we frequently shift from her first-person narration to third and back again, as she slips in and out of the heads of those around her. This plays two thematic ends to a middle: First, it forces us to see and experience the settlers as whole human beings, full of longing and disappointment and love and fear, but always in the context of the fathomless evil they’re engaged in, benefit from and perpetuate; second, it echoes the very real ways in which abused and marginalized people have to empathize with their oppressors in order to anticipate their actions and ensure their own survival.
While this approach makes for an engrossing and powerfully disturbing reading experience, it obscures Sigourney as a character, and occasionally makes it difficult to reconcile her voice with her behavior. Her actions are sometimes baffling, lacking a motivational throughline; at one point I wondered whether she’d simply forgotten the information she’d conveyed to the reader in order to arrive at a different, more plot-convenient conclusion. There’s also a narrative-upending twist toward the very end of the book, which, though I cheered, I was unconvinced by; it needs a lot of propping up after the fact in ways that don’t quite stand up to storytelling scrutiny, though it does make the sequel a much more thrilling proposition.
That aside, Callender’s debut is tautly written and beautifully realized, and deserves to be ranked among the year’s most ambitious and provocative.
Nino Cipri’s HOMESICK (Dzanc, 216 pp., paper, $16.95) makes the idea of home into a prism and beams a core of queerness through it, refracting into nine surreal and moving stories about families lost, found and transformed. The stories vary from formal experiments to deeply felt character meditations, from a three-page piece of flash fiction to a well-developed novella, and from heartbreak to horror to humor. Over all they excel in a kind of subtle startling, like meeting unexpected ripples in a mirror.
The first half of the collection dwells in hauntings and elisions, building gradually toward something like reunion and repair. In “A Silly Love Story,” a young man’s shirts are unraveled by an apricot-loving poltergeist while he falls in love with his gender-queer friend Merion; in “Dead Air,” we glimpse pieces of two women’s courtship through transcripts of increasingly unsettling audio recordings; in “She Hides Sometimes,” pieces of Anjana’s childhood home seem to slip away with her ailing mother’s memories. The later, longer stories impressed me most: “The Shape of My Name” explores a child’s development and transition through time travel; in “Presque Vu,” a ride-share driver is haunted by keys he can’t stop pulling out of his throat, but finds friendship and romance anyway.
While all the stories are told in a sure and steady voice, some of the shorter ones shy away from their own power — they seem halting, not in the sense of hesitation, but rather of abrupt and decisive ceasing, a door shutting, a turning away on the heel. This is especially notable in retrospect, as the collection builds toward its last and most accomplished story, the only one original to the collection: “Before We Disperse Like Star Stuff,” in which three estranged queer friends find one another and renew their relationships while filming a Smithsonian documentary about the ancient sentient weasel people whose remains they discovered, is absolutely wonderful in every respect.
CATFISHING ON CATNET (Tor Teen, 304 pp., $17.99), by Naomi Kritzer, is a pure delight and a late addition to my top books of the year. The benevolent, cat-loving sentient artificial intelligence from Kritzer’s Hugo Award-winning short story “Cat Pictures Please” returns in a brilliant young adult thriller that’s as tender and funny as it is gripping and fast-paced.
Steph and her mother live like fugitives, on the run from an abusive father the 16-year-old Steph can’t remember. The only anchor in Steph’s tumultuous life is an online chat called CatNet, where she and a group of pseudonymous friends trade cat photos and talk about their lives — their therapy, their poverty, their queerness. Unbeknown to Steph, though, one of those friends, CheshireCat, is a powerful A.I. who wants nothing so much as to help make her life better — with dangerous, unforeseen consequences.
This book is perfect. From the believable teenage voices to the shockingly effective thriller plot, it swings effortlessly from charming humor to visceral terror, grounding it all in beautiful friendships, budding romance and radical acceptance. If you enjoyed Martha Wells’s Murderbot series or Jeph Jacques’s web comic Questionable Content, I feel very confident you’ll love this book. 