With Italians’ appetite for snack food growing, Barilla and Ferrero are in a pitched battle to make sure their cookies come out on top.
MILAN — As Marianna Farina and her husband did some Christmas shopping on a windy night in Milan, she noticed lots of people walking around with small brown packages of cookies.
She had found her way to a promotional pavilion set up to hype the introduction of Pan di Stelle Biscocrema, a new hazelnut cream-filled cookie by the venerable Italian breakfast brand, famous for its round cocoa cookies dotted with 11 white sugar stars.
About a month earlier, Nutella, the juggernaut of hazelnut spreads, had encroached on Pan di Stelle’s turf by introducing, after what the company said were 10 years and 120 million euros (about $133 million) in research and development, Nutella Biscuits. Ms. Farina had tried and liked them. Now she bit into the Pan di Stelle cookie. She liked it, too.
“It’s a tough one,” she said.
When the government considered a sugar tax on snacks this year, the country’s rival populist, Luigi Di Maio, the foreign minister and leader of the Five Star Movement, had a meltdown and immediately put a stop to it. A budget that passed on Monday includes a sugar tax, but it applies only to sodas.
And so the Christmas cookie battle between two cultural and culinary touchstones, Pan di Stelle and Nutella, and their superpower parent companies, the pasta giant Barilla and the chocolate giant Ferrero, strikes right at the Italian aorta.
For the most part, the two companies respected each other’s borders.
But in January 2018, Barilla made a move. It introduced jars of Pan di Stelle Crema, a spread made from “100 percent Italian hazelnuts and ‘dreamlike’ chocolate,” the company’s news release said.
Ferrero was not about to let the aggression go unanswered. The company raised the stakes in early 2019 by quietly dipping across the Italian border and testing Nutella Biscuits in other countries. In April, it rolled out the cookie in France to start spreading buzz and demand among Italians living and traveling abroad.
“This is our modus operandi,” said Claudia Millo, a Nutella spokeswoman.
And then, as it unleashed a take-no-prisoners publicity campaign, with ads for the cookies papering subway stations, glowing on television screens, hanging from the rafters of Rome’s main train station, they brought Nutella Biscuits home to Italy in November.
It was an enormous success. Nutella sold 5.9 million boxes of cookies in its first four weeks, according to IRI, a sales data company.
A month later, Pan di Stelle answered, unveiling Pan di Stelle Biscocrema during a press event at a rooftop bar in Milan decorated with star-shaped lights and catered with the cookies, which are topped with a solid star made of cream.
“They’re a gem, a piece of art,” said Julia Schwoerer, the deputy chairwoman of the Mulino Bianco and Pan di Stelle marketing division.
But Barilla, which has invested in a foundation dedicated to environmental sustainability and better nutrition (including, of course, plenty of grains), wants to make it clear that the cookies are occasional treats, not daily bread.

Barilla has promoted its rejection of palm oil, a saturated fat that has also prompted devastating deforestation. Nutella knows you like it.
To visit Nutella headquarters in the hazelnut-dotted hills of Alba is to enter Willy Wonka’s chocolate factory.
But around Alba the brand loyalty was nearly absolute.
Back at the Pan di Stelle pavilion in Milan, workers retrieved giant cookie-shaped lamps blown by the wind and gave Ms. Farina a souvenir Pan di Stelle pen. (“Oh, it’s definitely war,” she said.) But as workers scurried to get the cookies to safety, the one thing they said they could not tolerate was any mention of the Nutella Biscuit enemy.
