Every day, members of the Cloud Appreciation Society post photos of the sky from around the world. This is why they stop to look up.
“It’s always a good year for clouds,” said Melyssa Wright, a meteorologist living in York, England, and member 23,652 of the Cloud Appreciation Society.
The Cloud Appreciation Society was founded by Gavin Pretor-Pinney in 2005. Its tens of thousands of members around the world communicate online via a “Cloud Forum,” and they regularly convene at “Sky Gatherings,” which feature group expeditions, lectures on cloud-related art and science and even performances of cloud-themed music. They also submit photographs to the Cloudspotter app to earn stars and badges for properly identifying the clouds they spot.
This year, the society collected nearly 50,000 submissions. All the photographs included here were taken this year and submitted to either the app or the online gallery.
Melyssa Wright is a meteorologist for Britain’s national weather service: “I actually get paid to go out and look at the sky.” Wright recalled some formations that struck her recently. “I saw a good halo this year” — a bright, rainbow-colored circle that appears around the sun under certain conditions. “If you aren’t a cloud-spotter, you probably don’t think they exist,” she said.
Hans Stocker, a retired I.T. project manager, lives in the Netherlands where “sometimes it can be gray and a bit dull,” he said. “You don’t have those spectacular skies that you can sometimes observe in America: thunderstorms with storm-chasers and really spectacular cumulonimbi,” dense clouds that can sometimes be tens of thousands of feet tall and are capable of generating lightning.
For other spotters, technical identification is less important. One of the most memorable clouds of the year for Geoff Thornton, a retired systems analyst, was one that resembled a baby deer. And on a trip to Las Vegas, Thornton was able to capture a cloud that looked like a cocktail glass, complete with stirrer.
Photo Credits: Gallery 1: Suzanne Winckler, Suzanne Winckler, Suzanne Winckler, Suzanne Winckler. Gallery 2: Dave Burnett, Kym Druitt, Kym Druitt, Cecelia Cooke. Gallery 3: Francoise Chicot, Hans Stocker, Melyssa Wright, Daviz Morales. Gallery 4: Melanie Brat, Phil Dawson, Michele Sabatier, Scott Thybony, Jack Maziarz, Hans Stocker. Gallery 5: John Marsham, Geoff Thornton, Carole Miles, Rebecca Hill. Gallery 6: Jan Hertoghs, Hans Stocker, Shannon Schultz, Ashok Kolluru, Rob Hawkes, Justin Needham, George Preoteasa, Paolo Bardelli, Laura Simms, Stephen Castell, Ian Robertson.
