What were some of the books published this year that you didn’t review but admired?
DWIGHT GARNER Ben Lerner is moving from strength to strength, and “The Topeka School” displays a unique mind and sensibility on the prowl. Colson Whitehead’s “The Nickel Boys” was a sustained pleasure. Sandra Simonds’s new book of poems, “Atopia,” sent me in search of her earlier work.
JENNIFER SZALAI Another tribute from me to “The Topeka School”; I admired Lerner’s previous novels but was moved by the bigger perspective and ambition of this new book. “How to Do Nothing,” by Jenny Odell, is an eloquent argument against the cult of efficiency, and I felt both consoled and invigorated by it. “The Yellow House,” by Sarah M. Broom, has everything I could want in a book: moving personal history, painstaking research, a reflexive self-awareness.
PARUL SEHGAL I was stunned by Ilya Kaminsky’s “Deaf Republic,” lyric poems presented as a play in two acts, set in a country in crisis, inspired both by Odessa, where Kaminsky grew up, and America, where he now lives. It’s a book about censorship, political apathy, torture — “the nakedness / of the whole nation” — but also about tomato sandwiches, the birth of a daughter and the sudden, almost shocking joys of longtime married life.
What about books not published in 2019 that you read in the past 12 months? Anything you would especially recommend?
GARNER I moved to a new city and into a new kitchen this fall, and rereading Laurie Colwin’s earthy and wise “Home Cooking: A Writer in the Kitchen” (1988) made me feel grounded. Colwin died in 1992, but you can’t read her without wishing she lived next door.
I didn’t mean to reread Samuel Pepys’s diary again, but I picked it up and inhaled it like a Popeyes chicken sandwich. Angela Carter’s essays, collected in “Shaking a Leg,” were a treat. So were “Legs,” “Billy Phelan’s Greatest Game” and “Ironweed,” the first three books in William Kennedy’s amazing Albany Cycle.
SEHGAL Reading Samantha Irby is the only form of self-care I recognize. Her essays — especially those collected in “We Are Never Meeting in Real Life” (2017) — are so funny and dank and truthful. I keep multiple copies around, putatively as gifts, but it turns out I can’t bear to give any of them away. I’m just hoarding them now.
The best book I read this year was first published in Britain, in 2011: Alice Oswald’s book-length poem “Memorial,” a retelling of the “Iliad” that tries to retrieve its essence: “as you might lift the roof off a church in order to remember what you are worshiping,” she writes. It’s a holy book. Chase it with Upamanyu Chatterjee’s sweetly profane “English, August,” about a government employee moldering away in India’s hottest city. It’s a tribute to sloth, slacking, impossible yearnings — the cardinal virtues.
SZALAI Parul and Dwight said something on the podcast about Deborah Levy’s memoir “The Cost of Living,” which sent me straight to that book. I loved that she saw her electric bicycle as a main character. I also loved her aversion to commas, even if that’s something I couldn’t abide by myself.
I reread Sarah Schulman’s “Conflict Is Not Abuse,” about the very human tendency to conflate discomfort with existential threats, which is a subject that seems to get more and more relevant every year. Schulman eventually addresses enormous political and social issues, but she starts out small, with interpersonal misunderstandings. She also makes a case for picking up the phone and working things out, rather than hiding behind emails and texts — a deeply unfashionable stance that will forever endear her to me, a stubborn phone person.
Who are some of your favorite writers that emerged (on your radar) this year? Or writers who took a step forward in their work (in ambition or craft) that you considered significant?
SZALAI There are a couple of historians on my list — Kerri Greenidge and Daniel Immerwahr — whom I had never read before this year. I reviewed an exquisitely written book by Megan Stack, a journalist, called “Women’s Work,” about the vexed relationship she had with the women she hired to clean her house and care for her children while she was living in Beijing and Delhi. Grace Talusan’s memoir, “The Body Papers,” finds unexpected points of connection between her experiences of abuse, immigration and genetic testing; the allusions she makes are powerful yet delicately drawn.
SEHGAL How in the world is Lucy Ellmann going to follow “Ducks, Newburyport,” her thousand-page novel told (mostly) in a single sentence, which seems to encompass all of modern life (and, for good measure, the thoughts of a mountain lion)? Ambition for ambition’s sake doesn’t tend to move me, but what this book accomplishes — formally, aesthetically, emotionally — is very exciting. I was also hugely impressed by the depth and sensitivity of Rachel Louise Snyder’s reporting in “No Visible Bruises,” her revelatory book about domestic violence and why it is so poorly understood.
GARNER The Zambian writer Namwali Serpell’s first novel, “The Old Drift,” seemed to come out of nowhere. It’s that rarity — a big, multigenerational novel that’s crunchy and alive on almost every page. Susan Choi’s work has always been worth attending to, but her new one, “Trust Exercise,” seems to me like a breakthrough. It’s looser than her previous novels; there’s more blood coursing through its veins.
Did anyone in particular disappoint you?
SEHGAL My most anticipated book this year was Ben Moser’s biography of Susan Sontag — a writer I admire on one I revere. I found it too diagnostically minded, however, and I’m not convinced by his claim that Sontag’s enduring importance lies in her myth, not her work. I’d argue the opposite. I admired “Cat Person,” the viral New Yorker short story, but found Kristen Roupenian’s collection, “You Know You Want This,” shockingly shallow. Watching Salman Rushdie parody himself in “Quichotte” was depressing.
GARNER Ta-Nehisi Coates’s first novel, “The Water Dancer,” was undercooked. He’s an important nonfiction writer who may become an important novelist, but he isn’t one yet. I’m an Elizabeth McCracken admirer but her new one, “Bowlaway,” was too whimsical for my tastes. Ditto Téa Obreht’s “Inland,” which lost me from its first pages. Michel Houellebecq! Someone needs to wind him up and point him in a new direction.
SZALAI I think Linda Hirshman has a brilliant mind, but her book “Reckoning” — about the long history behind the #MeToo movement — really drips with disdain toward any feminist she deems too “libertine” for her liking (i.e. Catharine MacKinnon is O.K.; Gloria Steinem isn’t).
Malcolm Gladwell’s latest book, “Talking to Strangers,” didn’t include the weird, obscure historical narratives that he used to take pains to uncover. Do we really need his theory about why attempts to appease Adolf Hitler didn’t work?
What’s the book on each of your lists of 10 favorites that most surprised you, either in terms of how much you enjoyed it or why you enjoyed it?
GARNER I’ve been distributing copies of Chelsey Minnis’s book of poems “Baby, I Don’t Care” since I read it. I’ve begun to feel like a Jehovah’s Witness. The book is a set of nearly 150 single-page poems that tinker with notions taken from Hollywood’s golden era and film noir. It’s dark and droll and utterly delightful. “You see, I’m the type of person who would hurt a fly,” Minnis’s narrator says.  These resemble Turner Classic Movies set to stun.
SZALAI I was surprised by how much I learned from Tim Alberta’s book “American Carnage”; I’ve read plenty about Republicans and Trump, but Alberta is clearly so well sourced with the G.O.P. that those sources opened up and said some things that were truly revealing. It’s a book about Trump that isn’t really about Trump — thank God.
SEHGAL I was struck by how many of the books I admired write their way into the silences in history — Saidiya Hartman’s “Wayward Lives, Beautiful Experiments,” Pekka Hamalainen’s “Lakota America,” Carmen Maria Machado’s “In the Dream House” — and how they manage to work around and with particular gaps and erasures. Hartman, in particular, is a sleuth of the archive, and she fills in what she cannot verify in the lives of young, mostly anonymous black women at the cusp of the 20th century with speculation, the conditional tense, even fictional imagining.
“A Warning,” by Anonymous, and the Mueller report were two of the big books of the year. What’s the state of political books this far into Trump’s term? Are we learning anything new? Are we surprised that so many books are still being churned out?
SZALAI I’ve been seeing a number of postmortems of the old order — books lamenting (or cheering) the demise of liberal democracy — and then, of course, there’s the endless stream of memoirs by Trump insiders, including Anonymous’s book. So far, none of those memoirs really compare to what we’ve been learning during these impeachment hearings.
The best political books about Trump are attuned to the deeper frequencies that enabled his rise: Andrew Marantz’s “Antisocial,” an account of the collapsing media ecosystem and the growing influence of the alt-right, is a stellar example. Another is William Davies’s “Nervous States,” which looks at how our rancorous politics reflect a more fundamental crisis in how we apprehend reality. Appealing to the facts used to offer a basis for consensus; now we often place more trust in sensation and things that “feel true” than in hard evidence.
GARNER Each new book arrives and you think, “This will be the one,” the arrow that threads the ax-heads lined up in a row and finds its mark. It’s so difficult for political books to keep up with the news now, and to fight through the perpetual fog that’s being generated. I do look at someone like Stephen Miller — every time he’s photographed with Trump I think of Salvador Dalí walking his anteater — and wonder who is going to write his Roy Cohn-style biography.
SEHGAL I don’t know about the state of political books these days; I only know that my state is parlous and full of confusion: Who is reading these books? Why do they accomplish so little? If William Davies is planning a follow-up to “Nervous States,” I hereby offer myself up as an excellent subject.
Novels this year that engaged with our political times included Ian McEwan’s “Cockroach,” Miriam Toews’s “Women Talking,” and Robert Menasse’s “The Capital.” How is fiction doing in keeping up with the news? Should it be doing more or less in that regard?
GARNER McEwan is so adept at capturing the mood of a moment (witness “Saturday,” published not long after the United States’ 2003 invasion of Iraq) that it was painful to watch him flail in “Cockroach.” It’s still so early. This administration’s assault on truth and moral values will percolate though every serious novel written in the next three decades.
SZALAI I can’t speak to the overall landscape for fiction, though I’d be curious what either of you would say makes a good political novel. (Or, conversely, what makes a bad political novel!) I remember bristling at McEwan’s “Saturday” because it was so adept at capturing a prevailing mood in the run-up to war, and I wanted something less smoothly sure of itself. That’s partly why I used to think Houellebecq was writing some of the most fascinating (if repugnant and troubling) political satire about rich, liberal democracies — though now that the abjection and nihilism he captured so well is ascendant, I don’t know if I could still read him in the same way.
SEHGAL I don’t think fiction has any obligations other than to engross me (me, specifically, yes). I’m interested when writers explore our moment with style and force, as Mohammed Hanif, Miriam Toews, Lucy Ellmann, Ben Lerner, Sally Rooney all do. But I’m also very drawn to writers who declare a war on the hegemony of what we have decided is relevant, on what we consider news. These writers — who stay interested in smallness, strangeness and the obscure — have a way of lasting. Two beautifully reissued novels by Natalia Ginzburg come to mind.