Masa Son, the Japanese billionaire, instilled a hard-driving work ethos at his venture capital firm, SoftBank Vision Fund: Go big or go home. But the fund has also been described as an environment of sycophancy and harassment, reports Bloomberg Businessweek.
The fund is known for making outsize bets on tech start-ups, which helped it take in more than $21.2 billion on investments in 2017. But its practices have raised skepticism from outsiders.
“The strategy that Son and his all-male phalanx of managing partners followed seemed less about any specific technology than about placing large bets on the buzziest start-ups,” Bloomberg writes.
The plan seemed to be working, until the fund’s most prominent investment, WeWork, spectacularly fumbled its I.P.O.
The Chinese government, already known for its vast surveillance systems, is stepping up its ability to spy on virtually everyone in the country, the NYT’s Paul Mozur and Aaron Krolik report.
The Chinese authorities are melding old and new technologies — including phone scanners, facial recognition cameras, and face and fingerprint databases — into tools for authoritarian control, according to private and police databases.
The tools can help identify people walking down the street, find out whom they are meeting, and determine who does and doesn’t belong to the Communist Party. In the United States and other countries, some of these techniques are used to track terrorists and drug lords.
The rollout in China has come at the expense of personal privacy. The authorities stored the personal data of millions of people on servers that are unprotected by even basic security measures, The Times found. Leaks of online data is a major problem.
Signs of a backlash are brewing: In Shanghai, residents pushed back against a police plan to install facial recognition cameras in a building complex, and in Zhejiang Province a professor sued a zoo after it required mandatory facial recognition scans for its members to get access, Mr. Mozur and Mr. Krolik write.
Fiat Chrysler and PSA, the maker of Peugeot, agreed today on a merger in a deal that would create the world’s fourth-biggest auto manufacturer, write the NYT’s Jack Ewing and Liz Alderman.
The carmakers signed a formal agreement for a 50-50 merger, which had been announced in October. The combined company will be led by PSA’s C.E.O., Carlos Tavares. The Fiat chairman, John Elkann, will hold the same role at the new company.
The new entity would surpass Volkswagen as the market leader in Europe, with more than 400,000 employees and worldwide sales of 8.7 million vehicles.
Integrating the companies could take many months, including the process of choosing a name for the new company.
Analysts regard the union as an imperfect match: “They share some weaknesses, including a dependence on the declining European market and the lack of a strong presence in China,” the reporters write.
Russia’s tech sector has a wealth of talent but is often hurt by the country’s stumbling attempts to market its developers’ skills, the NYT’s Andrew Higgins writes.
The $670 million sale this year of Nginx, a Russian company that developed web server software used by more than a third of the world’s websites, to F5 Networks of Seattle, sent a clear message: Russian programmers can create valuable products.
But that was before Russia’s capricious and aggressive law-enforcement system got involved.
Police officers with automatic weapons last week searched the homes of the company’s founders, Igor Sysoyev and Maxim Konovalov, and their company’s Moscow office, and also took the two men in for questioning.
The case, essentially an intellectual property matter that the authorities escalated to a criminal case, has turned one of Russia’s biggest IT success stories into an example of why the country has so much trouble developing its economy beyond natural resource extraction, Mr. Higgins writes.
Pacific Gas & Electric reached a $1.7 billion settlement with California regulators for deadly wildfires started by its equipment in 2017 and 2018, the NYT’s Lauren Hepler and Ivan Penn write. The deal resolves one of several obstacles that the company faces in its bankruptcy petition.
The utility is trying to win approval in U.S. Bankruptcy Court for a separate multibillion-dollar settlement. Two weeks ago, the utility appeared to have cleared a big hurdle by reaching a $13.5 billion settlement with wildfire victims.
But Gov. Gavin Newsom objected to the company’s proposed restructuring last week, as hedge funds vying for control of the utility seek to change the settlement with victims.
The results of those battles will shape how fire victims are compensated for lost homes and loved ones. It will also determine how California fixes and updates its strained energy system.
Many independent contractors in California are caught in uncertainty by a law that focuses on gig-economy workers. The legislation takes effect on Jan. 1, but many employers and workers say it is unclear how it will affect them, write the WSJ’s Christine Mai-Duc and Lauren Weber.
• Many workers will be reclassified as employees rather than independent contractors under the law, known as AB5, “giving them access to minimum wage and overtime laws, workers’ compensation coverage and paid sick days” the reporters write.
But confusion over who will be affected is driving some to take precautionary measures, while others hope a court will clarify the matter soon.
Other states are watching closely: “How the outstanding questions about AB5 get resolved in the coming months could have national implications, as lawmakers in other states including New York and New Jersey consider similar legislation,” the reporters write.
“We are going into uncharted waters,” one small-business owner said.
Bed Bath & Beyond’s new C.E.O., Mark Tritton, is ousting six senior executives.
Citadel, the alternative asset manager, named Tripp Kyle its chief corporate affairs and communications officer.
