It’s the holiday season and we’re hot and hungry. A roundup of our favorite food, wine and restaurants of late.
The Australia Letter is a weekly newsletter from our Australia bureau. Sign up to get it by email. This week’s issue is written by Damien Cave, the Australia bureau chief.
It’s the holiday season and we’re hot, hungry and ready for a break — so this week’s newsletter will be short and laser-focused on what brings comfort: food and drink.
In the midst of all the news in recent months, you might have missed a few Timesian explorations of such things, so let me be your concierge.
Let’s start with our wine critic’s favorite wine moments of 2019, not just because that thoughtful critic, Eric Asimov, suggests some fantastic bottles for gifts or family gatherings, but also because two of his favorite experiences occurred in Australia.
When he visited the winery, La Violetta, and its proprietor, Andrew Hoadley, Eric learned that the wine was fermented in barrels without clarifying or filtering — a radical approach that produced the name, suggesting a wine breaks all the rules.
Another favorite moment for Eric: visiting Luke Lambert in the Yarra Valley, where he discovered Mr. Lambert’s nebbiolo.
If you see either of those wines on the shelf at your local bottle shop, grab a case.
While you’re shopping for drinks, you might also want to pick up a bottle of Australian whisky. Yes, that’s right, whisky.
When Clay Risen told me he was going to write about it, I admit I was a bit skeptical. But then I bought a bottle of Lark in Tasmania as a gift for a friend, who was kind enough to share a glass or two with me, and I quickly (hallelujah!) became a believer.
We couldn’t do it without you, and wouldn’t want to anyway.
‘Why My Baby?’: How Measles Robbed Samoa of Its Young: When the virus arrived on its shores, the Pacific island nation was grievously unprepared. It had left the door to contagion wide open, and thousands of children have suffered.
Australia Records Its Hottest Day. At Least for Now. A national heat wave pushed high temperatures across the country on Tuesday to an average of 105.6 degrees. Even more heat is in the forecast.
On New Zealand’s Stunning West Coast, the Beauty Doesn’t Stop: For Stop #47, the 52 Places Traveler reveled in nature unleashed on the new Paparoa Track, where alpine forests and craggy peaks give way to dense rainforest.
After Volcano Blast, New Zealand Asks if Adventure Tourism Can Last: The eruption on White Island has set off an intense debate on exploiting nature for thrills.
On New Zealand’s Volcano, Knee-Deep Ash and Boiling Water Underfoot: The team that recovered bodies from White Island went “to the depths of their endurance and past it,” said the colonel who oversaw the mission.
What Do Gen Z Shoppers Want? A Cute, Cheap Outfit That Looks Great on Instagram: Three young female shoppers in three countries talk about what they buy, where they buy it and why.
On Wednesday, President Trump became the third sitting president in American history to be impeached. Here’s what you need to know.
Key Moments: The Day the House Impeached Trump: The historic votes charged the president with “high crimes and misdemeanors” in connection with a Ukraine pressure campaign.
An Inside Look at the Impeachment Case’s Most Intriguing Moments: Members of the House granted The New York Times rare access to photograph their impeachment preparations.
What’s Next for Trump? A Senate Impeachment Trial, Probably: Here’s what we know about if and when President Trump will be tried in the Senate.
Listen to The Daily: In a divided House, moderate Democrats are bearing the burden of answering for the impeachment vote.
The Decade in Pictures: The New York Times pored over 10 years of images, of moments both fresh and faded, to tell the story of the past decade.
The Biggest Breakout Stars of 2019: Music, movies, television, theater, art and dance: Here’s who broke away from the pack this year.
Prime Power: How Amazon Squeezes the Businesses Behind Its Store: Twenty years ago, Amazon opened its storefront to anyone who wanted to sell something. Then it began demanding more out of them.
