A reader’s monthslong trek gave him a new perspective on the country’s political schism. Also: Pedestrian safety in New York City; presidential debate rules; holiday waste; a tourist’s tale.
For the last five months I was in the woods walking from Maine to Georgia on the Appalachian Trail. The decision was rash and easy, made by two friends and me in our winding-down days of high school — to hike 2,200 miles instead of directly entering the much-anticipated world of college.
The expected fruits of such a journey were apparent: natural beauty; the joy of meeting other hikers; and the simplicity of this ambulatory life wherein the only necessities are food, water and one foot in front of the other.
Yet as I watched the impeachment process unfold on TV, the great schism along party lines ever deepening, I thought back to the acts of benevolence we saw from people of all 14 states we hiked through. My fellow hikers and I were grateful to all the strangers who offered a bed, food, water, hot chocolate, extra supplies, hitchhikes or whatever we needed. This support came from Trump supporters, from Bernie Sanders supporters, from the unknowing or indifferent; what mattered was that we could use the help.
It brings me solace and hope to know that the televised division of our country illustrated by our elected officials is not a thorough representation of the state of the union or the character of its citizens. It is worthwhile to go out and interact with those who are dissimilar rather than allow what is seen on TV to render them uncongenial.
The recent plague of traffic fatalities in New York City is a grim symptom of the withdrawal of a visible traffic police presence on most city streets. While I greatly admire the New York Police Department’s success in reducing violent crime, a lack of traffic enforcement has led to chaotic conditions on the streets.
As any pedestrian can attest, simply crossing the street is often a near-death experience, with trucks and taxis plowing through crowded crosswalks with no concern for those they are almost running down or worry about getting caught. At major intersections, drivers routinely zoom through red lights or block crosswalks.
If Mayor Bill de Blasio is genuinely concerned about making streets safer, he would be well advised to deploy more traffic police to rigorously enforce existing laws. An expensive traffic ticket is an excellent deterrent to bad driving and would easily pay for any increase in police deployments to protect pedestrians.
It’s unfair of the Democratic National Committee to set such strict standards for candidates to qualify for the next debate. At this point in the pre-election cycle, a candidate’s polling numbers can fluctuate, and we should not limit the field so much just yet.
The D.N.C. should strongly consider the request by Cory Booker and others to lower the threshold for the next debate. We want to hear more.
Thank you for pointing out the ecological downside of the holidays, especially wrapping paper. According to Sundale Research, Americans spent about $8 billion last year on wrapping paper. Not only is that a lot of waste for our landfills, but it’s also an expensive habit for something that gets ripped open in seconds.
It has been estimated that if every family wrapped just three presents in reused materials, it would save enough paper to cover 45,000 football fields. It doesn’t have to be ugly brown paper either. Personally, I’ve found the switch quite easy using colorful special sections of The New York Times!
As a tourist, I’ve heard how cold people can be in New York City, but this was not my experience. Visiting from Toronto this month, I was often approached by helpful passers-by while trying to figure out subway routes and rubbernecking to get my bearings. And then, this!
Now I, too, ❤️ New York.
