The senior rabbi at Temple Emanu-El says we need to demonstrate that an attack on one New Yorker is an attack on all New Yorkers. Also: Security in the subways; Joe Biden’s stuttering.
In December 1993 in Billings, Mont., a rash of nativist rhetoric and violence culminated in an attack on a Jewish home during the festival of Hanukkah. The city responded in a remarkable way.
Recognizing that anti-Semitism is not just a Jewish issue, residents of all faiths and of no faith at all placed pictures of Hanukkah menorahs in their windows. Together, they beat back the forces of hate.
The anti-Semitic violence that has plagued our city lately has targeted members of the more traditional Jewish community, easily identifiable by the clothing they wear. Let New Yorkers respond as the people of Billings did.
The yarmulke, the Jewish ritual head covering, is worn to show humility before God. Some Jews wear them; some do not. But if we all wore them, Jews and non-Jews, men and women alike, perhaps we could demonstrate to the haters in our city that an attack on one of us is an attack on all of us.
The writer is the senior rabbi at Temple Emanu-El in New York.
It is heartening to read that serious crime in the subway continues to decline, but the general sense of lawlessness in the subways is most definitely not down. Fare-beating seems rampant, despite the “crackdown” your editorial mentions; panhandling is incessant; and reports of riders being slapped, pushed and groped seem to be on the rise.
We need those extra police officers in the subways to increase the sense of safety for everyday strap-hanging New Yorkers. Without that safe feeling, ridership will decline, which is not good for anyone — the public, the M.T.A., the environment, traffic.
And while I take your point about adding officers who report to “a state-controlled authority that is less accountable to average New Yorkers,” the New York Police Department has plenty of other fish to fry. Having the governor save us from needing to use additional local officers to make us feel safer deserves thanks, not opprobrium.
Right on with that editorial.
The current policing priorities it mentions do seem odd. Who decided that fare evasion or selling food in the subway was more disturbing or dangerous to us than, say, the reckless impunity of car and truck drivers breaking traffic laws?
In any single week, hundreds of drivers exceed speed limits, run lights, creep into pedestrian crosswalks and double-park in bike lanes. If extra officers are hired for transportation duty, they belong on the streets, ticketing drivers and enforcing traffic laws.
There would also be a lot of new revenue in this intervention that could be put toward further improving our quality of life.
He uses certain well-known techniques — circumlocution or lowering his head — to control stuttering. As Mr. Leonhardt points out, circumlocution can result in “mangled syntax.” This can be misinterpreted as an indication that Mr. Biden isn’t as sharp as he once was. In fact, he’s used these methods all his life to counter stuttering and has been an effective senator and vice president.
Talking about this would not only be a revealing personal moment, but would also detail his overcoming a problem that would hinder almost anyone wishing to enter public life.
