When she’s not reading to children about art, Ruth Rodriguez makes her own, in her living room studio.
On most mornings, Ruth Rodriguez, a senior librarian in the children’s section of the Francis Martin Library in the West Bronx, seeks out new readers by going door to door in the neighborhood.
Ms. Rodriguez also runs after-school programs that introduce children to the work of current artists, with a focus on women of color.
“I’m known as the artsy librarian,” says Rodriguez, who has an M.F.A. from Lehman College, where she teaches life drawing once a week.
Ms. Rodriguez, 34, lives in University Heights, in a fifth-floor walk-up, just a 15-minute walk from the library.
THE FANTASY OF FRESH BREAD I wake up around 8 in the morning. For the most part it’s my neighbors playing some loud music in their cars or kitchens that wakes me up. Usually I get a whiff of the lingering smell of baked bread from the Fordham Road Bakery around the corner.
This helps motivate me to get up from bed. I may not actually go there early in the morning, but at least the fantasy of getting to the bakery and getting some fresh-baked bread or cake gets me going.
TALK TO ME Recently, I have really been into listening to library audiobooks in the morning to help me decompress without looking at a screen. Something about listening to a soothing narrator in the morning provides a nice contrast to loud car beats.
The narrator’s voice will often follow me to the kitchen, where I make my favorite breakfast: scrambled eggs on a corn tortilla that I toasted on top of my stove burners. I top it with spring mix salad, tomatoes, plain Greek yogurt, red pickled onions I made inside of a Trader Joe’s tomato sauce jar, topped with Romano cheese I get from Arthur Avenue.
QUITTING, CHEATING I have started the arduous process of not drinking coffee every day before work. But occasionally on Sundays I allow myself a nice espresso, made in a percolator, with whole milk.
ART-CENTRIC APARTMENT I look over some paintings or drawings that I have begun on the previous weekend and might paint or add to the drawings. I have turned my living room into an art studio with a small library, and I added a sitting area to my bedroom for when I have guests. Having my own studio helps me get more into an artistic mood. After I get some paint stains on my hands, I take a long shower, wash my wild puffy waves and enjoy the smells of an olive oil shower scrub.
BIKE If the weather permits and the sun has yet to set I will go for an afternoon bike ride that will sometimes lead me to Arthur Avenue to do some grocery shopping. That’s when I usually make it to the bakery around the corner from me. I use an electric-tape-covered road bike that I lock on my bottom staircase. I asked my super if I could leave it there since it was a bit much carrying it up and down from a fifth-floor apartment.
A LITTLE NIGHT MUSIC In the evenings, I sometimes like to eat dinner and listen to music at a place called Tilila. It’s a bar and restaurant in my neighborhood and they have a lot of live music from Latin America. I really like the acoustic sets. They showcase a lot of female musicians and singers. The place doesn’t close until midnight, but I have to be at work on Monday, so leave by 9.
PREPARING FOR MONDAY Evenings are kind of quiet. I listen to music or maybe take another look at my work. Then I go to bed. The library doesn’t open until 11, but I have to be there earlier, and I make time to go around to the apartments and knock on doors.