 But a lot of things have to go right for their plan to work.
“Mr. Robot” is not a show that traffics in easy catharsis. Seemingly every time Elliot Alderson and his allies — whether they exist only in his head or are flesh and blood human beings — win a battle against their ultrarich adversaries, defeat is snatched from the jaws of victory.
The 5/9 hack that wiped out the world’s credit records? It led to an economic tailspin that only tightened those adversaries’ grip on what remained. Elliot’s tireless work to stop his more hard-core Mr. Robot persona from blowing up a building containing paper versions of those records? It was all a ruse by his archnemesis, Whiterose, to blow up the dozens of buildings where Elliot parked those records instead.
Elliot’s decision to reverse the 5/9 hack and undo what he wrought? It amounted to a click of a button at the very end of last season, delaying what little gratification could be had from the reversal until the start of this season — which began with the retaliatory murder of his best friend, Angela.
So you’ll have to forgive me for being a glass-half-empty guy where this otherwise deeply satisfying episode is concerned. Sure, it looks as if Elliot and Darlene have finally put the screws to the Deus Group and exposed its leader, Whiterose, as the murderer she really is. But the season isn’t over yet. I’ll believe “Mr. Robot” gave us a happy ending only if that is still the case when the closing credits roll on the series finale.
In the meantime, though? Boy howdy, what a fun hour of television!
For all the lines of code the characters stare at, and for all the hacker jargon that gets thrown around, the plot is actually very simple. Darlene and Elliot need all the members of the Deus Group in one place so they can simultaneously ping all their phones with a phony alert from their bank. Once they all input their security codes, the Aldersons can break into their accounts and wipe out their fortunes.
But the plan works only if every member of the Deus Group — from Whiterose herself to a guy who sure looks a lot like Donald Trump — is in the same place at the same time, since a staggered hack would enable stragglers to wise up and ignore the fake alert. And as it turns out, Whiterose has moved the venue for the Deus Group meeting from its original location, which she has reserved for a one-on-one confrontation with the deposed E Corp chief executive, Philip Price. Her goal is to demand that Price give up what he knows about Elliot’s plans, but her presence at this separate location complicates those plans considerably.
Darlene is the one who is forced to get the most inventive, as Mr. Robot dispatches her to the new location (Cipriani, in case you want to make a reservation) to prepare the big Deus Group phone hack. Improvising cleverly, she shoots a new fsociety video, outing the conspiracy and announcing their current location. Crowds begin to gather, cutting off the plutocrats’ escape. Darlene also hacks the building’s parking-garage exit, trapping all their limousines inside and further slowing things down.
In the end, it all works out. Elliot gets Whiterose’s number. The Deus Group’s accounts are collectively wiped out.  The episode’s final shot shows her putting on her makeup (she spent the entire episode in her male-presenting secret identity, the Chinese state security minister, Zhang) while the sounds of a gun battle between police and her Dark Army minions are heard in the background. Everyone’s comeuppance has well and truly come up.
But even now, there are intriguing loose ends and charming plot threads not covered in a description of the main action. Take Philip Price, for instance. As played, brilliantly, by Michael Cristofer, Price seems to have known his time was almost up the moment he allied himself with Elliot to take down Whiterose. So when he realizes he has arrived at what is clearly meant to be his place of execution, he is resigned to his fate and spends the ensuing meeting getting hammered on champagne.
This leads to some of the night’s funniest lines. “You think I can’t survive being doxxed?” Whiterose shouts at him at one point after Darlene’s new video goes viral.
And later, when the hack goes through and Whiterose begins to realize it, you can hear the laughter in Price’s voice as he asks, “Something wrong, old sport?” Price has the most dramatic death of all the main characters who’ve bought the farm this season; it seems fitting that he has the most fun on his way out.
But Price had a plan of his own, one he wants to see Elliot bring to fruition. It’s not enough to bankrupt Whiterose and her Deus Group cronies: Price wants her top-secret project, some sort of huge machine being shipped to the Chinese Congo, destroyed.
For some time during the show’s middle seasons, it seemed that Whiterose was building some kind of time machine or dimensional gate that would literally enable its users to go back, undo their mistakes and live in a better world. Indeed, Whiterose insists to Elliot that Angela is still alive and that he can see her and talk to her if he just stops his scheme against the Deus Group.
Ultimately, neither Elliot nor Price buys what Whiterose is selling. Price notes, accurately, that Whiterose weaponized Angela’s regrets against her in a similar fashion, then destroyed her. But there’s still that nagging suspicion that maybe there really is something to Whiterose’s grandiose claims. It is fitting, given Whiterose’s obsession with time, that only time will tell.
At the start of the episode, we get another brief tease of some as-yet unseen alternate personality that Elliot’s other personas are waiting for. I’m still stumped.
It felt good seeing the old fsociety iconography back in action after all this time, even if its real-world inspirations, like the Anonymous hacker collective, seem a world away from where the world is now.