Two pro-choice activists object to a portrayal of the movement as fractured and complacent.
When it comes to abortion rights, it is inaccurate to blame a divided left for the current status of legal abortion in this country.
The abortion rights movement — made up of abortion providers, advocates, researchers, activists and patients — is not fractured. Like any family, we are made up of people who see the issues through their own lenses, have their own priorities and approaches, and, of course, occasionally disagree. This is nothing to lament. To be a strong movement, we need diverse voices, and we embrace that diversity.
As a movement we are fighting against entrenched misogyny and systemic racism, which are far more to blame for abortion restrictions and assaults on access than any alleged movement division. We are fighting against a nationwide politics of hate and wanton disregard for the needs of real people facing real issues — a politics more interested in scoring points than solving problems.
The challenges we face in this pivotal moment only strengthen our resolve and our cohesion.
The writer, an Episcopal priest, is president and chief executive of the National Abortion Federation, the professional association of abortion providers.
I agree that the clinics that offer abortions in embattled states are at the center of a perfect storm of opposition from the religious right. They deserve all of our support for the critical and brave care they provide. But the portrait of national abortion rights organizations as having become complacent, especially during the Obama presidency, does not at all jibe with my years of experience working for such organizations.
Under Barack Obama, these organizations were working around the clock to ensure that women’s reproductive health care was included within a national insurance program, but faced Republicans in Congress who opposed us at every turn.
When abortion coverage was out of the question, we strategically worked to include contraceptive coverage in regulations implementing the law. On the state level, we were (and still are) challenging restrictive laws passed by Republican-controlled legislatures and signed by Republican governors.
The struggle to protect Roe v. Wade started the day that it was decided by the Supreme Court and has not stopped throughout many presidencies. The price of liberty is indeed eternal vigilance.
The writer is a former vice president of Physicians for Reproductive Health and a former communications director of the Center for Reproductive Rights.
The polarization of views on abortion leaves pro-choice Louisiana Democrats like ourselves feeling marginalized. Derided by the religious right for being pro-choice, we (and our governor) are spurned by progressive Democrats for not passing the litmus test of absolute support of abortion.
Like all tumultuous moments in history, ours is a time in which the center has collapsed. In this heated debate, both sides have an obligation to recognize a woman’s complex feelings during the trauma of an unwanted pregnancy, and respond with compassion.
Instead of posturing to their base, Democrats and Republicans should focus on supporting women’s needs, both by preserving Roe v. Wade and also by aggressively legislating for sex education, contraception, prenatal and child care, paid leave, adoption and equal pay for equal work.
