Two bodies were pulled from the rubble of a collapsed store on Monday, but searchers were looking for more after the powerful quake in the south.
Rescuers on Monday raced to reach several people believed trapped inside a supermarket that crumbled as a magnitude-6.9 quake violently shook the southern Philippines this weekend, killing at least five people, officials said.
At least two people were killed when the store collapsed at the Southern Trade shopping center in the town of Padada, an impoverished community in the province of Davao del Sur, which bore the brunt of the temblor.
“Rescuers were able to pull out two female bodies from the rubble” before dawn, said Francisco Guerrero, the vice mayor of Padada.
On Sunday, a 6-year-old girl was killed after a wall collapsed on her at a separate location. The government also reported two other people dying of heart attacks related to the quake.
Mr. Guerrero said that rescuers had deployed sensitive listening devices to try and detect any more signs of life in the rubble at the store.
The quake was the third with a magnitude of 6.5 or higher to hit the area since late October. The quake struck near the heavily urbanized Davao City, President Rodrigo Duterte’s hometown, causing widespread panic there.
Nearly 200 aftershocks followed throughout the night, the state seismology bureau said. The Office of Civil Defense reported that at least 49 people had been injured and more than 5,700 displaced.
The Philippines sits in the Pacific Ocean’s Ring of Fire, which is prone to earthquakes caused by movements in the tectonic plates.
Mr. Duterte, who was in Davao City when the quake struck, ordered that all disaster relief officials and security forces be placed on a heightened state of alert and that they continue their work in recovery operations.
“The national government, together with our local disaster risk reduction management offices, are definitely on top of the situation on this latest quake that hit Davao del Sur,” said Karlo Alexei Nograles, the secretary of the president’s cabinet.
Senator Richard Gordon, who runs the local Red Cross operation, said first aid and trauma teams had provided assistance to several people, including a 39-year-old woman who was pinned down by a collapsed wall.
He said additional ambulances and medical volunteers had been dispatched to the affected areas to help overwhelmed local medical units.
“We are closely monitoring in our operations center to further assist the victims,” Mr. Gordon said.