Willem Dafoe stars in the latest addition to Disney’s sled dog canon.
We don’t talk about it much, what with all the cultural space we’ve devoted to Marvel and Star Wars and Pixar, but Disney loves making movies about sled dogs. From “Iron Will” to “Snow Dogs” to “Eight Below,” the studio’s executives clearly have a soft spot for rugged frontier tales of tough Arctic men and their canine companions. The latest entry in their unofficial Sled Dog Cinematic Universe, “Togo” (streaming on Disney Plus beginning Dec. 20), adds two new perks: its basis in fact and the presence of its star, Willem Dafoe.
Tom Flynn’s screenplay draws its inspiration from the 1925 serum run, in which antitoxins were transported more than 600 miles, in the midst of a deadly winter storm, to stay a diphtheria outbreak in Nome, Alaska. The dog that completed the run, Balto, got the fame and the glory (and his own, earlier big-screen vehicle) but Togo was reportedly the real hero, running 264 miles of the route under the guidance of his trainer and musher Leonhard Seppala (Dafoe).
The first half is somewhat derailed by a baffling dual-timeline structure, flashing back to Seppala and Togo’s initial conflicts (“That is not a sled dog!” Seppala announces, all but winking at the viewer). There are no real stakes or doubts — we know they end up getting along — and these stretches serve only to stall the momentum of the primary narrative.
But when “Togo” gets going, it goes. The ever-earthy Dafoe forges a believable bond with the well-trained dog, and closing scenes (along with their hero shots and heavy strings) are genuinely moving. The set pieces, particularly a near-tumble off a cliff and a terrifying run across cracking ice, are impressively executed — visceral and scary enough to make this streaming-only release seem like a real missed opportunity.
Once upon a time, Disney released movies like this in theaters. But today, tentpole movies reign supreme, and most everything else is relegated to streaming. That’s a shame, as Ericson Core (who is both the director and cinematographer) does right by his wide, open spaces, painting imposing pictures of snow-capped mountains and rolling vistas. A film of this scope will, presumably, lose something on an iPad.
Rated PG. Running time: 1 hour 53 minutes.