Mr. Klosowski is a staff writer at Wirecutter, a product recommendation site owned by The New York Times Company.
Isaac Blum, director of applications and system services at logistics real estate company Prologis, added that even if you feel like you have job security, you might not have data security, depending on the security tools your company uses. “Some of these tools, if they detect a breach, they’ll start wiping files,” Mr. Blum said. If your computer gets infected with malware, the security measures taken to try to get rid of problems might clear out your personal files, too.
Since it’s online and not software installed on our computers, it’s easy to think of G Suite, which includes services like Gmail, Google Docs, and Sheets, as private productivity software. But the Freedom of the Press Foundation notes several reasons you shouldn’t use a company-issued Google account to store your private data.
Administrative users with G Suite Enterprise can search for specific phrases in an employee’s emails and documents, just like you can in your own account. Employers can set up audits to be notified of suspicious behavior and create custom scripts for retaining data.
As for non-Gmail employee email accounts, you can safely assume they’re being monitored too. Mr. Blum said, “We can see people’s emails. There’s only a select few people, but nothing is technically not viewable.” Due to the risk of sharing insider information, the number of individuals who have access to employee emails is usually small.
Your employer almost certainly monitors your internet traffic. But beyond watching out for the obvious stuff, this probably isn’t as nefarious as you think. Blum said it’d be aware of “basic web traffic” only. Though, if you’re routinely not getting your work done, don’t be surprised if a boss rolls out data on how much time you spend scrolling Facebook.
Even if your employer doesn’t care much about your browsing habits, it’s still best to avoid doing any personal business — like side hustles or hobbies — on your work computer. But you don’t have to be paranoid about everything. “You can pay all your bills,” Mr. Blum noted.
You should treat your work computer with the same care as you would your personal computer. That means being secure on public Wi-Fi and using common sense. Ms. Maleeff suggested using a VPN for public Wi-Fi (Wirecutter recommends using TunnelBear).
Ms. Maleeff also suggested locking your computer when you step away from it. “I have a great story of a U.S. government employee traveling next to me on Amtrak who left his laptop open and unlocked while he left his seat,” she said. “Without even touching the computer, I was able to determine a lot of information.” If you’re at a coffee shop, on an airplane or train, or anywhere else in public, log out or shut your laptop.
When you use employer-owned equipment, it’s good to remember you don’t have a right to privacy — but that doesn’t mean your employer shouldn’t also clearly state what kind of monitoring it does and how.
If your handbook doesn’t have details but you’re still curious about which monitoring software your computer has, the information is usually easy to find. Mr. Blum said that such software “may not launch on a task bar, but many are still located in add/remove programs. On a Mac, they’ll show as an application or service.” A quick Google search should reveal the software’s capabilities. As weird as it can feel to have your employer monitor you, everyone I spoke with recommended against deleting the software, which will call attention to you.
Most employers include screen-sharing software, like VNC or TeamViewer, which gives your I.T. department access to your computer remotely. If you’ve ever been freaked out because an I.T. worker “took control” of your mouse to fix your computer, this is what they used. It’s usually obvious when this software is running, so don’t fret about your I.T. department watching you mistype emails all day long.
The central tenet of this advice is to avoid saying or doing anything on a work-issued computer or account that you don’t want your employer to see. It’s probably fine to pay a bill now and again — or to create a lineup for your office’s fantasy football league — but avoid doing anything personal or unprofessional.
