The latest effort to rework a program for borrowers whose schools broke the law drew an immediate promise of a court challenge.
The change creates a complicated sliding scale on which defrauded students’ relief is calculated using group earnings data. Debts will be fully forgiven only if students in a particular program earned far less than those from similar programs at other schools.
“We cannot tolerate fraud in higher education, nor can we tolerate furiously giving away taxpayer money to those who have submitted a false claim or aren’t eligible for relief,” Education Secretary Betsy DeVos said in a written statement.
The policy change will almost certainly be challenged in court by borrowers, who have already beaten back one attempt by Ms. DeVos to enact partial forgiveness.
Ms. DeVos sought in 2017 to reduce the relief offered through the rule known as “borrower defense to repayment,” which allows the former students of schools that broke laws to seek forgiveness of their federal student loans. A federal court blocked that effort, saying the department’s method for determining how much relief to grant applicants illegally misused individual income data obtained from another federal agency.
The agency’s new method turns the individual earnings approach on its head. If the department affirms that a school broke state laws or otherwise misled students, it will use government data to calculate the median earnings of students in each program that qualifies for relief. It will measure those figures against the median earnings of students from other programs the Education Department considers comparable.
The department will give full relief only to classmates who earned much less than students in similar programs. Groups with smaller earnings disparities will receive tiered debt relief ranging from 25 percent to 75 percent of their federal loans, the agency said.
An advocacy group that has represented borrowers in lawsuits against the Education Department said it would fight the new policy in court.
Ms. DeVos’s actions are “a slap in the face of students across the country,” a group of students who attended now-closed for-profit schools said in a letter sent to the secretary on Tuesday.
The department announced its policy change the same day the Federal Trade Commission unveiled a $191 million settlement with the University of Phoenix, which became the latest in a series of for-profit schools to be penalized for misleading students. The commission’s announcement pointedly noted that students who felt they had been deceived by the school could seek to have their federal loans wiped out through the borrower-defense program.
The program dates back to the mid-1990s but was little used until a rash of for-profit chain collapses — starting with Corinthian Colleges in 2015 — flooded the Education Department with claims. The education secretary at the time, Arne Duncan, said his department would use the borrower-defense system to eliminate Corinthian students’ debts.
The Obama administration approved debt elimination for about 32,000 students at Corinthian and two other schools, but the process dragged for others. When President Trump took office in 2017, most Corinthian students were still waiting for the promised relief.
Ms. DeVos, who called the plan a “free money” giveaway, soon imposed a partial-relief approach, based on student income. To discover how much applicants earned, the Education Department shared their personal details with the Social Security Administration.
A federal magistrate in San Francisco found that the policy violated the Privacy Act, a decision that the Education Department has appealed. The magistrate, Sallie Kim, recently held Ms. DeVos in contempt of court for illegally billing nearly 46,000 Corinthian borrowers whose loans are supposed to be frozen until their case is resolved.
The case is one of more than a dozen lawsuits against the department over the program. Among them is a suit from California’s attorney general, Xavier Becerra, which argues that the Education Department cannot retroactively switch the Corinthian students to partial relief after Mr. Duncan’s promise.
The legal fights have essentially ground the program to a halt. The department had more than 210,000 claims stuck in limbo as of June.
Now, it intends to resume deciding claims using the new methodology. As many as 20,000 decision letters will be sent out shortly, according to Diane Auer Jones, the Education Department’s principal deputy under secretary.
“It’s been clear all along that the secretary has had this authority to do partial relief,” she said.
The new policy is not the only change to the program the department has made under Ms. DeVos. In August, it rewrote its rules for the borrower-defense program, making it significantly harder for borrowers to qualify for relief in the first place. The new policies will apply to federal student loans made from July 2020 onward.
Ms. DeVos is scheduled to testify about her agency’s borrower-defense policies at a House hearing on Thursday.