An opening sketch featured celebrities playing the world leaders who were caught on tape gossiping about President Trump.
If there are two things that “Saturday Night Live” loves, it’s geopolitics and celebrity cameos, and it got to indulge both of these infatuations in this weekend’s opening sketch, set within the socially ruthless confines of the NATO cafeteria.
The segment, which kicked off an episode hosted by Jennifer Lopez and featuring the musical guest DaBaby, was based on a real-life incident in which several world leaders were caught on video at a NATO meeting near London, seeming to mock President Trump for his lengthy news conferences.
The “S.N.L.” interpretation cast Jimmy Fallon (playing Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada), Paul Rudd (President Emmanuel Macron of France) and James Corden (Prime Minister Boris Johnson of Britain) as the cool kids of the dining hall, all looking down their noses at Alec Baldwin (playing Trump), who shuffled in holding a plate piled high with burgers.
Rudd and Fallon urged Corden to hold a party at Buckingham Palace, and after overhearing their plans, Baldwin tried to find out further details.
Fallon insisted that Baldwin wouldn’t like it. “You’d have to walk up stairs,” he said.
Sent back to his social exile with a sign taped to his back that read, “Impeach me!!!,” Baldwin took his seat next to Moffat.
“Oh, they’re just kidding around,” Baldwin said.
“Are you crying?” Moffat asked him.
It’s been a while since we last heard from Darius Trump, the “Empire”-inspired sendup of President Trump played by Kenan Thompson. But he was back this week, along with his children Darius Jr. (Chris Redd) and L’Evanka (Ego Nwodim), in another installment of “S.N.L.”’s satirical series “Them Trumps.” This latest episode had Thompson about to enter a rally in Hershey, Penn., where an adviser (Moffat) warned him that a possible impeachment could turn the public against him.
Speaking to a stadium crowd, Thompson said: “They say I abused my office. And you know what? Maybe I did. Because I will do whatever it takes to win this election. I will pop somebody in the head, right on Fifth Avenue, with my own gun if I have to.
“And I know you will always have my back,” he continued, “even though I’m black.” At which point he was pelted with fruit and chased out of the arena.
Over at the Weekend Update desk, the anchors, Colin Jost and Michael Che, continued to riff on the latest impeachment developments.
This week, Democrats announced that they would be moving towards impeachment before Christmas. So Trump was right, a lot of Americans will be saying Merry Christmas again. After announcing articles of impeachment, Nancy Pelosi criticized a reporter who asked her if she hates President Trump, saying, “As a Catholic, I don’t hate anyone.” Which is crazy, because as a Catholic, I know, there’s always one person you hate: yourself. Also, the Catholic approach wouldn’t be to impeach Trump. It would be to quietly transfer him to a different presidency.
President Trump warned France that if it imposes a tax on U.S. tech companies, the U.S. will retaliate with attacks on French wine.  Like, if it was Japan, I bet he’d try to tax ninja stars. Or if it was Italy, spaghetti. 
“Which, if true, would be the longest call ever completed on AT&T. And that means that Giuliani, Devin Nunes and Lev Parnas were in constant contact during the whole Ukraine scheme. I’m just impressed these geniuses were able to come up with a plan at all. Usually when people with their mental capacity team up, all they do is talk about different kinds of shrimp.
In a desk-side segment on Weekend Update, Kate McKinnon played the speaker of the House, Nancy Pelosi, explaining the fiery response she had given in a news conference to a reporter who had asked her if she hated President Trump.
