Dutch baby with bacon and runny Camembert.Credit...Christopher Testani for The New York Times. Food Stylist: Simon Andrews.
Good morning. It’s been a difficult month for my crowd, and it looked for a time as if we’d lose Christmas entirely. But the tree’s now trimmed with favorite ornaments (A ski-jumping bear from Quebec! A ceramic dolphin from Florida!), and the whole place smells of forest and cinnamon. There’s lots of jing-jing-jingling. The dog’s asleep in front of the fire.
What’s needed: a menu for the week. Some are celebrating the start of Hanukkah this evening. If that’s you, we’ve got you covered with a vast collection of recipes for the festival of lights. But here’s the one I’m going to try to execute, at least until I change my mind.
Today: David Tanis’s recipe for sesame-glazed duck legs with spicy persimmon salad, and some steamed white rice. It’s a remarkably flavorful dinner situation that leaves you with a couple of excellent byproducts useful during a holiday week: rendered duck fat and super-concentrated duck broth. And the cooking’s fun.
Tomorrow: baked mushrooms and white beans with buttery bread crumbs, from the terrific Colu Henry.
Tuesday: brown butter salmon with lemon and harissa. Serve that with roasted potatoes, and make flat-and-chewy chocolate-chip cookies for dessert, so you can leave two out for Mr. Claus, along with a glass of milk.
On Wednesday, Christmas Day, I’m absolutely availing myself of one of Melissa Clark’s new recipes for big breakfast feeds. There’s a bacon and Camembert Dutch baby (above)! Also baked eggs with salmon and crème fraîche; baked Irish oatmeal; and a simple broiled grapefruit that you may keep like a present for the rest of your days. Later on: ham with all the trimmings.
For a Thursday repast after the lazy-day feasting of Christmas, vegetarian “carbonara” with spinach, which as some readers note can be made all the more delicious with a dusting of nutritional yeast.
And then I’ll end the week using my saved-up duck fat to make Alison Roman’s recipe for crisp smashed potatoes with fried onions and parsley. They pair very nicely with deviled chicken thighs and kale salad.
Further inspiration may be found in the world of social media. You can find us on Facebook. (Where you ought to join our NYT Cooking Community.  You can find us on Instagram and Twitter as well. And do spend some time with us on YouTube where we’re showing off how some of our contributors are celebrating the holidays.
Now, it’s nothing really to do with puddings or pork, but I do love Pete Hamill’s book of short stories, “The Christmas Kid,” particularly this time of year.
Here’s Pete Josef singing “Hope,” a track sent to me by my friend Destinée-Charisse Royal, and it’s so so great.
Finally, you’ll be needing a yule log for the big screen at some point in the next few days. Why not make it the original WPIX version, which I grew up with? I’ll be back tomorrow!