Reader Center|Our Readers Made Our Journalism Better in 2019. Here Are 8 Ways.
Our Readers Made Our Journalism Better in 2019. Here Are 8 Ways.
“Never read the comments.” It’s an internet cliché. But here at The New York Times, we do read your comments — and your emails, tweets and letters, too.
Below are just a few times when Times readers have contributed to our report this year, and what we learned from them.
Readers often inform our journalism. Their questions and feedback provide opportunities to explain how we work and grapple with difficult editorial decisions.
In January, when we published a photo showing some of the dead victims of an attack in Nairobi, Kenya, many readers thought we made the wrong call. They said the image was inappropriate, and some questioned whether we would publish similarly horrific photos after an attack in the United States or elsewhere in the West.
Whenever the question of publishing graphic images arises, many people across the newsroom are involved in hard conversations. Editors must weigh the desire to be sensitive and respectful of victims and their families with our mission to give readers a clear view of what’s happening in the world.
Criticism of the Nairobi photo spurred us to revisit and clarify our guidelines for the publication of graphic images. And we asked Meaghan Looram, our director of photography, and Marc Lacey, our National editor and a former Nairobi bureau chief, to answer a selection of questions raised by readers.
Readers also prompted us to explain why we sometimes include descriptions of a person’s appearance in our political coverage.
When Vanessa Friedman, our chief fashion critic, wrote about Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s burnt orange coat and our Politics reporters mentioned it in an article, some readers took issue.
“I look forward to your headline about Trump having worn a navy suit and red tie at his next press conference, and about McConnell wearing a black suit and blue tie when announcing that he won’t let the Dems’ bill be voted on in the Senate,” read one tweet.
To ignore how public figures use what they wear is to ignore one of the ways our own understanding is being manipulated. I consider it part of my job as The Times’s chief fashion critic to help readers understand how fashion is being used to communicate, in the same way Andrew Ross Sorkin helps us understand economic policy.
Over the years, readers have asked how our editorials work: who writes them, why they’re unsigned and how their views are developed.
When The Times’s editorial board argued in support of the impeachment inquiry in September, James Bennet, the editorial page editor, used it as an opportunity to explain not only why the editorial board was making this argument, but also what an editorial board is — a question he said he and his colleagues are asked constantly, including within The Times.
Poignant memories and experiences shared by readers often add to our journalism, leading to articles and follow-up pieces that highlight their stories.
In May, a Times article on chest binding prompted a discussion among readers about the practice, which some transgender and gender-nonconforming people use to compress their breasts and to treat body dysphoria. We heard from readers who were upset that more voices of trans people were not included.
After President Trump attacked four Democratic congresswomen of color in a series of tweets in July — “Why don’t they go back and help fix the totally broken and crime infested places from which they came,” he wrote in one — we asked readers if they had ever been told to “go back.” Some 16,000 responses flooded in on our website, Facebook, Instagram and Twitter.
Readers recounted the insults they had heard as African-Americans, Asian-Americans, Native Americans and Jewish Americans. Many recalled first becoming aware of their “otherness” as young children and said that slurs had followed them into adulthood.
After The Times published a Food article about how mealtimes can be difficult for widows (a gender-neutral term that bereavement counselors now use), hundreds of readers described in the comments the heartbreak and the joy that food and cooking can bring after losing a partner.
Readers continued to console one another in the comments of the roundup. “I’m a nine-month widow tonight and this thread has given me some hope and a lot of comfort — I feel that I am not alone,” wrote Mary Sutton Pobedinsky from Monroe, N.Y.
For years, The Times has asked readers to contribute their voices to our reporting — usually centered on a question or a topic that our journalists would like to address. But Your Lead, a Reader Center project announced last month, is involving our readers in the editorial process even further, empowering them to act almost as assignment editors. The project asks readers to send us their questions that they want our journalists to investigate.
Readers often ask smart, thoughtful questions, which have led to new coverage.
