The mandate came as the Chinese government disclosed that hundreds of medical workers who had been helping combat the coronavirus outbreak had become infected and at least six had died.
This briefing has ended. Read the latest updates on the coronavirus here.
On the front lines of China’s war against the coronavirus, doctors face grave risks.
More Americans could be tested for coronavirus.
Two bloggers who criticized China’s response to the virus have vanished from Wuhan.
In the hospital where Yu Yajie works, nurses, doctors and other medical professionals fighting the new coronavirus have also been fighting dire shortages. They have used tape to patch up battered protective masks, repeatedly reused goggles meant for one-time use, and wrapped their shoes in plastic bags for lack of specialized coverings.
The virus has infected more than 83,700 people in China and at least 50 other countries.
Infections and deaths continued to climb after the government this week changed the criteria by which it tracks cases. Officials early Saturday reported 2,641 new coronavirus cases and 143 additional deaths in the previous 24 hours.
In all, more than 66,000 people have been infected and at least 1,523 killed worldwide. The vast majority of cases are in mainland China, with the heaviest concentration there in Hubei, the center of the epidemic.
Health officials in the United States will begin testing some people with flulike symptoms for infection with the coronavirus.
Patients in five cities will be tested if their flu tests are negative, Dr. Nancy Messonnier, director of the National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, said at a news briefing on Friday.
Health officials will use a nationwide surveillance network already set up to track influenza, she said. The five cities are Chicago, Los Angeles, New York, San Francisco and Seattle.
“We need to be prepared for the possibility it will spread,” Dr. Messonnier said.
So far, there have been 15 coronavirus cases in the United States.
They had recorded dozens of videos from Wuhan, streaming unfiltered and often heartbreaking images from the center of the outbreak. Long lines outside hospitals. Feeble patients. Agonized relatives.
Now, two video bloggers whose dispatches from the heart of the outbreak showed fear, grief and dissatisfaction with the government have gone silent.
Videos made by Fang Bin and Chen Qiushi were another manifestation of the dissatisfaction that the government’s handling of the outbreak has unleashed among ordinary Chinese citizens.
A 40-minute video about the coronavirus outbreak propelled Mr. Fang, a local clothing salesman, to internet fame. Then, less than two weeks later, he disappeared.
Friends and family of Mr. Chen, a lawyer from eastern China, said they believed he had been forcibly quarantined.
Africa has its first confirmed coronavirus case.
The first coronavirus case on the African continent was reported in Egypt on Saturday when the Egyptian health ministry reported that an infected person had been placed in isolation in a hospital.
In a statement, the ministry said the patient was a foreigner but did not specify a nationality. The World Health Organization in Egypt said on Twitter that the person was carrying the virus but had not shown any symptoms.
Several African countries have stepped up screening at airports and other ports of entry in recent weeks over fears that nations with weak health care systems, especially those already battling diseases like malaria and ebola, are particularly vulnerable.
Sixteen countries have the capacity to test for the coronavirus and another 20 will come online by Feb. 20, Dr. John Nkengasong, director of Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention, told reporters in the Ethiopian capital, Addis Ababa, on Friday.
China and Africa have become intertwined in the last two decades as China has expanded its political, economic, and military ties to Africa, attracting large numbers of Chinese workers to the continent and increasing the risk of the virus spreading there.
As the summer Olympics in Japan approaches, coronavirus concerns inject uncertainty.
International Olympic Committee officials on Friday said that the Summer Games in Tokyo would go on as planned, citing discussions with the World Health Organization.
A spokesman for the World Health Organization said in an emailed statement that the organization was not advising that large gatherings be canceled.
Dr. Michael Ryan, the head of the W.H.O.’s Health Emergencies Program, told reporters at a briefing on Friday that experts were monitoring the situation and no final guidance had been given on the matter.
“It’s not the role of W.H.O. to call off or not call off any event,” Mr. Ryan said, adding that the organization was offering technical advice about risk assessment and response measures.
The Games are scheduled to take place between July 24 and Aug. 9 this summer in Japan, the country that has endured the largest number of coronavirus cases outside China — over 250, including 218 aboard a cruise ship quarantined in Yokohama. On Thursday, Japanese authorities announced the country’s first death of a patient who had contracted the virus.
And on Friday, Japan’s health ministry announced that a local government official who earlier this week helped transfer patients with the coronavirus from the quarantined Diamond Princess cruise ship had tested positive for the coronavirus.
Most of the 3,400 anxious passengers and crew of the ship remain onboard in quarantine. More are getting sick — possibly infecting one another — and health officials have raised the possibility of prolonging the quarantine, now set to expire next Wednesday.
The government official, a man in his thirties, helped transfer infected patients from the cruise ship on Monday afternoon, the health ministry said in a statement. The transportation process took about 40 minutes and the man was wearing goggles and a mask.
A senior health official in Wuhan has called on residents who have recovered from the coronavirus to donate blood plasma, believing their naturally produced antibodies could be used to treat sick patients.
The government is prescribing a combination of antiviral drugs and traditional Chinese medicine. But on Thursday, China National Biotec Group, a state-owned company under the Ministry of Health, said it had found that administering a round of human antibodies from the survivors to more than 10 critically ill patients caused inflammation levels to drop significantly after 12 to 24 hours of treatment.
Fiat to shut factory in Serbia for lack of parts.
The economic repercussions of the coronavirus outbreak became more visible in Europe on Friday after Fiat Chrysler Automobiles shut down a factory in Serbia because of shortages of parts made in China.
Fiat said Friday that supply problems prompted it to move forward the dates of a planned shutdown at the plant in Kragujevac, Serbia, which produces Fiat 500 subcompact cars.
The shutdown, apparently the first by a carmaker in Europe caused by coronavirus, will add to concerns that the outbreak could sap what little growth the Continent has been able to muster recently.
Facebook has canceled a marketing conference in San Francisco.
Facebook said on Friday that it is canceling its Global Marketing Summit in San Francisco next month because of coronavirus concerns.
“Out of an abundance of caution, we canceled our Global Marketing Summit due to evolving public health risks related to coronavirus,” Anthony Harrison, a Facebook spokesman said in a statement.
The company had invited marketing partners from around the world to the conference, scheduled for March 9-12 at San Francisco’s Moscone Center. Local officials said they were disappointed by the decision.
“A short-term cancellation will have an impact on hotels, restaurants, retail stores and attractions,” said Joe D’Alessandro, president and chief executive of San Francisco Travel Association, the convention and visitors bureau that books events at the Moscone Center.
There remains deep uncertainty about the new coronavirus’s fatality rate, with the high-end estimate that it is up to 20 times that of the flu, but some estimates are much lower, putting it on par with the flu for those affected outside of China’s overwhelmed Hubei Province.
But whatever the metrics, the mind has its own ways of measuring danger.
“This hits all the hot buttons that lead to heightened risk perception,” said Paul Slovic, a University of Oregon psychologist.
Reporting and research was contributed by Keith Bradsher, Ivan Nechepurenko, Tariq Panja, Roni Rabin, Sui-Lee Wee, Choe Sang-Hun, Richard C. Paddock, Elaine Yu, Motoko Rich, Lin Qiqing, Karen Zraick, Amie Tsang, Amber Wang, Zoe Mou, Albee Zhang, Yiwei Wang, Gillian Wong, Davey Alba, David Yaffe-Bellany, Denise Grady, Declan Walsh, Simon Marks and Claire Fu.