There are “only” eight candidates left in the Democratic primary and we still do not know who won Iowa. Here is a recap of what you might have missed from a busy week in the Democratic primary.
Well, that was exhausting.
One and a half states down, 48.5 to go. Let’s catch you up on what happened during one of the most eventful stretches of the 2020 race so far.
New Hampshire was the first clean test for the Democratic candidates. Here’s an analysis of the results, and what they mean for the race.
So we finally have actual election results from the state of New Hampshire. They are clear, and they are authoritative and they are a little bit complicated. “Hello, America.” “We are here to stay.” “Our campaign is built for the long haul.” “We’re going to Nevada. We’re going to South Carolina. We’re going to win those states as well.” Bernie Sanders has won the state by a little bit. Two other candidates who had quite a strong night — Pete Buttigieg and Amy Klobuchar. Not such a good night for Joe Biden or for Elizabeth Warren or for anybody else. “New Hampshire.” “New Hampshire.” “New Hampshire.” “We’re here together.” “New Hampshire.” “You all up here in New Hampshire.” After the debacle in Iowa, national attention has focused even more intensely on New Hampshire as the first real clean test of political momentum in this race. “People are still undecided.” “Uh, Bernie.” “Bernie Sanders, all the way.” “Mayor Pete.” “Amy Klobuchar.” “Oh, Joe Biden.” “I’ll just probably decide Tuesday, five minutes before I go in to vote.” New Hampshire is a classic swing state. “Ronald Reagan is the winner in the state of New Hampshire.” “Bill Clinton won it.” “It’s neck and neck.” “New Hampshire goes to Obama.” In 2016, Hillary Clinton prevailed over Donald Trump, but by a tiny margin. It’s a state that’s very much in play for 2020. “Four more, Trump. Four more years!” New Hampshire might gauge whether a candidate is able to appeal to certain other constituencies they will need in the general election. We have seen over the last week a real rivalry emerge between Bernie Sanders and Pete Buttigieg. “Hot, fresh and vegan. Get your Bernie-on-a-stick.” New Hampshire is really home turf for Bernie Sanders. He comes from right next door in Vermont. And he also drew strong support, as he did in 2016, from younger voters and more liberal voters. “Young voters want Bernie because he’s fighting for their future. He’s not fighting for his future. He’s in his future.” [cheering] Bernie Sanders came into New Hampshire claiming momentum out of Iowa, based on his lead in the popular vote. “Finally, the votes were counted in Iowa. Took them a little while. We won the vote by 6,000 votes.” He has been somewhat more aggressive with his primary opponents here … “We don’t have a Super PAC.” … talking about the difference between himself … “We don’t want billionaires’ money.” … and candidates in the race, like Pete Buttigieg, who take money from billionaires and other big donors. “We are running a campaign for working people, funded by working people. And that is why we are going to win here in New Hampshire and all over this country.” [cheering] The biggest thing this might mean for Bernie Sanders is that he has clearly reasserted himself as the dominant leader on the left wing of the Democratic Party. And then there’s Pete Buttigieg. “Back in the Obama campaign, we called it ‘no drama Obama,’ and I haven’t come up with the right rhyme for Buttigieg.” [cheering] Pete Buttigieg has claimed, among the moderate candidates, a sense of momentum in New Hampshire that other folks were not able to take. “We can’t risk dividing Americans further. The idea that you’ve either got to be for a revolution or you got to be for the status quo leaves most of us out.” His message here has been pretty similar to his message in Iowa, but really focused on the idea that he’s the candidate who can win crossover support in the general election. “We need a politics that brings all of us in because all of us need a new and better president.” After finishing at the top in both Iowa and New Hampshire, Buttigieg now has a tremendous opportunity to put himself forward at the national level as the leader of moderate Democrats. Announcer: “Senator Amy Klobuchar!” The word that Amy Klobuchar supporters are using to describe what happened here is ‘Klomentum.’ She came to New Hampshire after a fifth-place finish in Iowa without a whole lot of wind in her sails. “It’s been funny suddenly seeing media come to all of our events.” [laughter] Things just turned around for her dramatically. If Klobuchar had not finished so strong in New Hampshire, it might have been the end of her campaign. “If you are tired of the extremes in our politics, and you are tired of the noise and the nonsense, you have a home with me.” She gets the chance to fight onward to Nevada and South Carolina and Super Tuesday. I would not make any plans that are based on knowing a Democratic nominee anytime soon. Well, I am going to Las Vegas next, so I probably would have a chance to do that.
New Hampshire voters went to the polls on Tuesday, and we got results several hours later. Amazing!
The summary: Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont won; former Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind., was a close second; and Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota came in a surprisingly strong third.
That was not great news for Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, who placed fourth with less than 10 percent of the vote. And the results were very bad for former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., who finished fifth.
You can see the full results here, and take a look at five takeaways from the primary.
In a news analysis, Matt Flegenheimer and Katie Glueck wrote that one loser was the Democratic establishment.
Other colleagues reported that Mr. Sanders’s rise has made some Democrats nervous. The Upshot examined the math that could add up to a Sanders nomination.
And the final days of campaigning in New Hampshire showed a new dynamic: Mr. Buttigieg and Mr. Sanders trying fiercely to create a two-person race.
We regret to inform you that we still don’t know who won the Iowa caucuses.
Every precinct has reported its results, and they show Mr. Buttigieg with the slightest of leads over Mr. Sanders in the state delegate equivalent count. But both campaigns requested partial recanvasses this week based on irregularities and miscalculations in specific precincts, and the Iowa Democratic Party agreed to check the numbers.
If the errors Mr. Sanders’s campaign reported were all verified, he would net about six state delegate equivalents, which would move him into first place. That would earn him the one extra national delegate reserved for the statewide winner. But if the errors Mr. Buttigieg’s campaign reported were all verified, he would expand his lead over Mr. Sanders by about 14 state delegate equivalents.
As recriminations continued to fly, Troy Price, the chairman of the Iowa Democratic Party, announced his resignation on Wednesday. The party will choose an interim leader this weekend.
Our colleagues Reid J. Epstein, Sydney Ember, Trip Gabriel and Mike Baker have the definitive account of how the Iowa caucuses fell apart.
As if Iowa hadn’t given Democrats enough heartburn already, the relatively low turnout there had some people worried, though the turnout in New Hampshire was higher.
Next up are the Nevada caucuses, which will be administered differently from Iowa’s, as our colleague Isabella Grullón Paz reports. A powerful union in Nevada, the Culinary Workers Union, Local 226, declined to endorse a candidate this week.
“I am the math guy, and it is clear tonight from the numbers that we are not going to win this race,” said Andrew Yang, an entrepreneur with no political experience, as he ended his bid for the Democratic nomination on Tuesday night in New Hampshire.
Three candidates ended their campaigns after dismal finishes in New Hampshire: the entrepreneur Andrew Yang (2.8 percent of the vote), former Gov. Deval Patrick of Massachusetts (0.4 percent) and Senator Michael Bennet of Colorado (0.3 percent).
There are now “only” eight candidates in the Democratic race. That is a huge post-New Hampshire field by any historical standard, but compared with the 24-person free-for-all we had a few months ago, it’s luxuriously manageable.
We’re still tracking the field here.
Former Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg of New York City faced a barrage of criticism this week after two sets of old remarks resurfaced.
The first recording, which was posted on Twitter on Monday, was from a 2015 appearance Mr. Bloomberg made at the Aspen Institute. In the clip, he staunchly defended stop-and-frisk policing, a tactic that his mayoral administration used disproportionately against black men and Latinos, and that he apologized for only on the eve of his presidential campaign.
Later in the week, comments surfaced from a forum Mr. Bloomberg attended in 2008. He claimed the end of redlining, a racially discriminatory housing practice, had helped cause the financial crisis.
Among those who condemned Mr. Bloomberg’s remarks was Ms. Warren, who told supporters on Thursday that his comments should disqualify him from becoming the Democratic nominee.
There is no doubt that Mr. Sanders is the new Democratic front-runner, as evidenced not only by his performances in Iowa and New Hampshire but also by two national polls released this week.
A Quinnipiac poll released Monday showed Mr. Sanders at 25 percent, eight points ahead of Mr. Biden — his first lead outside the margin of error in a national debate-qualifying poll. A Monmouth poll released the next day showed an even larger lead, 26 percent to 16 percent.
Monmouth had Ms. Warren and Mr. Buttigieg tied for third with 13 percent apiece, while Quinnipiac had Ms. Warren at 14 and Mr. Buttigieg at 10. Mr. Bloomberg was also in double digits in both polls — 15 percent in Quinnipiac and 11 percent in Monmouth — putting him one poll away from qualifying for next week’s debate.
Our resident polling expert Giovanni Russonello wrote about Mr. Sanders’s rise.
Mr. Bloomberg released short plans this week on two crucial issues — immigration and reproductive rights — on which the other major candidates long ago announced their positions.
In his immigration plan, he pledged to create a pathway to citizenship for undocumented immigrants, set a target of 125,000 for refugee resettlement and end the backlog of naturalization applications. He also said he would “reform Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) and Customs and Border Protection,” but gave no details.
His reproductive rights plan calls for codifying Roe v. Wade, repealing the Hyde Amendment, and ending the domestic and global “gag rules” — all points on which the Democratic field is united. Mr. Bloomberg also said he would “encourage states” to allow the prescription of birth control through telemedicine and to authorize a wider variety of medical professionals to perform abortions.
Ms. Warren released an agenda for Asian-Americans, Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders, which draws on a long list of her existing plans.