App-enabled part-time work gives parents flexibility, but long hours don’t guarantee a high paycheck.
This piece is part of “The Price of Modern Parenting.” Read more about the sandwich generation, the cost of adoption and out-of-pocket expenses for preterm births.
Most days, Shawn Morse of Milwaukee can be found caring for his two young children while his wife works full time as a manager of neurology clinic research at the Medical College of Wisconsin. But after she comes home around 6 p.m., and the family has had dinner, Morse checks his apps: GrubHub, DoorDash, UberEats, Uber, Lyft, Instacart.
In recent years, a growing number of parents like Morse have discovered the possibilities of the gig economy — short-term and freelance work increasingly enabled by app-based companies that rely on independent contractors to fulfill orders or supply services. Full-time jobs — or even fixed part-time hours — can be challenging amid caregiving responsibilities, but “people generally both want and need to work,” said Sara Sutton, the CEO of FlexJobs, a job board for remote, part-time and flexible work.
Of course, the gig economy has downsides too, particularly for parents — long hours that don’t guarantee paychecks, yet still require time away from family members. Still, for many families, gigs have become an important tool for making modern life work.
Samantha Kruger of Rockford, Ill., drives for DoorDash and GrubHub while her 12-year-old daughter is at school, at volleyball practice or with her father every other weekend. If she wants to work at other times, she enlists a group of parents who watch each other’s children during gigs.
“There are a lot of single parents that do this,” she said. “At least in our little close-knit community, it takes a village.” The extra income — a good week generates $200 — allows for little splurges, like mini-vacations to nearby Chicago. She also uses gig pay to help her parents financially.
Workers have always freelanced, and entrepreneurs have always had some control over their schedules. But building a business takes time, something parents often find in short supply. Parents report that the key upside of the app-based gig economy is that it supplies a quick way to earn money without a great business idea — though multiple interviews with parents working with gig economy apps suggest that those who think through costs and opportunities tend to do better.
John D. Hawkins of Portland, Ore., a father of two, drives for GrubHub to supplement his main I.T. job, and to help his family pay off debt. “With the way my job works, I never know when I’m going to get off,” he said, making a traditional second job challenging. At first, he took any food order, no matter how small dollar-wise. But after his wife, functioning as his bookkeeper, began tracking his gas mileage and calculating his net earnings after subtracting fuel and other expenses, his approach changed. “What we started doing was trying to be a little bit more picky with the orders,” he said. The goal was to make at least $20 per hour.
This can be challenging; gig economy workers face a lot of variability and risk, since they aren’t paid by the hour as employees would generally be, with pay subjected to minimum wage and overtime laws. Drivers for restaurant delivery apps have reported restaurants not cooking the orders until they show up, necessitating extra waits that a company paying delivery workers by the hour would push back on. Safety can also be a concern; according to data from Uber, 42% of reported sexual assaults that occurred in Uber rides were reported by drivers.
As delivery apps try to boost volume, and compete with new apps, many don’t discourage customers from placing inexpensive orders (which produce low earnings and tips for the time they take). Gig workers can often choose whether to accept orders, but acceptance rates can affect a driver’s quality ratings and future business. Pay algorithms can also change, plus tipping is highly variable.
In an effort to protect contract workers from these downsides, federal and state regulators have started looking more closely at the gig economy. California’s A.B. 5 bill, which became law in January, created a stricter test for whether someone is an employee — who would generally be paid by the hour or a salary, with more of the risk falling on the employer — or an independent contractor responsible for their own payroll taxes and benefits. The stated goal of such bills is to protect workers, though there are always trade-offs. Among other things, the law limited freelance writers to 35 articles per year for a publication; people writing more than that would need to be classified as employees. Vox Media ended freelance contracts with about 200 California-based writers in response, saying that they would be replaced with a smaller number of employees.
From negotiating family leave to wrangling your budget after baby, visit NYT Parenting for guidance on dealing with work and money as a parent.
Dani Blum is a news assistant at The New York Times. Laura Vanderkam is the author of “I Know How She Does It: How Successful Women Make the Most of Their Time” (Portfolio, 2015), and “Juliet’s School of Possibilities” (Portfolio, 2019).