The inmates’ lives are confined to a pair of buildings. Inside each are big rooms lined with bunk beds covered with brightly patterned blankets. Bedsheets hang in the doorways as decoration and to keep out the dust. Daylight hours are spent mostly outdoors, where laundry hangs to dry from pine boughs and inmates chat casually with one another as they scrub aluminum cooking pots and stainless-steel tea thermoses. Those not on cooking or cleaning duty can usually be found lounging across felt-carpeted floors, watching soap operas or doing needlework.
Other women’s prisons in Afghanistan have fallen under scrutiny for sexual harassment and assault, a lack of access to female medical providers and poor construction and upkeep, leading to dangerous living conditions, but the Herat facility, which is run and staffed by women, has become a kind of refuge for the prisoners. Despite the overcrowding, many inmates told Hayeri that they felt freer in prison than they had in their marriages.
Another prisoner, Fatima, 39, told Hayeri that she was married off to her cousin and bore him five children, the first when she was 13. He was a violent man, prone to punching Fatima in the head; once, he even shot her. “Even your bones cannot leave this house,” he would say when she begged him to stop. On several occasions, she tried to kill herself in halfhearted ways, eating food that had gone bad or exposing herself to cold weather. In the end, she choked her husband to death in his sleep. The court sentenced her to 20 years in prison. She has already served eight.
In 2009, the Afghan government passed the Elimination of Violence Against Women law. Legislated with the help of local organizations and international partners, it was the first to establish protections for Afghan women against child marriage, forced marriage and 20 other acts of violence — but only on paper. Like so many other Western-backed initiatives in Afghanistan, the law’s greatest feat was creating the illusion of progress.
Natasha Latiff, a lawyer who has represented defendants accused of killing their husbands, says the assertion of control over women by men is considered a cultural norm of masculinity. Men are often forgiven for crimes of violence against their spouses, so long as they’re still seen as providing for their families. In the years after the law’s implementation, the United Nations has continued to find that most acts of violence against women, including sex trafficking, rape and forced suicide, never make it into a courtroom. Instead they are mediated by local elders or by the police — usually against the women’s will, and against their interests. This applies even in the case of murder: The United Nations found in 2018 that just 18 percent of documented murders of women in Afghanistan led to legal action against the perpetrator.
According to a local saying, “A woman enters her husband’s house wearing white and leaves his house wearing white,” referring to the shroud that wraps the dead before burial. That very well could have been the fate of some of the women in Hayeri’s photographs. Instead, they left in handcuffs.
Parisa’s 3-year-old son, Mohammad Irfan (above), came to the prison with her. One weekend she let her in-laws take him for a visit and then they refused to give him back. Parisa petitioned the government and her son was eventually returned to her in prison.
Parisa’s mother visits her on Saturdays, during the visiting hours for women. Families that travel from far away have to come twice if both male and female relatives want to visit the prisoners.
As a girl, Nafas, 20, was promised to a drug-addicted relative, a man 17 years older. Before they married, he beat her, leaving her with scars. She protested the union for a year, appealing to her parents and brothers. “Even if you die, you have to marry him,” they told her. When they wouldn’t relent, Nafas took her brother’s gun and shot her husband. He died from the wound. “I had to do it,” Nafas says.
Foroozan was born into a poor family and married off to a man 25 years her senior. “He never allowed me to go outside,” she says. “In the 15 years of our marriage, I didn’t leave my house more than 15 times.” For years, Foroozan took the beatings in stride, until one early morning she saw her husband attempting to molest one of their daughters, who was fast asleep in the other room. Foroozan grabbed a shovel and hit him repeatedly with the blade until he died.
Foroozan and her three children were all imprisoned for her husband’s death. Her son served 2.5 years at a juvenile detention center, and he fled Afghanistan on foot when he was released. He is now 17 and lives in Germany. Foroozan’s daughters, Mozhdah, 14, and Mahtab, 12, were moved to a safe house after they were released from prison.
Mina, an inmate’s daughter, examining a scar on Fatima’s arm. Fatima says she doesn’t remember how she hurt herself, but other women told her she picked up some broken glass and intentionally cut herself.
Fatima says she was forced to marry her cousin, who beat her so severely that he left her with a traumatic brain injury. She experiences chronic pain from the physical abuse, and the younger inmates offer to wash her clothes for her, but she refuses their help.
Kiana Hayeri is an Iranian-Canadian photographer and a senior TED fellow. She is a regular contributor to The New York Times from Afghanistan, where she has been based since 2014. May Jeong is a fellow at the Type Media Center and a contributing writer for Vanity Fair magazine. This is her first article for the magazine.
Reporting by Kiana Hayeri.