How does the new coronavirus compare to other infectious diseases?
This graph, showing the new coronavirus as compared to other infectious diseases, appeared elsewhere on NYTimes.com. It uses a log scale, the same type of scale used for measuring earthquakes, where an increase of 1 on the log scale represents a 10-fold increase in the original scale.
By Friday morning, Feb. 28, we will provide the “Reveal” — the graph’s free online link, additional background and questions, shout outs highlighting student comments and headlines, and Stat Nuggets.
On Wednesday, Feb. 26, our collaborator, the American Statistical Association, will facilitate this discussion from 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. Eastern time to help students’ understanding go deeper. You might use their responses as models for your own.
4. By Friday morning, Feb. 28, we will reveal more information about the graph at the bottom of this post. Students, we encourage you to post an additional comment after reading the reveal. How does the original article and the moderators’ comments help you see the graph differently? Try to incorporate the statistical terms defined in the Stat Nuggets in your response.
Sign up for our free weekly newsletter so you never miss a graph, and add our 2019-20 “What’s Going On in This Graph?” live-moderated discussion Wednesdays to your Google calendar (2/26, 3/4, 3/11, 3/18, 3/25, 4/1, 4/8). Graphs are always released by the Friday before to give teachers time to plan ahead.
How deadly is the new coronavirus? And how does this pandemic compare to other infectious diseases? This week’s graph from the New York Times article “How Bad Will the Coronavirus Outbreak Get? Here are 6 Key Factors.” uses the variables average number of people infected by each sick person and fatality rate. See how it compares to the most deadly 1918 Spanish flu and the recent Ebola pandemics. See how it compares to the measles and the common cold. With this information, how do you think the coronavirus might be contained? Search online for the most recent information on the coronavirus.
Here are some of the headlines that really capture the main ideas of this graph: “Coronavirus and the Potential for Destruction or Not?” by Jude of Pasadena, CA, “The Dangerous Range of Disease” by Gracie of Western Guilford High School in Greensboro, NC, “Coronavirus Chaos” by Lauren of Academy of Saint Elizabeth in Morristown, NJ, “Can the Coronavirus Go Up Against These Other Big Dog Diseases?” by Chanse Davis of Academy for Software Engineering, New York City and “Frequent and Fatal Diseases“ by Kiersten of St. John the Apostle School, Clark, NJ.
___________ is the most infectious disease because ____________.
___________ is the most deadly disease because ____________.
Of these two diseases, which are you most afraid of? Explain your answer.
The New York Times graph uses a log scale on the vertical y-axis. After reading about log scales in the Stat Nugget below, examine this graph that does not use a log scale. Both graphs display the same information, except this graph only has data as of 2014. The new coronavirus is not included. Determine where it would be on the graph.
Both graphs are mathematically correct, but they represent the information differently. Which one is better for comparison of how contagious diseases are? Explain your answer.
There are six other graphical displays in the New York Times article, including two infographics that show how far in feet the virus can spread and how many people could become infected in five cycles of transmission. Examine any of the graphs. Combined with what you have noticed and wondered about the other graphs, what other insights do you have about the new coronavirus?
You may want to read the New York Times opinion article “We’re Reading the Coronavirus Numbers Wrong” by John Allen Paulos. Here, Paulos explains the inconsistencies in data collected on diseases. This, in part, explains why this graph shows a rectangular region for the coronavirus’ deadliness. Stay tuned for a revised graph.
Below in the Stat Nuggets, we define and explain mathematical terms that apply to the graph.
Join us Wednesday, March 4 to notice and wonder about voter opinion polls. We look forward to your responses between 9 a.m. - 2 p.m. Eastern time during the live online moderation.
A logarithmic scale, or log scale for short, is a scale of measurement where the position of the values on the original scale are converted to their logarithmic values. (The logarithm of a number is the power to which 10 must be raised to get a value equal to that number. For example, the log of 100 is 2 since 10 raised to the second power equals 100.) Log scales are often used on graphs when the data values have a huge range. On a log scale, the length of the axes’ intervals change in a particular pattern. This is in contrast to a typical linear scale in which the length of the intervals do not change. An example of the use of a log scale is for the amplitude (or wiggle) of earthquakes. The amplitudes are converted to log values (the Richter scale) and then plotted on a log scale. For logs, each whole number increase in magnitude represents a tenfold increase in measured amplitude.
In the virus graph, the vertical y-axis scale is a log scale. The scale is compressed into smaller intervals to make the variation between less-deadly diseases easier to see but to still have the most deadly diseases on the graph. Diseases near the top of the graph are much deadlier than those in the middle. Here, the distance from 0 to 0.1 is the same as the distance from 1 to 10, or from 10 to 100.
A scatter plot is a graph that is used to display the relationship between two quantitative variables and is described by the direction, strength and form of the relationship, and unusual observations.
Direction: A positive direction means that the y-variable tends to increase as the x-variable increases (or an uphill trend). A negative direction means that the y-variable tends to decrease as the x-variable increases (or a downhill trend). Relationships between quantitative variables are said to have no direction when there is no consistent positive or negative pattern in the scatter plot.
Strength: Relationships between two quantitative variables run from strong, if the points fall in a “tight” pattern, to weak, if they are spread out.
Form: The form of a relationship is determined by the pattern of the points in the scatter plot. The most common forms are linear and curved. If there is no apparent pattern in the scatter plot, the form is sometimes referred to as scattered.
Unusual observations: Unusual points that do not fit the general pattern in the scatter plot are called outliers.
In the virus graph, the quantitative variables are the average number of people infected by each sick person and the fatality rate. There is no direction or description of strength because the form of the graph is scattered. The most unusual disease is measles since a person with measles infects, on average, 15 people. People with other diseases infect only one to five others, on average.
The graphs for “What’s Going On in This Graph?” are selected in partnership with Sharon Hessney. Ms. Hessney wrote the “reveal” and Stat Nuggets with Roxy Peck, a professor emerita, California Polytechnic State University San Luis Obispo, and moderates online with Nick Simonetti, high school mathematics teacher at the Western Guilford High School.