A short video of a hog-like creature sprinting down the streets of Tucson, Ariz., took off this week. It was wonderful.
Look! Down on the ground, racing through the streets of Arizona! It’s a bird! It’s a plane! It’s a pig! It’s a boar!
It’s actually a javelina: resembling a large-ish hog to an amateur’s eye, but more accurately a salt-and-pepper-coated peccary. And boy, can it move.
The javelina in question (that’s javelina like have, the Spanish pronunciation, not like javelin) was filmed last week sprinting along the side of the road in Tucson, Ariz. As far as 12-second viral videos go, the clip was on par with the cinematic greats: It was Forrest Gump running through Alabama. It was Simba galloping home to take his place as the rightful king of Pride Rock. All that was missing was the “Chariots of Fire” theme song.
The clip’s origins are a tad more commonplace. Damion Alexander, a real estate agent in Tucson, was looking at houses when he captured the video from the passenger seat of his client’s car. They slowed down to about 25-30 miles an hour to catch the clip, Mr. Alexander said. But the javelina kept pace — majestic strides and all.
On Saturday, Mr. Alexander shared the video on Facebook, where it gained some notice. But it wasn’t until Monday that the clip really, er, picked up speed when Hannah Tiede, a reporter from KOLD News, a local TV station, posted the javelina on Twitter. That clip now has more than seven million views.
As Ms. Tiede’s post took off, it seemed as if all of Twitter had united in a brief moment of joy. “Where is she going?” one user asked. “What is her story? Is she late for work?” Brands got involved.
Eventually, the video made its way to Teddy Martin, a 19-year-old student in New Orleans. A scene that momentous, he thought, needed a sweeping soundtrack to match.
“I’m extremely well versed in javelinas now,” Mr. Martin added.
Javelinas are pretty common around Tucson, and are primarily found in Arizona, Texas and New Mexico, according to the Arizona Game and Fish Department.
Mark Hart, a spokesman at the Arizona Game and Fish Department’s Tucson office, was not quite as amused.
Javelinas are typically docile, Mr. Hart added, unless people try to feed them or they mistake a household pet for a predator. This one couldn’t figure out an escape route — but it did find a hole in the fence to duck into after the filming ended, Mr. Alexander said.
