Criticism of the sentence grew after Evelyn Yang, the wife of a former presidential candidate, said the doctor had sexually assaulted her in 2012.
In an interview last fall, Cyrus R. Vance Jr., the Manhattan district attorney, and his chief assistant defended their decision to strike a plea deal in 2016 that allowed a gynecologist accused of sexually abusing 19 patients to avoid going to prison.
The chief assistant, Karen Friedman Agnifilo, said the case against the doctor, Robert A. Hadden, was “not a slam-dunk.” Among other things, she said, some of the women were pregnant when they say the assaults occurred and so they could not see what was happening. That, she said, could have been used by the defense to undermine them as witnesses.
But on Thursday, the district attorney’s office said it had opened an investigation into new abuse allegations against Mr. Hadden.
The move came about a month after the wife of a former Democratic presidential candidate publicly declared that she was one of Mr. Hadden’s victims, and amid renewed calls from elected officials and women’s rights groups that Mr. Vance resign over his handling of the case.
Danny Frost, a spokesman for Mr. Vance, said in a statement that two top prosecutors had been assigned to the inquiry and that they were “in touch with a number of survivors.” Mr. Frost also encouraged anyone with allegations against Mr. Hadden to contact the office.
“Their voices will be heard and the abuse they suffered will be thoroughly investigated,” Mr. Frost said.
Mr. Hadden did not respond to requests for comment. The lawyer who represented him in the earlier case, Isabelle Kirshner, is not currently representing him.
Mark A. Bederow, a criminal defense lawyer in New York and former Manhattan prosecutor, said that Mr. Vance was taking an appropriate step.
Mr. Vance has been on the defensive over his prosecution of sex-crimes cases since the emergence of the #MeToo movement and the revelation that he chose not to prosecute the movie producer Harvey Weinstein in 2015 when presented with what Mr. Vance’s critics said was a credible allegation.
Mr.  The jury in the case finished its third day of deliberations on Thursday without reaching a verdict.
Criticism of Mr. Vance intensified in January when Evelyn Yang, the wife of the former Democratic presidential candidate Andrew Yang, said in an interview with CNN that Mr. Hadden had sexually assaulted her in 2012, when she was pregnant with her first child.
In an interview with The New York Times, Ms. Yang noted that she had worked with Mr. Vance’s office to build a case against Mr. Hadden and had testified before the grand jury that indicted him in 2014 on charges involving six women, including five counts of committing a criminal sexual act. If the case had gone to trial, prosecutors planned to use the testimony of 13 other women who said he had abused them.
Mr. Vance’s office ultimately agreed to resolve the case by letting Mr. Hadden plead guilty to a single felony count of third-degree criminal sexual contact and a misdemeanor count of forcible touching. He was stripped of his medical license but spared prison time.
Mr. Vance’s office then ignored a state panel’s recommendation and sought the lowest sex offender status for Mr. Hadden, which a judge granted.
In the interview last fall, Mr. Vance and Ms. Friedman Agnifilo said that the plea agreement had guaranteed that Mr. Hadden was convicted of a felony and that he could no longer practice medicine.
More than 65 women have now accused Mr. Hadden of sexually abusing them — including two who were teenagers when they say the assaults occurred, said Anthony T. DiPietro, a lawyer who is representing many of the women in a lawsuit against Mr. Hadden and his employers, Columbia University and NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital. The figure is double what it was before Ms. Yang went public with her account, he said.
Mr. DiPietro questioned Mr. Vance’s motivation for starting a new inquiry, and he argued that Columbia should also be investigated for what it knew about his behavior.
“While I’m glad the D.A. finally decided to support the survivors, it’s not enough,” he said.

The earlier investigation involving Mr. Hadden began in June 2012 when a patient told the police that he had licked her vagina and touched her nipples during an examination.
One of the six women he was accused of abusing, described in court papers as Victim No. 5, said he had rubbed her clitoris after removing his gloves during an exam in 2011.
As part of the plea deal, Ms. Kirshner, who has known Mr. Vance since they were colleagues in the district attorney’s office in the 1990s, negotiated with prosecutors for a pledge that they would not pursue any similar crimes that were known to the office in February 2016.
As for a new investigation into Mr. Hadden, Ms. Yang said on Thursday that she was pleased that it was happening, but continued to be frustrated over how the earlier case was handled.
