The decision came after a group of doctors, patients and proponents sued, arguing that a 2015 law infringed on their constitutional right to make decisions about their own lives.
BERLIN — Germany’s highest court on Wednesday overturned a ban on organized medically assisted suicide, allowing terminally and gravely ill patients to seek help ending their lives without leaving the country.
The ruling came after a long-running discussion about the role of doctors and caregivers in end-of-life decisions, one that has special resonance in a country where Nazi doctors killed hundreds of thousands during World War II.
A group of doctors, patients and proponents had sued to change the criminal law banning organized assisted suicide, arguing that the measure infringed on their constitutional right to make decisions about their own lives.
The court’s decision comes more than four years after the German Parliament moved away from many of its European neighbors by voting to ban organized assisted suicide.
With the ruling on Wednesday, Germany will once more allow people to help those too ill to end their lives, even if they do so in an organized fashion, as medical practitioners and end-of-life volunteer associations aim to do.
It was hard to determine how many patients would make use of the ruling. While more than 9,000 Germans killed themselves in 2017, Germany does not keep track of those who had been gravely ill before. In the past, many sick Germans wishing to end their lives would travel to Switzerland, where the practice is legal. Dignitas, an assisted-dying association in Switzerland, counted 3,225 German members last year, the nationality most represented in the association.
The ruling gives doctors wider powers not just for rare end-of-life decisions, but also in palliative care, said Dr. Matthias Thöns, one of the physicians whose complaint took the case to the constitutional court.
Dr. Thöns, who treats patients in their homes, explained that under the old ban, he had to worry about how much pain medication he would leave patients, lest he become criminally liable in the event of a purposeful overdose.
“It is a good judgment for people in desperate situations,” Dr. Thöns said in a telephone interview from Karlsruhe, Germany, where he had traveled to hear the judgment. And though he welcomed the decision, Dr. Thöns warned that the practice needed to be tightly regulated.
The law that was introduced to stop organized assisted suicide passed Parliament with a solid majority in 2015. But the constitutional court had already weakened the law when it ruled in 2017 that patients in extremely exceptional circumstances could not be barred from access to lethal drugs.
The German government said it would examine the court’s ruling before deciding how to proceed, a spokesman said on Wednesday.
The subject is especially contentious in Germany because of the Nazis’ public policy of killing hundreds of thousands of sick and disabled people.
