When you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.
The trouble with Picasso, Julian Barnes wrote, reprovingly, in his essay collection, “Keeping an Eye Open,” is that he didn’t make paintings — he made Picassos.
It could be Barnes’s aversion to self-parody — to producing a “Barnes” — that has driven his frenetically various career. He has written a cubist biography of Flaubert; a history of the world “in 10 ½ chapters” (narrated, in part, by a termite); love stories and crime fiction (published under a pseudonym); essay collections on cooking; a reckoning with his own mortality; linked novels told from rotating points of view; and a memoir of his wife’s death, by way of a history of aerial photography.
An instantly identifiable character stands, a bit shyly, at the center of almost all this work, however. He is recessive, lightly ironic, evasive (“I think I write about Englishness,” Barnes once said), puzzling over his life and, very often, his attachment to a charismatic and congenitally unfaithful woman.
Enter the exuberant Samuel Jean Pozzi, the star of Barnes’s new book of nonfiction, “The Man in the Red Coat” — and the subject of one of John Singer Sargent’s most famous portraits. In Sargent’s painting, from 1881, Pozzi poses in a blood-red robe; he is full-bearded, but subtly and suggestively androgynous. One hand rests on his hip, the other holds the gown closed at the neck, but only just.
Not quite. Pozzi was a surgeon, and something of a celebrity gynecologist, who transformed his field, wrote an influential treatise and designed an innovative hospital. “Disgustingly handsome,” in the words of the Princess of Monaco, he was a roué of some renown (“a moral wreck,” in his daughter’s view) and a lover of Sarah Bernhardt. An aesthete and a cosmopolitan, he was a “kind of hero,” according to Barnes, and a new character in the author’s work — a figure of action and appetite, beloved for his energy, curiosity and radiant cheerfulness.
In “Flaubert’s Parrot,” Barnes’s narrator draws a distinction between two kinds of people in relationships: “Those who want to know everything and those who don’t. This search is a sign of love, I maintain.” In “The Man in the Red Coat,” this taxonomy is refined, and a third type introduced: those who understand that not everything can be known — especially about figures of the past. In this sense, Barnes’s latest is a sharp commentary on biography — the phrase “we cannot know” echoes not as a statement of failure but an ethic. In one section of the book Barnes lists his questions that must go unanswered — some whimsical (Sarah Bernhardt, just what did happen to that leg of yours?), and others that go to the heart of Barnes’s fascination with Pozzi.
This new book — so contentedly diffuse — pulls into sharp focus. How were these men judged in their time? And how are we prompted to judge them now? With what “late-assembled court of morals”? “Biography is a collection of holes tied together with string, and nowhere more so than with the sexual and amatory life,” he writes.
