Corrections that appeared in print on Saturday, Feb. 29, 2020.
An article on Friday about a patient who exhibited symptoms associated with the coronavirus, but was not tested for days because she did not meet the strict federal criteria, misspelled the county in California where she lives. It is Solano, not Solana.
An article on Friday about the stock market entering a correction misstated the number of coronavirus cases in Italy. It was 650, not 14.
An article on Friday about a proposal that would increase the fee to challenge a deportation order misstated the impact of the proposal on fees for green cards and naturalization. Fees for permanent residence permits, known as green cards, would increase by $990, to a total of $2,750, and the cost for naturalization of new citizens would increase by $445, to $1,170; it is not the case that a green card and naturalization would cost $990 and $445.
An article on Thursday about Deontay Wilder’s entrance costume for his fight with Tyson Fury misstated the given name of Mr. Wilder’s opponent in a match last November. He is Luis Ortiz, not Victor.
A theater review on Wednesday about “Dana H.” misstated the end date of the play. It is running through April 11, not Feb. 29.
An art review on Friday about “Judd” at the MoMA misidentified the location of the Bernstein Brothers workshop. It was in Queens, not Manhattan.
An article on Page 18 about the play “Help” by Claudia Rankine describes incorrectly the production of “The White Card.” It was an American Repertory Theater production at ArtsEmerson; it was not at American Repertory Theater.
A theater entry in the Listings on Page 28 about what to see and do in New York this spring misspells the name of an ambassador and congresswoman (and character in “Flying Over Sunset”). She was Clare Boothe Luce, not Clare Booth Luce.
An article this weekend on Page 20 about medical examiners erroneously includes one location in a list of places where chief medical examiners have resigned in protest over intolerable caseloads and insufficient funding and resources. New Hampshire’s former chief medical examiner did not resign in protest; he retired.
An obituary on Feb. 18 about the golfer Mickey Wright omitted a name from a list of golfers who have won four consecutive major events. In addition to Wright in 1961 and 1962 and Tiger Woods in 2000 and 2001, Bobby Jones achieved this feat in 1930.
Errors are corrected during the press run whenever possible, so some errors noted here may not have appeared in all editions.
To contact the newsroom regarding correction requests, complaints or other comments about our coverage, please email |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Comments on editorials may be emailed to |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or email customercare@nytimes.com.