A modern showplace in Charleston, a Tudor Revival-style house in Denver and an Asian-influenced retreat in Portland.
This concrete-and-glass home was designed as a showplace for art and entertaining, with local artisans contributing decorative painting, metalwork and woodwork. The Frank Gehry-inspired roof is made of metal tiles imported from Canada that overlap like fish scales.
The house is in the Wagener Terrace neighborhood, on the upper Charleston peninsula, about two and a half miles northwest of the downtown historic district. (Here, the houses date to the 1930s.) The property is two and a half blocks from Rodney Scott’s James Beard award-winning Whole Hog BBQ and other popular restaurants, and looks out to the 60-acre Hampton Park. The Citadel military college is about a half-mile west.
This home is in a FEMA flood zone designated as a moderate- to low-risk area, with flood insurance recommended but not required.
The front door opens to a lofted space with white epoxy-finished concrete floors, white walls and a 25-foot ceiling with light flowing from upper windows. The houses on either side are screened out with rippling panels of translucent fiberglass.
The open kitchen includes custom oak cabinetry with waterfall laminate surfaces and integrated stainless steel appliances.
The master bedroom overlooks the main floor. Upholstered oak benches are built into the walls on either side; behind the bedroom is a bathroom with an oak vanity with twin sinks, a walk-in glass shower with a pebble floor and a stand-alone tub. A walk-in closet lined with drawers and open shelves and racks is accessible from the bedroom and the bathroom.
Two additional bedrooms with en suite bathrooms are on the lower level, with glass walls overlooking the backyard.
Outdoor space: The upstairs landing leads out to a partially sheltered deck with a built-in bench. The fenced backyard has flowing patches of gravel and synthetic grass framed by bamboo. Round steppingstones lead to a sculptural shelter (cheese holes in the stucco-and-plywood structure pick up on the circle theme). The driveway has room for three cars to park in tandem.
This house is in the Lower Highland (commonly known as LoHi) neighborhood, near schools, restaurants and popular watering holes. Denver’s central business district is two miles southeast. Highland Park is three blocks west, on the other side of Federal Boulevard.
Indoors: After years as an apartment building, the structure was recently gutted and restored to its original use as a single-family house. The half-timbered exterior with its wide grids of windows is original; everything else — plumbing, electricity, HVAC, oak floors, Sheetrock and other wall surfaces — is new.
The front door opens to the living room, where it is flanked by a pair of benches. To the left, as you enter, is a wood-burning fireplace, set into a shiplap wall. To the right is a sitting area next to the staircase and, beyond that, a bedroom with arched windows. Moving straight ahead takes you to a family room with a wet bar (a bathroom with a walk-in shower is off to the side). This space flows into the open kitchen and dining area, which has white cabinets and quartz counters along two walls, plus an island with a cooktop. Gleaming ceramic tile serves as a backsplash.
The second floor has been opened up to create a loft space at the top of the stairs. Dark beams intersect below the vaulted ceiling and are echoed in the half-timbered wall pattern. A glass door between grids of windows opens to a street-facing balcony. The loft includes an enclosed guest room, a bathroom with a tub, and a laundry area. A private entrance is reached from an exterior backyard staircase.
Behind the loft is a master suite that includes a bathroom with a vanity with twin sinks and a walk-in shower.
Outdoor space: The fenced backyard has new concrete walkways leading to a detached two-car garage.
This house is at the end of a long, private driveway, three miles southwest of downtown and four and a half miles northeast of the city of Beaverton. The West Hills neighborhood is known for its high-quality schools.
The property had a major renovation before the current owners moved in a decade ago; flagstone, lacquer, cherry wood and light are its principal elements.
Indoors: Double glass doors open to a stone-paved entrance hall with translucent skylights that resemble rice-paper screens. Turning right takes you to the connected living and dining rooms, with their Brazilian cherry floors, vaulted ceilings, clerestory windows and shoji doors topped with lattice-wood inserts. The living room has a gas fireplace with a stone hearth; beyond it is a sitting room with built-in cabinets and shelves and a floating fireplace in a corner. Next to that is a study with two sets of glass doors opening to a deck that looks out to the gardens.
Turning left at the front door, or passing through the dining room, you find a kitchen with slate floors, black lacquer cabinets topped in granite and a seating peninsula that extends diagonally into the middle of the room. The appliances include a Sub-Zero refrigerator and freezer with a glass door.
The master suite is off the kitchen. The carpeted bedroom has recessed ceiling lights and windows that wrap a corner. The bathroom includes heated marble floors, glass-block wall finishes, a jetted bathtub and a walk-in shower. 
Two additional bedrooms and a bathroom are on the lower level, which walks out to a patio. A mudroom off the attached garage contains a sink; laundry appliances are hidden in cherry cabinets.
Outdoor space: Robert Murase, a Seattle-based landscape architect who died in 2005, designed the half-acre property with Japanese maples, bamboo, sculpture, water features, lighting and a path that encircles the yard.
