 (Read the judge’s explanation of the sentencing at the time.) The White House published a list of 33 high-profile names who supported Mr. Milken’s cause, including: Tom Barrack of Colony Capital; the Fox Business anchor Maria Bartiromo; Rudy Giuliani, who led the case against Mr. Milken in the 1980s; Robert Kraft, the New England Patriots owner; the media mogul Rupert Murdoch; Sean Parker, the Napster founder and former Facebook executive; the hedge fund billionaire John Paulson; the activist investor Nelson Peltz; and David Rubenstein of the Carlyle Group.
Seen as an underdog, even a very wealthy and well-connected one, Mr. Milken has long inspired a counternarrative that he was a victim of a media and Wall Street establishment jealous of his wealth and success. However unfounded in fact, that version of reality has now gotten a presidential stamp of approval.
Bloomberg would sell Bloomberg if he won. But to whom?
Mike Bloomberg caught the attention of many on Wall Street yesterday when he proposed policies to rein in the financial industry. Then he made more waves when his campaign said he would sell his financial empire if he became president.
Bloomberg L.P. could be valued at up to $60 billion, according to analysts at Burton-Taylor International. Campaign officials said Mr. Bloomberg would put the company into a blind trust should he win, with the intent of selling it.
Who would want Bloomberg L.P.?
• Data-hungry exchanges like the Intercontinental Exchange, which owns the N.Y.S.E. The London Stock Exchange bought Refinitiv, a Bloomberg competitor, last year.
• Banks like Goldman Sachs and JPMorgan Chase, which have invested in Symphony, a rival to Bloomberg’s chat service.
• A cash-rich tech giant like Google or Microsoft.
Bloomberg L.P. generates $10 billion in sales a year, with around $4 billion coming in profit before taxes (and other items). Put it another way: Mr. Bloomberg is used to seeing several billion dollars of cash roll into his personal bank account every year, and even if an all-cash payout incurred a huge capital gains tax, he’s used to it.
Of course, there are good strategic buyers that could offer cash and stock. Microsoft, Google and Amazon — businesses that, like Bloomberg, deal in data and messaging — make sense. But Mr. Bloomberg will be calculating the following trade: giving up a very rich, regular cash dividend for stock in a company he doesn’t control that could go down in price.
Some have suggested a lone buyer could emerge, someone like Warren Buffett or Bill Gates who might appreciate the beauty of the business beyond the balance sheet. But that would create a set of optics no one would want: a billionaire helping out another billionaire so he can become president.
The Japanese tech conglomerate said this morning that it planned to raise about $4.5 billion. This being SoftBank, however, the way it’s doing so isn’t exactly straightforward.
We’d expect nothing less from a company whose $100 billion Vision Fund relies on a complicated, debt-heavy structure. In its latest maneuver, SoftBank will borrow against some of the holdings in its publicly traded Japanese telecom affiliate rather than just selling new bonds.
SoftBank needs quite a bit of money. It’s under pressure from Elliott Management, the activist hedge fund, to buy back about $20 billion worth of its shares to bolster its stock price. And it has been spending more of its own money on tech investments as fund-raising for its second Vision Fund proves to be slow going.
Using bonds to fight the epidemic: At the urging of Beijing, Chinese companies have raised more than $3 billion in “virus control” bonds, reports the FT. The debt benefits from a faster approval process and low yields, since there is strong backing from state-backed buyers. Borrowers are required to devote at least 10 percent of the amounts raised to fighting the epidemic.
The usual ways of addressing sexual harassment in corporate America aren’t working, Gretchen Carlson and Roxanne Petraeus write in Fortune. They suggest another approach: rethinking the use of nondisclosure agreements.
When founders are building out their hiring practices, even at the early stages of their companies, they should understand what N.D.A.s are in their employment contracts, and consider the impacts on their colleagues, should those N.D.A.s be applied to sexual harassment cases. Investors should also be asking these questions to their portfolio companies.
Similarly, leaders of more mature companies have a real platform: They can publicly denounce the use of N.D.A.s in sexual harassment cases to set new standards when it comes to what is considered common practice in dealing with sexual harassment.
