Friday: Officials are urging caution but not panic. Also: A Super Tuesday update.
Gov. Gavin Newsom announced that there had been 33 cases in California and as many as 8,400 people were being monitored for the virus, but that the state had only about 200 testing kits, which he described as “inadequate.” The C.D.C., he said, had promised to provide more.
My colleagues reported that one of those 33, a Solano County woman, had to wait days to be tested. That woman may also be the first patient in the United States to be infected through community spread — a case in which the source of infection is unknown.
Later on Thursday, The Sacramento Bee reported that a student at the University of California, Davis, was showing “mild symptoms,” and that the student's three roommates were in isolation.
But although the authorities have emphasized that emergency declarations and other measures are still mostly precautionary, The Los Angeles Times reported that businesses were pulling events out of California and that this weekend’s Korea Times Music Festival at the Hollywood Bowl has been postponed.
Businesses in Chinese enclaves are struggling, too: The Guardian described San Francisco’s Chinatown — normally bustling with tourists — as almost eerily deserted.
Of course, this is all just in California. The outbreak has been a global phenomenon, sending financial markets plummeting and becoming a political cudgel.
The latest on the virus around the globe.
The virus can be deadly, but the vast majority of those who have been infected suffer only mild symptoms and make full recoveries — here's why that’s kind of a double-edged sword.
What a coronavirus outbreak means for schools around the U.S.
As we’ve mentioned, California really wants people to vote.
Secretary of State Alex Padilla told reporters on Thursday morning that more than 2.7 million Californians had already voted by mail. He wouldn't even estimate how many more ballots could be on their way (about 15 million vote-by-mail ballots went out), or how many people will take advantage of the in-person, day-of voter registration.
He did, however, caution that because of all the ways Californians can vote, it may take some time to finish verifying and counting all the ballots. County election officials must report final results to the secretary of state’s office by April 3.
So who’s going to win? That’s a tougher question to answer, but according to CalMatters, if things go according to the polls, Senator Bernie Sanders could win all the delegates chosen by statewide vote.
If you missed it, here’s more about the arrest last year of the gynecologist, Dr. George Tyndall, and more about the latest on the university’s settlement with his former patients.
Last year, around Pride, I wrote about the delicate efforts to keep San Francisco’s L.G.B.T.Q. communities alive and thriving.
On Saturday afternoon, a group of the city’s L.G.B.T.Q. leaders are set to host a march aimed at remembering the city’s Castro district as it once was, as well as highlighting the need to support businesses there today.
Ms. MORE! will be helping to lead Saturday’s march — in heels, naturally. The group will be laying black wreaths at the sites of businesses that have closed and rainbow wreaths on queer businesses that are open.
Ms. MORE! said the march is meant as much to “shake everyone" to attention as it is to mourn a bygone era.
“My hope is to, really, reignite hope,” she said.
Whether or not you’ll be out in your heels, it’s worth perusing the list of businesses on the route — like Castro Camera, the camera shop that was run by Harvey Milk — which you can find here.
California Today goes live at 6:30 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Were you forwarded this email? Sign up for California Today here.