Since 1900, the House and Senate have repeatedly failed to pass such a bill. Now the legislation could be on its way to the Oval Office.
But on Wednesday, a measure to add lynching to the United States Criminal Code passed in the House. The Senate passed a version of the bill last year.
Once the bills are formally reconciled, the legislation can be sent to the Oval Office, where President Trump is expected to sign it into law.
The House bill, called the Emmett Till Antilynching Act, was introduced by Representative Bobby Rush, a Democrat from Illinois. The Senate bill, which passed unanimously last year, was introduced by Kamala Harris, Democrat of California; Cory Booker, Democrat of New Jersey; and Tim Scott, Republican of South Carolina.
“Today brings us one step closer to finally reconciling a dark chapter in our nation’s history,” Mr. Booker said in a statement about the passage of the House bill on Wednesday.
“We are one step closer to finally outlawing this heinous practice and achieving justice for over 4,000 victims of lynching,” Mr. Rush said in a statement when the House vote was announced last week.
The two white men who were charged with killing Emmett were acquitted by an all-white jury. At the time, it was often the case that perpetrators of racist violence were either acquitted or not prosecuted at all.
“The importance of this bill cannot be overstated,” Mr. Rush said in his statement.
The House voted to pass the Emmett Till Antilynching Act, and the Senate passed a version of the bill last year. President Trump is expected to sign it into law.
Murder is typically prosecuted at the state or local level, but the House and Senate bills would make lynching a federal crime. It fits a longstanding pattern: Civil rights legislation has often been passed at the federal level after individual states did not act.
Racially motivated killings have continued to occur in the United States since the end of the Jim Crow era. High-profile cases include those of James Byrd Jr., a black man who was brutally murdered by three white men in Texas in 1998, and the nine black parishioners who were killed in a church massacre in South Carolina in 2015.
But a bill in 2020 cannot protect the thousands of people who were victims of racist violence decades ago.
She added that when she spoke to people about her research, many said that they were not aware of the devastating scale and continuing impact of racist violence in the United States.
Researchers with the Equal Justice Initiative, a nonprofit legal advocacy group, have documented more than 4,000 lynchings in the United States between 1877 and 1950, mostly — though not exclusively — in the South. The extrajudicial killings were instruments of terror, often conducted as public spectacles in full view of, or with cooperation from, law enforcement.
Bryan Stevenson, a civil rights lawyer and the executive director of the Equal Justice Initiative, said that the terror drove millions of black people to flee the South, drastically altering the demographic geography of the United States.
The bill that the Senate approved last year noted that 99 percent of lynching perpetrators escaped punishment.
The omission of Wells’s name from the House and Senate bills was a major oversight, Dr. Hobbs said. “I can’t think of one American who did more to bring the cause of anti-lynching to national and international attention,” she said.
Representative George Henry White, Republican of North Carolina, proposed an anti-lynching bill as early as 1900, when he was the only black member of Congress.
“I tremble with horror for the future of our nation when I think what must be the inevitable result if mob violence is not stamped out of existence and law once permitted to reign supreme,” he said in a speech on the House floor. His words were applauded, but his bill did not pass.
The cause was later taken up by the N.A.A.C.P., which produced a report on lynching in 1919, and by members of Congress, including Representative Leonidas C. Dyer, who sponsored an anti-lynching bill that passed the House in 1922; and Robert F. Wagner and Edward P. Costigan, who introduced another version in the Senate in 1934.
Ms. Harris, Mr. Booker and Mr. Scott introduced a version that the Senate approved in 2018, but it was never taken up by the House.
Though it is nearly identical, the House legislation still needs to be reconciled with the 2019 Senate bill before a final version is sent to the Oval Office. A White House spokesman said Mr. Trump was expected to sign it.
