Credit...Christopher Testani for The New York Times. Food Stylist: Simon Andrews.
Good morning. Julia Moskin was in London recently, to speak with Fergus Henderson and his wife, Margot Henderson, celebrated British chefs and restaurateurs who have done a huge amount over the last 25 years to reinvent (some might say invent!) a particular kind of British cookery: minimalist, local and deeply seasonal. Julia’s article about the couple is a joy to read.
Naturally there are recipes to accompany the prose. The first is for Ms. Henderson’s chicken braised with potatoes and pine nuts, a one-pot meal that hints at Spanish and Portuguese flavors while remaining a decidedly home-cooked British meal. The second is for the beans and bacon (above) that Mr. Henderson serves at his St. John restaurant, a fragrant, richly flavored version of the dish that would later become, in the United States, a New England classic. Won’t you make one of those real soon?
Or, if following instructions from us isn’t your jam on a Wednesday night, and you’d prefer to freestyle as we so often do in the middle of the week, please accept this prompt: soft-boiled eggs, rice, butter and soy sauce. Maybe on a bed of soft salad greens? All you need to know is, for soft-boiled eggs: Start them in a single layer in a sauce pan well covered by lukewarm water, then heat them until the water just boils, turn off the stove, cover the pan and let the eggs stand for 2 minutes. Rinse under cold water when the time’s up, peel and cut onto your bowl of buttered rice. Add soy to taste, you’re welcome.
There are thousands and thousands of actual recipes awaiting you on NYT Cooking. (Check out these loaded sweet potatoes with black beans and Cheddar. See what you make of this sheet-pan Italian sub dinner. Revel in this roasted salmon with jalapeño honey and lime.) Yes, you need a subscription to access them all. Subscriptions are the river from which we draw our sustenance, and survive.
Come visit us on Instagram if you have an account. The photographs are terrific. We’re on Twitter as well, with news. Videos are on YouTube. And our community does a lot on Facebook. Check all of that out.
Write us, please, if anything goes wrong along the way, either with your cooking or our technology |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| We will get back to you.
Now, it’s nothing to do with boned quail or cabbages, but Julie Bosman had a riveting story in The Times the other day about a great migration of black families out of Chicago, and it’s absolutely worth a read.
I cannot emphasize how much you need to watch “Cheer” on Netflix, perhaps especially if you downed it in one epic binge after it was released this year. There’s levels to it.
Sasha Frere-Jones’s elegy for Andy Gill and Gang of Four, in The New Yorker, is top-drawer criticism.
Please read David E. Rattray in The East Hampton Star, on the history of enslaved men and women on the East End of Long Island.
Finally, I was up at Rockefeller Center on Monday morning to cook some fried chicken, cornbread and coleslaw on “The Today Show.” I went bold with my shirt choice because you can’t really cook chicken in a coat and tie, and if you want to make fun of me for that, feel free to dunk the clown |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| I’ll be back on Friday.