At a raucous debate, Bernie Sanders was the target, but who really got hurt?
In case you were at all confused, Bernie Sanders is the apocalypse. Or something very close to it.
That was the message from his six rivals on Tuesday night at the latest and perhaps nastiest Democratic debate, which devolved at times into an oratorical melee of overlapping voices, overheated tempers and dire warnings about what would happen if Sanders, the current front-runner in the contest for the Democratic presidential nomination, becomes the party’s nominee. President Trump would get four more years. Several of the Democrats on the stage in Charleston, S.C., essentially guaranteed it.
Nomination contests often get ugly, with candidates in the same party — candidates with some of the same core values — belittling one another. But this felt different. This felt worse. This felt like a genuine freakout.
Sanders’s competitors weren’t just desperate to reverse his progress before Super Tuesday next week, when roughly a third of all delegates are awarded, so that one of them can overtake him. They seemed to be in the grip of some larger existential crisis, their understanding of their party’s dynamics challenged, their sense of its destiny upended and their dread of blowing an immeasurably consequential election profound.
Within the first 15 minutes, Mike Bloomberg attacked Sanders and then Elizabeth Warren did, and then Pete Buttigieg, Joe Biden and Tom Steyer got in on the action. Amy Klobuchar joined the fray late but with no less exuberance. Together they pressed the case that Sanders’s proposals — for health care, education and more — were too uncompromising, too disruptive and too expensive, and that he had shown an inexplicable, suspicious softness toward authoritarian regimes around the world.
A few of them made clear that they don’t merely see Sanders as a less-than-ideal adversary for Trump. They see him as political suicide.
And as the candidates gave voice to that dark vision, they occasionally vaulted past fierce to feral. There were episodes when they spoke over one another, not just for a few sentences but for entire paragraphs, while the journalists moderating the debate watched helplessly. The worst of these involved Sanders and Buttigieg, who perhaps devoted the most energy to sounding the Sanders alarm.
Sanders, red-faced, shook his head. He did so much of that on Tuesday night it was as if he were a pioneer in neck aerobics.
But he also kept his cool and stood his ground, so that a night devoted in large part to wounding him probably left him with little more than a nick or two. He was able to say, correctly, that he beats Trump in polls that posit a hypothetical matchup of the two. He was able to cite, accurately, his impressive favorability ratings.
He was also able to step back during stretches of the debate when the ugliness didn’t focus on him — when the generally foul atmosphere pitted Biden against Steyer or Warren against Bloomberg, or Klobuchar against Biden.
Nobody really looked good, and that’s another big part of what spooked me. I was watching a political party devour itself. It was all so unpleasant — and so unflattering — that candidates took to commenting on how unpleasant and unflattering it was.
“I guess the only way you do this is to jump in and speak twice as long as you should,” Biden groused, as he delivered yet another debate performance in which he was obsessed with the clock, the rules and whether he should follow them when others didn’t.
 But before I could cheer, she proceeded to tear Sanders down. That’s the bind that she and other moderate Democrats are in. To press for a nominee less divisive than Sanders, they’re forced to behave in a manner that’s, well, divisive. It’s a Catch-22. Make that a Catch-2020.
The debate wasn’t just scary but sad, because when the vitriol waned, there were glimpses of just how much more prudent and better prepared than Trump all of these candidates are. There were glimmers of just how much more serious than the Republican Party the Democratic Party is.
Asked about the threat of the coronavirus, the candidates spoke authoritatively and compellingly about the Trump administration’s missteps and America’s vulnerability. They discussed science, something with which Trump has barely any relationship. They mentioned international cooperation, something for which Trump has scant respect.
Bloomberg, so awful when he made his debate debut last week, answered a question about public health and then a subsequent one about the legalization of marijuana in a nuanced, knowledgeable fashion, demonstrating that Trump’s problem isn’t that he’s a plutocrat. 
But do Democrats have the antidote to that ignorance? I fervently believe that the vigor and durability of our democracy depend on it, and the debate’s rancor and noise filled me with apprehension.
Maybe there’s solace in Sanders’s final remarks, when he quoted Nelson Mandela: “Everything is impossible until it happens.” He meant that as an answer to his candidacy’s detractors. But I’ll interpret it as an assertion that Democrats will find their way through this mess.
