It’s 1972, and Cindy Copeland is mired in adolescent misery as she enters seventh grade.
In Cynthia L. Copeland’s graphic memoir CUB (Algonquin Young Readers, 223 pp., $12.95; ages 8 to 12), deliverance comes to her younger self in the form of a vocation.
Noting Cindy’s fluid writing and powers of observation, her English teacher steps in, apprenticing her to a junior reporter at the local daily newspaper, The Torrington Register.
Cindy’s new mentor is Leslie, a caffeinated young woman in granny glasses, who whisks her off to such exhilarating assignments as the finance subcommittee meeting of the Board of Education.
“This is so cool,” Cindy breathes, clasping her reporter’s pad. She walks out some hours later with a traumatized expression on her face, after flailing in a sea of incomprehensible bureaucratese, unable to extract a single coherent thought from her notes. As a former cub reporter myself, all I can say is, word.
The idea that finding the right job can solve a person’s problems is not one we tend to promote, especially to children. But this is exactly what happens to Cindy.
The work frees her. When she’s armed with a notebook and camera, the anxiety stomachaches go away and she is at ease, even bold.
At a school board meeting, she calls out a top administrator for padding the school superintendent’s salary — “I have it right here in my notes!” — setting off a chorus of outrage from the adults.
And this success at one thing, journalism, seeps into every part of Cindy’s life. She agrees to go steady with a boy, someone she, in accordance with local custom, completely ignores in school. She discovers that she doesn’t care what the popular girls say about her. She has found a way to be herself.
In both its story and its buoyant artwork — the groovy coloring was done by Ronda Pattison — Copeland gets so many things right. She gets the nuances of hippie-chic ’70s teenage fashion. She gets the daffy chatter of cousins after Thanksgiving dinner has been eaten. (“Eat it! Eat the weird pie!”) She gets the ordinary heartbreak when, again and again, Cindy’s father reflexively nourishes the ambitions of her brothers, looking past her as if she is invisible. (“You know, John, I think you’d be an excellent politician!”) And she gets the way that Cindy’s immediate problems, like a friend scorning her in the hall, can feel as vivid and epoch-defining as Watergate or the passage of the Equal Rights Amendment.
Copeland gets why Cindy nearly faints with pleasure when she gets her first real byline, for a dinky brief on Earth Day.
And yet, there is also the example of Hilde Lysiak, the Pennsylvania girl who in 2016 started her own neighborhood newspaper, The Orange Street News, at age 10, breaking the story of a murder a few blocks from her house.
“Cub” offers a road map for the Hildes and Cindys of today, proposing to the awkward and the ambitious that they are not, in fact, hostage to the merciless social sorting that can happen within the confines of middle school.
Look outward, this delightful book advises. A great big world is waiting.