Trenton Charlson’s back, at his zenith, with a quality puzzle.
SATURDAY PUZZLE — When you’ve got a lot of entries with wings, as well as a ton of “rare” scrabbly letters and wild letter combinations flying around, you’ve got a Trenton Charlson puzzle. Both of those elements are so fanciful, and they’re so gracefully incorporated into this grid, that even if your solving experience is challenging, it’s full of zing.
I love encountering this type of grid, and I cheerfully admit that I solve them quite slowly. I still get intimidated by unusual letter placement! When I look at the finished product, I imagine that other veteran puzzlers probably speed through grids with rampant Z’s and Q’s, as their presence shrinks the pool of possible entries.
The top and bottom of this grid hold the showstoppers, but there’s plenty to chew on in the middle.
14A: There are many cultural examples of the gesture indicated by Mr. Charlson, if you’re able to interpret his clue as a gesture (I looked at my fingers for a while, trying to think of alternatives. Hunters and peckers on a typewriter? I dunno). Maybe you think of Steve Martin or Chris Farley, both of whom relied on these four fingers for comedy; maybe you use your own fingers to draw QUOTATION MARKS in the air to emphasize irony.
I thought it was fun that this was clued straight, and found early examples of the motion used in earnest. This is a long lost entry, by the way, back for the “first time since 1971” (when the clue was punny). The instance below is from “Breakfast for Two,” which goes back quite a bit further.
28A: This would have been a Saturday clue without the Boz, I think. Not complaining! Filling in SCAGGS helped me make early progress, and it sent me to the archives for some peppy puzzling music. On this week’s episode of Two Degrees of Separation, Boz Scaggs and Steve Miller played in bands together, starting in college. Steve Miller’s godfather, and guitar instructor from early childhood? LES PAUL.
51A: Not every strange letter combo today involved a consonant, let alone a Z or a Q. The IO MOTH is named after a Greek priestess with whom Zeus had a dalliance; the moths themselves are striking because of the prominent eye spots on their wings.
59A: This clue identifies a character from French pulp fiction of a similar vintage, ARSÈNE Lupin, a chic and lovable “gentleman burglar” who’s quite famous and a regular entry in the Times puzzle. The clue today, citing this particular story collection, is a debut: I confess to reading overcompletely missing “Herlock Sholmès” when I first solved this puzzle, and being delighted after reading Mr. Charlson’s notes.
3D: I count two transliterations today, in proximity, that can go by more than one spelling. I had “tsarinas” here before I remembered John MCCAIN at 1A, which gave me the correct CZARINAS. In The Times, the stylebook requires “cz,” but the puzzle has used 72 “tsarina” references, compared with only seven to “czarina” (singular and plural). Both CZARINAS and ROYALLY return after multi-decade absences, so be sure to wave.
12D: Close by, a “hafiz” is a student of the Holy Book of Islam; in the Times puzzle, this book has gone by “Koran” 92 times and QURAN only five. There’s been a recent change, however, which roughly coincides with The Times’s stylebook switching from Koran, which is considered a Western transliteration, to Quran in 2013.
35D: “With patches” indicates APPLIQUÉ, the art of stitching cutout fabrics onto a background to make pictures and patterns. The technique involved here makes me think of something I’ve recently read about, “visible mending,” in which people creatively patch the holes in their textiles rather than chuck them into the massive global pile of discards. Yes, I know, this is nothing new, but I still can’t endorse it heartily enough!
One day, while at the gym, I thought wryly of the phrase DEN OF INIQUITY in regard to one of the … let’s say, infelicitous … conversations I happened to overhear in the sauna (thankfully, I wear headphones the rest of the time). I noted that it was 13 letters, and shortly afterward I thought of QUIZZICAL LOOK as another interesting 13 containing a Q. Later, I recalled a grid pattern with stacked 13/14 pairs that had been used a couple times recently (one of which I actually helped edit the clues for). I thought it would be cool if I could put QUIZZICAL LOOK in row 2 with a 14 starting with Q underneath it, though to be honest, I wasn’t expecting too much.
I was pleasantly surprised when the top stack took shape, but wasn’t celebrating yet, as I know all too well the feeling of having one section come out nicely, only to have the symmetrical section refuse to cooperate (I have many half-finished themelesses haunting the abyss of my files). So, I figured it was more than pushing my luck not only to put DEN OF INIQUITY into the bottom half, but to also try to place a Q above the U so that all four long entries would contain a Q. Fortunately, it turns out that the exhilarating phenomenon of having the logistics of a theme simply work out perfectly sometimes applies to themeless puzzles, too. I sometimes agonize over which option for a section of a themeless feels like the “right fit” — not so much here. I don’t think I’ve ever had a themeless feel more “meant to be” than this one.
