Editors’ Note: Thomas Feyer, the letters editor of The Times, recused himself from selecting responses to his own article and delegated that role to another editor.
I spent 18 years as the letters editor at The Calgary Herald. I believe that your obsession with tallying the gender of letter writers to achieve greater parity between men and women is the height of political correctness run amok.
During my tenure at The Herald, I, too, noticed that more men than women wrote letters. However, gender was never among my criteria for publication. Letters that were well written, concise and thoughtful got published in The Herald, regardless of whether a man or a woman wrote them.
My goal for The Herald’s letters page was simply to offer a mix of topics and a diversity of opinions each day. The best letters were often the two-line zingers we received from a variety of people indulging in delightfully sarcastic commentary on political and other issues. Men write letters to the editor more often than women. So what? Stop being silly. Just publish the best letters you get, regardless of who wrote them.
I applaud the Women’s Project in its effort to balance representation on the letters page. And I applaud Kimberly Probolus, whose letter inspired the project a year ago. Before we conclude that we can correct that imbalance if more women submit letters and more men listen, I wonder if we haven’t simplified the issue.
Why aren’t more women offering their opinions on matters of both political and personal importance? Why have women persistently lagged in speaking up?
Could it be that our voices have repeatedly been censored or dismissed by a system in which men still hold most of the power? That women have, in effect, been socialized not to speak because to do so threatens that system?
Women must speak if they want to be heard. And listening is a necessary starting place for men. But to reach gender parity, our society still has a long way to go.
I would like to share my dismay at the limited coverage (articles and photos) about women in the hard news sections. I love to peruse The Times daily, and often fail to find a photo of a woman and have to wait for the Arts or Style section (soft news) before there is some evidence that women are worth reading and writing about, except as victims.
Women make up half the world, do a huge share of the world’s work, take care of children and the elderly, and often lack recognition. Please, let’s try to remedy this imbalance. Perhaps more women will write if they see themselves, and their issues and values, more fairly covered in the hard news sections.
He went on to cite a 1964 study published in the Journalism Quarterly indicating that published letter writers were male by a 3-to-1 ratio. Still, in 1971, our dad was proud of The Times’s efforts to enhance openness and welcome — and print — a diversity of opinion from a diverse readership.
I have a simple solution to the issues undermining goals to achieve gender parity via the Women’s Project. Letter writers should be identified simply with a first initial and a last name. Certainly if the content of the opinion “requires” that the letter writer identify as “a mother of three in Milwaukee” or “a gay male bus driver in Los Angeles,” then the integrity of the response should be maintained. Otherwise, let the opinion in the letter run on its own merits, without at the end “outing” the letter writer as male or female.
I applaud the Women’s Project. But I think there is another project that needs to be implemented by The Times — getting more young people to write. When I accepted your invitation to attend a meeting of frequently published letter writers, I was struck not only by the small percentage of women but even more so by the apparent absence of anyone, male or female, under the age of 55. Young voices matter, too, especially as they are confronted with the massive problems their elders have created for them.
The Times needs younger readers, and engaging them seems like an important undertaking when all of journalism is under attack.
