Book Review|This Novel Is Set in a ’90s M.F.A. Program. The Author Is Aware of Your Concerns.
This Novel Is Set in a ’90s M.F.A. Program. The Author Is Aware of Your Concerns.
Teddy Wayne’s new novel, “Apartment,” is about a volatile friendship between two men enrolled in Columbia University’s M.F.A. program in creative writing in 1996. Yes, the author is aware of your concerns. “Is the choice of a writer-protagonist in a bildungsroman too facile and predictable?” a professor asks in the book’s opening pages, in the midst of a brutal critique of the narrator’s first workshop submission. The other students in the class pile on. “The literary references felt overdetermined,” says one. Another seems to break the fourth wall to speak to any critics who might be reading: “You know how book reviews always call something ‘unflinching’?” she asks rhetorically. “Well, here it feels like the protagonist is flinching,” she concludes, and “all the plotty stuff” might just be there to cover up some fundamental reluctance to examine himself too closely.
This move on Wayne’s part will be familiar to anyone who has endured a few workshops, the writer attempting to head off criticism by acknowledging he knows his piece is flawed — that actually, whatever problems you think you’ve found are intentional. In reality, instead of inoculating a piece against judgment, this posture creates a kind of critical stalemate: If you already know what your readers are going to say, why should we bother saying it? And if you’re smart enough to be aware of these pitfalls, why not just avoid them?
Since Wayne is a veteran writer, and not an M.F.A. student or a debut novelist, he knows that we know what he’s doing in these opening pages. He’s setting himself the difficult task of asking the reader to cut through numerous layers of prophylactic irony — the unnamed narrator protecting himself, as an insecure aspiring writer; the author operating within the limited skill set of his narrator — to access some deeper emotional truth about these characters. It’s to Wayne’s credit that he often succeeds, despite the sometimes-maddening (I know, he knows!) flaws that he’s painstakingly signposted.
In that first class, the narrator’s one defender is Billy, a young scholarship student from Illinois who shows great literary promise despite never having heard of David Foster Wallace, whose “Infinite Jest” has just been published. (“He writes pretty avant-garde stuff,” the narrator helpfully explains to his new friend. “He’s from Illinois, actually. … You’d like him.”) Awkward and uncomfortable in his surroundings despite his upper-middle-class Northeast pedigree, the narrator latches onto Billy as not just a fellow outsider, but a paragon of masculine authenticity. When he finds out Billy is sleeping in a basement storage room beneath an East Village dive bar, he offers to take him in for free at the rent-controlled apartment he’s already illegally subletting from his great-aunt. Billy insists on cooking and cleaning to earn his keep, in addition to fulfilling his unofficial role as the narrator’s diligent editor, transforming one of his workshop-maligned stories into a piece worthy of acceptance by a small literary magazine.
There’s never any doubt, of course, that the equilibrium of this arrangement will not hold, but Wayne, in the terrible-roommates tradition of Sam Shepard and Miranda July, rigorously draws out their dance of attraction and repulsion.  Sleep together? Or just make passive-aggressive comments about each other’s writing? In a sequence that encapsulates the book’s easy charm, the narrator takes Billy to Chumley’s, the past-its-prime West Village literary bar, hoping that some of the Hemingway and Fitzgerald magic will rub off on them. Instead, since it’s 1996, they decamp with two female British tourists to an N.Y.U. bar where they all sing along to “Don’t Look Back in Anger” and make pained jokes about the lack of irony in Alanis Morissette’s “Ironic.” Billy effortlessly beds the woman he brings home, while the narrator finds himself unable to perform after some awkward groping with his own date.
Though class and sensibility play a role in their tension, the real problems between the roommates pivot on questions of gender and sexuality, questions to which I found Wayne’s approach at once overly cagey and too on-the-nose. Billy is cruelly dismissive of a colleague’s gender reassignment surgery (“C’mon”), and visibly perturbed by the gay scene on Christopher Street. In a steam room with Billy, the narrator conjures a “brief, less gruesome” vision of that infamous moment in “The Silence of the Lambs,” in which he “somehow wore Billy’s body like an exoskeleton, moving through the world in his impervious chassis.” He visits a urologist and in the waiting room contemplates a new father as he “frowned his way through the checklists and questions he never thought he’d have to answer — questions he’d never even thought of,” and wonders how his own distant father felt in that position. He has two different emotionally charged encounters with people who are missing limbs. At one point, an obnoxious professor invokes Jake’s oblique but oft-cited war wound in “The Sun Also Rises.” And that’s just the tip of the iceberg.
As it did for the narrator in the opening workshop, Wayne’s choices here “work” in the sense that we believe his narrator would, were he writing the novelization of his life, handle his discomfort with his body and feelings with these kinds of hints and dodgy revelations. But at the same time — and this is true when it happens in a workshop, too — it feels a little cheap to turn the central character’s genuinely poignant longing and trauma into a scavenger hunt. Relatedly, as in Wayne’s previous book, the campus novel “Loner,” I couldn’t help feeling that the busyness and extremity of the plot’s denouement undercut the author’s otherwise humane sensibility. In other words: Just because he told me he was going to flinch doesn’t mean I wasn’t disappointed when he did.