Being single isn’t a bad thing. In fact, many women prefer it.
Despite the increasing number of dating apps, matchmakers, and love advice designed to facilitate romantic connections, many women are opting out of relationships. Instead of moping over singledom or aggressively trying to find partners with arbitrary deadlines in mind, they are declaring to be happily unmarried and proudly find solace in living solo.
More than seven months after her split, Ms. Clare has settled into her new life, where she now enjoys yoga classes, seeing friends, or staying in on a Friday night watching the series “Outlander,” rather than going out on dates. She also cherishes her sleep.
“When you’re feeling someone out and starting to spend the night together, you don’t sleep well,” she said. “A few years ago, I would have been like, ‘of course, sleep over. No big deal.’” Now, she chooses to work out in the morning, make breakfast or sleep in if she so desires.
On Instagram, more than 12.9 million posts utilize the hashtag #engaged. Many of these photos feature up-close pictures of diamond-clad left ring fingers.
On the other hand, #single is used more than 17.9 million times, #singlewoman has more than 96,100 mentions and #singlegirl is featured in more than 915,000 posts.
In 2016, 110.6 million U.S. residents 18 years and older were unmarried. Women accounted for 53.2 percent of these individuals, according to the United States Census Bureau.
In support of the unattached population, the Instagram account @notengaged (which has 164,000 followers) depicts what life is like without an engagement ring. The account’s creator, Mary McCarthy, 31, of Astoria, Queens, has uploaded more than 800 pictures of her bare left ring finger while on vacation, at home with wine, at the movie theater, and in other locations since September 2016.
“There are times that I’m posting pictures of my far-flung adventures, but there are also times that I’m posting cleaning my tub on a Saturday night, because that’s real life — no matter if you’re coupled up or not,” said Ms. McCarthy, who is unmarried and also #notengaged.
On New Years Eve 2018, an Instagram post featuring Ms. McCarthy’s jewel-free left hand in front of a Christmas tree garnered more than 8,800 likes and about 500 direct messages. “People were like, ‘I’m celebrating New Year’s on the couch, too. I’m by myself, and I’m totally fine,’” she said.
Beyond couple-centric holidays, Ms. McCarthy says she’s received “overwhelmingly positive” feedback from her audience which is 96 percent female.
In addition to the Instagram page, Ms. McCarthy created a fake wedding website via The Knot, where she details her relationship with herself (and tacos) and requests actress Anne Hathaway attend an imaginary Dec. 31, 2022 wedding as her flower girl. (For context: banana bread is the bridesmaid and TV is the matron of honor.) To date, more than 250 people electronically submitted R.S.V.P.s to the nonexistent party.
