The philanthropist Judy Francis Zankel said she was cutting the museum out of her will after Caroline Baumann was forced out for violating conflict of interest rules.
A philanthropist who quit the board of the Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum to protest the termination of its director said on Thursday that she was also rescinding her $5 million bequest to the Upper East Side institution.
Judy Francis Zankel, who resigned as secretary of the board after Caroline Baumann was forced out by the Smithsonian, sent an email to Lonnie G. Bunch III, the top official, notifying him that she was cutting the Cooper Hewitt out of her will.
“I find your treatment of Caroline Baumann to be unconscionable and disgraceful,” Ms. Zankel said in her email to Mr. Bunch, in which she copied the rest of the Cooper Hewitt board. She called the investigation that led to Ms. Baumann’s ouster “biased” and said that she had also changed her mind about leaving the museum her collection of decorative objects.
“Although I love the museum and its work, I can no longer support an institution that functions this way,” she wrote.
Ms. Baumann, who had worked at the museum since 2001 and was named director in 2013, was forced to resign on Feb. 7 after a Smithsonian inspector general’s report concluded that she had created the appearance of a conflict of interest in connection with her 2018 wedding.
The inspector general noted that she had bought a wedding dress from a Brooklyn designer for $750, while the designer’s website advertised gowns starting at $3,000, though the designer asserted that the dress she made was not comparable to a gown and that she had not given Ms. Baumann a discount. The designer later received a free ticket to a museum gala worth $1,700; Ms. Baumann has argued that such complimentary invitations are routine.
For the wedding ceremony, Ms. Baumann obtained free use of a Hamptons property affiliated with a nonprofit, and Ms. Baumann allowed the nonprofit to use a Cooper Hewitt meeting room without charge, the inspector general found.
Some of the board members who resigned said they believed Ms. Baumann’s termination had been too harsh a punishment, given Ms. Baumann’s record of stewardship of the museum. Ms. Baumann had received high marks on her 2019 performance review, according to her lawyer, Luke Nikas.
Ms. Zankel, who has given close to $1 million to the Cooper Hewitt over the years, is the second donor to say she was changing her will in the wake of Ms. Baumann’s departure. Arlene Hirst, a design journalist who is not on the board, has said she would remove the museum from her will.
Six other board members — who were also frustrated at not having been informed of the investigation in advance — have resigned along with Ms. Zankel. The board, which had 27 members before the departures, is only an advisory body; major decisions are made by the Smithsonian in Washington. But board members’ donations play a significant role in the finances of the museum, which receives far less taxpayer support, as a percentage of its budget, than do the Smithsonian’s other 18 museums and galleries. The Cooper Hewitt is also the only one to charge admission.
“We are grateful for the continued public and private support,” it said.