The addiction memoir may be the most vigorous subgenre spawned by the memoir boom of the 1990s, although the progenitor of the form is Thomas De Quincey’s “Confessions of an English Opium-Eater,” published in 1821. Many readers, myself included, seem addicted to them, and to the vicarious thrills of intoxication, degradation and redemption. Compared with such hair-raising, train-wreck narratives as Bill Clegg’s “Portrait of an Addict as a Young Man” or Jerry Stahl’s “Permanent Midnight,” Dan Peres’s “As Needed for Pain” is a subdued and civilized narrative, surprisingly short on drama and depravity.
In this instance, the pivotal epiphanic moment in which the junkie discovers true pharmacological love, usually an occasion for literary rapture, passes by like a channel quickly surfed: “I hobbled to the living room, took two more Vicodin, and put on the television. Soon I was feeling no pain. My whole body was warm and relaxed. I felt like I’d been wrapped in an electric blanket.” That’s it. The trauma precipitating this inaugural episode of opiate abuse was not a tortured childhood or a psychological imbalance but a failed cartwheel, performed in the lobby of the Saatchi building in SoHo to impress a trio of young women. Peres is nothing if not self-deprecating, and his description of this event is hilarious. He’d never performed a cartwheel and was by his own admission horribly out of shape. Predictably, he crashes to the floor and seriously injures his back, though he gamely hobbles off to a party. Peres can write; he crafts deft, unshowy sentences and shapely anecdotes. But he’s not great at conveying the exhilaration or the despair of addiction, or the details of the glittering world he inhabited for many years as a reporter for W and, later, as the editor in chief of Details magazine.
It remains a bit of a mystery how the 28-year-old Peres, who was working as a correspondent in Paris, got the head job at a major Condé Nast title, and an even bigger mystery how he kept that job for 15 years. By his own admission, he was largely uninterested in fashion, fitness, night life, music, sex or celebrities other than David Copperfield — the magazine’s staple topics. And soon after he got the job, in 2000, he was zonked on a dose of 60 Vicodins a day. (“Man, that would explain a lot,” a current Condé Nast editor said when I told him the subject of Peres’s memoir.) Peres would seem to be a poster boy for high-functioning addicts, although he describes himself as barely functioning — missing meetings, nodding out at work, spending hours in the offices of five different pain-management doctors to feed his habit. You can’t fault his honesty, although you’ve got to wonder about the judgment of his bosses, including Si Newhouse, the chairman of Condé Nast at the time, and Patrick McCarthy, who occupied the same position at Fairchild Publications, the owner of W.
Unfortunately, we don’t learn much about these two, or any of the other characters Peres encountered in these years, except for Copperfield (Peres is a mad devotee of magic). The W publisher John Fairchild is described as “legendary and mischievous,” and that’s as specific as Peres gets in his characterizations. A rock star makes an appearance, providing some much-needed OxyContin after a party in Los Angeles, but he remains nameless and generic. Peres says he “liked being able to double-air-kiss Karl Lagerfeld or bum a smoke from Kate Moss.” By his own account, he craved the validation but didn’t take much pleasure in being at the party.
Despite having been at the epicenter of fashionable Manhattan in the ’90s and the ’00s, Peres is curiously uninterested in the world outside his Greenwich Village apartment — undoubtedly a function of his addiction. This tunnel vision gives the book a certain tonal and thematic unity, but it also leaves a trail of missed opportunities.
Like many of Peres’s friends and colleagues, Eilene Zimmerman was in denial. “Smacked” is the heart-wrenching story of her failure to recognize the signs of her ex-husband’s lethal drug habit until after his death. Like David Sheff’s “Beautiful Boy,” it’s the obverse of an addiction memoir: a chronicle of trying to make sense of a loved one’s struggles with the problem.
The book’s first half tells the story of Zimmerman’s marriage and its dissolution. A freelance journalist who has been a frequent contributor to The New York Times (and whose book grew out of a 2017 article for the newspaper that went viral), Zimmerman writes movingly about the glimmers of romance in the couple’s early years, when they would read poetry together in bed and take long drives into the wilderness. But these happy memories seem few and fleeting, and her husband, Peter, remains an enigmatic figure, a cipher to his wife, who seems loath to probe too deeply into his psyche, given her own insecurities.
Zimmerman portrays herself as “the kind of woman who gets married because she needs health insurance, who does not expect a romantic proposal, who gets married because she’s afraid if she doesn’t, the man who loves her will change his mind and then no one will want her.” This insecurity helps explain her failure to challenge Peter on his spousal shortcomings, and to accept his implausible explanations for his health problems, his unreliability and emotional volatility. Their eventual divorce seems inevitable, even as they remain involved as parents of two children.
At the time of his death Peter was making more than a million dollars a year as a partner in a San Diego law firm. Zimmerman was unable to reconcile this fact with the idea that her husband could be addicted to opioids and cocaine, groping for any number of other diagnoses for his increasingly erratic behavior. Her eventual realization, after his death, that “there is no particular type of person that becomes a drug addict,” will not surprise many readers. Whether his addiction began while they were still married or in the years after is a mystery that haunts the narrative.
Zimmerman can be keenly observant; she describes her ex’s new bachelor pad with slightly bewildered precision: “heavy modern furniture from stores I didn’t even know existed; cupboards packed full of Whole Foods groceries, bottles of expensive wines, top-shelf vodka and tequila and special glasses from which to drink them; art purchased not just because it’s pretty but because it’s also an investment; silverware from a special silver maker in Santa Fe, New Mexico; pots and pans so heavy and serious looking, you feel you’re a better cook just by holding them.” But her powers of observation fail when it comes to Peter’s drug use. Even when she discovers his corpse on the floor of his bedroom, she doesn’t notice the track marks on his arms or the drug paraphernalia strewn about until the medical examiner calls her attention to this glaring evidence.
Zimmerman’s experience leads her to research and report on white-collar addiction, particularly with respect to the legal profession, where, she discovers, anxiety and depression are rampant, and heavy drinking and drug use common. 