Opinion|Who’s Afraid of Gwyneth Paltrow and Goop?
Who’s Afraid of Gwyneth Paltrow and Goop?
Ms. Albert is a novelist. Ms. Block writes frequently about women’s health.
When Netflix announced the trailer for Gwyneth Paltrow’s “The Goop Lab” in early January, the media and #medtwitter made dire predictions for both the streaming service and for humanity itself. The show would surely promote “dangerous pseudoscience,” peddle “snake oil,” and be “undeniably awful for society.” Longtime Paltrow critic and health law researcher Timothy Caulfield was among the many opiners who warned on Twitter of the “spread of health misinformation” and the “erosion of #criticalthinking.” Other relevant hashtags included #PostModernDarkAge and #saynotogoop.
Six episodes of the show finally dropped late last month, and so far civilization seems to be more or less intact.
Yes, the rich, willowy blonde at Goop’s helm is an easy target. No, the average Jane can’t afford plasma facials or a trip to Jamaica to drink magic mushroom tea under the guidance of a legitimate shaman. And sure, we know all about the Yoni Egg Debacle, wherein the company had to pay a hefty fine for making unsubstantiated medical claims. Disclaimers are now rightfully in place all over both the site and the show, and obviously we should always practice good hygiene, but it’s worth repeating that so far there are no documented reports in the medical literature of yoni eggs causing anybody harm.
The tsunami of Goop hatred is best understood within a context that is much older and runs much deeper than Twitter, streaming platforms, consumerism or capitalism.
Traditionally, “woo” modalities have been practiced and taught in relative secret, which protected practitioners but limited their reach. When we become empowered to learn more about our bodies, our instincts, our emotional landscapes and the connections therein, maybe we’ll begin to demand that our complex and (still!) mysterious physiologies are treated with respect, dignity, and humility in the realms of medicine and science. Until then, we’ll take the curiosity and experimentation of a celebrity luxury capitalist whose good fortune it is not to have to worry about actual burning at an actual stake.
