Separated by less than 50 miles, Oregon and Oregon State have vastly different weapons in their chase for a Final Four. And with the Ducks star Sabrina Ionescu at the forefront, the fans have responded.
EUGENE, Ore. — As Becky Sisley sat in her prized midcourt seat in the gleaming glass-and-steel Matthew Knight Arena, she could gaze across the boisterous student section — dotted with football players — and over to Gov. Kate Brown and the Hall of Fame quarterback Dan Fouts, then up to the far reaches of a gym where none of the 12,364 seats were empty.
In certain moments — like when Sabrina Ionescu, the University of Oregon’s incandescent star, sank 3-pointers at the buzzer to end the first and third quarters — the players not only heard the crowd, they also felt its reverberations.
The scene was enough to take Sisley back to 1966, when the women’s team she coached at Oregon featured more rudimentary basketball: half-court games; pinnies for uniforms; and once-a-week practices. The team played six games that season.
“It’s unbelievable,” Sisley said of the changes between then and now.
What is happening here, along the southern end of the evergreen Willamette Valley, may well serve as a model for any college basketball program’s aspirations. Oregon and Oregon State — rivals who have made smart coaching hires, established strong financial commitments and forged close ties to their communities — collided twice on a recent weekend that sized up both teams’ Final Four potential. And helping drive the excitement was Ionescu, who is likely to be selected No. 1 in the W.N.B.A. draft in April.
The weekend came in the second consecutive season that their home-and-away series was played in front of sold-out crowds at their arenas, which are less than 50 miles apart along State Highway 99. When they met — first on a Friday night in Eugene, then in Corvallis two days later — Oregon, now ranked third by The Associated Press, swept Oregon State, which is No. 9.
Though Oregon won in Corvallis for the first time since 2010 on that Sunday, the celebration was muted. News that Kobe Bryant had died in a helicopter crash broke about 90 minutes before tipoff, a gut-wrenching moment for the Ducks, who had been visited a handful of times by Bryant and his 13-year-old daughter, Gianna, who also died in the crash. They sat courtside as recently as December, when the Ducks played at Long Beach State.
Though it was difficult to play, some players said afterward that competing honored Bryant’s memory. And the atmosphere, with the crowd fiercely behind the Beavers, may have helped briefly refocus the players toward basketball — particularly when Oregon State surged to a 6-point lead late in the second quarter. Oregon seized control in the third, but the crowd remained engaged until the final seconds.
Not long ago, it was hard to see this coming at either school — particularly at Oregon State, which fired Coach LaVonda Wagner in 2010 after a last-place conference finish, a raft of player defections and accusations that, according to The Oregonian, Wagner had thrown a chair during a locker room rant and ordered players to attend Weight Watchers sessions.
The Beavers turned to Scott Rueck, who a year before had coached nearby George Fox University to the Division III national championship.
Oregon’s circumstances were better — but only marginally.
In 2014, it parted ways with Paul Westhead, a former N.B.A. coach whose contract allowed him to live outside Eugene for five months each year, and replaced him with Kelly Graves, who had turned Gonzaga into a perennially ranked program.
The two programs have operated on parallel tracks over the last six years, combining for at least a share of all of the last five Pac-12 Conference championships and each gaining a Final Four berth — Oregon State in 2016 and Oregon last season.
Still, the identities of the programs are as distinct as the buildings they play in — the Ducks in their grand house built with help from the Nike founder Phil Knight, and the Beavers in Gill Coliseum, a 9,604-seat basketball barn that is short on amenities but long on history.
A rare common thread between the programs — and a lingering source of friction, as both coaches acknowledge — is the Oregon associate head coach, Mark Campbell, a top recruiter who left Oregon State in 2014 to join Graves, switching sides in a cutthroat competition for top players.
For its part, Oregon is bringing in five McDonald’s all-Americans next season, along with Sedona Prince, a former five-star recruit who is sitting out this season after transferring from Texas.
It is hard, though, to imagine any of them matching the impact of Ionescu.
She leads the country in assists per game (8.6 as of Wednesday) and keeps extending her career record for triple-doubles — 23 through Monday, more than any other player in N.C.A.A. history, man or woman. And her skills — a deadeye shooter, crafty dribbler and prescient passer with an off-the-charts basketball I.Q. — have drawn shout-outs from LeBron James and Stephen Curry, as well as widespread adoration from those closer to Eugene.
Dozens upon dozens of fans — adults and children, male and female — wore her No. 20 jersey at the Ducks’ 76-64 home win over Oregon State on Jan. 24. And there were those like Henry Fleener, a senior studying fish and wildlife at Oregon State who turned out in Corvallis for his first women’s basketball game, one that had been sold out for more than a month.
Ionescu said it was still jarring, and humbling, to see so many people wearing her jersey. Later, she considered the value of her popularity.
She added that she hoped that athletes would be able to profit from their own fame under new rules being considered for college sports, in a way that would be “in the best interest of the student athletes and not only” the schools and the N.C.A.A.
Graves encourages his players to use their platform for causes that are important to them — a green light that Ionescu and Satou Sabally, her sidekick from Germany, have embraced.
They chided Nike on Twitter in November for not producing replica Oregon women’s jerseys (the company soon began selling them) and called out the N.C.A.A. as hypocritical for requiring players to sit out a season if they transfer while coaches change schools with almost no restrictions. Sabally also uses social media to highlight instances of racism and social injustice.
This willingness to engage off the court appears to have helped each team’s popularity. Oregon’s postgame autograph sessions were recently curtailed because the lines snaked around the arena concourse.
Pivec, Oregon State’s senior leader who graduated in three years with a bio-health sciences degree, volunteers at a women’s homeless shelter and together with Slocum started a community service club for athletes.
Bev Smith, an all-American at Oregon in the early 1980s and later the school’s coach, said the popularity of the two teams — who are easily outdrawing their male counterparts this season — shows what can result from strong investments in female athletes, an issue that has gained traction in other sports, such as through the United States women’s soccer team’s push for equal pay and the W.N.B.A.’s new collective bargaining agreement.
The bond between the players and the community is highlighted at Oregon State by an enduring ritual that began when there were only a few hundred fans. The players remain on the court after games — win or lose — to sign autographs and chat. It is called the eight-minute mingle.
After the 66-57 loss to the Ducks in Corvallis, it made for a melancholy scene.
Pivec, who had 20 points and 12 rebounds, signed autographs and talked with a gaggle of little girls at midcourt. 
“It’s just a game,” Richmond told her.
“That’s not true,” Pivec said.
“Look me in the eye and tell me that,” Richmond said.
Pivec could not.
Instead, she was drawn into Richmond’s embrace and began to cry.