He should be allowed back into baseball and be eligible for the Hall of Fame.
The writers are professors of law.
Baseball’s mild punishments for cheaters who tainted the World Series highlight the great unfairness of Pete Rose’s lifelong expulsion from baseball. Rose has been banished from the game for almost 31 years and from the Hall of Fame for nearly as long. It is time for that to end for a player whose record 4,256 hits and 15,890 plate appearances may never be equaled.
On his behalf, we and other lawyers acting pro bono have petitioned Major League Baseball to reinstate him and make him eligible for the Hall of Fame.
As the passage of time brings new examples of misconduct in baseball and new penalties, the comparative fairness of old penalties can change. In the wider world, that’s why presidents and governors often grant clemency to people serving harsh sentences imposed long ago, after seeing later wrongdoers receive relative slaps on the wrist.
We rightly demand fairness and a level playing field in sports. All rules of the sport should be applied equally to everyone.
Pete Rose was banned from baseball in 1989 for betting on games, including on the team he managed, the Cincinnati Reds, to win. No one has ever claimed that Rose’s misconduct was intended to gain a competitive advantage over other teams or had the slightest effect on the outcomes of any games.
In 1989, Rose’s gambling could reasonably be perceived to threaten the integrity of baseball, with the 1919 Chicago Black Sox scandal of throwing the series for money as the only remotely comparable analogy. But more recently, including just last month, baseball has confronted violations of its rules — namely steroid use and electronic sign stealing — that affected the results of plays and perhaps games, including possibly the outcomes of two consecutive World Series.
These acts manifestly and deliberately violated the letter and spirit of the rules and rendered hallowed records meaningless by any objective metric. Hundreds of millions of dollars, probably far more, flowed to owners, management and players as a direct result of premeditated violations of basic rules of the game.
Senator George Mitchell’s 2007 report to the baseball commissioner concluded that “for more than a decade there has been widespread illegal use of anabolic steroids and other performance-enhancing substances by players in Major League Baseball, in violation of federal law and baseball policy.” He described the steroid use as undermining the “integrity” of the game.
Yet it wasn’t until 2005 that a steroid user was punished, and since then only one player (who tested positive three times) received Rose’s punishment of a lifetime ban, and that was withdrawn after two years. No steroid user has been barred from the Hall of Fame. Indeed, racists who created and perpetuated baseball’s color line, cocaine users and men who physically abused women have already been inducted or remain eligible. With the exception of Rose and the Black Sox’s Shoeless Joe Jackson, the Hall of Fame remains open to whomever the voters deem the greats of the game.
On Jan. 13, the baseball commissioner, Rob Manfred, reported that the Houston Astros violated league rules by engaging in electronic sign-stealing in 2017 and 2018. His findings could not have been more damning: Nearly all the Astros players, as well as their manager and bench coach, were aware of the sign-stealing scheme and participated to varying degrees. Manfred rightly concluded that this scheme undermined the “fairness” of the game. This cheating may very well have changed the outcome of games and the 2017 and 2018 World Series.
What punishments were imposed? The manager and general manager of the Houston Astros received one-year suspensions from professional baseball without pay; the players received no punishment at all and were not even named.
In this context, Rose’s reinstatement to baseball and eligibility for the Hall of Fame is the only way to restore a proper sense of proportionality.
This is not the first time Rose has sought to return to baseball. In 2015, Commissioner Manfred refused to reinstate him, saying that he had not exhibited “an honest acceptance” of his “wrongdoing.” We disagree. Rose has expressed remorse for his actions.
The question is not whether one likes or dislikes Rose or the Reds. What’s fair is fair. A 31-year ban for betting on his own team to win, for a 78-year-old man, is enough — too much, compared with others who more severely undermined the integrity of the game and received far milder punishments or got off scot-free.
Much more rides on the importance of fair treatment than just Rose’s fate. We look to sports not only for entertainment but also for how we talk to our children about fairness on and off the field. This is the role and responsibility of baseball that matters most.
Let Pete Rose back in.
Evan Caminker is a professor of law and former dean at the University of Michigan Law School. Erwin Chemerinsky is the dean at University of California School of Law, Berkeley.