President Trump’s former communications director will return as an aide to Jared Kushner, the president’s son-in-law and senior adviser.
Hope Hicks, a close aide to President Trump who resigned nearly two years ago, will return to the White House in a new role, administration officials said Thursday.
Ms. Hicks, 31, worked on Mr. Trump’s 2016 campaign from its inception and followed him to the White House after he was elected, eventually becoming communications director. Her return will come as his re-election campaign intensifies and as his advisers say the superstitious president has talked about recreating some aspects of that first race.
A senior administration official said that Ms. Hicks would work on projects that Mr. Kushner oversees, including the re-election campaign. She will not rejoin the communications office.
Since last fall, Ms. Hicks had been working as the chief communications officer at Fox, the spinoff company started by Lachlan Murdoch, the son of the media mogul Rupert Murdoch.
The White House she will return to this winter is very different from the one she left. A number of senior aides have departed, including the chief of staff John F. Kelly and his deputies. In their place are Mick Mulvaney, the acting White House chief of staff, and a number of aides who are loyal to him.
And at the time Ms. Hicks left, the investigation by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, was still underway — and a year from wrapping up. She was among the many administration officials he interviewed for his final report, and she testified before congressional committees on some of the issues that it raised.
Ms. Hicks’s time with Mr. Trump began when she was working as an aide for his elder daughter, Ivanka Trump, on her fashion brand. He hired her for his skeleton staff when he began his campaign for president in 2015, and because the campaign was so small, Ms. Hicks, then 26, was constantly at Mr. Trump’s side.
From there, she became indispensable to Mr. Trump, and once he became president, he brought her into the West Wing. Some newer and more senior aides tried to block Ms. Hicks’s access to the president, but her relationship with him outlasted most of their tenures.