The defense is focusing on the relationships some of the women maintained with Harvey Weinstein after alleged assaults, presenting a challenge for prosecutors.
 She continued to see him, send friendly messages and seek work from him.
A second woman said Mr. Weinstein, the one-time Hollywood titan, raped her in a Midtown Manhattan hotel room. She maintained a sexual relationship with him for years, she said, to save her career.
 One said she agreed to meet Mr. Weinstein about a film role after he had masturbated in front of her in a club. The other said she met him to talk about a script after he had reached up her skirt and touched her genitals during their first encounter.
The prosecution rested its case against Mr. Weinstein on Thursday after graphic, first-person testimony from six women who said the producer had sexually assaulted them.
But the district attorney’s office has to overcome a significant hurdle: The two main witnesses against Mr. Weinstein maintained friendships with him after the alleged assaults, even having some consensual sexual encounters. Other accusers ignored his sexual misconduct and saw him again in the hope of getting work.
That places a burden on prosecutors. They must explain to the jury of seven men and five women why some of the women continued to see him.
“It’s confusing for the jury that they’re being told they” — Mr. Weinstein’s accusers — “were devastated by the crime and then they ask, ‘When do I get to see you next?’” said Matthew Galluzzo, a New York defense lawyer and a former Manhattan sex crimes prosecutor.
Mr. Weinstein’s lawyers are calling several witnesses to the stand to bolster his position that the relationships were consensual and in some cases transactional. Some of the women, the lawyers said, wanted to advance their own careers and use Mr. Weinstein to do so.
The trial is largely seen as a watershed moment for the #MeToo movement, a rebuke of decades of sexual harassment and abuse by men against women in the workplace, focusing attention on complex issues of consent and power dynamics.
For weeks, Mr. Weinstein, who is 67 and recently had back surgery, has sat at the defense table, seemingly frail, slightly hunched and worn. He has used a walker to get around.
It is an image that prosecutors have sought to counter. Mr. Weinstein, they told jurors, was a giant in Hollywood, known for Oscar-winning films including “Shakespeare in Love” and “Pulp Fiction,” who had used his influence and physicality to overpower and coerce women into sexual encounters.
Two of the women who testified against Mr. Weinstein — Annabella Sciorra and Lauren Young — never contacted him again. Ms. Sciorra, an actress, said Mr. Weinstein barged into her own New York City apartment and raped her in the early 1990s. Ms. Young, a model, said Mr. Weinstein groped her breast in a hotel bathroom in Los Angeles while masturbating.
At the heart of the criminal indictment are allegations made by two women: Miriam Haley, a former production assistant who said the producer forced oral sex on her inside of his home in 2006, and Jessica Mann, a former actress who accused him of raping her in a Midtown Manhattan hotel in 2013.
Mr. 
Testimony from Ms. Sciorra, known for her work in “The Sopranos,” is meant to support the predatory sexual assault charge, which requires that prosecutors show that the movie mogul committed a serious sex crime against at least two women. Mr. Weinstein faces up to life in prison if convicted on that charge.
Ms. Young and two other women, Dawn Dunning and Tarale Wulff, recounted for the jury their encounters with Mr. Weinstein under a state law that allows testimony about “prior bad acts” to demonstrate a pattern of behavior. Prosecutors have said that Mr. Weinstein tricked young women into meeting with him under the impression he intended to help their careers.
The Manhattan district attorney’s case rests almost entirely on the women’s testimony. None of them reported the attacks to the police at the time, and there is little physical or forensic evidence to support their claims, beyond photographs of the defendant that are being used to corroborate their descriptions of his body.
Defense lawyers used their cross-examinations to suggest that the witnesses had consented. On Thursday, the defense called Paul Feldsher, a former film producer, who recalled Ms. Sciorra telling him in the early 1990s on a walk in Manhattan that she had awkward sex with Mr. Weinstein but not that she had been raped.
For their part, prosecutors are banking that the women’s accounts will support one another and establish a pattern of predatory behavior. A similar tactic proved effective in Bill Cosby’s second sexual assault trial, in which he was convicted after five women testified.
One of the reporters who broke the story of Harvey Weinstein’s alleged abuse speaks with Donna Rotunno, the lawyer behind Mr. Weinstein’s legal strategy.
I was contacted on a Tuesday evening as I was leaving my office, from someone in New York, and they said it’s something big. And it’s funny, because I think most people would expect me to say I was shocked by the call. And I really wasn’t.
We spoke for eight hours the first time I came. And he was really interested in speaking to a female lawyer, and I said I thought that was a good idea for him.
Being a woman at least puts me in a position where people say, well, wait, this woman has a different position than what the majority of women are feeling today. But I also believe that I hold the position that a lot of women feel and don’t want to talk about. At the end of the day, Harvey Weinstein is well aware of the fact that his life is on the line here. And obviously, having a voice is not only necessary and fair but it’s something that he deserves. He deserves to have a voice out there.
How are you feeling, Harvey?
Thank God your mother’s not here to see this.
Mr. Weinstein, how are you feeling today?
Harvey Weinstein walked gingerly into court this morning without the walker he has relied on for weeks.
Harvey, how are you feeling today?
In the trial of Harvey Weinstein, six women have taken the stand, each making similar accusations of rape and sexual assault against the movie producer.
Today, she took the stand, recounting three separate assaults, at times sobbing uncontrollably.
But the defense previewed what it called dozens of loving emails sent by some accusers to the producer.
— and suggested that in many cases, it was the women who wanted something from Weinstein.
Donna Rotunno, Harvey Weinstein’s lawyer, asked Jessica Mann to read an email that she had sent to her boyfriend at the time.
His lawyers have seized on the fact that the two women whose accounts are at the center of the criminal charges agreed to have sex and friendly contact with Weinstein after they were allegedly victimized.
Today, on her second day of testimony, Jessica Mann had a breakdown on the stand during cross-examination, when she was being questioned by Weinstein’s attorney Donna Rotunno.
Any comment on the trial, Mr. Weinstein?
I have good lawyers.
How you doing, Harvey?
I hope so, for crying out loud.
It’s Friday, February 7.
Do you want to tell us what you had for breakfast?
Sure. I had a nothing for breakfast [LAUGHING], actually. Not even a coffee.
All right. Well, Donna, thank you again for being with us this afternoon. I’ve read that you have represented as many as 40 men accused of sexual misconduct. That’s a lot.
Do you remember a specific case that pulled you into representing men accused of sexual misconduct?
You know, I think, really, one of the cases that pulled me in initially, before I even was taking these kinds of cases, was the Duke lacrosse case. It’s like here we have the media coming out and just assassinating these young guys, and then coming to find out that this story completely collapsed. And I remember my mother saying at the time, when we were watching the coverage on the news, “When those boys die someday, their obituary is going to say ‘the Duke lacrosse players.’  I mean, these are life changing circumstances. I think quite often we look to the accusers, and we talk about the effects that these things have on their lives. But we do not look at the effects that these types of allegations and accusations have on the person being accused. And you have to look at what it does to people’s financial abilities, their status in the community. I mean, I represented a guy in Chicago who is a custom clothing designer, who made clothes for movie sets and presidents and high level executives in Chicago. And one woman makes an allegation, and all of that business goes away. And so he wins, but what do you win? You win your case in criminal court, and then you have to worry about building your reputation back, if you can, where people are willing to then come back and frequent your establishment. So the ramifications are social. They’re economic. They are mental — the mental toll that it takes. I mean, look at Harvey. Look at Harvey physically, from what he looked like when all of this started to what he looks like now. People can talk all they want about walkers and faking it. Physically, it is so apparently obvious what this has done, and the toll this has taken on him.
No. I’m talking about the fact that we — especially today — all I can tell you is, in my cases, what I see, we allow people who make allegations to automatically take on a victim status. And I think for me, all I’m looking for is fairness. And if we automatically have this notion that we’re supposed to believe all women, or believe all victims, or believe all people that come forward, we are taking out a very large portion of the steps that we should be taking before we get to that notion — that just because someone says something they should be believed. So I think it’s, what you have reported, I will not disagree with. I’ve seen police do horrible things. I’ve seen prosecutors do horrible things. But I’m speaking from the perspective of what I think going through something like this, and an allegation, does to someone. And one isn’t it more serious than the other. One shouldn’t be more important than the other. They’re facts. Difficult for people to come forward. Difficult for people to be accused.
Are you saying that as you built your practice and created this niche in terms of representing men accused of sexual misconduct, that as you saw it, the criminal justice system favored victims?
I think 100 percent. I think it 100 percent favored victims. I think prosecutors and police are afraid to be skeptical of complaining witnesses and accusers today. I think they feel like, I better just believe what they say. I think it’s also happening in domestic violence cases.
What is it like to cross-examine alleged victims of sex crimes?
I think that it requires a skillful set of questions and preparation. And I don’t ever look at my job as going in there trying to be disrespectful, or berate someone, or minimize what they claim happened to them. I don’t take pride in having to put people through circumstances that they may find difficult. That’s not the point of what I do. My job is to ask questions that make a trier of fact, whether that be a judge or a jury, determine if they think their story is credible. What someone says does not mean that that’s what happened. There’s always more than one side to a story. And there’s something in our Constitution, the Sixth Amendment right to confront witnesses. And my client, whoever that is at the time, has the right to confront his accusers through me or my team. And that’s what I have to do. And to live in this country, to not believe that baffles me.
So what did you think about how the #MeToo movement unfolded?
I’ve talked about #MeToo a lot, and I get labeled this anti-#MeToo. It’s not really anti-#MeToo. it’s anti-what happens because of things like #MeToo. So if 500 positives come from #MeToo — and I’m sure I could sit here with you and look at all the things that have come from #MeToo and agree that there’s positive things that come from #MeToo. But if as part of that, that strips your right to due process — if we’re going to convict people before they have a trial, I find that to be damaging and detrimental.
In making your decision to represent Weinstein, did you factor in this long history of accusations of sexual harassment and sexual assault against Weinstein outside of the criminal charges, some of which were made years before 2017 and the #MeToo movement being ignited?
You know, I didn’t. I didn’t. Because my role in this is to represent him in a criminal case. And as I’ve said multiple times, there is a difference between sins and crimes. And you can believe that Harvey Weinstein is a sinner. And you can believe that he did things that you wouldn’t do or you don’t like. But my question here is, does that rise to the level of a crime?
What are sins?
I mean, sins are treating somebody inappropriately. Sins are yelling at somebody at work.  And you know, those types of things are not good, but they also don’t mean that you should spend the rest of your life in prison.
So what do you see as the clearest evidence that Harvey Weinstein should not be convicted?
I think, you know, these are consensual encounters. We have communications at the time that I believe prove that they were consensual encounters. I believe the actions of women after the fact prove that they were consensual encounters. When you look at real-time communications between two people, it really lends a very interesting spotlight into what was happening between two people at the time. And maybe the story being told today or in a courtroom is different. And I guess at the end of the day, it’s going to be for the 12 people on the jury to decide based on the evidence, if they can shut out everything else that they’ve heard. And hopefully they will make their decision based on the facts and the evidence that they hear in the courtroom.
Do you think that sexual violence can take place within otherwise consensual relationships?
I do. I absolutely do.
No, I don’t think that that plays into this case at all. I don’t think it plays into this case when you have people that are continuing to contact him when they have absolutely no other reason to. You know, things like reaching out to Mr. Weinstein after you change your phone number, saying, I wanted to make sure you had my new phone number. These communications go far beyond anything that any mental health professional, psychiatrist, psychologist — they go far beyond any of these new circumstances that doctors want to put forth in order to explain away why people may enter into certain behaviors. They go far beyond that.
So what about the wide understanding that Harvey Weinstein was not just a powerful producer in the entertainment industry, but one of the most powerful producers. Somebody who could make and break careers that could serve as a gateway into the entertainment industry. And a lot of the women who have made allegations, not just in the criminal case, but beyond the criminal case, have said that even after experiencing alleged sexual misconduct, they had communication with him because they felt like he could either hurt or harm their careers.
Well, the notion that he could hurt them is absolutely ridiculous. Harvey Weinstein was one of many very powerful people. And if Harvey Weinstein called one of the other people in the industry and said don’t use actress A, they would have wanted to use actress A 10 times more. So that notion that he could hurt people’s careers I absolutely find ridiculous. The second part of your question is, these are still choices that women are making. And whether they’re choices you’re happy you made or not happy you made, you still made a choice. And women have to start owning those choices. And they either have to say, I’m not going to do these things to attempt to get a job, or I’m going to own my choice for making that decision.
Can you elaborate on that a little bit? I’m trying to understand how that — when you say that women have choices, I’m trying to understand how that does not extend to you saying that women have a choice whether or not to be sexually harassed or sexually assaulted. that you seem to be placing all of the responsibility on the woman.
Megan, I’m not blaming anyone. Megan, no, I’m not putting all of the responsibility on the woman. I’m placing responsibility on the woman. Women cannot be equal if women don’t start taking on equal risk. Women want men to take on all the risk. They want to then put themselves in whatever situation they’re in, and then walk out and say, oh my God, I had no idea that was going to happen to me. You can’t have it both ways. And when you’re put in circumstances that you think are questionable, or negative, or you don’t want to be in, or you think this is the only way I’m going to get the job, we know that that’s ridiculous. We know that if women stand up and say, I’m not going to take this, I’m not going to do this, you have other options. So when I make comments and say “if you go to the hotel room,” doesn’t mean you deserve to have something bad happen to you. But if you go to the hotel room, you continue to perpetrate a culture that allows that to be acceptable. And so if women take the power and women say, none of us are going to a hotel room, then that culture must change.
I mean, I think it’s also important to make clear that you’re kind of conflating women in general, agreeing to meet somebody in a hotel room, with alleged victims of Harvey Weinstein agreeing to meet Harvey Weinstein in hotel rooms. In those cases, it was very well established that Harvey Weinstein conducted business in hotel rooms. Oftentimes, women who say that they were victimized by Weinstein in those hotel rooms said that they were showing up for work meetings. In fact, some of them had been told to go there by their agents.
Well, I’m just going to tell you that in my case, the two charged victims in my case, that is not the circumstance. And if you are asked to go to a event for the Oscars, and then you are asked to go out for drinks after the event for the Oscars, and then you are asked at midnight to come up and see a script, I think at some point women have to — like, the radar has to go up, or the light bulb has to go on, and you have to say, O.K., this may not be what I think it is.
So there are — of the many women who said that they showed up for work meetings at a hotel room or at an office, only to feel like Harvey Weinstein turned around and preyed on them and tried to sexually assault or harass them — there are women who have said that they were able to find ways to get out of the room. There are obviously other women who say that they failed to be able to get out of the room. That he attacked them, that he physically restrained them.
Again, based on the cases that I have and the things that I’m seeing, anytime someone said, I don’t want to do this, you have a bad reputation with women, I’m not giving you a massage — they walked out of the room. I think anybody that said no, they walked out. And a lot of people that said no are very famous now.
What reason would these women have to lie?
We have created a society of celebrity victimhood status. We have created a society where women don’t have to take any responsibility for their actions. And we have created a society where if we say believe all women, that means we’re not supposed to question anyone at all. So there is absolutely no risk for a woman to come forward now and make a claim. Zero.
It’s one thing for a woman to step forward and make an allegation on social media or in the pages of a newspaper. It’s another thing for a woman to agree to be part of a criminal prosecution and to move forward with all that that entails, including the rigorous cross-examination that you and your co-counsel are performing. Do you think that women would submit themselves to that process if they were lying?
Yes. Because I’ve seen it over and over and over again.
So you believe that Harvey Weinstein is not guilty of the criminal charges he’s facing in this trial, but there are these more than 90 women who have accused Weinstein of sexual misconduct. Do you accept that this criminal case aside, he may very well be guilty of being a sexual predator?
My job is not to defend all things Harvey Weinstein. My job is to defend Harvey Weinstein in a criminal courtroom, which I’m doing. And society will make the judgment call after that. That’s not my call to make.
So you don’t think that the stories of those 90 plus women are valid or are meaningful in relation to you?
Megan, it’s not about valid. Megan, you could turn this around every way you want. Everybody that’s listening to this knows you wrote a book and knows you have a completely different agenda than the reason that I’m sitting here. And I came here today, in good faith, to talk to you about this conversation. And I’m more than happy to do it. But in terms of me going back and talking about every claim someone made, I’m sure if I delved into individual claims, I would find things that make me say, I’m not so sure. But in terms of what happens going forward, Harvey Weinstein hopefully is going to walk out of that criminal courtroom as a free man. And then the society is going to make its judgments. And that’s not for me to decide. And for you either, frankly.
So, and I’m sorry, but to go back to the comment you made about the fact that, you know, my colleague Jodi Kantor and I not just broke the Weinstein story and did a lot of investigative reporting on this, we did in fact write a book. But when you say my agenda or our agenda, what do you mean by that?
Well, you have a completely different view on this, and of course I’m not begrudging you. You have a right to your opinion, just as I have a right to mine. But all I’m saying is that, you know, I look at the title of the book. The title of the book is “She Said.” It’s very difficult for Harvey to be able to tell another side, or tell his side of the story, when there is a criminal case going on. So I’m just cautioning people to be a little bit more skeptical about a one-sided version of events. That’s all.
Megan, I’m not saying that. I’m not saying that.
We have, yeah, we have engaged. We have gone to Harvey Weinstein and presented all of the allegations that we were planning to publish and given him adequate time to respond. And I think that, you know, I just want to emphasize that we go into our reporting with skepticism. That when we were reporting the allegations of sexual misconduct against Weinstein, that we didn’t simply turn around and publish those allegations without doing due diligence, without turning to people in whom these women had confided, in whom they had reported these alleged attacks, and gathering that corroborating evidence, and tracking down the documents of the secret settlements that were silenced and other internal company records.
Again, I’m not debating any of this. I read it. I read it. I’m not debating any of this. I’m merely stating that now that we’re in a criminal courtroom, there is a different forum to be able to tell this story and let these events play out. That’s all.
So certainly there are women who believe you are doing the right thing by defending Harvey Weinstein, but you must know a lot of women who see you as a kind of traitor. How do you respond to that?
All I can say to them is I hope they never find themselves in a situation where their family member is accused, and they’re hoping that the criminal justice system is fair to them. Because at the end of the day, that’s the most important part of this whole aspect, is that if you are accused of a crime, the system of justice should work one way or another. And I’m not here to predict outcomes. I don’t know what’s going to happen or what the jury’s going to do. But just as everybody wants fairness to the people making allegations, I want Mr. Weinstein to have the same fairness that should be afforded to him.
Well, thank you so much for taking the time to talk to us, Donna. I really appreciate it.
Thanks. I appreciate it, too.
Are there any question, and other questions, guys? I know that was a long one.
Oh, and actually I had another question, which was whether or not you’ve been sexually assaulted.
Because I would never put myself in that position.
So you’re saying — O.K., actually, I’m sorry. So you’re saying that you — you’re saying that you have never been sexually assaulted, because you would never put yourself in the position of being sexually assaulted?
No. I’ve always made choices, from college age on, where I never drank too much, I never went home with someone that I didn’t know. I just never put myself in any vulnerable circumstance ever.
Do you believe that every woman who’s been sexually assaulted somehow put herself in that position, whether it was having drinks or agreeing to go to a hotel room?
Absolutely not. But just as we make smart decisions when we walk out on the street at night, I think you have to make the same decisions when you’re putting yourself in circumstances with other people. When we walk out at night, we look around. We make sure we have our phone. Some people take Mace. We take precautions. And all I’m saying is, is that women should take precautions.
Totally different conversation.
Totally — being pulled into a dark alley is a totally different conversation.

Do you think it’s possible for women to be sexually assaulted by somebody that they know, even if they’ve taken precautions?
I can’t help but feel like you continue to place the burden of safety on women, on potential victims in general. Should the burden rest on them? Or should it rest on the perpetrators?
I think it should rest equally. And we’ve moved this conversation so far away from what we were talking about, but if you go out with someone, you can’t have it both ways.  I went out with them, and I went to their house and we were flirting or kissing or whatever. And then say I had no idea that he may want to do this. You just can’t have it both ways. So I’m saying that women need to be very clear about their intentions. I think women need to be very prepared for the circumstances they put themselves in. And I think absolutely women should take on equal risk that men are taking on. And the responsibility should be equal as well.
Is there anything that you think that men need to do differently?
Sure, I think men also need to be very clear about their intentions. And if I was a man in today’s world, before I was engaging in sexual behavior with any woman today, I would ask them to sign a consent form.
You are being serious.
I’m being dead serious. I’m being dead serious. Because how easy is it for two people to engage in behavior and a day later, two days later, five days later, 27 years later, somebody say, you know what? That’s not what that was. Why not? Why not? Take all of the question out of it. Make it easier on everybody.
Donna, thank you again for taking so much time. I really do appreciate it.
On Thursday, the prosecution rested its case against Harvey Weinstein, and defense lawyers for Weinstein began calling their own witnesses.
Here’s what else you need to know today. A Times analysis of the results of the Iowa caucuses has found that more than 100 precincts reported results that were internally inconsistent, missing data or not mathematically possible under the rules of the Iowa caucuses. The irregularities do not appear to be deliberate and may not affect the outcome, but they point to larger problems with the caucuses, which have been criticized for years as amateurish, and raise questions about when, if ever, the public will get precise results from the contest. On Thursday afternoon, the chairman of the Democratic National Committee, Tom Perez, called for a recount of the Iowa results.
In his first public remarks since his acquittal in the Senate impeachment trial, President Trump celebrated the verdict, expressed no regret for his conduct and mocked the Democrats, who had pursued the charges against him.
It was evil. It was corrupt. It was dirty cops. It was leakers and liars, and this should never ever happen to another president, ever.
During his speech delivered at the White House, Trump personally thanked his defense lawyers, his Republican allies in Congress and the Senate majority leader, who oversaw the trial.
“The Daily” is made by Theo Balcomb, Andy Mills, Lisa Tobin, Rachel Quester, Lynsea Garrison, Annie Brown, Clare Toeniskoetter, Paige Cowett, Michael Simon Johnson, Brad Fisher, Larissa Anderson, Wendy Dorr, Chris Wood, Jessica Cheung, Alexandra Leigh Young, Jonathan Wolfe, Lisa Chow, Eric Krupke, Marc Georges, Luke Vander Ploeg, Adizah Eghan, Kelly Prime, Julia Longoria, Sindhu Gnanasambandan, Jazmin Aguilera, MJ Davis Lin, Austin Mitchell, Sayre Quevedo Neena Pathak, Dan Powell, Dave Shaw, Sidney Harper, Daniel Guillemette, Hans Buetow and Robert Jimison. Our theme music is by Jim Brunberg and Ben Landsverk of Wonderly. Special thanks to Sam Dolnick, Mikayla Bouchard, Stella Tan, Lauren Jackson, Julia Simon, Mahima Chablani and Nora Keller. That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you on Monday.
From the start, prosecutors have tried to portray Mr. Weinstein as a calculating predator who groomed and targeted women he believed he could easily manipulate.
His accusers, they say, fit that profile: Ms. Mann was a naïve, aspiring actress who fled an abusive home on a dairy farm in Washington State, and Ms. Haley was a financially struggling production assistant from Sweden who had a tough childhood.
Mr. Weinstein, who had walked red carpets around the world and rubbed elbows with Bill and Hillary Clinton, overawed his accusers, prosecutors said. Most of the women were not famous — with the exception of Ms. Sciorra — or financially secure, and they had few or no ties to their families.
The women’s accounts shared several similarities: Mr. Weinstein allegedly lured them to his home or a hotel room with the promise of an acting role or a job, then cornered them into a bedroom or bathroom, demanded that they undress — even as they protested — and coerced them into a sexual act, using physical and verbal intimidation.
Ms. Mann testified that she had maintained a yearslong relationship with Mr. Weinstein after he had forced oral sex on her during a meeting at a hotel in Beverly Hills, Calif. She said she had engaged in a number of consensual sexual encounters with him before and after the alleged rape in March 2013 at the Doubletree Hotel in Midtown Manhattan until as late as 2016.
Similarly, Ms. Haley, who legally changed her name from Mimi Haleyi, said she, too, had tried to maintain “a professional connection” with Mr. Weinstein. She said she continued to share scripts, pitch projects, seek work and accept tickets to movie premieres after the producer had forced oral sex on her. His lawyers suggested she was using Mr. Weinstein.
A forensic psychiatrist, Barbara Ziv, testified for the prosecution that it is common for victims of a sexual assault to not report the crime to law enforcement and to remain in contact with their attacker. In some cases, Dr. Ziv said, victims worry that their assaulter might ruin their reputation or job. Sometimes the victim maintains a relationship with the perpetrator because they have a connection to the person.
