The N.F.L. has reinstated Myles Garrett, the Cleveland Browns defensive end, the team announced in a statement on Wednesday. He had been suspended indefinitely for pulling off the helmet of Pittsburgh Steelers quarterback Mason Rudolph and hitting him in the head with it during a game in November.
Andrew Berry, the Browns’ general manager, said in a statement, “We welcome Myles back to our organization with open arms.” Garrett met with N.F.L. representatives, including the commissioner, Roger Goodell, on Monday in New York. Garrett is now eligible to participate in spring workouts and play when the season begins.
The incident occurred after a brawl between the two teams on Nov. 14, in Week 11. Garrett, the first overall pick in the 2017 N.F.L. draft, grappled with Rudolph, then removed Rudolph’s helmet and swung it wildly, hitting Rudolph in the head. He missed the six remaining games of the season under the suspension.
During his initial appeal of the suspension, Garrett, who is black, accused Rudolph, who is white, of calling him a racial slur. Rudolph denied the accusation, and the N.F.L. said it looked into the allegation and found no evidence to support it.
On Wednesday, the league upheld the $50,000 fine levied against Rudolph for his role in the scuffle. Rudolph’s appeal of the fee had been heard by one of the two appeals officer jointly appointed by the N.F.L. and N.F.L. Players Association. In total, 33 players were fined for their involvement in the altercation.
Garrett is a fearsome pass rusher and ferocious tackler. At the time of his suspension, he had 10 sacks and 11 tackles for a loss, ranking fourth in the league in both categories.
Garrett was fined more than $50,000 for penalties in September, for punching Delanie Walker of the Tennessee Titans and for committing two roughing-the-passer infractions against Jets quarterback Trevor Siemian, one of which ended Siemian’s season.
Garrett was set to head to Tanzania next week, the team said, as part of a humanitarian program to provide clean water to East Africa.