About 37 million Americans tuned in on Tuesday, the smallest audience of President Trump’s tenure.
President Trump put a “Celebrity Apprentice” spin on his State of the Union address on Tuesday, seeding the 78-minute broadcast with surprise reveals and viral moments: a tear-stained reunion of a military family, a snubbed handshake and an impromptu bestowing of the Presidential Medal of Freedom to a guest star, the radio host Rush Limbaugh.
It was the kind of camera-ready spectacle that can translate into big ratings for afternoon talk-show hosts and prime-time reality shows.
This time, though, the Nielsen numbers did not come through.
Roughly 37.2 million Americans tuned in for Mr. Trump’s speech, Nielsen said on Wednesday, the smallest live-TV audience for a presidential address to Congress since Barack Obama’s valedictory State of the Union in 2016.
The viewership on Tuesday was a 20 percent decline from Mr. Trump’s State of the Union last year, and well below the audience for his speeches in 2017 and 2018.
Why the dip? For one thing, viewers may be feeling a bit overwhelmed.
A Pew survey last fall found that 66 percent of Americans said they were “worn out by the amount of news these days.” And those numbers predated Mr. Trump’s impeachment, American military conflict in Iran, the president’s trial in the Senate and this week’s Iowa caucuses — the outcome of which, as of Wednesday evening, was still in limbo.
Fox News was by far the most-watched network for the speech, drawing 11.5 million viewers, a slight increase from its audience a year ago. MSNBC, which is popular with liberals, fell to last place among the major channels airing the speech, a sign that Mr. Trump’s critics may have decided to tune out.
NBC had the largest audience among the Big Three broadcast networks, with 4.8 million viewers. The Nielsen data did not include C-SPAN viewers or those who watched the speech online or via streaming video, meaning that many more Americans likely saw some portion of the address.
During a week of intense political TV, Wednesday brought another dramatic episode: the Senate’s afternoon vote on the articles of impeachment.
In a riveting roll call — imbued with the incantations and solemnity of a church service — 100 senators, one by one, announced “guilty” or “not guilty” before a national audience.
“It’s a pretty dramatic and grave moment, and as far as the political impact, I think you’d have to say that Donald Trump is better off now than he was when this impeachment process began,” the anchor Chris Wallace said on Fox News afterward.
On MSNBC, post-acquittal, the mood was melancholic.
The final vote was preceded by another dose of TV drama, when Senator Mitt Romney, Republican of Utah, revealed that he would vote to convict Mr. Trump on both counts.
Mr. Romney, it emerged, had taped a sit-down with Mr. Wallace on Fox News earlier on Wednesday morning and granted advance interviews about his decision to The Atlantic and The New York Times, among a handful of news outlets. It was a deft public-relations move by Mr. Romney, the former Republican presidential nominee, that apparently caught the White House off guard.
The static, lo-fi images of the Senate floor vote were in stark contrast to the high production values of Mr. Trump’s State of the Union, where cameras swooped above the audience and zoomed in on the facial reactions of politicians.
That was because the Republican Senate leadership restricted television coverage of their proceedings to in-house, government-controlled cameras, rather than allowing independent news outlets like C-SPAN to cover the trial.
As for the State of the Union, Nielsen said that social media engagement with the speech peaked just after its conclusion, at 10:31 p.m., when House Speaker Nancy Pelosi tore up her copy of the president’s speech in full view of the cameras — her own contribution to the evening’s series of meme-worthy moments.
