Tuesday: An update on the outbreak. Also: The likelihood of a super bloom this year.
The coronavirus outbreak that has killed more than 420 people in China is sending waves of panic around the world as it sickens thousands, scrambles travel and rattles economies.
At the same time, fears about the outbreak have fueled racist sentiment both abroad and here in the U.S. — even as health officials note that the risk here is relatively low.
On college campuses, students of Asian descent said they’ve been unsettled by the glares they get when they cough. At the University of California, Berkeley, a post by the university’s health services that said “xenophobia” would be a “normal” response to anxiety over the virus led to an immediate backlash, and the post’s removal.
My colleague Farhad Manjoo wrote recently in a column that what he finds more worrisome than a little-understood, dangerous illness is the spread of misinformation and fear, which have historically been used to justify acts of repression against minorities.
All this is to say the situation is serious, but it’s important not to lose perspective. The flu, for example, has caused 10,000 deaths in the U.S. this season, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
There are now six cases in California, the most of any U.S. state. That includes one case each in Los Angeles and Orange Counties, while four are in the Bay Area.
A husband and wife in San Benito County learned they had the illness on Sunday and were taken by ambulance to a hospital in San Francisco on Monday, according to The San Francisco Chronicle. They were the first cases involving the household person-to-person transmission of coronavirus in California.
Because of the number of people in California who travel to and from China, the state is “on that front line,” an infectious disease expert told my colleagues. Screenings at the San Francisco and Los Angeles airports were put into place on Jan. 17. But flights have been canceled and officials advise against traveling to China if it’s avoidable.
Military bases in California, Colorado and Texas were getting ready to house Americans under quarantine. So far, though, the only people under quarantine were the 195 people who have been held at March Air Reserve Base in Riverside.
Many healthy people don’t need masks, which largely help prevent you from transmitting a respiratory illness. And hoarding them can contribute to shortages among those who need them.
Ultimately, experts say, the best mode of prevention is frequently washing your hands and not getting too close to people who are coughing or sneezing. And if you’re sick, don’t go to the office.
In Monday’s newsletter, my colleague Jennifer Medina told us about what Californians should keep an eye out for in the Iowa caucuses. She mentioned that Joe Biden and Senator Bernie Sanders, especially, were ones to watch to gauge whether they would be heading west, where they’ve been campaigning heavily, with momentum.
Well, things got confusing, and the release of the Iowa caucus results was delayed after inconsistencies in the reporting of data, officials said. So we’ll be waiting a little longer to be able to interpret the results — and how they may reshape the race in California.
Last winter, atmospheric rivers drenched the state, yielding a super bloom.
The state’s deserts exploded in color, and Instagrammers descended. Some drew the ire of locals and environmentalists, who saw people trampling flowers and clogging traffic in pursuit of the perfect shot.
This year, though, The Desert Sun reported that such a profusion of wildflowers is less likely, thanks to a drier start to the year.
Still, the piece offered some tips for flower peeping; it’ll still be beautiful, if less gregariously colored.
