Under the plan, the hedge fund Chatham Asset Management would take over 30 newspapers nationwide, including The Sacramento Bee and The Miami Herald.
It was a thriving family business that got its start in 1857 as a four-page newspaper for residents of Sacramento in the wake of the gold rush. Now the McClatchy Company, the publisher of The Sacramento Bee, The Miami Herald and 28 other dailies across the country, has filed for bankruptcy and is expected to be run by a New York hedge fund.
In a Chapter 11 filing in New York on Thursday, McClatchy, one of the largest news publishers in the United States, said it planned to restructure its pension obligations and address more than $700 million in debt. Its newsrooms in 14 states would continue operating as usual during bankruptcy proceedings, the company said.
Under the plan, the hedge fund Chatham Asset Management, a major lender and shareholder for the chain, would operate McClatchy as a private company. McClatchy went public in 1988.
If the Chapter 11 plan gains court approval, McClatchy would become the latest newspaper company to fall under the control of Wall Street investors, an unlikely relationship that has become more common as the financial industry seeks to wring profits from an ailing business.
McClatchy has struggled with debt for more than a decade, after it acquired a rival newspaper chain, Knight Ridder, for $4.5 billion in 2006. Then came the recession and a sharp decline in revenue that accompanied the rise of digital media, a one-two punch that destabilized the industry. In November, McClatchy announced a plan to end its Saturday print editions by the end of 2020.
The state of the business is dismal. Roughly a quarter of the newspapers in the United States, most of them weeklies, have been shut down since 2004, and about 50 percent of newspaper jobs have been eliminated in that time. Daily weekday print circulation for newspapers nationwide has plummeted by about 50 million in the last 15 years.
The migration of classified notices to the internet and a steep drop in overall advertising revenue have not helped. 
As a whole, the industry was caught off guard by the rapidly changing demands of its customers, who now prefer to get their news on laptops, smartphones and other digital devices. With so much news available online free of charge, revenue from digital subscriptions has failed to make up for the money lost when readers got out of the habit of reading print newspapers. Against this backdrop, the financial industry, on the lookout for distressed assets, saw an opportunity.
The private equity giant Fortress Investment Group is the manager of the nation’s largest newspaper chain, Gannett. Like McClatchy, Gannett thrived in the last century as a family-run enterprise.
Gannett reached its current size in November when it merged with GateHouse Media. Before the deal went through, Fortress — which is owned by SoftBank, the Japanese conglomerate founded by Masayoshi Son — controlled New Media Investment Group, the parent of GateHouse. Although GateHouse was the larger of the two companies, the supersize version of the two took the Gannett name.
Alden’s role in the news industry has only expanded since then. Last fall, the hedge fund revealed that it had become the largest shareholder in the Tribune Company, the publisher of The Chicago Tribune, New York Daily News and The Baltimore Sun, among other dailies. Journalists in Chicago and Baltimore have made pleas to benefactors to buy their newspapers.
Ken Doctor, a news media analyst, said Chatham Asset Management’s role in a post-bankruptcy McClatchy represented a significant shift in the American news business.
Private equity companies gained a strong foothold by setting themselves up as lenders of last resort to the troubled industry, a position that enabled them to become major investors, Mr. Doctor added.
Journalists and press advocates have expressed concerns about the future of journalism in the hands of private equity. A 2019 report from PEN America warned that the closing of hundreds of local newspapers would damage democracy.
Chatham Asset Management, led by Anthony Melchiorre, is the principal owner of American Media, the publisher of supermarket tabloids including The National Enquirer, the Globe and the National Examiner. Mr. Melchiorre pushed for a sale of American Media after the company attracted the scrutiny of federal investigators for its role in the 2016 presidential campaign.
In April, American Media announced that it had reached an agreement to sell its tabloids to Hudson Media, a company run by James Cohen, a son of the founder of the Hudson News franchise. That deal has yet to close.
Chatham Asset Management is also a major investor in Postmedia, a Canadian chain that publishes The National Post, The Montreal Gazette and The Ottawa Citizen, among other newspapers.
Rick Edmonds, a media business analyst at the Poynter Institute, a nonprofit organization that supports journalism, said Chatham Asset Management’s track record suggested that it might not cut newsroom jobs in the manner of other hedge-fund players in the industry.
McClatchy newspapers have punched above their weight journalistically in recent years, winning three Pulitzer Prizes in editorial cartooning and numerous awards for investigative reporting, including for a Kansas City Star series about Kansas’ governmental secrecy; work by The Miami Herald on the local juvenile justice system; and Sacramento Bee articles about a Las Vegas hospital’s mistreatment of mentally ill patients.
A reporter for The Herald, Julie K. Brown, was credited with reviving interest in the case against Jeffrey Epstein, the financier who was facing new accusations of sex trafficking before he killed himself last year in jail. In 2018, Ms. Brown re-examined sexual misconduct accusations against Mr. Epstein and scrutinized the secret plea deal prosecutors offered him, reporting that helped lead to his arrest on new charges and the resignation of Alexander Acosta, the U.S. secretary of labor who as U.S. attorney had offered Mr. Epstein the deal.
A $1.4 billion pension pot for more than 24,000 McClatchy employees has weighed heavily on the company. In November, McClatchy disclosed that it did not believe it would be able to make a mandatory $124 million contribution to its pension plan in 2020.
The Wall Street Journal reported last month that McClatchy had frozen some pension payments while it tried to get a bailout from the government’s pension insurer, the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, after the Internal Revenue Service denied a request for a waiver of its obligations. The company said in its filing Thursday that it expected to hand over the management of its pension plan to the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation.
In an interview with McClatchy DC on Thursday, Kevin McClatchy, the chairman and a member of the family that runs the company, said the pension woes were a key factor in the bankruptcy declaration.
“While we tried hard to avoid this step, there’s no question that the scale of our 75-year-old pension plan — with 10 pensioners for every single active employee — is a reflection of another economic era,” he said.
Mr. Forman, the chief executive, said pension benefits would be paid to “substantially all of the plan’s participants and beneficiaries” under the reorganization.
McClatchy said it expected its fourth-quarter 2019 revenue to be $183.9 million, down 14 percent from a year earlier. It said that over the past three years, it had reduced operating expenses by $186.9 million.
The entry of the financial industry into the news business increases the chance that another big media merger is on the way, Mr. Doctor said. “That’s what’s more likely — that the financialization will drive more consolidation,” he said.