The American Ballet Theater soloist secured a coveted role, Giselle, and finds time for extra coaching sessions.
On Mondays, the day most ballet dancers spend soaking their aching feet, Skylar Brandt, a soloist at American Ballet Theater, takes a different route. First, she has ballet class, then Pilates; next, a two-hour private coaching session at a City Center studio and, finally, a visit to the chiropractor.
She likes to work. Soloists, generally, have down time — too much for Ms. Brandt’s taste. “I just turned 27, and I feel like at this point I should be starting to experience more growth,” she said. Or some growth. It’s not just about being promoted; she really just wants to dance.
But while she is happy that Mr. McKenzie trusts her enough to give her “three days’ notice to learn a three-act ballet like ‘Le Corsaire,’” she said, she doesn’t want to build a career that’s dependent on her friends’ getting injured or sick.
Now she has a part to call her own. And it’s not a hand-me-down. It’s Giselle — though for just one show.
Securing the coveted debut — opposite Joo Won Ahn on Feb. 16 at the Kennedy Center in Washington — wasn’t easy. Each year, after Ballet Theater’s spring season at the Metropolitan Opera House in New York, Ms. Brandt meets with Mr. McKenzie to discuss what she might want to work on over the summer. This year she took a bold approach and flat-out asked him what she would be dancing the next year.
Still, that was enough for Ms. Brandt to delve into the role under the guidance of the husband-and-wife team Maxim Beloserkovsky and Irina Dvorovenko, former American Ballet Theater principals who have been coaching her privately for four years.
Or at least that’s what she has recently started to understand. Ms. Brandt, who has been part of the Ballet Theater world longer than most — she began studying at its Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis School in 2005 before joining the company in 2011 — doesn’t like to ask for parts. She prefers to operate on the assumption that good work is rewarded.
Ms. Brandt will debut as Aurora in Alexei Ratmansky’s “The Sleeping Beauty” in New York this spring, but she sees “Giselle” as presenting a different kind of artistic stretch. During the course of its two acts, the heroine — a peasant girl with a weak heart — falls in love with Albrecht, a nobleman disguising his true identity. When she realizes that he is betrothed to another, she goes mad and dies, ending up in the land of the Wilis, or spirits of women who died before they could marry. Ms. Brandt, tiny and radiant, is a technical virtuoso; Giselle calls for that and more.
Because there are so many dancers at Ballet Theater, finding enough one-on-one time with coaches be difficult. Ms. Brandt said that even if she has one hour of variations coaching with the highly respected ballet mistress Irina Kolpakova — and that’s a lot of time to devote to one dancer — it’s still not enough.
But two consecutive hours is transformative. “It’s going to sink in a lot better because I don’t have the pressure of it ending,” she said.
At a recent rehearsal, Mr. Beloserkovsky hummed around Ms. Brandt like a bee while Ms. Dvorovenko sat in front, tapping a foot to emphasize certain counts as she narrated the action of the mad scene. At that moment, Giselle relives a memory from earlier in the ballet when she and Albrecht counted the petals of a flower in a game of “he loves me, he loves me not.” Albrecht had discarded a petal so that the answer would land on the affirmative. As Giselle realizes Albrecht’s duplicity, the memory comes flooding back.
“It’s like, the flower told me the truth,” Ms. Dvorovenko said.
Growing up in Westchester and New York City, where she shared an apartment with her parents when her training intensified — her two sisters, one, a former Knick City Dancer, were by then enrolled in college — Ballet Theater was the only company she was interested in. Her mother, Barbara Brandt was a well-known fitness trainer in the 1990s; she trained John McEnroe, Joan Lunden and the football player Butch Woolfolk.
