My family has no idea where our next check will come from, because of a radical change in rent laws, enacted out of the blue.
Ms. Koenig is a writer who covers real estate.
When I heard the news about New York City regulators suddenly banning brokers from charging a fee to renters, I was shocked, and not in a good way. I scrolled through Twitter, reading the comments from some of the city’s most prominent voices celebrating this as a victory over awful, unscrupulous middlemen, and my heart sank.
To be clear, fees are the primary means through which the city’s 25,000 licensed real estate brokers make money. And while they will still be able to collect fees from landlords (and renters who hire a broker themselves), those in the industry widely expect the compensation to be much smaller if this regulation stands.
 And there are certainly some superstar agents who rake in much more than the average. But many New York rental agents actually make between $45,000 to $60,000 a year. That’s decidedly middle-class, especially in this city.
I personally know many people who have had bad experiences with dishonest brokers. But there are few professions that are so widely viewed as malicious — in everything from TV commercials to my kids’ cartoons. But you can find bad apples in any profession. Not all brokers are shady, and we shouldn’t be celebrating a change in policy that could ruin their livelihoods. I should know; I’m married to one of them.
When Luke and I moved to New York City together in the late ’90s we were two wide-eyed playwrights. We’d met and fallen in love in the playwriting program at Ohio University before making our way to the city. We found temp jobs as well as a tiny one-bedroom apartment in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, happily accepting all of the furniture from the landlord’s dead mother.
While I worked as an assistant to the executive producer of a soap opera, Luke put on the one white button-down shirt he owned and dutifully took the subway for over an hour each day to a job where he sat at a desk pushing paper, a soul-crushing job for someone with a personality like his. He did it until an actor friend suggested that Luke take up what the friend was doing, real estate — a profession filled with creative types looking to support themselves while they made their art.
It was a better fit. Luke craved movement, and the job of renting apartments unchained him from the desk and allowed his long legs to traverse the city, looking for listings and meeting fellow New Yorkers. When we moved to Park Slope and, later, Windsor Terrace, he quickly became a well-known figure in our community. Standing at 6 feet 4 inches, he is very recognizable.
For those celebrating the fact that they will never again need to fork over thousands of dollars to someone who — they believe — just turns a key, I respectfully say, you don’t know my husband’s business.
Even with the advent of apps like StreetEasy and Zillow, there are still hours and hours of hard work to be done: Obtaining the rental listings from landlords requires years of legwork and relationship building, writing listing descriptions (his often marked with the poetry of a writer who needs to put food on the table), vetting potential customers over the phone, arranging viewings and organizing open houses. He does it all well and unflinchingly, even if the result in the end is zero pay because no deal is made.
Of course, people often balk at his fee, which he insists on calling a commission. He gently reminds customers that the fee is his only income. There are customers who view apartments with rents that require a hefty income but suddenly cry poverty when it comes to paying for his work. They haggle, dig in their heels and often see my husband as nothing but an obstacle to getting the expensive digs they want in a tony neighborhood.
Many customers are cheerful, serious about moving and respectful. But others see Luke’s time as disposable, ghosting him after he makes a late appointment, sometimes at the cost of being able to read to our children in the evening. Then, there are ones who show up late, holding steaming-hot cups of name-brand coffee, ruining his schedule and those of his other clients.
The New York City apartment broker who has been my partner in life for over 20 years isn’t a thief preying on the young people who come to New York City trying to make it, just as we did. He’s a member of our Brooklyn community, shoveling tenants’ driveways, taking cleaning supplies from our own kitchen cabinets to ready an apartment for a showing, checking in on an aging, recently widowed landlord who is currently housebound. “Let’s take a walk,” he said gently to the man whose doors he has opened to so many people over the years.
But as of this weekend, my family has no idea where our next check will come from because of this unannounced government policy enacted out of the blue that has left us — and many other New York families — blindsided.
Ronnie Koenig is a writer who covers real estate.