The animated short centers on an African-American father who is learning how to style his daughter’s natural hair for the first time.
At the Oscars, it’s the big-ticket categories that tend to draw the most attention, but this year the winner for animated short rose to prominence.
“Hair Love” is a sweet and joyful story about an African-American father learning to style his daughter’s natural hair in his wife’s absence. The film uses words sparingly; the characters’ gestures and expressions take viewers through the father’s commonplace but poignant endeavor.
One of the film’s messages — embracing and loving your natural hair — was transported to the ceremony itself on Sunday. The actress Gabrielle Union and the former N.B.A. champion Dwyane Wade, married producers of “Hair Love,” invited to the ceremony a black high school student in Texas who was suspended because of the way he wore his dreadlocks.
The student, DeAndre Arnold, was told that his look violated the student handbook, which said that male students’ hair must not extend below the top of a T-shirt collar. Critics of the policy called it racist and rooted in limiting gender roles.
Accepting his Oscar, “Hair Love’s” writer, Matthew A. Cherry, said he wanted to draw attention to the Crown Act, a law first passed in California that bans discrimination based on natural hairstyles and that backers hope to pass in other states.
In “Hair Love,” young Zuri tries to fashion her thick curls into a stylish hairdo using the directions of a vlogger, but when she struggles to make it work, her dad steps in. He starts out frustrated and bewildered by the array of hair tools and products, almost giving up until he seeks help from the natural hair vlogger.
The six-minute film stood out in a year where Oscars nominees have noticeably lacked racial diversity, despite efforts in the film industry to shift the narrative: Only one actor of color — Cynthia Erivo of “Harriet” — was nominated.
Cherry, a former football player, said in an interview last year that he wanted the film to combat negative stereotypes about black fatherhood and address a lack representation in animation.
“I wanted to see a young black family in the animated world,” he said.
