Baseball|The Nationals Beat the Astros. They Still Feel Overshadowed.
“It’s disappointing that becomes the talk of the off-season,” Stephen Strasburg said of the Astros and their sign-stealing scandal.
WEST PALM BEACH, Fla. — The clocks in the Washington Nationals’ spring training clubhouse do more than tell time. They are branded with an image of the Commissioner’s Trophy, reminding all who pass through that the Nationals are the reigning World Series champions.
The Houston Astros, who train on the other side of the complex, are not — but their sign-stealing scandal has consumed the sport.
The neighbors are a bit annoyed.
“It’s disappointing that becomes the talk of the off-season,” said Stephen Strasburg, the Nationals pitcher who beat Houston twice in the World Series last fall. “Heck, we went out there and beat ’em.
The Nationals were the first team ever to win four road games in a World Series. Now the feat seems even more astonishing because it happened at Minute Maid Park, which the Astros used as a laboratory for subterfuge while winning a title in 2017.
Did Houston cheat last year, too? Officially, the commissioner’s report made no such finding, but the Nationals are not convinced. Catcher Kurt Suzuki told The Washington Post he heard whistling from the Astros’ dugout during the World Series, just as the Yankees claimed in the American League Championship Series. The Nationals changed signs furiously in Houston, with each pitcher tucking a card inside his cap that listed five sets of signals.
Now the Astros have been punished — with the loss of draft picks, a $5 million fine, and suspensions for General Manager Jeff Luhnow and Manager A.J. Hinch, who were then fired by the owner Jim Crane. But the players avoided discipline altogether, and their apologies on Thursday largely rang hollow to their peers.
Mike Rizzo, the Nationals’ general manager, was especially bothered that Crane would not admit his team had cheated in 2017. Crane acknowledged that the Astros “broke the rules” but refused to use the more emphatic synonym.
Rizzo clearly noticed the contrast in attention on Thursday, when his pitchers and catchers practiced for the first time as champions. He saw lots of Nationals players but few national reporters — yet the Astros’ side was bustling.
While the Astros try to rehabilitate their image, the Nationals’ new challenge is to become the first team to repeat as champions since the 2000 Yankees. This is the longest stretch in major league history without a repeat World Series winner, and the Nationals must try without third baseman Anthony Rendon, who left for a seven-year, $245 million contract with the Los Angeles Angels.
The top prospect Carter Kieboom, 22, should take over at third base, but it is hard to expect him to match Rendon’s production. To prevent more runs, the Nationals expect to have a better bullpen, with Will Harris arriving from Houston as a free agent and the relievers acquired last summer — Daniel Hudson, Hunter Strickland and Roenis Elias — back for a full season.
The rotation, as usual, is Washington’s biggest strength; Max Scherzer, Strasburg, Corbin and Anibal Sanchez combined to go 54-28 with a 3.33 earned run average last year, with clutch performances in October. Strasburg — whose new contract is identical to Rendon’s — emphasized the Nationals’ integrity on Friday in a clear brushback pitch to the Astros.
When they rewind the hands of their commemorative clocks, then, the Nationals will do it with a clear conscience. To them, their title is clean and the Astros’ is dirty — but they cannot escape the stench wafting over from their spring training neighbors.
