Thursday: A reporter explores the connection between a small Sierra town and its newspaper. Also: Camp Fire deaths; and an art fair.
My colleague Tim Arango recently wrote about a man who stepped in to save one of the state’s oldest newspapers. The man’s story elicited heartfelt responses — including from Tim himself.
A few weeks ago I drove into the Sierra to visit Downieville, an old gold mining town on a fork in the Yuba River, because I had heard a remarkable story: how a local retiree had stepped in to save the town’s newspaper, The Mountain Messenger, just as it was about to shut down, after publishing for 166 years.
In our piece, we introduced you to Carl Butz, 71, a former labor economist for the state of California, and The Mountain Messenger’s savior, having bought it for a price in the “four figures” plus the assumption of some debts.
Mr. Butz is a fourth-generation Californian whose great-great-grandfather came to California in 1852 from Ohio, probably with dreams of striking it rich during the Gold Rush.
Mr. Butz is also awash in grief, having lost his wife, Cecilia Kuhn — who was a drummer in the Bay Area feminist punk band Frightwig — in 2017. And as I spent time watching him put out his first issue of the paper, he told me that while he was happy to be saving something special to the community, the endeavor was also saving him.
“She would be proud of me,” he said.
Local newspapers at their best knit together communities and connect generations of families, and that is how longtime residents of Downieville and surrounding Sierra County described The Messenger. Each one expressed great relief and gratitude that Mr. Butz had saved the paper.
It was intensely familiar to me: My first job after college was editor and publisher of a weekly in Vermont, The Essex Reporter, which, thankfully, is still in business even as nearly 1,800 local papers have closed since 2004, according to a study published by the University of North Carolina. The best advice I received then was quite simple: Get the names of as many kids as possible into each issue, from honor rolls to Little League games to school plays.
The story touched many readers, who responded with notes to us, or to Mr. Butz directly, with offers to contribute to the paper or asking how they could subscribe.
One reader who took special notice of our story was Ken Garrett, an entertainment lawyer in Beverly Hills. Hanging from the wall in his office is a front page of The Messenger, dated Dec. 1, 1883. As it turns out, one of his ancestors had been an owner of the paper.
“I had no idea it was still being published, or that it was California’s oldest weekly newspaper,” Mr. Garrett wrote.
For a long time, the paper was defiantly analog, without a website or presence on social media.
But just recently, The Messenger, under Mr. Butz’s editorship, took a first gentle step into the digital age, by setting up a Twitter account, under the paper’s nickname: @TheMountainMess.
Earlier this week, residents of a town on the Hudson River engaged in a quaint ritual in which they go absolutely bananas over a canine pageant known as the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show.
My colleagues in the main New York Times newsroom not far from the scene covered this year’s show extensively, including the competition itself, the behind-the-scenes preparation and the light controversy.
Thanks to the magic of the internet, we here on the West Coast can also enjoy that coverage, including many, many dog photos, as a treat.
California Today goes live at 6:30 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Were you forwarded this email? Sign up for California Today here.
Jill Cowan grew up in Orange County, graduated from U.C. Berkeley and has reported all over the state, including the Bay Area, Bakersfield and Los Angeles — but she always wants to see more. Follow along here or on Twitter, @jillcowan.
California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley.