Mr. Walsh, a conservative radio show host and former Republican lawmaker from Illinois, was running a long-shot bid for the party’s presidential nomination.
WASHINGTON — Joe Walsh, the conservative radio show host and former Tea Party congressman from Illinois who was running a presidential campaign challenging President Trump’s fitness for office, announced on Friday that he was ending his bid for the Republican nomination.
That leaves Mr. Trump with only one Republican challenger, former Gov. William F. Weld of Massachusetts.
Those calls, however, seemed to fall on deaf ears.
Mr. Walsh, who supported Mr. Trump in 2016 and ran as a former disciple who had seen the light, became a regular presence on cable news channels, calling Mr. Trump an “unfit con man” and a danger to the country. His hope was that he would create a permission structure for other former supporters to follow suit and change their minds about Mr. Trump.
The experience, he said, left him cynical about the future of the party.
Who’s Running for President in 2020?
The field of Democratic presidential candidates has been historically large. Here’s who’s in and who’s out.
Mr. Walsh, who entered the race last August, was once part of a trio of Republican challengers to Mr. Trump, who together were involved in a quixotic attempt to peel away support from a president with an iron grip on his party.
But Mr. Trump’s campaign operatives had worked for over a year to lock up support at the state level and make it impossible for any primary challenger to find sunlight. The state Republican parties in Arizona, Kansas, Nevada and South Carolina canceled their 2020 presidential primaries.
Even in Iowa, the state party chairman, Jeff Kaufmann, framed his caucus more as a test run for what he expects to be a competitive 2024 Republican field.
The tactics worked.
Last November, former Gov. Mark Sanford of South Carolina dropped out of the Republican primary, just two months after announcing his run.
Speaking from the White House on Thursday as he celebrated his acquittal in the Senate impeachment trial, Mr. Trump dismissed his remaining challengers as “non-people,” a rare acknowledgment that he had any competitors at all.
Mr. Weld’s campaign aides said they planned to soldier on alone.
Mr. Lyman said that Mr. Weld would stay in the race regardless of how he fares in the New Hampshire primary on Tuesday. “There’s no doubt that the independence and individuality of New Hampshire are traits we hope will pierce through the cultish obsession of the Trumpists,” he said.