Movies|‘Call of the Wild’ Casts a Digital Star. Is He a Good Dog?
Filmmakers created their lead canine using computer generated imagery. But the question remains whether audiences will be on board.
In the 1935 movie “The Call of the Wild,” the canine protagonist, Buck, was cast as a burly St. Bernard alongside a mustachioed Clark Gable. In 1972, he was played by a stoic German shepherd, and in 1997, by a hulking Leonberger.
The new Buck is able to do things onscreen that Bucks of yesteryear could not.  He can pull the meat off a turkey leg in one smooth gulp, and he can glance disapprovingly when his human companion, played by Harrison Ford, drinks too much liquor.
But at first look, some viewers found the leading dog to be more distracting than nuanced; some complained online that they wished the studio had taken a different route.
The rebooted Buck is the latest example of filmmakers’ replacing trained movie animals with computer-generated creatures, an expensive and painstaking approach that opens up endless opportunities in postproduction and circumvents ethical concerns about the treatment of working animals.
Over the past few decades, advances in C.G.I. have made these onscreen animals significantly more lifelike. But the question remains whether audiences will accept computer-generated animals as the industry standard or cringe at the four-legged illusions.
From the beginning, the filmmakers behind “The Call of the Wild” knew that their lead needed to be capable of more than a typical movie dog, Stafford said. Previous versions of the film focused on the human in the story, John Thornton, when, in fact, the 1903 novel by Jack London portrayed Buck as the main character as he was wrenched from domestic comforts in California to be sold as a sled dog in northwestern Canada during the gold rush of the 1890s.
At first, the filmmakers chose to model their dog after a Bernese mountain dog. But weeks into the process, it became clear that the breed’s black fur would get lost in the shadows of night scenes, Stafford said.
Then, Jessica Steele-Sanders, the wife of the movie’s director, Chris Sanders, found a rescue dog online: he seemed like a possible St. Bernard-Scotch shepherd, the same mixture of breeds as the novel’s version of Buck. She adopted the dog (who happened to be named Buckley), and soon, he was being scanned and photographed so that visual effects specialists could create a digital imitation of him.
Hundreds of people had a hand in getting Buck just right. A group of staffers videotaped Buckley and about a dozen other dogs in a warehouse in Los Angeles while they played, creating reference footage for the movie’s animators.
Most of the time, one man stood in for Ford’s furry companion. To play Buck for motion capture, Terry Notary, a former U.C.L.A. gymnast who is known in the film industry for his animal mimicry, wore a tight gray suit, a gray skull cap and carbon fiber arm extensions that allowed him to walk on all fours. For some scenes, Notary wore a synthetic rubber muzzle over his face.
In a film that hinges on the relationship between a dog and his owner, Ford had Notary to hug, pet and talk to.
In July, the filmmakers behind “The Call of the Wild” were closely watching the release of another movie packed with computer-generated animals. Although “The Lion King” took in nearly $1.7 billion at the box office, criticism arose online that the animals lacked emotional expressiveness.
Stafford said that as Buck’s character came to life, the filmmakers noticed the opposite problem. He looked too expressive, too anthropomorphic. The filmmakers worked to make Buck seem more dog-like.
Because the visual effects were handled by Moving Picture Company, which also did “The Lion King,” “The Call of the Wild” was able to benefit directly from the technological advancements of its predecessor.
With each of the three “Planet of the Apes” movies since 2011, the apes got more realistic, thanks to technological improvements that enhanced details like the way light transmitted through a chimpanzee’s hair, said Chris White, a visual effects supervisor at Weta Digital, the New Zealand effects house.
The strategy can be exorbitantly expensive and laborious, but filmmakers often prefer it because of the control it gives them after the filming is over.
Visual effects specialists recognize that moviegoers have a different relationship with dogs than bears, apes or pigs. The emotional stakes are higher.
“Show me one person who didn’t ugly cry at ‘Old Yeller,’” said Lori Boyle, an animal trainer from Canada who has worked with movie dogs for decades.
Boyle said she was skeptical about whether “The Call of the Wild” could pull off that distinct canine-to-human connection with a computer-generated dog.
Recent dog-centric films opted for the real thing. In Disney’s live-action “Lady and the Tramp” (2019), a real cocker spaniel and mutt are made to look as if they were talking by use of visual effects. “A Dog’s Journey” and “A Dog’s Way Home,” both released last year, used real dogs, too.
In the animal rights world, activists are split on whether computer-generated dogs should one day replace real ones entirely. The Humane Society of the United States prefers C.G.I. because they see it as the only foolproof way to ensure animal safety on set, the group’s president said. But American Humane, the nonprofit that gives the “no animals were harmed” stamp of approval in the end credits, backed the continued use of real animals paired with visual effects.
Boyle, who recently trained animals featured in the Disney sled dog movie “Togo,” said that one of the dogs playing the lead husky was thrilled to be at work, where his favorite reward was a brisk run around the perimeter of the building. That joy and determination translated onscreen, Boyle said.
The people behind “The Call of the Wild” tried mightily to make sure it was.
Buck was engineered to look at times sheepish, fearful, inquisitive and protective. When he’s with his pack of sled dogs, he acts like a benevolent leader, giving another hungry dog his fish. And he has a Lassie-like instinct for saving other creatures.
