One morning last spring Tiler Peck woke up, but she wasn’t the same Tiler Peck. She didn’t recognize herself. She couldn’t.
“I was afraid to use my eyeballs to look because I was in so much pain,” she said.
On April 23 — she has been keeping a journal — she was diagnosed with a severe herniated disc in her neck. Doctors couldn’t pinpoint exactly how it happened. During the past five or six years, Ms. Peck, a New York City Ballet principal, had experienced a stiff neck from time to time, but this was different.
Just before City Ballet’s spring season, she had an M.R.I. scan. She was packing her bag to go to the theater when her doctor called and asked her if she was sitting down.
Though she’s performed in two dances at City Ballet since November, her return to the stage is still a cautious one. It has involved six doctors, five of whom advised surgery.
Ms. Peck, 31, isn’t a fragile ballerina prone to injury. A member of City Ballet since 2005 and a principal since 2009, she is almost preternaturally self-assured, possessing an astounding technique that is made all the more radiant by her silken musicality.
When she was first told that she needed to stop dancing, she called Marika Molnar, the physical therapist and director of Health and Wellness at City Ballet, whom she has worked with since she was 15.
Ms. Peck said her gut kept telling her not to have surgery — one doctor, pushing for it, asked if Ms. Molnar would be responsible for Ms. Peck if she were to become paralyzed afterward.
Finally, she met with Dr. Frank P. Cammisa Jr., who specializes in the surgical treatment of spinal disorders. He told her that there was a good chance of her spine healing on its own. He advised taking off the summer — beyond not being able to dance, she didn’t really move her head for six months — before getting another M.R.I., which she did, in August. (She will have another in March.) It showed improvement. Ms. Peck could start moving again. She wasn’t taking pain medication so she could report all of her symptoms — the tingling and pain — to her physical therapists.
Ms. Molnar doesn’t want Ms. Peck near new choreography that could put her at risk; she is also enforcing two days of rest between performances. Ms. Peck may be dancing again, but these are still early days.
At the start of this month, Ms. Peck was preparing for her next challenge: “Swan Lake” and the dual part of the swan queen, Odette, and her evil doppelgänger, Odile. (She is scheduled to dance on Feb. 19 and Feb. 22.) “I’m going to try 10 fouettés today,” she said at a recent rehearsal, referring to the whipping turns — traditionally, the ballerina performs 32 — that Odile performs in the ballroom scene.
Though she was cutting her fouettés short and skipping her jumps, there was something transformative about her dancing. Her neck looked longer. Her back had both a newfound delicacy and expansiveness that made her arms appear more willowy. And she even looked taller. “I have to have better posture all the time,” she said with delight.
She may be the unofficial president of Ms. Peck’s recovery team, but Ms. Molnar is not its only member. When she first received her diagnosis, Ms. Peck was treated by a chiropractor who put her in touch with a sports psychologist. A condition like Ms. Peck’s affects more than the body; when a visit to a doctor was upsetting, her symptoms — including tingling in the face — would flare up.
Above all, she was left with an important question: When dance is taken away, what’s left? Her injury has taught her that she needs to be more open — less calculated and more spontaneous in both her dancing and her life. In rehearsals, those qualities were apparent as she worked on “Swan Lake.” This will be her second time performing the ballet with the company, but just as important as the first. That time, she learned she had the part a week after she and Mr. Fairchild had separated.
