Lawmakers who flipped Republican districts in 2018 worry that a democratic socialist at the top of the ticket could doom their re-election chances.
WASHINGTON — As Bernie Sanders emerges as the leader in the race for the Democratic presidential nomination, his rise is generating fears among centrist Democrats that the apparent leftward shift of their party could cost them not only a chance to retake the White House, but also their hold on the majority in the House of Representatives and their shot at winning the Senate.
Concern is also building among centrists in the Senate, where Democrats already face an uphill battle in their quest to flip the four Republican seats they would need to regain the majority. They are eyeing seats in North Carolina, Arizona, Colorado and Maine — states where Mr. Sanders’s calls for a political revolution may not fare well with voters.
Democrats must also defend centrists like Senator Jeanne Shaheen of New Hampshire and Tina Smith of Minnesota who are up for re-election. Ms. Smith, who is also backing Ms. Klobuchar, said the party needed someone who “can bring people along, up and down the ballot.” Ms. Shaheen, who has not endorsed any candidate, said she was not concerned by Mr. Sanders but sounded frustrated on Wednesday by the suggestion that he had won big in her state.
In the House, eight of the front-line Democrats, including Representatives Haley Stevens of Michigan, Max Rose of New York and Lucy McBath of Georgia, have endorsed Michael R. Bloomberg, the former New York City mayor. Others, including several military veterans — Representatives Conor Lamb and Chrissy Houlahan of Pennsylvania, and Elaine Luria of Virginia — are coalescing around former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.
Still, the race is young. While Mr. Sanders won in New Hampshire on Tuesday night, the majority of voters — about 53 percent — picked a trio of more moderate candidates: Mr. Biden; Mr. Buttigieg; and Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota. And three candidates, Senator Michael Bennet of Colorado; Deval Patrick, the former governor of Massachusetts; and the businessman Andrew Yang, just dropped out.
