The Manhattan district attorney’s office made an unusually risky decision when it brought criminal charges against Harvey Weinstein. The two women at the center of the case not only had friendly communications with the Hollywood producer after their alleged attacks, but also agreed to have sex with him.
Rape experts say victims sometimes remain on outwardly good terms with their assailants and even have sexual encounters with them after assaults. But it is rare to prosecute such cases, according to police officials, defense lawyers and victim advocates across the country. The longstanding assumption is that jurors will find the accusers less than credible or the dynamics too complicated for a conviction.
Trying those cases is “practically unheard of,” said Kaethe Morris Hoffer, executive director of the Chicago Alliance Against Sexual Exploitation, who after working with victims for three decades could recall only a single prosecution under these circumstances — one that ended in acquittal.
“Sexual contact afterward is very problematic unless it really can be thoroughly explained and understood,” said Roger Canaff, a former prosecutor in New York.
The prosecution rested its case on Thursday, leaving the defense to call the last few witnesses in the days ahead. Over the past three weeks, the two sides have built competing narratives to answer a critical question: Why did Miriam Haley and Jessica Mann, the two central accusers, agree to have sex and other contact with Mr. Weinstein?
Prosecutors say that keeping victims close was a key part of Mr. Weinstein’s predation. They argue he was so powerful, manipulative and menacing that the women, seeking a break in the entertainment industry, felt compelled to go along.
When Ms. Haley had sex with Mr. Weinstein two weeks after he allegedly assaulted her in 2006 — and signed one of her emails to him “Lots of love” — she was trying to make what happened “not so disgusting” and “almost normalize the situation,” Meghan Hast, a prosecutor, told the jury.
One of the reporters who broke the story of Harvey Weinstein’s alleged abuse speaks with Donna Rotunno, the lawyer behind Mr. Weinstein’s legal strategy.
I was contacted on a Tuesday evening as I was leaving my office, from someone in New York, and they said it’s something big. And it’s funny, because I think most people would expect me to say I was shocked by the call. And I really wasn’t.
We spoke for eight hours the first time I came. And he was really interested in speaking to a female lawyer, and I said I thought that was a good idea for him.
Being a woman at least puts me in a position where people say, well, wait, this woman has a different position than what the majority of women are feeling today. But I also believe that I hold the position that a lot of women feel and don’t want to talk about. At the end of the day, Harvey Weinstein is well aware of the fact that his life is on the line here. And obviously, having a voice is not only necessary and fair but it’s something that he deserves. He deserves to have a voice out there.
How are you feeling, Harvey?
Thank God your mother’s not here to see this.
Mr. Weinstein, how are you feeling today?
Harvey Weinstein walked gingerly into court this morning without the walker he has relied on for weeks.
Harvey, how are you feeling today?
In the trial of Harvey Weinstein, six women have taken the stand, each making similar accusations of rape and sexual assault against the movie producer.
Today, she took the stand, recounting three separate assaults, at times sobbing uncontrollably.
But the defense previewed what it called dozens of loving emails sent by some accusers to the producer.
— and suggested that in many cases, it was the women who wanted something from Weinstein.
Donna Rotunno, Harvey Weinstein’s lawyer, asked Jessica Mann to read an email that she had sent to her boyfriend at the time.
His lawyers have seized on the fact that the two women whose accounts are at the center of the criminal charges agreed to have sex and friendly contact with Weinstein after they were allegedly victimized.
Today, on her second day of testimony, Jessica Mann had a breakdown on the stand during cross-examination, when she was being questioned by Weinstein’s attorney Donna Rotunno.
Any comment on the trial, Mr. Weinstein?
I have good lawyers.
How you doing, Harvey?
I hope so, for crying out loud.
It’s Friday, February 7.
Do you want to tell us what you had for breakfast?
Sure. I had a nothing for breakfast [LAUGHING], actually. Not even a coffee.
All right. Well, Donna, thank you again for being with us this afternoon. I’ve read that you have represented as many as 40 men accused of sexual misconduct. That’s a lot.
Do you remember a specific case that pulled you into representing men accused of sexual misconduct?
You know, I think, really, one of the cases that pulled me in initially, before I even was taking these kinds of cases, was the Duke lacrosse case. It’s like here we have the media coming out and just assassinating these young guys, and then coming to find out that this story completely collapsed. And I remember my mother saying at the time, when we were watching the coverage on the news, “When those boys die someday, their obituary is going to say ‘the Duke lacrosse players.’  I mean, these are life changing circumstances. I think quite often we look to the accusers, and we talk about the effects that these things have on their lives. But we do not look at the effects that these types of allegations and accusations have on the person being accused. And you have to look at what it does to people’s financial abilities, their status in the community. I mean, I represented a guy in Chicago who is a custom clothing designer, who made clothes for movie sets and presidents and high level executives in Chicago. And one woman makes an allegation, and all of that business goes away. And so he wins, but what do you win? You win your case in criminal court, and then you have to worry about building your reputation back, if you can, where people are willing to then come back and frequent your establishment. So the ramifications are social. They’re economic. They are mental — the mental toll that it takes. I mean, look at Harvey. Look at Harvey physically, from what he looked like when all of this started to what he looks like now. People can talk all they want about walkers and faking it. Physically, it is so apparently obvious what this has done, and the toll this has taken on him.
No. I’m talking about the fact that we — especially today — all I can tell you is, in my cases, what I see, we allow people who make allegations to automatically take on a victim status. And I think for me, all I’m looking for is fairness. And if we automatically have this notion that we’re supposed to believe all women, or believe all victims, or believe all people that come forward, we are taking out a very large portion of the steps that we should be taking before we get to that notion — that just because someone says something they should be believed. So I think it’s, what you have reported, I will not disagree with. I’ve seen police do horrible things. I’ve seen prosecutors do horrible things. But I’m speaking from the perspective of what I think going through something like this, and an allegation, does to someone. And one isn’t it more serious than the other. One shouldn’t be more important than the other. They’re facts. Difficult for people to come forward. Difficult for people to be accused.
Are you saying that as you built your practice and created this niche in terms of representing men accused of sexual misconduct, that as you saw it, the criminal justice system favored victims?
I think 100 percent. I think it 100 percent favored victims. I think prosecutors and police are afraid to be skeptical of complaining witnesses and accusers today. I think they feel like, I better just believe what they say. I think it’s also happening in domestic violence cases.
What is it like to cross-examine alleged victims of sex crimes?
I think that it requires a skillful set of questions and preparation. And I don’t ever look at my job as going in there trying to be disrespectful, or berate someone, or minimize what they claim happened to them. I don’t take pride in having to put people through circumstances that they may find difficult. That’s not the point of what I do. My job is to ask questions that make a trier of fact, whether that be a judge or a jury, determine if they think their story is credible. What someone says does not mean that that’s what happened. There’s always more than one side to a story. And there’s something in our Constitution, the Sixth Amendment right to confront witnesses. And my client, whoever that is at the time, has the right to confront his accusers through me or my team. And that’s what I have to do. And to live in this country, to not believe that baffles me.
So what did you think about how the #MeToo movement unfolded?
I’ve talked about #MeToo a lot, and I get labeled this anti-#MeToo. It’s not really anti-#MeToo. it’s anti-what happens because of things like #MeToo. So if 500 positives come from #MeToo — and I’m sure I could sit here with you and look at all the things that have come from #MeToo and agree that there’s positive things that come from #MeToo. But if as part of that, that strips your right to due process — if we’re going to convict people before they have a trial, I find that to be damaging and detrimental.
In making your decision to represent Weinstein, did you factor in this long history of accusations of sexual harassment and sexual assault against Weinstein outside of the criminal charges, some of which were made years before 2017 and the #MeToo movement being ignited?
You know, I didn’t. I didn’t. Because my role in this is to represent him in a criminal case. And as I’ve said multiple times, there is a difference between sins and crimes. And you can believe that Harvey Weinstein is a sinner. And you can believe that he did things that you wouldn’t do or you don’t like. But my question here is, does that rise to the level of a crime?
What are sins?
I mean, sins are treating somebody inappropriately. Sins are yelling at somebody at work.  And you know, those types of things are not good, but they also don’t mean that you should spend the rest of your life in prison.
So what do you see as the clearest evidence that Harvey Weinstein should not be convicted?
I think, you know, these are consensual encounters. We have communications at the time that I believe prove that they were consensual encounters. I believe the actions of women after the fact prove that they were consensual encounters. When you look at real-time communications between two people, it really lends a very interesting spotlight into what was happening between two people at the time. And maybe the story being told today or in a courtroom is different. And I guess at the end of the day, it’s going to be for the 12 people on the jury to decide based on the evidence, if they can shut out everything else that they’ve heard. And hopefully they will make their decision based on the facts and the evidence that they hear in the courtroom.
Do you think that sexual violence can take place within otherwise consensual relationships?
I do. I absolutely do.
No, I don’t think that that plays into this case at all. I don’t think it plays into this case when you have people that are continuing to contact him when they have absolutely no other reason to. You know, things like reaching out to Mr. Weinstein after you change your phone number, saying, I wanted to make sure you had my new phone number. These communications go far beyond anything that any mental health professional, psychiatrist, psychologist — they go far beyond any of these new circumstances that doctors want to put forth in order to explain away why people may enter into certain behaviors. They go far beyond that.
So what about the wide understanding that Harvey Weinstein was not just a powerful producer in the entertainment industry, but one of the most powerful producers. Somebody who could make and break careers that could serve as a gateway into the entertainment industry. And a lot of the women who have made allegations, not just in the criminal case, but beyond the criminal case, have said that even after experiencing alleged sexual misconduct, they had communication with him because they felt like he could either hurt or harm their careers.
Well, the notion that he could hurt them is absolutely ridiculous. Harvey Weinstein was one of many very powerful people. And if Harvey Weinstein called one of the other people in the industry and said don’t use actress A, they would have wanted to use actress A 10 times more. So that notion that he could hurt people’s careers I absolutely find ridiculous. The second part of your question is, these are still choices that women are making. And whether they’re choices you’re happy you made or not happy you made, you still made a choice. And women have to start owning those choices. And they either have to say, I’m not going to do these things to attempt to get a job, or I’m going to own my choice for making that decision.
Can you elaborate on that a little bit? I’m trying to understand how that — when you say that women have choices, I’m trying to understand how that does not extend to you saying that women have a choice whether or not to be sexually harassed or sexually assaulted. that you seem to be placing all of the responsibility on the woman.
Megan, I’m not blaming anyone. Megan, no, I’m not putting all of the responsibility on the woman. I’m placing responsibility on the woman. Women cannot be equal if women don’t start taking on equal risk. Women want men to take on all the risk. They want to then put themselves in whatever situation they’re in, and then walk out and say, oh my God, I had no idea that was going to happen to me. You can’t have it both ways. And when you’re put in circumstances that you think are questionable, or negative, or you don’t want to be in, or you think this is the only way I’m going to get the job, we know that that’s ridiculous. We know that if women stand up and say, I’m not going to take this, I’m not going to do this, you have other options. So when I make comments and say “if you go to the hotel room,” doesn’t mean you deserve to have something bad happen to you. But if you go to the hotel room, you continue to perpetrate a culture that allows that to be acceptable. And so if women take the power and women say, none of us are going to a hotel room, then that culture must change.
I mean, I think it’s also important to make clear that you’re kind of conflating women in general, agreeing to meet somebody in a hotel room, with alleged victims of Harvey Weinstein agreeing to meet Harvey Weinstein in hotel rooms. In those cases, it was very well established that Harvey Weinstein conducted business in hotel rooms. Oftentimes, women who say that they were victimized by Weinstein in those hotel rooms said that they were showing up for work meetings. In fact, some of them had been told to go there by their agents.
Well, I’m just going to tell you that in my case, the two charged victims in my case, that is not the circumstance. And if you are asked to go to a event for the Oscars, and then you are asked to go out for drinks after the event for the Oscars, and then you are asked at midnight to come up and see a script, I think at some point women have to — like, the radar has to go up, or the light bulb has to go on, and you have to say, O.K., this may not be what I think it is.
So there are — of the many women who said that they showed up for work meetings at a hotel room or at an office, only to feel like Harvey Weinstein turned around and preyed on them and tried to sexually assault or harass them — there are women who have said that they were able to find ways to get out of the room. There are obviously other women who say that they failed to be able to get out of the room. That he attacked them, that he physically restrained them.
Again, based on the cases that I have and the things that I’m seeing, anytime someone said, I don’t want to do this, you have a bad reputation with women, I’m not giving you a massage — they walked out of the room. I think anybody that said no, they walked out. And a lot of people that said no are very famous now.
What reason would these women have to lie?
We have created a society of celebrity victimhood status. We have created a society where women don’t have to take any responsibility for their actions. And we have created a society where if we say believe all women, that means we’re not supposed to question anyone at all. So there is absolutely no risk for a woman to come forward now and make a claim. Zero.
It’s one thing for a woman to step forward and make an allegation on social media or in the pages of a newspaper. It’s another thing for a woman to agree to be part of a criminal prosecution and to move forward with all that that entails, including the rigorous cross-examination that you and your co-counsel are performing. Do you think that women would submit themselves to that process if they were lying?
Yes. Because I’ve seen it over and over and over again.
So you believe that Harvey Weinstein is not guilty of the criminal charges he’s facing in this trial, but there are these more than 90 women who have accused Weinstein of sexual misconduct. Do you accept that this criminal case aside, he may very well be guilty of being a sexual predator?
My job is not to defend all things Harvey Weinstein. My job is to defend Harvey Weinstein in a criminal courtroom, which I’m doing. And society will make the judgment call after that. That’s not my call to make.
So you don’t think that the stories of those 90 plus women are valid or are meaningful in relation to you?
Megan, it’s not about valid. Megan, you could turn this around every way you want. Everybody that’s listening to this knows you wrote a book and knows you have a completely different agenda than the reason that I’m sitting here. And I came here today, in good faith, to talk to you about this conversation. And I’m more than happy to do it. But in terms of me going back and talking about every claim someone made, I’m sure if I delved into individual claims, I would find things that make me say, I’m not so sure. But in terms of what happens going forward, Harvey Weinstein hopefully is going to walk out of that criminal courtroom as a free man. And then the society is going to make its judgments. And that’s not for me to decide. And for you either, frankly.
So, and I’m sorry, but to go back to the comment you made about the fact that, you know, my colleague Jodi Kantor and I not just broke the Weinstein story and did a lot of investigative reporting on this, we did in fact write a book. But when you say my agenda or our agenda, what do you mean by that?
Well, you have a completely different view on this, and of course I’m not begrudging you. You have a right to your opinion, just as I have a right to mine. But all I’m saying is that, you know, I look at the title of the book. The title of the book is “She Said.” It’s very difficult for Harvey to be able to tell another side, or tell his side of the story, when there is a criminal case going on. So I’m just cautioning people to be a little bit more skeptical about a one-sided version of events. That’s all.
Megan, I’m not saying that. I’m not saying that.
We have, yeah, we have engaged. We have gone to Harvey Weinstein and presented all of the allegations that we were planning to publish and given him adequate time to respond. And I think that, you know, I just want to emphasize that we go into our reporting with skepticism. That when we were reporting the allegations of sexual misconduct against Weinstein, that we didn’t simply turn around and publish those allegations without doing due diligence, without turning to people in whom these women had confided, in whom they had reported these alleged attacks, and gathering that corroborating evidence, and tracking down the documents of the secret settlements that were silenced and other internal company records.
Again, I’m not debating any of this. I read it. I read it. I’m not debating any of this. I’m merely stating that now that we’re in a criminal courtroom, there is a different forum to be able to tell this story and let these events play out. That’s all.
So certainly there are women who believe you are doing the right thing by defending Harvey Weinstein, but you must know a lot of women who see you as a kind of traitor. How do you respond to that?
All I can say to them is I hope they never find themselves in a situation where their family member is accused, and they’re hoping that the criminal justice system is fair to them. Because at the end of the day, that’s the most important part of this whole aspect, is that if you are accused of a crime, the system of justice should work one way or another. And I’m not here to predict outcomes. I don’t know what’s going to happen or what the jury’s going to do. But just as everybody wants fairness to the people making allegations, I want Mr. Weinstein to have the same fairness that should be afforded to him.
Well, thank you so much for taking the time to talk to us, Donna. I really appreciate it.
Thanks. I appreciate it, too.
Are there any question, and other questions, guys? I know that was a long one.
Oh, and actually I had another question, which was whether or not you’ve been sexually assaulted.
Because I would never put myself in that position.
So you’re saying — O.K., actually, I’m sorry. So you’re saying that you — you’re saying that you have never been sexually assaulted, because you would never put yourself in the position of being sexually assaulted?
No. I’ve always made choices, from college age on, where I never drank too much, I never went home with someone that I didn’t know. I just never put myself in any vulnerable circumstance ever.
Do you believe that every woman who’s been sexually assaulted somehow put herself in that position, whether it was having drinks or agreeing to go to a hotel room?
Absolutely not. But just as we make smart decisions when we walk out on the street at night, I think you have to make the same decisions when you’re putting yourself in circumstances with other people. When we walk out at night, we look around. We make sure we have our phone. Some people take Mace. We take precautions. And all I’m saying is, is that women should take precautions.
Totally different conversation.
Totally — being pulled into a dark alley is a totally different conversation.

Do you think it’s possible for women to be sexually assaulted by somebody that they know, even if they’ve taken precautions?
I can’t help but feel like you continue to place the burden of safety on women, on potential victims in general. Should the burden rest on them? Or should it rest on the perpetrators?
I think it should rest equally. And we’ve moved this conversation so far away from what we were talking about, but if you go out with someone, you can’t have it both ways.  I went out with them, and I went to their house and we were flirting or kissing or whatever. And then say I had no idea that he may want to do this. You just can’t have it both ways. So I’m saying that women need to be very clear about their intentions. I think women need to be very prepared for the circumstances they put themselves in. And I think absolutely women should take on equal risk that men are taking on. And the responsibility should be equal as well.
Is there anything that you think that men need to do differently?
Sure, I think men also need to be very clear about their intentions. And if I was a man in today’s world, before I was engaging in sexual behavior with any woman today, I would ask them to sign a consent form.
You are being serious.
I’m being dead serious. I’m being dead serious. Because how easy is it for two people to engage in behavior and a day later, two days later, five days later, 27 years later, somebody say, you know what? That’s not what that was. Why not? Why not? Take all of the question out of it. Make it easier on everybody.
Donna, thank you again for taking so much time. I really do appreciate it.
On Thursday, the prosecution rested its case against Harvey Weinstein, and defense lawyers for Weinstein began calling their own witnesses.
Here’s what else you need to know today. A Times analysis of the results of the Iowa caucuses has found that more than 100 precincts reported results that were internally inconsistent, missing data or not mathematically possible under the rules of the Iowa caucuses. The irregularities do not appear to be deliberate and may not affect the outcome, but they point to larger problems with the caucuses, which have been criticized for years as amateurish, and raise questions about when, if ever, the public will get precise results from the contest. On Thursday afternoon, the chairman of the Democratic National Committee, Tom Perez, called for a recount of the Iowa results.
In his first public remarks since his acquittal in the Senate impeachment trial, President Trump celebrated the verdict, expressed no regret for his conduct and mocked the Democrats, who had pursued the charges against him.
It was evil. It was corrupt. It was dirty cops. It was leakers and liars, and this should never ever happen to another president, ever.
During his speech delivered at the White House, Trump personally thanked his defense lawyers, his Republican allies in Congress and the Senate majority leader, who oversaw the trial.
“The Daily” is made by Theo Balcomb, Andy Mills, Lisa Tobin, Rachel Quester, Lynsea Garrison, Annie Brown, Clare Toeniskoetter, Paige Cowett, Michael Simon Johnson, Brad Fisher, Larissa Anderson, Wendy Dorr, Chris Wood, Jessica Cheung, Alexandra Leigh Young, Jonathan Wolfe, Lisa Chow, Eric Krupke, Marc Georges, Luke Vander Ploeg, Adizah Eghan, Kelly Prime, Julia Longoria, Sindhu Gnanasambandan, Jazmin Aguilera, MJ Davis Lin, Austin Mitchell, Sayre Quevedo Neena Pathak, Dan Powell, Dave Shaw, Sidney Harper, Daniel Guillemette, Hans Buetow and Robert Jimison. Our theme music is by Jim Brunberg and Ben Landsverk of Wonderly. Special thanks to Sam Dolnick, Mikayla Bouchard, Stella Tan, Lauren Jackson, Julia Simon, Mahima Chablani and Nora Keller. That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you on Monday.
Ms. Mann, who acknowledged having a three-year “relationship” with Mr. Weinstein that alternated between consensual and nonconsensual sex, said he was a “pseudo-father” who could “lift you up,” but also a man who constantly negotiated for sex and demanded obedience, making the aspiring actress fear physical or professional harm. “Maybe I can just grin and bear it,” Ms. Hast said of Ms. Mann’s frame of mind.
“You don’t tell him you love him in 2016 and you are tired of being a booty call in 2017 and call him a predator in 2020,” said Damon Cheronis, a lawyer for Mr. Weinstein, referring to messages that Ms. Mann sent to the producer after her alleged 2013 rape.
Mr. Weinstein, 67, is the real victim, his lawyers say, insisting that his accusers used him to try to advance their careers. The lawyers have been especially aggressive in their cross-examination of Ms. Mann, who broke down in sobs at the witness stand on Monday and, after court was adjourned, could be heard screaming behind a closed door.
The Weinstein trial was expected to be consequential, but the testimony and details that have emerged in the packed courtroom have added layers of controversy. Allegations against the producer, first reported by The New York Times in 2017, helped ignite the #MeToo movement, and he has now been accused by more than 90 women of sexual harassment or sexual misconduct. But his trial hinges on the complex stories of Ms. Haley and Ms. Mann, and how the jury interprets their tales of acquiescence and violation. As the twelve jurors begin to debate, starting in the next week or so, they will be in largely uncharted legal territory, making a decision that could inform future sex crimes prosecutions.
Victim advocates and researchers see a chasm between how these situations play out in real life and how they have been viewed in the criminal justice system.
“It’s not uncommon to see sexual assault happen in the context of ongoing relationships, whether it’s colleagues, dating or friends,” said Katie Edwards, an associate professor at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln who has studied young women who remain in relationships with men who sexually assault them.
Some victims are reluctant to believe that someone they trusted could violate them, advocates and researchers say. Others seek ways to regain power and control. If they are both part of the same peer group, the victim can be reluctant to do anything that could turn the group against her. With domestic violence, it can be especially difficult to leave.
But even as rape law has evolved over the years — defense lawyers, for example, are largely restricted from using victims’ sexual behavior with others to try to discredit them — many prosecutors believe that friendly contact after an alleged attack, especially sex, will prevent charges from sticking.
In 2006 and 2007, Philadelphia juries acquitted Jeffrey Marsalis, accused of drugging and raping 10 women, after hearing that many had contact with him afterward and a few even dated him (he was convicted of two less serious sexual assault charges). It was only when he was tried a third time in 2009 — for drugging and assaulting an Idaho woman who went straight to the police — that he was convicted of rape.
A decade later, the 2016 sexual assault trial in Toronto of Jian Ghomeshi, a Canadian radio host, ended in acquittal, in part because some accusers were not forthcoming about the degree of contact — including sexual relations, in one case — they had with him afterward.
As Ms. Haley and Ms. Mann have tried to explain their decisions, the defense has pushed back at every turn.
But Mr. Cheronis cast the sex in the hotel as something Ms. Haley liked, pointing out that over the next three days she drew hearts in her calendar.
“It may have been,” Ms. Haley said.
Ms. Mann, 34, who grew up in a trailer in rural Washington State and described herself as a victim of a previous sexual assault, has said there were many layers to her relationship with Mr. Weinstein, claiming that he manipulated her into sex by exerting control over her career and insinuating he could hurt her father.
But Donna Rotunno, Mr. Weinstein’s lead defense lawyer, has sought to flip the allegations, claiming it was Ms. Mann who was manipulating Mr. Weinstein by engaging in sex with him, pretending to like him and sending him affectionate emails for years.
 Ms. Rotunno later asked.
“After a long negotiation at times, then yes, I would put on the face and do what I said earlier, which is like role playing,” Ms. Mann said.
To bolster its case, the prosecution called on Dr. Barbara Ziv, a forensic psychiatrist who has evaluated thousands of sexual assault victims and perpetrators, to explain to the jury that some victims pretend the assault never happened and continue to have a relationship with their attacker.
Prosecutors also called on four other women with allegations of sexual assault against Mr. Weinstein, ones that could never result in charges because they took place too long ago or outside New York. These victim witnesses described a pattern that was similar to that told by Ms. Haley and Ms. Mann.
But because the four other women say they never had consensual sex with Mr. Weinstein, their testimony could cut both ways, either supporting prosecutors’ arguments that Mr. Weinstein is a rapist, or serving as a contrast to Ms. Haley and Ms. Mann, possibly undermining their credibility in the eyes of the jury.
Mr. Weinstein has issued sweeping denials of all allegations of nonconsensual sex. His lawyers are not putting him on the stand, so he will not face the type of cross-examinations the women have undergone.
But in the past, Mr. Weinstein has privately apologized for his behavior, according to former employees, witnesses and previously undisclosed records.
In 1990, after a young assistant at Miramax accused him of sexual assault, Mr. Weinstein acknowledged to John Schmidt, the company’s chief financial officer, that he had done “something terrible,” saying, “I don’t know what got into me. It won’t happen again,” Mr. Schmidt said. Mr. Weinstein has denied the exchange.
In 1998, the producer flew to London to pay settlements to two former Miramax assistants, Rowena Chiu and Zelda Perkins, to quiet allegations that he had assaulted Ms. Chiu. Mr. Weinstein agreed to therapy, a new company harassment policy and penalties for subsequent settlements for sexual misconduct.
“It’s good it happened because I’m happy to be aware of what I did,” he added, according to the newly revealed notes.
Mr. Weinstein, through his legal team, denied ever speaking those words, but Ms. Chiu and Ms. Perkins said they remembered the moment clearly.
“Harvey said 22 years ago he did not know when things were consensual,” Ms. Perkins said.
At the 1998 meeting, Mr. Weinstein’s team insisted on collecting the notes. So at Ms. Perkins’s request, her lawyer secretly phoned her secretary, read her Mr. Weinstein’s statement and asked her to make a record of it. Over the years, Ms. Chiu and Ms. Perkins feared it was lost, but recently, British regulators investigating the matter obtained the record from Simons Muirhead & Burton, the firm that represented the women.
If Mr. Weinstein is acquitted in New York, he will still face charges in Los Angeles, where prosecutors have accused him of raping one woman in February 2013, and assaulting another the next night.
The woman accusing him of rape, an Italian model whose name has not been disclosed, had no relationship with Mr. Weinstein before or after, according to her lawyer, Dave Ring.
