LONDON — Last season, a hot new trend emerged during fashion month. Gabriela Hearst, Burberry and then Gucci all staged “carbon neutral” runway shows.
Carbon, or how to offset it, was all the rage.
To some bemused observers, it was a strange time for fashion to begin touting its carbon-neutral credentials. To merely attend the ready-to-wear collections, tens of thousands of professionals fly to four separate countries in a single month. Simple math dictates that the entire exercise is a veritable bonanza of carbon emissions.
Now, just in time for another season of shows, comes a report that attempts to measure the carbon impact of a slice of the fashion world for what its authors say is the very first time.
Zero to Market, jointly released by Ordre.com, a fashion technology company, and the Carbon Trust, a climate change consultancy, has quantified the travel and transport carbon cost of what is known as “the wholesale buying process” of fashion season.
Translated, that refers to the buyers for boutiques and department stores who fly around the world to select items from catwalk shows and showrooms, as well as the designers and brands who move their collections from studios to display shelves to sell the shops their wares.
The report’s authors used representative data from 2,697 retailers, including Net-a-Porter, Selfridges and Galeries Lafayette, and 5,096 designer brands, including major names like Marc Jacobs and Michael Kors but also smaller labels, to estimate the carbon cost for the industry as a whole over a 12-month period.
Starting with the spring 2018 season, the authors measured the travel required to attend the four major fashion weeks during four women’s wear and two men's wear seasons (about four months of the year), as well as attendance and participation at a number of major trade shows in such cities as Copenhagen, Tokyo and Seoul (another two months).
According to the report, the travel undertaken by buyers and brands resulted in about 241,000 tons of CO2 emissions a year. That figure, said the report, is equivalent to the annual emissions of a small country — say, Saint Kitts and Nevis — or enough energy to light up Times Square for 58 years.
International air travel is the primary culprit, followed by accommodation (lights, water and electricity in hotels), then cabs and black cars, and then the emissions associated with transporting the fashion collections.
“Obviously fashion weeks are the tip of the industry pyramid and contribute far less to the climate crisis than areas like manufacturing, logistics and clothing waste,” said Simon Lock, the founder of Ordre.com, a platform that showcases collections online in an effort to reduce fashion travel.
Finding answers is especially important because, according to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the fashion industry is responsible for about 10 percent of global greenhouse gas emissions. If that figure continues to grow at current rates, fashion could use more than a quarter of the world’s annual carbon budget by 2050.
According to the Zero to Market report, the average professional carbon footprint of a fashion buyer is twice that of an average global citizen. A retailer will fly an average of 19,214 kilometers (nearly 12,000 miles) every year in order to attend showrooms at fashion weeks, the report found.
Travel to and during New York Fashion Week produced the biggest carbon numbers of the four fashion capitals, thanks to the long-haul travel required. It accounted for 37 percent of total annual emissions, with 40,000 buyers and designers visiting New York annually.
The Zero to Market co-author Ordre.com also included suggestions on how to help fix the problem. Some solutions are already being tried — combining men’s and women’s wear in the same show, for example, or combining pre-fall and fall collections.
Others, like creating a fashion “district” in each city to limit traffic congestion and travel, are more conceptual. Still others sound good but may be hard to implement: forgoing flying business class, which has a higher carbon footprint per passenger than coach, and traveling by trains instead of planes where possible.
Overall, the response from the organizations that run the major fashion weeks was cautiously positive, if not entirely enthusiastic.
“As industry bodies, we can facilitate and encourage conversations between brands on the schedule, but we can’t demand guests or brands change in a particular way, nor is it our responsibility,” said Steven Kolb, the chief executive of the Council of Fashion Designers of America, adding that a new resource hub on the CFDA website would have a vertical on producing responsible events.
Pascal Morand, the executive president of the Fédération de la Haute Couture et de la Mode, noted that the numbers of designer and retailers included in the report was far higher than those listed on the official Paris Fashion Week schedules. He also cautioned that no solution, however well intended, was without consequences.
