The Vermont senator tightened his grip on the Democratic Party’s liberal wing, benefiting from a field that has divided moderate voters.
New Hampshire was the first clean test for the Democratic candidates. Here’s an analysis of the results, and what they mean for the race.
So we finally have actual election results from the state of New Hampshire. They are clear, and they are authoritative and they are a little bit complicated. “Hello, America.” “We are here to stay.” “Our campaign is built for the long haul.” “We’re going to Nevada. We’re going to South Carolina. We’re going to win those states as well.” Bernie Sanders has won the state by a little bit. Two other candidates who had quite a strong night — Pete Buttigieg and Amy Klobuchar. Not such a good night for Joe Biden or for Elizabeth Warren or for anybody else. “New Hampshire.” “New Hampshire.” “New Hampshire.” “We’re here together.” “New Hampshire.” “You all up here in New Hampshire.” After the debacle in Iowa, national attention has focused even more intensely on New Hampshire as the first real clean test of political momentum in this race. “People are still undecided.” “Uh, Bernie.” “Bernie Sanders, all the way.” “Mayor Pete.” “Amy Klobuchar.” “Oh, Joe Biden.” “I’ll just probably decide Tuesday, five minutes before I go in to vote.” New Hampshire is a classic swing state. “Ronald Reagan is the winner in the state of New Hampshire.” “Bill Clinton won it.” “It’s neck and neck.” “New Hampshire goes to Obama.” In 2016, Hillary Clinton prevailed over Donald Trump, but by a tiny margin. It’s a state that’s very much in play for 2020. “Four more, Trump. Four more years!” New Hampshire might gauge whether a candidate is able to appeal to certain other constituencies they will need in the general election. We have seen over the last week a real rivalry emerge between Bernie Sanders and Pete Buttigieg. “Hot, fresh and vegan. Get your Bernie-on-a-stick.” New Hampshire is really home turf for Bernie Sanders. He comes from right next door in Vermont. And he also drew strong support, as he did in 2016, from younger voters and more liberal voters. “Young voters want Bernie because he’s fighting for their future. He’s not fighting for his future. He’s in his future.” [cheering] Bernie Sanders came into New Hampshire claiming momentum out of Iowa, based on his lead in the popular vote. “Finally, the votes were counted in Iowa. Took them a little while. We won the vote by 6,000 votes.” He has been somewhat more aggressive with his primary opponents here … “We don’t have a Super PAC.” … talking about the difference between himself … “We don’t want billionaires’ money.” … and candidates in the race, like Pete Buttigieg, who take money from billionaires and other big donors. “We are running a campaign for working people, funded by working people. And that is why we are going to win here in New Hampshire and all over this country.” [cheering] The biggest thing this might mean for Bernie Sanders is that he has clearly reasserted himself as the dominant leader on the left wing of the Democratic Party. And then there’s Pete Buttigieg. “Back in the Obama campaign, we called it ‘no drama Obama,’ and I haven’t come up with the right rhyme for Buttigieg.” [cheering] Pete Buttigieg has claimed, among the moderate candidates, a sense of momentum in New Hampshire that other folks were not able to take. “We can’t risk dividing Americans further. The idea that you’ve either got to be for a revolution or you got to be for the status quo leaves most of us out.” His message here has been pretty similar to his message in Iowa, but really focused on the idea that he’s the candidate who can win crossover support in the general election. “We need a politics that brings all of us in because all of us need a new and better president.” After finishing at the top in both Iowa and New Hampshire, Buttigieg now has a tremendous opportunity to put himself forward at the national level as the leader of moderate Democrats. Announcer: “Senator Amy Klobuchar!” The word that Amy Klobuchar supporters are using to describe what happened here is ‘Klomentum.’ She came to New Hampshire after a fifth-place finish in Iowa without a whole lot of wind in her sails. “It’s been funny suddenly seeing media come to all of our events.” [laughter] Things just turned around for her dramatically. If Klobuchar had not finished so strong in New Hampshire, it might have been the end of her campaign. “If you are tired of the extremes in our politics, and you are tired of the noise and the nonsense, you have a home with me.” She gets the chance to fight onward to Nevada and South Carolina and Super Tuesday. I would not make any plans that are based on knowing a Democratic nominee anytime soon. Well, I am going to Las Vegas next, so I probably would have a chance to do that.
MANCHESTER, N.H. — Senator Bernie Sanders narrowly won the New Hampshire primary on Tuesday, consolidating support on the left and fending off a late charge by two moderate rivals to claim his second strong showing in two weeks and establish himself as a formidable contender for the Democratic nomination.
Mr. Sanders had about 26 percent of the vote with 90 percent of the ballots counted, while former Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind., was a close second. Mr. Buttigieg split the centrist vote with Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota, who surged in New Hampshire to finish in third.
Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, Mr. Sanders’s progressive rival, finished a distant fourth in her neighboring state, and in a stinging blow to his candidacy, former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. finished fifth.
The results raised immediate questions about how much longer Mr. Biden and Ms. Warren, onetime front-runners, could afford to continue their campaigns. Both had already cut back their advertising because of financial strain.
Mr. Sanders’s victory leveraged his own reliable strengths as a liberal champion against a moment of turmoil in the party’s more moderate wing: With Mr. Biden tumbling and Mr. Buttigieg and Ms. Klobuchar striving to take his place, Mr. Sanders’s grip on progressives carried him to the top of the field in both Iowa and New Hampshire.
But in both states he captured less than 30 percent of the vote, and his vote share was the lowest total ever for a winner in the primary here. Coupled with the abrupt rise of Mr. Buttigieg and Ms. Klobuchar, his modest success only underscored the churning uncertainty of the race and raised the prospect of a drawn-out nominating process that could last through the spring.
The rise of Mr. Sanders, a democratic socialist from Vermont who remains a political independent, has distressed many centrists and traditional liberals at a time when Democratic voters are united by a ravenous desire to defeat President Trump.
Mr. Trump’s impeachment acquittal, the chaotic vote-counting in Iowa and the fractured Democratic field have many in the party worried that they are endangering their opportunity to win back the White House.
Yet for Mr. Sanders, 78, winning here and cementing his status as a front-runner represented a moment of redemption just four months after he had a heart attack that threatened his candidacy, and four years after he lost the Democratic nomination after a long and often bitter primary race.
While he has not demonstrated a capacity to appeal much beyond his left-wing base, Mr. Sanders is benefiting from something he lacked in 2016: a field of opponents who are dividing moderate voters. The centrist candidates, so far, have been unable to consolidate support.
Mr. Buttigieg and Ms. Klobuchar asserted themselves on Tuesday, and their rivalry may only intensify; Mr. Biden is fading but staying in the race; and the self-funding Michael R. Bloomberg, the former mayor of New York City, is gaining strength in advance of the Super Tuesday contests next month.
The field may thin out by then. The culling began Tuesday night when Senator Michael Bennet of Colorado and the entrepreneur Andrew Yang dropped out after poor showings.
How will Bernie Sanders’s win change the race for the Democratic nomination?
OK, so we are walking.
We are walking into the Stan Spirou Field House in Manchester, a.k.a., the Bernie Sanders primary night rally spot. And there are a lot of people lined up outside, despite the fact that it is very cold and snowy on the ground. So we’re expecting a very large crowd.
The crowd is counting down.
This crowd is loving these numbers. Bernie Sanders absolutely in the lead.
(CHANTING) Bernie, Bernie, Bernie, Bernie, Bernie, Bernie!
(CHANTING) Bernie, Bernie, Bernie, Bernie, Bernie, Bernie, Bernie, Bernie, Bernie.
Bernie is taking the stage right now.
He seems very triumphant.
Thank you, New Hampshire!
Thank you, New Hampshire.
From The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.” Today: Bernie Sanders wins the New Hampshire primary, with Pete Buttigieg and Amy Klobuchar following close behind him in second and third place, and Elizabeth Warren and Joe Biden coming in a distant fourth and fifth place. Alex Burns on what that means for the rest of the race. It’s Wednesday, February 12.
OK, Alex, I’m pleased to be sitting with you, albeit at 12:15 a.m., because we actually have election results to discuss this time.
It’s sort of a novel experience, right, for the 2020 campaign? They just count the votes, and the person who got the most votes is the guy who won.
— as the election.
So I want to start at the top of the results.
To thank the people of New Hampshire for a great victory tonight.
On the one hand, that’s the expected result and it has been for months, right? And New Hampshire went for Sanders overwhelmingly in 2016 over Hillary Clinton. So how should we be thinking about the significance of this result tonight?
Look, there’s no question that this is an important milestone for the Bernie Sanders campaign.
Let me say tonight that this victory here is the beginning of the end for Donald Trump.
It re-establishes him clearly as the leader of the left wing of the Democratic Party, which was not sure to be the case at this point in the race. But you saw Elizabeth Warren really recede as a competitor and Bernie Sanders consolidate his support in a way that positions him pretty well for the next couple rounds of this thing. At the same time, you saw him come out on top with about 26 percent of the vote.
Four years ago, he won 60 percent of the vote here. Now, there are many, many more candidates running this time, so it’s not an apples-to-apples comparison. But I do think that when you look at the results in both Iowa and New Hampshire, you see a majority of the Democratic electorate leaning towards those more moderate candidates and Bernie Sanders prevailing mainly because there are more moderates than there are progressives.
Right, because one way of thinking about what happened tonight is that Bernie Sanders got around a quarter of the vote, 25 percent, and he won. But another way of thinking about it is that if you add up all the more moderate candidates’ vote tonight, they collectively got something like 70 percent of the vote.
Right. Now, of course for Bernie Sanders’s purposes, winning is winning, right?
But, what that tells you is that as this race advances, if you end up with fewer and fewer moderate candidates, it could become harder and harder for Bernie Sanders to keep winning states.
Right, because those votes would likely coalesce around one moderate.
One or maybe two moderates, compared to the three, four, five moderate options we have had in the race up to this point. Sanders is going to need at some point to broaden his coalition within the Democratic Party. And delegate math is a boring and arcane subject.
Well, I think that between friends, we can say that it’s an arcane subject. But the way the Democrats hand out delegates, which are ultimately the point system that determine who gets to be the nominee, is really proportional to the share of the vote you get. So it’s not like winning by 1 percentage point or 1.5 percentage point over Pete Buttigieg means you get all the delegates and he gets zero.
Mm-hm. In other words, these kind of victories — 26 percent of the vote — means functionally you get something like 26 percent of the delegates. It doesn’t mean you’re collecting just a giant boatload in a state like New Hampshire or Iowa, for that matter.
— and fundraising, for just winning. But in terms of winning delegates to claim the nomination, a larger share of the vote matters almost as much as just actually winning.
Well, so when it comes to that question — to momentum — what does this mean for Sanders?
There is now an 11-day sprint for the candidates until the next contest in Nevada. And what Bernie Sanders now has is an opportunity to try to broaden his support. And to try to go out and get some of those progressives who had been voting for Elizabeth Warren, or some more working-class voters who had been voting for Joe Biden and pull them into his camp, and make himself more formidable as not just a really strong candidate, but as a front-runner. To take control of this race and to do it before one of those moderate alternatives catches up with him.
Right. Time here is of the essence for Sanders.
(CHANTING) All the way. Granite State, what do you say? Mayor Pete all the way. Granite State, what do you say? Mayor Pete all the way.
And I don’t think you can beat what Pete’s talking about. He may not win tonight, but number two, that keeps him going. And that’s all we’re looking for.
— who came in second tonight, just behind Sanders.
Buttigieg came into this state with a whole lot of momentum coming out of Iowa. And just looking at his events, at his crowds over the last week in New Hampshire, you could see a lot of support moving away from Joe Biden and into the Mayor Pete camp. And, but for a couple moments in that debate last Friday, he might have won this state outright.
In this election season, we have been told by some that you must either be for a revolution or you are for the status quo. But where does that leave the rest of us? Most Americans don’t see where they fit in that polarized vision. And we can’t defeat the most divisive president in modern American history by tearing down anybody who doesn’t agree with us 100 percent of the time.
You really saw him take a beating on the debate stage for the first time from every direction.
Senator Warren, is that a substantial answer from Mayor Buttigieg?
Literally every other candidate on stage went after Mayor Pete.
Mayor Buttigieg is a great guy and a real patriot. He’s a mayor of a small city who has done some good things, but has not demonstrated he has the ability to — and we’ll soon find out — to get a broad scope of support across the spectrum, including African-Americans and Latinos.
And the one who probably went after him to the greatest effect was Amy Klobuchar.
We have a newcomer in the White House, and look where it got us. I think having some experience is a good thing.
Another moderate from the Midwest, who went out there and made a very, very blunt case that he’s just not qualified to be president.
It is much harder to lead and much harder to take those difficult positions. Because I think this going after every single thing that people do, because it’s popular to say and makes you look like a cool newcomer — I just, I don’t think that’s what people want right now.
And you think that was effective, or it just did enough to hurt him here?
Well, when you look at how Amy Klobuchar finished in New Hampshire — I don’t want to jump the gun here — but she did pick up an enormous amount of momentum at the end. I think you do have to consider the strong possibility that a bunch of moderate voters who ended up with her after that debate would otherwise have been with Pete.
So it may have been Klobuchar and her gain here that cost Buttigieg a victory here.
I think that’s pretty likely.
I also think that she has really benefited from the decline of Elizabeth Warren. That there are a lot of voters out there who feel very strongly that they’d like to see a woman elected president, and particularly they’d like to see a woman go up against Donald Trump. And that was a big dynamic fueling Elizabeth Warren’s rise, and I don’t think that that demand has gone away. And part of what you saw here in New Hampshire was a lot of more moderate and older women — who may have been drawn to Warren but were concerned about whether or not she could win the general election — suddenly see this other alternative pop up, who is a woman, and a moderate, and from the Midwest, and has a much blunter electability argument in her arsenal.
And what exactly is that argument?
The argument is that she has won three statewide elections in Minnesota, which is on the verge of being a swing state.
I’m the only one up on this stage, you can check it out, that has consistently won in red congressional districts. Not once, not twice but three times.
And she likes to tick off — and she’s very, very happy to do it — the list of the numbers of counties that voted for Donald Trump in 2016 that she then carried when she ran for re-election in 2018. It’s a little bit of an oversimplified case, because she had a pretty weak opponent in 2018. It’s not like it was this battle of the titans thing that she somehow miraculously survived. But for voters, I think especially outside the Midwest, this notion that you’re from the part of the country that Democrats lost last time is really appealing. I think it’s also appealing to people when they hear Pete Buttigieg talking about his identity as a Midwesterner.
You’re saying it should not be seen as a coincidence that two of the top three candidates here are Midwestern moderate Democrats.
No, absolutely not.
So the results are still coming in from across the state, but right now it is clear that Senator Sanders and Mayor Buttigieg had strong nights.
OK. Fourth up, Elizabeth Warren.
And I also want to congratulate my friend and colleague Amy Klobuchar for showing just how wrong the pundits can be when they count a woman out.
You said that Klobuchar benefited from her decline, but help us understand Warren’s decline. She got 9 percent of the vote tonight, which was really pretty underwhelming.
So I think part of why Elizabeth Warren became such a strong candidate for a long period of time in this race was that she managed to get out from under Bernie Sanders’s shadow. Because she got out there and defined herself so clearly in the eyes of Democrat voters as a daring leader, her own person, someone with big thoughts and big plans, she managed to appeal to a set of voters who weren’t accessible to Bernie Sanders in 2016, may not be accessible to him today, liberal women who voted for Hillary Clinton, and other people who are pretty progressive but not far left enough to feel comfortable going the full Bernie Sanders.
So yes, I’m with Bernie on Medicare for All. And let me tell you why. I spent a big chunk of my life studying why families go broke. And one of the number one reasons is the cost of health care, medical bills.
And her decision was to align herself far more closely with Bernie Sanders.
That leaves families with rising premiums, rising co-pays, and fighting with insurance companies to try to get the health care that their doctors say that they and their children need. Medicare for All solves that problem.
That made it much tougher for her to continue being this unifying figure within the party. I do think Elizabeth Warren is still, for a lot of Democrat voters, a compelling enough personality and thinker and communicator that she may be tougher to push out of this race than someone like, say, Bernie Sanders would like her to be. But it’s really hard sitting here tonight to draw the path back to front-runner status for her.
Mm-hm. Alex, what do you take away from what we’ve seen with Warren? What lesson is there when it comes to understanding the Democratic electorate in this race?
I think you see a really low tolerance for anything that they perceive as risk. I think you see the Democratic voters are in a really unforgiving mood when it comes to candidates who they see as making a mistake of any kind, because they want a nominee who’s a sure thing for the general election. I think you have consistently seen and heard from voters anxiety about the implications of nominating a woman, even as there is still a lot of excitement about that idea. And I think you’ve seen the difficulty that candidates have had really up until the last week or so at carving out a durable space for themselves in a race where you have had, on the one hand, Bernie Sanders as this really tenacious leader on the left, and Joe Biden as, until recently, a pretty dominant figure on the political center.
When you say low tolerance for risk, I guess I’m not understanding that. What makes them a risk?
Well, in the eyes of voters, the notion that somebody could make a big misstep in a debate is anathema to Democrats at this point. The idea that somebody could fumble a big policy question when the hot lights are on, I think, is a hard thing for Democratic voters to process. And I think that you do see pretty conventional assessments of people’s electability kick in as we get closer to primaries. So coming from Massachusetts, not as appealing to somebody who’s thinking about electability as coming from Minnesota.
Somebody who maybe fits demographically a voter’s idea of what a president looks like may be an easier sell than somebody who would be a historic candidate.
Well, I wonder if this low tolerance for risk, if that’s also a way of understanding what happened to Joe Biden.
This is Tom Kaplan, and I’m at Joe Biden’s election night party in Nashua. This is a pretty strange party in that Joe Biden isn’t going to be here. He already left the state to go to South Carolina. He’s supposed to address the party via livestream. It’s fair to say the room here, it’s not exactly buzzing with excitement. There’s probably not going to be much to celebrate tonight if you’re a Biden supporter.
We are in a battle for the soul of the nation. Now Jill and I are moving on to Nevada, and South Carolina and beyond, beyond. And we want you all to know how much we appreciate everything you’ve done. Look, we’re going to be back. We’re going to be back in New Hampshire. We’re going to be back there to defeat Donald Trump in November. Elect Jeanne the next senator again. And up and down the ticket. So don’t go away. You’re not getting rid of us. We’re coming back, and we love you. We’re going on and we’re going to win in Nevada and in South Carolina. Thank you.
And I almost can’t believe we’re talking about the electability candidate, the guy whose ads declared him to be the one person who could beat Donald Trump, coming in fifth place here.
It’s really staggering and such an abrupt decline for Biden in this race. I think for months you heard this from voters over and over again. They were willing to give Joe Biden a pass on a lot of stuff that they would not have tolerated from other candidates, because they did perceive him as the electability candidate. That if all they cared about was beating Donald Trump, then the fact that he wasn’t so impressive in debates and his message wasn’t so clear didn’t really matter all that much to them. Except to the voters who saw him the most up close, the people in Iowa and New Hampshire. And when you saw him come in fourth in Iowa, it set off just a devastating chain reaction in New Hampshire. That this was a guy who voters had already been suppressing a lot of anxieties about — because they thought he could win — suddenly losing and losing pretty badly in the first state. And what has happened here, just over the last eight days, is just a rushing of the air out of the balloon. His support has just scattered to other candidates, probably mostly Pete Buttigieg and Amy Klobuchar.
This is the long race. I took a hit in Iowa, and I’ll probably take a hit here. Traditionally, Bernie won by 20 points last time, and usually it’s the neighboring senators that do well.
— that these first two states do not represent his greatest strength and his possibility — that that’s accurate?
Absolutely. I don’t think we can sit here right now and say Joe Biden is totally finished. I think we can say that he’s entering by far the most difficult stretch of his campaign.
There are already signs that Biden’s support among black voters may be more vulnerable than he hopes that it will be. But we’re going to find out soon enough that he staked his claim pretty clearly on the idea that now the rest of the country — states that look like the country as a whole, Nevada and South Carolina — are going to have their say. And because he has put so much moral weight on those states, it would be very, very difficult, probably impossible, for him to shrug off another loss.
OK, so you have brought us at long last to Mike Bloomberg. Help us understand how he fits into all this, particularly in light of what happened to Joe Biden today.
Well, when Bloomberg got into the race in November, what his advisers said was that he wasn’t convinced that Joe Biden could make it out of the early states. And that he wanted to essentially be waiting in March if Biden took a dive before then, and you ended up either with Bernie Sanders emerging from February as a front-runner, or just a jumbled split decision among the other candidates running.
How do you like that prediction?
Well, I think Mike Bloomberg likes that prediction quite a bit right now. That if the idea for Bloomberg was Biden had to fall for him to rise, at least half of that has happened now.
And so, help me understand what their vision of this race is. He’s not been on the ballot these first two states. Joe Biden is, as their prediction required, stumbling. So what needs to happen for the Bloomberg candidacy to take off?
Mike Bloomberg started as a middle-class kid who had to work his way through college, then built a business from a single room to a global entity, creating tens of thousands of good paying jobs along the way.
— check out his campaign appearances, that they will start to see him as the safe option in the race.
The electable guy.
Because there’s an America waiting to be rebuilt, where everyone without health insurance is guaranteed to get it, and everyone who likes theirs can go ahead and keep it.
And there is some sign that that’s already happening. There’s at least some polling to suggest that a good number of moderate voters and a good number of black voters are shifting, at least somewhat, in Bloomberg’s direction.
This is Matt Stevens. I’m here at Andrew Yang’s campaign party on primary night here in New Hampshire.
So finally we’d be remiss if we didn’t mention the two candidates who dropped out tonight.
Mr. Yang is going to announce that he’s dropping out of the race for president when he comes and gives his speech here sometime shortly after 8:00.
Hello, New Hampshire, how are you?
Well, we lost Andrew Yang and we lost Michael Bennet, the senator from Colorado.
Though thousands of voters came out for our campaign tonight, tonight is not the outcome we fought so hard to achieve. And while there is great work left to be done, you know I am the math guy, and it is clear tonight from the numbers that we are not going to win this race.
I am not someone who wants to accept donations and support in a race that we will not win. And so tonight, I am announcing I am suspending my campaign for president.
(CHANTING) Andrew Yang, Andrew Yang, Andrew Yang!
Hi, my name is Gene Bishop. I live in Ashland, New Hampshire. I’m 81 years old.  And I never, ever, before Andrew came along, I never contributed to a candidate. I never worked for a candidate. But I saw him in March of 2018, 2019. And the first time I saw him, I knew he was something special. Very, very different. And I had to do what I could to help him be successful. So I just can’t believe that it’s over.
Yeah, very upset. Probably just as — I’m being very selfish, because he’s probably very upset, too. It’s something that probably he never want wanted to do, but it just hurts.
You think you’d ever get this connected to a candidate, where you’d feel this strongly when he drops out?
Never, no never. 
I do think that when you look at the Andrew Yang experience, he is somebody who comes out of this race as a political player in a way that he was not at all two years ago. That he has a following. And when you talk to Democratic voters, even voters who like most people supported other candidates, there is an interest in him. And almost a certain affection for him, that he was often the most lighthearted character in a debate. And people liked the way he talked about the economy. And the question is, if he does want to stay in politics, what does he do with that?
Right, he seems to have “cabinet member” written all over him. If he wants it.
If he wants it.
What do we think happens to the Yang Gang? Where do they go?
We don’t really know. Because he’s one of these candidates, and it’s a genre of candidate that crops up from time to time, who seems to draw on a constituency that isn’t really partisan, It isn’t ideological, in the sense that we think of it. They’re drawn to a candidate’s personality and world view and just the way they talk about things.
I think of Ross Perot.
Yeah, I think that’s a pretty good comparison in a lot of ways. And do they go to another candidate? If it’s anybody, it might be Bernie Sanders, because he does have this following of younger, disaffected liberal men that overlaps, at least somewhat, with the people supporting a Yang. But a lot of them also may just sit out the rest of the primaries, because they may have been drawn uniquely to Andrew Yang.
Mm-hm. So it’s now a little after 1:00 a.m. on Wednesday morning. We had this absolute mess of a situation in Iowa. We have a quite real result in New Hampshire. What is Alex Burns thinking, beyond all the many thoughts that you have already shared with us?
We are still in a really, really muddled race. I think last week we talked about how five candidates in Iowa cracked double digits, and nobody got more than about a quarter of the vote. Well, this time three candidates cracked double digits, and their vote shares were a little bit higher. But you still don’t have anybody here running away with the New Hampshire primary the way we saw both Bernie Sanders and Donald Trump do in 2016. So there are still a bunch of people in this race who have a great chance to make their case, a couple of people who have a less great chance to make their case, and then Michael Bloomberg sitting out on the horizon. And I think the next three weeks are going to be some of the most unpredictable and fluid that certainly I’ve seen in presidential politics.
Here’s what else you need to know today. Four federal prosecutors have withdrawn from the case of Roger Stone, a longtime friend and adviser of President Trump, after senior officials at the Justice Department recommended a more lenient prison sentence for Stone. Stone was convicted last fall of trying to obstruct a congressional investigation into Russian meddling in the 2016 election, a conviction for which prosecutors had originally sought a seven- to nine-year sentence. But in a surprise filing on Tuesday afternoon, the Department of Justice called that recommendation excessive, prompting the prosecutors to leave the case in protest.
As he did in Iowa, Mr. Buttigieg, 38, gave a triumphant speech Tuesday that cast himself as a victor, though Mr. Sanders was still ahead by about 4,000 votes when Mr. Buttigieg took the stage.
He used the moment to claim vindication from the most persistent attack leveled against him over the past week, chiefly by Mr. Biden and Ms. Klobuchar: that he lacked the résumé to be president.
Mr. Buttigieg was the leader among moderate and conservative voters on Tuesday and, without naming Mr. Sanders, he urged voters to reject a political approach that demanded revolution or nothing.
Helping Mr. Sanders just as much as the fragmentation of the moderate vote is the decline of Ms. Warren, whose setback in New Hampshire may allow Mr. Sanders to further coalesce the party’s left-wing voters.
Taking the stage before even half the votes were counted, but with her dismal finish apparent, Ms. Warren sought to cast herself as a candidate who could unify the party’s factions and warned against a “long bitter rehash” of the center-vs.-left tensions that plagued Democrats in 2016.
The night was even more damaging to Mr. Biden, who was already reeling from his fourth-place finish in Iowa. Anticipating a poor showing, Mr. Biden left New Hampshire on Tuesday and headed to South Carolina, a state he hopes can salvage his candidacy.
Trying to change the subject as Ms. Warren did, Mr. Biden appeared at a rally in Columbia, S.C., replete with a gospel choir, and sought to contrast the heavily white electorates in Iowa and New Hampshire with those of the more diverse Nevada and South Carolina, the next states to vote.
“We haven’t heard from the most committed constituency of the Democratic Party, the African-American community, and the fastest-growing segment of society, the Latino community,” he said.
But there are signs that some black voters are exploring other options, most of all Mr. Bloomberg and Tom Steyer, another self-funding billionaire who has focused much of his effort on South Carolina.
Mr. Sanders got a lift in New Hampshire from an electorate that, like Iowa’s, is fractured along ideological and generational lines. He was the overwhelming favorite of younger and more progressive Democrats, while his rivals divided older and more moderate voters.
Mr. Buttigieg and Ms. Klobuchar still roared into contention here thanks to a late migration of voters who said they had just made up their minds.
Mr. Buttigieg benefited from his virtual tie with Mr. Sanders in Iowa last week and steadily gained support as Mr. Biden declined in the week leading up to the primary here.
Ms. Klobuchar’s surge was even more sudden. After a lackluster finish in Iowa, the third-term Minnesota senator harnessed a standout debate performance on Friday to gain momentum and emerge as the unexpected story of New Hampshire, a state famous for springing electoral surprises.
As the race moves forward, Mr. Sanders has another factor weighing heavily in his favor: money. Besides Mr. Steyer, Mr. Sanders is the only candidate who has raised enough cash to finance a robust advertising and get-out-the-vote effort in Nevada and South Carolina, which vote this month, as well as in the 15 states and territories that all vote on March 3.
His campaign raised $25 million in January, and even before polls closed on Tuesday said it had already received 600,000 contributions in the first nine days of February.
As promising as this moment may appear, Mr. Sanders still faces daunting obstacles. Most notably, he has not yet demonstrated an ability to build a broader coalition beyond his loyal faction of progressives.
His 26 percent of the vote in New Hampshire was less than half of what he drew here in 2016, and he received only slightly more than a quarter of the vote in Iowa. Even if his center-left opponents continue to split voters, they may still deny him the delegate majority he needs to claim the nomination because Democrats do not have winner-take-all contests.
Each of Mr. Sanders’s top New Hampshire rivals insisted on Tuesday that they were forging ahead.
But the Nevada caucuses, which take place a week from Saturday, could winnow Mr. Sanders’s opposition.
Mr. Biden had been his most formidable opponent in Nevada, at least according to polls taken before Iowa and New Hampshire. But with 10 days before Nevada votes, Mr. Buttigieg and Ms. Klobuchar may prove stronger than Mr. Biden after their success in New Hampshire.
For both of them, Nevada represents the first test of their abilities to build support from racial minorities, something they did not have to do in the first two states, which have heavily white electorates. Both candidates scrambled to start airing broadcast television ads in Nevada this week.
A more significant challenge for Mr. Sanders may await on Super Tuesday, which takes place just three days after South Carolina’s primary on Feb. 29: Mr. Bloomberg, who did not compete in the first nominating states, has used his wealth to saturate the states voting that day with more than $300 million on advertising and organizing.
Polls show the former New York mayor rising nationally and also in some of the Super Tuesday contests, in part because no one besides him, Mr. Sanders and Mr. Steyer has been able to buy commercials in those states.
The central question for Democrats on the center-left is whether Mr. Biden can regain traction in the race or whether his support is likely to crumble after another poor showing in New Hampshire — and, after falling short again, whether any of the remaining moderates can sweep up the bulk of those votes.
Within the progressive wing of the party, the shape of the race seems clearer. Mr. Sanders is widely seen as having a good chance to win the Nevada caucuses, and the strength and enthusiasm of his national following may give him an upper hand on Super Tuesday over a diffuse field of rivals on the center-left.
Yet there are deep doubts across much of the party about his ability to win the general election. It is unclear whether he will be able to ease those concerns in time to take control of the race during the big-state primaries in March. For him to do that, Mr. Sanders would have to more fully sideline Ms. Warren, who still has a sizable bloc of support on the national level, and do more to chip away at moderate resistance to his candidacy.
Stephanie Saul contributed reporting from Columbia, S.C.