Opinion|Valentine’s Day: A Festival of Love or a Giant Scam?
Valentine’s Day: A Festival of Love or a Giant Scam?
Breaking hearts, brains and bank accounts since at least the 14th century.
Mr. Bokat-Lindell is a writer in The New York Times Opinion section.
This article is part of the Debatable newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it Tuesdays and Thursdays.
Nobody really knows how Valentine’s Day began. Depending on your sources, its origins can be traced back to an ancient Roman fertility festival involving sacrificial goats or to a Chaucer poem about birds. “It is one of those mysterious historical or antiquarian problems which are doomed never to be solved,” The Times wrote in 1853.
It’s perhaps just as well that the holiday’s history remains disputed. Either thousands or hundreds of years later, Americans seem likewise unable to agree on whether Valentine’s Day is a hallowed celebration, a marketing scam that entrenches the hegemony of the nuclear family or just a harmless convention that everyone needs to calm down about. Here’s a bouquet of perspectives to help you figure out your feelings about the tradition, which, unlike most relationships, is not going to end.
But romantic love is not the only kind of love worth honoring, as Briallen Hopper argues in her book of essays, “Hard to Love.” She is one of a growing number of people who now observe “Galentine’s Day,” a holiday on Feb. 13 that Amy Poehler’s character on the TV show “Parks and Recreation” invented to celebrate female friendships.
In Estonia and Finland, Feb. 14 is known as “Friend’s Day,” a celebration of platonic love, as Mélissa Godin reports for Time.
You can also use Valentine’s Day as an occasion to practice self-compassion, as Tara Parker-Pope suggests in The Times.
Do you have a point of view we missed? Email us at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Please note your name, age and location in your response, which may be included in the next newsletter.
Here’s what one reader had to say about the last edition: President Bernie Sanders? Read more of the conversation here.
