Her son is just 1, but she knows soon he will be perceived as a “big black boy.” Can she overcome the “systems” she feels are in place to oppress her young son?
In my old neighborhood, like you can hear the swings when the wind is blowing. I would hear the sirens going past late at night. [sirens] You can literally go down for blocks and see abandoned buildings, vacant lots lined with churches. There would be young men on the back deck. That always made me feel really concerned, like getting in and out of my car. Are they watching when I leave and when I come back? It’s not like the young men I see standing on the bus stop, catching the bus to school or in their football uniforms. I’m like, that’s going to be my young boy, my son.  But I knew that reality was now in full effect. This is it. Now, let’s start getting to work. I read about raising successful black boys. Keep them busy. Know their friends. Feed them well.  I’ve asked a lot of — a lot of — single mothers whom I knew: How do they raise successful black boys? They gave me the same advice: Keep him busy, know his friends, and surround him with good examples. I never like to talk of the things that I’m afraid of for him. I really only like to talk about the things that it is that I want for him. I want him to be free, to be himself, to walk down the street and not be stopped and frisked or to be shot. And I don’t know what I can do to prevent that. I don’t want to teach him these black codes. I feel like I’m up against systems that are in place to be oppressive to black boys, to black people. A lack of opportunity and resources for these young children to be maneuvered into so that then, their worldview and their perspective is broader than the four-block radius of where they grew up. He’s 1 year old right now, so he has, at least maybe, until he’s 8 — 7 — before someone sees him as a big, black boy. I read to him every night. The day I brought him home from the hospital, I was reading to him. His room is full of colors. It engages their mind and vision. And I got the whole thing, quote unquote, “planned out.” I hope when people see my son, they, they see a young man who is about something, who is doing something with his life. I want them to be able to see him and pass him easily. They’re not fearing him, but they feel, you know, safe, and that he’s just another young boy. And that is how I wish that society would look at all of our young boys. I have this one vision, but he’ll be even better than that. I believe that. I hope for that.
Find all our Film Club films here.
Can she overcome the “systems” she feels are in place to oppress her young son?
1. Watch the short film above. While you watch, you might take notes using our Film Club Double-Entry Journal (PDF) to help you remember specific moments.
What moments in this film stood out for you? Why?
Were there any surprises? Anything that challenged what you know — or thought you knew?
What messages, emotions or ideas will you take away from this film? Why?
What connections can you make between this film and your own life or experience? Why? Does this film remind you of anything else you’ve read or seen? If so, how and why?
3. An additional challenge | Respond to the essential question at the top of this post: What challenges do parents face in raising and protecting their black sons in America?
5. After you have posted, try reading back to see what others have said, then respond to someone else by posting another comment. Use the “Reply” button or the @ symbol to address that student directly.
• See all the films in this series.
• Read our list of practical teaching ideas, along with responses from students and teachers, for how you can use these documentaries in the classroom.
• Want to make sure you never miss a film? Add Film Club to your Google calendar to receive weekly reminders and see our full publishing schedule for the 2019-20 school year.