What happens when hundreds of reporters from New York and Washington go to Des Moines? A sponsored Sunday brunch.
DES MOINES — Every spring, the Washington impresario Tammy Haddad hosts a charity brunch before the White House Correspondents’ Dinner that is a required stop for reporters, editors, network news anchors and political operatives.
That crowd is currently in Iowa — drinking, schmoozing, occasionally driving off to see a presidential candidate or two — so Ms. Haddad, a media consultant and TV veteran, decided to bring the fun to them. Hence the Snowflake Garden Brunch, a Georgetown-in-the-cornfields gathering in Des Moines on Sunday that attracted a healthy chunk of the visiting political class.
Attendees were greeted with mimosas and a wall of Krispy Kreme doughnuts. The anchor Greta Van Susteren chatted up Senator Joni Ernst of Iowa. Mayor Pete Buttigieg’s spokeswoman, Lis Smith, gossiped with executives from ABC and NBC. The 15-year-old son of Janice Min, the former Us Weekly and Hollywood Reporter editor, was on-hand reporting for a group called KidUnity.
The sponsors included Wells Fargo, the health insurer Anthem and a Washington-based lobbyist for the wind energy industry.
“I’m living the dream at the Wells Fargo brunch,” one reporter said, eyeing an ice sculpture of a cow.
Hundreds of journalists from Washington and New York have been crisscrossing the state for weeks covering the run-up to Monday’s caucuses, seeking insight into the psyche and soul of the average Iowan and stress-testing the abilities of a jumbo field of Democratic hopefuls.
But as at any industry gathering, shoptalk is hard to avoid. These days, Iowa and its journalist hot spots — namely the glaringly lighted, hideously carpeted lobby bar of the Des Moines Marriott Downtown — can feel like a summer camp, trade convention and I.R.L. Twitter rolled into one.
A story of caucusing and confusion from a middle school gym.
Today: The kickoff to the 2020 campaign was undercut on Monday night by major delays in the reporting of the results from the Iowa caucuses. The story of the day.
It’s Tuesday, February 4.
Here comes Alex.
I’ll just grab a water.
Yeah, yeah. (WHISPERS) That was Alex Burns. Hi.
Happy caucus day.
Is that a thing people say out here?
I don’t know. It’s something we say out here.
Exactly. So let’s just set the scene a little bit. It’s 4 p.m. We’re in Des Moines. In about 2.5 Iowans are going to start heading to these caucus locations around the state. We’re going to do the same. And I want to talk with you about how this is going to work. So can you just give me a quick primer on this very particular tool of American democracy, the caucus?
Well, calling it a tool of democracy is generous in the view of some people. It is not a secret ballot. This is not something where people take 10 minutes in the middle of their workday, go vote and then return to their desk. This is an in-person, out in the open exercise of demonstrating your public support for a candidate. The way this works — literally, physically, in practice — is there are hundreds of predesignated caucus locations around the state. And around 7 p.m. local, people show up at these locations, and they’re asked to gather themselves into groups according to which candidate they’re supporting. They do that. There is an assessment made about which candidate has 15 percent of the support in the room and which candidates do not hit that threshold of support. So when people refer to the threshold, that’s what they’re talking about — 15 percent support at the caucus site.
Of everybody in the room — 15 percent of everybody who has showed up.
Entirely possible. He’s not super popular in Iowa. You can reallocate your support to somebody else in the room, perhaps Michael Barbaro, who just barely cleared the threshold at 16.5 percent.
So what might be the impact of this process on the field of 2020 Democratic candidates and what we know about those dynamics? I’m thinking about Bernie Sanders, for example, who has been polling in the lead and who we understand has benefited from more moderate Iowans splitting their support among the other leading candidates in the race.
Well what the Sanders campaign believes will certainly be good for him, or almost certainly be good for him, is having that first-round popular vote ultimately released to the public. They believe that however the reallocation process ultimately sorts itself out, that he is very, very likely to have the most support on that first round of caucusing. So that even if he ends up slipping behind somebody else, they will be able to brandish that as a symbolic victory.
Which is another way of saying he predicts he might lose some support through the process as it goes along.
Exactly. And for the more moderate candidates, those candidates have been competing for a lot of the same indecisive voters who are trying to sort out which of these candidates is the best bet against Trump, but I’m not for Bernie Sanders. Right? So if you are a moderate woman in the suburbs of Des Moines and you are tempted by three or four of these candidates, you may very well have the chance to vote for one and then change your mind in the second round. And it’s really anyone’s guess right now as to whether you are going to see more moderates moving towards Joe Biden on the second round, or women moving towards Elizabeth Warren on the second round, or perhaps Pete Buttigieg supporters scattering across the field. It is wildly unpredictable. And because of the way that 15 percent threshold works, it is hugely important whether somebody in the first round is at 16 percent or at 14 percent. Not only because whether they hit the threshold for themselves, but because it will determine whose supporters are actually deciding what happens on the second round. And in a caucus site where Elizabeth Warren is at 16 percent, her people are locked in. In a site where she’s at 14 percent, that’s a place where suddenly Bernie Sanders is in a position to pick up all the support from liberals who preferred Elizabeth Warren but might consider him on the second round.
Right. Right. But if Elizabeth Warren’s at 16 percent, Bernie Sanders can’t go after any of her supporters because they’re locked in.
Right. So if you are Pete Buttigieg or Joe Biden, you are looking at the other guy and really hoping he doesn’t clear 15 percent in a lot of places. Because you’re betting that most of those voters are moderates and are likelier to go to me — by a lot — than they are to go to Bernie. But if both Biden and Buttigieg mostly end up at 16 or 17 percent, then they could find themselves sort of persistently stuck behind Bernie Sanders or Elizabeth Warren.
So what should we be most on the lookout for as we head out to these caucuses?
A lot of voters here are not necessarily going to make up their mind based on the ideological factors that we perceive as the national media looking at these candidates from afar. There can be a real sort of oversimplification for the way we see the lanes in this race that we think that somebody who is an Elizabeth Warren supporter is more likely to go to Bernie Sanders than to Joe Biden, as I just said. But it may be that somebody is an Elizabeth Warren supporter, not because they are left populist ideologically, but because they like her experience and they saw her in television ads with Barack Obama and they liked that.
So they could easily go to Pete Buttigieg, not Bernie Sanders.
Right, or to Joe Biden or anybody else, right? That if you’re a Klobuchar voter, I think we in the national media tend to think of her as a centrist candidate, and by and large she is. She’s also the only other woman with a real shot at clearing the 15 percent threshold in this process. And if you’re for Amy Klobuchar, not just because she’s a centrist, but because you feel like it’s important to elect a woman president, you might end up moving to the ideological left on a second round just because Elizabeth Warren is the option available to you.
Got it. So you’re saying don’t make assumptions.
I’m saying that anybody who is gaming this out in advance, with ideology as the sole or defining characteristic of how these voters make up their minds, is really risking missing the way real people are going to experience this.
So we will talk to you four hours — five hours?
O.K. Good luck.
Prepare yourself for some extremely unpleasantly cold weather. O.K. I don’t know — oh actually that’s Reid.
Thank you for being our chauffeur. I feel like my dad’s taking us all to the soccer game.
It’s really wild.
What are you listening to, Reid?
I have “Les Mis” on. I told you.
Are you a big “Les Mis” guy?
Last day of Iowa?
The last day of Iowa.
So this is the idea of the song, is like one day more.
One day more.
Can we crank it?
We can crank it. Hold on.
Can you pull the lyrics up on your phone?
Continue on Second Avenue for four miles.
There’s a lot of cars here.
— pretty full. I’d say there’s a couple — maybe 150 cars here.
We’re asking you to stay right in this area here.
Press. Right over here on the left.
I’ll take it. I’ll just go over here.
O.K. It’s 6 o’clock and the doors have just opened.
Precinct One is on this side. Precinct Two on this side.
We are now in a very crowded main hallway of the school, and I think they’re going to go register.
You’re not on here either.
Oh good. Thank heavens.
You know each other? Do a lot of people know each other?
Two houses down.
And then they head into the caucus room.
Which is a gym.
Which is, I believe, a gymnasium. I’m just — I’m having flashbacks to high school.
So now we’re in the gymnasium. There’s a huge set of bleachers in the back, and that is where the candidate alignment is going to begin. There are signs for Bernie, and people are sitting on those bleachers. There are signs for Pete, people are sitting on those bleachers. Warren, Klobuchar, Yang.
(WHISPERING) It’s Tom Leffler. He’s the precinct chairman. He’s running the caucus.
— in the vicinity.
(WHISPERING) Amy Klobuchar is outside.
Is she allowed in?
Amy Klobuchar has just walked into the room.
(WHISPERING) Why is Klobuchar here, and why is she allowed to be here?
Any candidate who shows up can speak.
(WHISPERING) And what’s the point of her showing up at the last minute right before the caucus?
Because this is really the time when she has to convince undecided caucus goers to come for her. And more important, people who their candidates might not be viable on the second alignment, to get them to come to her on a realignment. Iowans love people to show up, and she’s literally shown up at the caucus.
Yeah, it’s a really dramatic gesture.
Do you know what’s happening right now?
Do you know what’s happening right now? Is now the time you vote?
I don’t think we have to.
— they told us we had a total of 358 people here to caucus, registered voters. We have to have 15 percent to be viable. Well, that figures out to 54 is a count that you have to have to be viable.
So I was going to ask, does it look like anyone’s in, at this moment, in danger of not being viable, and who isn’t?
Well the Yang group is probably not going to be viable. Doesn’t look they have 54 people over there.
Biden — it doesn’t look like Biden is going to be viable here.
— may not have 54 people.
(WHISPERING) Are you surprised that Biden doesn’t seem viable at the moment?
Well, what happens happens, but I think that’s a mistake. I can’t understand the lack of support. Of course, my wife’s supporting somebody else.
Who is your wife supporting?
So if you don’t become viable, where do you think you’re going to go next?
We’ll see you over there.
(WHISPERING) Are you guys the Yang gang?
(WHISPERING) Yes we are.
How are you guys doing? We’re from “The Daily” with The New York Times. How’s your vote count?
And then maybe negotiate?
We’re hoping. That’s my hope.
My hunch is the Yang is probably more of a group of true believers, versus hoping just for the most electable candidate. So we’ll find out.
Over here, we’d be willing to tell you why he’s a good candidate.
I would agree, cabinet member at least.
No, we’re not going to go Joe because he caucused when I was 24 — his first election. 1988.
He is solid as a rock.
Have you fact checked that?
Yes, I have. Yes.
— and about the legitimacy of it?
His son — yes, his son — his son has not done anything for that money. His son has not done anything for that money.
So this is your overture to the Biden people?
Yeah I’m sorry. I know, it didn’t work very well, did it? It fell flat on its face, so I’ll go back.
God, these people scare me.
That amazes me. I’m so sorry about that.
You didn’t seem swayed.
I’m not swayed.
No I’m not angry. I’m disappointed.
 Well yeah, because I’m hot. But not that kind of hot.
Did that feel like a winning argument from the Yang people to you?
No, not to me.
Do you know where you might go?
No, but are you going to go somewhere else if he’s not viable?
If he is not viable, Amy would be my second choice.
Will you try to convince your group to go to Amy?
I don’t know what I’ll do. I’ll have to think about that. I have to think about that because I — but Amy would be my second choice.
Final results are being read now for the first allocation.
Biden has 37. 37 will not be viable.
You can come over here.
Warren has 59. Viable. [APPLAUSE] Klobuchar has 75. [APPLAUSE] Viable.
So at 8 o’clock, here is the count from the first round, the first allocation as it’s called: Sanders has 76. Klobuchar has 75. Buttigieg has 70. Warren has 59. Biden has 37, is not viable. Yang has 33, is not viable. Steyer has four, not viable. Gabbard has three, not viable. And there are now 77 votes among the nonviable candidates that will be redistributed in the coming minutes, and that could obviously — given the spread between the top candidates — completely change everything. Of course, some voters may just walk out because dinner’s at home getting cold or because they don’t believe in any of the other candidates.
If you want your voice to be heard, join us. Join team Bernie.
I think we’re going to go — I’m going to go with Amy. Amy Klobuchar.
So we have some — we have some Biden voters who don’t have a home, heading over to Klobuchar. What’s your name if I could ask you?
Kathleen, I can see from reading your lips that you are about to go home and not cast a vote because Joe Biden is not viable. Can you explain that decision?
I just — he’s just my candidate. There are other ones that are good. I don’t want to go to Bernie.
Too far to the left.
For me. For me. I’m 82 years old, so I like Amy. I really like her.
But you’re not going to go there either?
No, I’m not going to go there either. I’m just kind of old and tired, and I’m going home. I guess I just don’t have the feeling other than I want Joe, and I guess I don’t have the fire I used to have. [LAUGHS] Oops a daisy.
Have a safe trip home.
So it’s about 8:15, and it feels like realignment has more or less finished. People have switched sides, switched seats, switched camps. And it feels like a final count is upon us.
Warren has apparently added nine or 10 new caucusgoers in this latest round.
Who were you with?
You had another Biden there.
Have you counted the new ones?
The new Warren votes in round two have pretty much come from everywhere.
They’ve come from Yang, Biden, Steyer and uncommitted.
Klobuchar has picked up a lot of new votes too.
It looks like she might win this precinct.
22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. Let’s do it again.
Klobuchar picking up nearly 30 votes, and it looks like that’s going to be enough.
Oh wait, we’ve got one more.
Sorry, I was behind you.
What’s the count?
31 and 75 is 106.
O.K. Now collect them.
O.K. Collecting cards.
O.K. I cheated and I looked at that spreadsheet, and it looks like Amy Klobuchar has won this precinct.
O.K. Bernie had seven more. The new total for Bernie is 83. Warren — [APPLAUSE] Warren had 10 more. The new total is 69. Klobuchar had 31 more. The new total is 106. [APPLAUSE] And Pete had 11 more. The new total is 81.
So at 8:24, here are the results. Amy Klobuchar wins this precinct — just one — but she wins it. And Sanders in second place. So what we saw happen, which Reid predicted could happen, Sanders won round one by a hair and lost round two. Klobuchar won round two.
I mean, the big thing was Klobuchar got almost all of Biden’s people. And so she won this precinct.
Thank you, Reid.
So I got to run to Pete’s headquarters. For the Pete-a-Palooza.
I understand that you’re literally leaving us carless? Is that what you’re saying?
I’m leaving you carless. You’re going to walk back from Johnston.
Reid, thank you.
Thank you. It was so nice to meet you.
And have yourself a water.
Thank you so much for your help. It was really fun.
I wonder what happened in this other precinct. Are you guys from the other precinct?
What was the result there?
Oh, Pete won, I guess.
Pete won? And what was the — who’s second, third, and fourth?
So Pete won, and then there was a tie between Warren, Biden, Sanders, Klobuchar.
Was there a big shift in the realignment?
A lot of people went over to Amy.
Amy wasn’t viable before the realignment, and then she ended up with two delegates afterwards. So she doubled her people.
Well thanks again. Have a good night.
We’re going to connect with our colleagues in New York. Right now, it’s 11:22 Iowa time, 12:22 New York time. And we’re getting the sense that we won’t have the results by 6 a.m. when this episode needs to go up.
So we’re figuring it out.
Hi. You’re on speaker here.
So we just have been so deep in the tape that we have no idea what the news actually is. So what’s going on?
So there’s just a huge delay in reporting from all the precincts that, for all we know, could extend late into the evening or even the morning.
Uh huh. So does just nobody know what’s actually happening?
Put this into perspective for us — how seismic of a shock is what has happened here at the Iowa caucuses in 2020?
— the thing we’ve all been waiting for?
Do you think we’ll get results tonight or tomorrow morning, tomorrow afternoon, before the debate on Friday?
Sean Sebastian is joining us right now from Story County. He’s a precinct secretary out there. What can you tell us about this delay in getting any results, Sean?
Well Wolf, I have been on hold for over an hour with the Iowa Democratic Party.
The guy in the White House is chuckling all night here, showing the Democrats can’t even get a three-car funeral organized or whatever you want to call it.
[INAUDIBLE] Can I help you?
So this is a real coincidence, Wolf. I just got off hold just now.
So I’ve got to get off the phone to report the results.
All right, go ahead. Report the results.
Can we listen in as you report them, Sean?
All right, let’s listen.
O.K. Hi. Hello? They hung up on me.
This has not been a success.
So Alex, it’s 12 — Jesus, it’s 1 o’clock in the morning. You seem a little frustrated.
I’m a little frustrated, Michael.
Because we have no results from the Iowa caucuses. We have seen sort of anecdotal data dribbling out all evening, but the Iowa Democratic Party has not posted any complete results from any of the caucuses online. There’s just been a massive failure of data collection and transmission and verification. And so we don’t really know a whole lot more about who won the Iowa caucuses now than we did three or four hours ago.
And do you understand exactly what happened, why we don’t have the results, where the breakdown happened?
We don’t know in all the kinds of forensic detail that I think we probably will soon enough. But what seems to have happened is that this time, the Iowa Democratic Party created an app that was intended to make it super easy for the volunteer leaders at these 1,600-plus caucuses to send in the results to a central hub and that that app did not get the job done. Whether that’s because of user error or bad Wi-Fi, bad cell service, we don’t really know in full. We know that the backup system was supposed to be that these precinct volunteer leaders were supposed to be able to call in the results, and that then the phone lines got totally overloaded. And so the state party is trying to collect and verify three different sets of data to report out exactly what happened in these caucuses, and we have access to exactly none of them.
So how are we seeing the candidates handling this absence of information?
We’re trying to see each of them fill this void with their own message, as uncertain as that message might be at this time. They have access, because of their own sophisticated campaign machinery, to at least some detailed data about what probably went on on Monday night.
Right. Their precinct captains, of course, have their tallies for every precinct.
That’s right. The campaigns aren’t flying completely blind the way we sort of are as reporters. We don’t have hundreds of people around the state feeding us information like that. So when you see one of the leading candidates come out and strike a certain tone in a speech, or not strike a certain tone in a speech, they’re not completely guessing. They’re at least making a pretty educated guess about what kind of final results they might experience.
Well, the Iowa Democratic Party is working to get these results — get them straight, and I want to make sure they’re very careful in their deliberations.
— and then point towards states where he thinks he is going to do better than he probably did here based on the information that his campaign has.
So it’s on to New Hampshire, Nevada, South Carolina, well beyond. We’re in this for the long haul.
You heard a similar, not quite as baleful approach from the Elizabeth Warren campaign.
Because this race started right here in Iowa, but from tomorrow it will run from ocean to ocean.
Tonight showed that our path to victory is to fight hard.
— but it wasn’t a sort of attempt to declare victory. And you did hear her campaign manager, Roger Lau, go out and say that every second that the Iowa results are not known, it undermines the process. That is notably a tone that you’re not hearing from the Sanders and Buttigieg campaigns, which, among the competitors here in Iowa, probably feel the most optimistic about their odds of coming out on top.
Mayor Buttigieg basically gave a victory speech as though the race had been called for him even though we’re not nearly there yet.
That is a very, very forward-leaning posture in a situation of great uncertainty.
Right. That’s known as leaning into a vacuum.
 That there’s just no information for ordinary people. And his campaign, I think genuinely, from my own conversations with them, feels very good about their odds of ultimately winning or coming close in this state.
And then you have Senator Amy Klobuchar who certainly believes that she did a little bit better than anticipated.
And whose campaign manager went out on Twitter and said, according to their internal data, she is running even or ahead of Vice President Biden in a lot of places. Again, we have no way to verify on our own whether that’s true at this point, but it is the position that a number of the campaigns are taking. I have heard it from advisers to Klobuchar, to Warren and to Buttigieg that Joe Biden had a weak finish. That’s certainly what they’re hammering away at.
Well actually, at the precinct where we went in suburban Des Moines — a town called Johnston — the thing that, Alex, you had predicted would happen actually did happen. Sanders ended up as the front-runner in the first count, and then when the realignment happened, the more moderate candidates ended up benefiting. And that ended up working out in Klobuchar’s favor. She won the final tally by about 20, 25 votes, and that might have been aided by the fact that she showed up. But what do you make of that?
I think most of us who were following this campaign, and a lot of the strategists who were active participants in this campaign, believed that that dynamic would favor Joe Biden at the expense of Amy Klobuchar. That if there was a moderate candidate who was persistently not quite hitting that 15 percent threshold, it would be her, and that her supporters would mostly go to Joe Biden. If something like the opposite happened, that could give us a really fascinating result when we actually get the numbers we’re waiting for. This will be thrown into much sharper relief.
Any moment. Any moment.
Do you think that tonight’s kind of meltdown of this process is going to lessen the ultimate significance of the results in Iowa? Because the usual significance we give it, as the first in the nation, is that it’s the kickoff of the whole thing.
I think it’s extremely likely, both because of the meltdown tonight and because of just how much else is going on in the news this week between impeachment, the State of the Union, a global pandemic, the Super Bowl on the eve of the Iowa caucuses. I don’t know how much the ultimate victor is going to be able to break through now that they’ve been denied their own evening to spike the football, as it were. And I think it’s possible that a candidate who gets really embarrassed here will suffer badly for it. But I think the likelihood that somebody gets some enormous surge of momentum based on the results of Iowa is much more questionable now than it would have been if the Iowa Democratic Party had run this process in a more competent fashion.
And good morning.
It was the kind of crowd that lets out a collective gasp and tweets multiple exclamation points when the final Des Moines Register poll of Iowa voters is abruptly canceled. Which happened on Saturday night.
The last weekend before the caucuses brings a unique kind of frenzy, along with some dweeby fandom (hey, it’s the “Pod Save America” guys!). More than 400 reporters attended Mr. Buttigieg’s final rally on Sunday at a high school. Television and newspaper executives, in town for a look-see, sat down to steaks at downtown chophouses while rookie embed reporters drank at the Mexican dive El Bait Shop.
Occasionally, the high reporter-to-real-person ratio yields political consequences. John Kerry, the former secretary of state, had the misfortune of sitting next to an NBC reporter at breakfast when he apparently blabbed on the phone about a potential run for the presidency. The story exploded on Twitter before Mr. Kerry issued an obscenity-laced denial.
“Strong ‘overheard on the Acela’ energy,” Rosie Gray, a BuzzFeed News reporter, wrote on Twitter, referring to the Amtrak express train that whooshes the chattering classes between New York and Washington.
Were average Americans following the reports from Iowa? Unclear. With President Trump on trial in the Senate, the ABC, CBS and NBC evening newscasts devoted just 10 minutes of coverage last week to the caucuses, compared with 86 minutes in 2016, according to one study. Correspondents in Iowa, on three-hour drives to candidate forums in Decorah or Fort Madison, made a habit of listening to C-SPAN Radio to keep up with the impeachment proceedings.
The Sunday brunch — which Ms. Haddad co-hosted with Hilary Rosen, another high-powered Washington media strategist, and the Iowa political operatives John and Christine Stineman — raised money for veterans and their families.
A contingent there coalesced around Rob Sand, the state auditor and boyish bright young thing of Iowa Democratic politics.
“You look like a young Pete Buttigieg,” Ms. Rosen joked, as Mr. Sand’s fingers flew to his smooth cheeks. “But Pete can grow a beard!” he protested.
Does Mr. Sand resent all these interlopers parachuting in? “I’ve tried to be ‘Iowa nice,’” he said wryly.
Brad Anderson, the Iowa state director at AARP, said in an interview that he appreciated all the national interest in his state. But he advised reporters to spend more time meeting with the people who really mattered: the Iowans who would be caucusing on Monday night.
Mr. Anderson happened to say this while kibitzing at Ms. Haddad’s fancy brunch. Be honest: Will he miss the media when it’s gone?
