A con man is only as good as his charm. Frank William Abagnale, reincarnated by Leonardo DiCaprio in “Catch Me if You Can,” inhabited half a dozen identities by the time he was 21 and did so with such brio that he was able to fool hundreds. Charles Ponzi was a dapper operator who tooled around in a Locomobile. And Ronnie Cornwell, the father of the novelist John le Carré, was an insurance fraudster who later became the model for the charismatic Rick Pym in le Carré’s “A Perfect Spy.” The most famous image of Cornwell shows him in a top hat and buttonhole striding confidently through a top-class English crowd, with a look of knowing concentration mixed with an offhand breeziness. You can feel the charm coming off the image.
In Adam Sisman’s amusing and elegantly written biography of the midcentury British impostor Robert Parkin Peters, excitedly styled “Peters the Parson” and “Romeo of the Church” by the yellow press, the subject is a curious and relatively harmless man of many faces who managed to attract the attention of one of Britain’s most august modern historians. The suavely aristocratic and yet strangely gullible Hugh Trevor-Roper first encountered Peters at Oxford in 1958 when Trevor-Roper, then a Regius professor of modern history, received a letter from an unknown supplicant on behalf of a Mr. and Mrs. Peters. They were young academics suffering “vindictive persecution from outside the university.” Could the professor help?
Trevor-Roper was curious. Having made his name in 1947 with “The Last Days of Hitler,” which drew on his wartime work with MI6, he was, at 44, one of the most famous men at Oxford and indeed in the country. He offered his assistance to Peters and eventually agreed to meet him. “Peters,” Sisman writes, “was a small, chubby-cheeked, bespectacled man with thinning hair and an earnest manner, who spoke with a slight lisp.” He was a graduate student in divinity at the prestigious Magdalen College, which had for some reason neglected to go through his application materials with their customary diligence.
Although Trevor-Roper did not know it at the time, Peters had been born with a skeletal deformity that had forced him into a metal frame during his formative years. He claimed to be 34 but was most likely 40. Pugnacious, yearning to be a genuine theological academic, Peters struck the historian as curiously impressive in some way. He said he had been persecuted by the bishop of Oxford “in the most unaccountable manner,” barred from officiating for reasons unknown. Intrigued, Trevor-Roper agreed to look into the matter — and by doing so opened a door into the parallel life of Robert Peters, bigamist extraordinaire, false priest, phony academic and, for a time, a respected member of Magdalen College. Not to mention erstwhile husband to at least seven women, none of whom suspected that he was not an upright man of religion.
Peters had lied about having a degree from the University of London and managed to forge recommendation letters. But charm, along with a pathological persistence, got him a long way. Even after Trevor-Roper had at last cottoned on to Peters’s innumerable frauds, he remained fascinated by him, following his adventures from a grimly amused distance. It is this fascination that Sisman (who counts Trevor-Roper and le Carré among his previous biographical subjects) has made the tenet of his book: Peters’s antic mayhem jibed with Trevor-Roper’s own taste for anti-establishment mischief. How could he not be somewhat enchanted with this sendup of the entire British academic and social system? Over the years Trevor-Roper accumulated an entire dossier devoted to the case.
“Depth is now opening on depth,” he wrote to the historian Joel Hurstfield, “and ever new and more fantastic revelations are coming out of them.” The “Romeo Rev” had apparently skipped bail in 1947 while awaiting a charge of bigamy. He fled to Lake Geneva, checked into a mountain hotel under the name Mr. Humphreys, was deported to the United Kingdom but jumped train in France and made his way to Marseille. From there he went east by sea.
Peters seemed to others to be a genius at two things: mimicking the verbal pretentiousness and obscurantism of academic parlance and sweeping naïve young women off their feet by means of an alchemy that remained mysterious to everyone else.  What then did women find attractive about him? Perhaps, as Sisman theorizes, it was that he was never after money so much as status — a place in the loftier realms of scholarship.
One imagines Peters himself enjoying a chuckle of recognition at this debacle, for in the end “the greatest hoax of modern times” was laid not at his doorstep but at the esteemed historian’s.