
Why Are You Still Packing Lunch for Your Kids?
While parents have been focusing on creating Instagram-friendly school lunches, the quality of cafeteria food has improved significantly.
Ms. Gaddis is an expert on school lunch policy.
Parents today face a steady stream of advice about how best to care for their children. Mothers, in particular, are pressured to be the perfect parent: Most of the advice on social media and parenting blogs is directed at them.
How to feed the kids gets a lot of the attention. Sending children off to school carrying a healthy, made-from-scratch lunch is one of the ways that (mostly) mothers are encouraged to protect their children from the harmful effects of the industrialized food system.
Middle- and upper-middle-class women especially are encouraged to pack lunches made from pricey local organic and fair-trade ingredients — these women are assumed to have financial resources and time to make healthy lunches every morning.
It rarely gets said outright, but the subtext is clear: Don’t let the lunch lady feed your child.
For many parents, school cafeterias evoke memories of subgrade hamburger meat, soggy tater tots and grilled cheese sandwiches that taste like warmed-up cardboard.
But in recent years, while some parents have been focusing on creating Instagram-friendly packed lunches, the quality of school-cafeteria food has improved significantly. The passage of the Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act in 2010 was a major step forward, requiring schools to serve lunches made with more whole grains, a wider variety of fresh fruits and vegetables and less salt and trans fat while creating opportunities for schools to serve free meals to all students.
Yet the progress K-12 schools have made toward serving healthier and more appetizing lunches may stall unless more middle- and upper-middle-class parents can be persuaded to let their kids buy lunch at school. Without greater participation from children paying for lunch, local school districts will lack the funds to maintain the gains in quality.
In fact, if we could muster the political will, increasing the financial and public support for subsidized lunches would secure a future for healthy school food that would improve public health, create better jobs for school cafeteria workers (some 90 percent of whom are women) and help the country transition to a more sustainable food system.
Ninety-five percent of public schools participate in the government-subsidized National School Lunch Program, which was created in 1946 to improve children’s health and support American farmers. On a typical school day, roughly 30 million children, mostly from lower-income households, eat lunch through this program, which sorts students into different payment categories, depending on their family income.
Children from a family of four that earns more than $47,638 per year pay full price, while lower-income families pay either 40 cents per lunch or nothing at all. The average cost for a full-price elementary school lunch is about $2.50, but local districts set their own prices. Some high school lunches, with prices as high as $5 per lunch, exceed the limits of affordability for many families.
Putting healthier food on school cafeteria menus has done little to change school lunch participation rates: By my calculation, roughly 20 million eligible children, mostly from middle- and upper-middle-class families, continue to opt out of the national program by bringing lunch or by buying special à la carte food items not covered by the program.
As an individual family decision, packing lunches might seem like the best option, especially for children with special dietary needs. But when millions of families do so, their actions reduce the political will and financial resources necessary to make public school lunches better for everyone.
In practice, this has meant enacting policies that loosen restrictions on the amount of sodium, flavored milk and refined grains that can be served in school meals. The department’s own data shows that participation in the national lunch program is higher in cafeterias that serve healthier meals, yet the administration’s latest proposal, released last month, would allow schools to serve more French fries and fewer green vegetables.
Despite these setbacks, in recent years, community activists have won universal free school meals in many of the nation’s poorest schools and in some large districts like Boston and New York City public schools. Many more districts have started robust farm-to-school programs that support local food and farm economies. And Democrats are talking about universal free lunch on the campaign trail.
There are limits, however, to what even the most progressive school food service programs can achieve when roughly 40 percent of eligible students continue to opt out of the national program.
The food-service director of the Austin Independent School District, Anneliese Tanner, told a local news outlet that the district could afford to serve grass-fed beef if the kids who currently opt out of the national program would eat school lunch just once a week.
All families stand to benefit from making a public investment in high-quality, universal free school meals. Mothers, in particular, would benefit far more than we might realize: According to the American Time Use Survey, women spend more than twice as much time per day preparing family meals as men. Preparing school lunches cuts into their already limited leisure time and adds to the mental load they disproportionately shoulder.
The solution is right in front of us. When kids eat school lunch, they and their parents are supporting the efforts to improve the national program for current and future generations.
