Readers reflect on what was achieved, Mitt Romney’s act of defiance and the meaning of acquittal.
Well, it’s finally over, and now come the analyses and the blowback from the White House. And what was accomplished by the impeachment effort? A lot, I think. Some good, some bad.
For one thing, the House Democratic leaders reminded us of who we are and what we are. Representative Adam Schiff’s “Enough!” should echo through campaign ads all across the nation this fall.
The most consequential accomplishment of the impeachment effort, I think, is that it did exactly what President Trump tried to do by pressuring the president of Ukraine. It dragged Joe Biden’s name through the mud, and that helps explain Mr. Biden’s poor showing in Iowa. So Mr. Trump seems to have a clear shot at being re-elected.
But there’s a silver lining. At least some of the G.O.P. members of Congress who live in fear of Mr. Trump and who turned their backs on the Constitution will not be returning to Washington, and we’re likely to see Democratic majorities elected in both the House and the Senate.
Thank you, Adam Schiff, Hakeem Jeffries, Val Demings, Zoe Lofgren, Jason Crow, Sylvia Garcia and Jerry Nadler. Thank you for your hard work as House impeachment managers over the many long days and nights of the proceedings. Thank you for heartfelt and inspiring words. And, most of all, thank you for your deep knowledge of and belief in democracy and the Constitution.
Thank you for reminding us that there are still people like you in Congress — people of character who work every day to do what’s right for our country. We now owe it to you to seek out and help elect more people like you in November.
Thank goodness this ill-conceived debacle of an impeachment has come to its inevitable end. It should be clear now that the program of resistance aimed at toppling President Trump has failed. If anything it has made him stronger.
Let me suggest to the Democrats that the time has come to put aside your hatred of President Trump. That does not mean you should stop challenging him. By all means continue to challenge him, but challenge him in the arena of ideas. At the end of the day the party that succeeds will be the party that does the most to improve the lives of Americans.
Let’s remember that an acquittal does not mean the accused did not commit the offenses alleged, or suggest innocence, only that a jury — for whatever reason, including the most shameless and self-serving — failed to convict.
It is shocking for a senator of the United States to find it necessary to appear like a penitent schoolboy to explain his vote. It is alarming that currently many Americans seem eager to celebrate blind loyalty, and seek to punish those who exercise their rights to freedom of thought and speech. This is the path to tyranny.
I applaud Senator Mitt Romney for his courage, but I grieve that he felt it necessary to explain. It should not have been so.
Senator Mitt Romney said, “We’re all footnotes at best in the annals of history.” He is wrong. He is no footnote. It was easy for every Democrat to vote for President Trump’s conviction, and it was easy for every Republican but him to vote to acquit. Both sides yielded to peer pressure and the herd mentality of their party. But Mr. Romney genuinely and unequivocally voted his conscience. He is no footnote. He is a shining light.
Palos Verdes Estates, Calif.
You found him innocent of the charges against him, yet I read that a number of you have serious concerns about his actions. Why not assert yourselves and express those concerns? Fifteen or so of you could band together and vote with Democrats to deliver a strong message of censure. Mr. Trump will bluster and tweet, but if you stick together, he will not hurt you, and history will note that the Senate had a spine and a moderate G.O.P. re-emerged on this day. How about it?
Now that President Trump has been acquitted, he will have three priorities: his re-election campaign, his golf game and revenge.
