Mike Hughes, a go-it-alone daredevil, limousine stunt driver and self-taught astronaut who professed to believe that the Earth was flat and who was known to supporters as Mad Mike, died in a rocket launch in the California desert on Saturday. He was 64.
Around 2 p.m. on Saturday, San Bernardino County sheriff’s deputies were called to a rocket launch on private property in Barstow, Calif., about 120 miles northeast of Los Angeles. “A man was pronounced deceased after the rocket crashed in the open desert,” the sheriff’s office said in a statement.
A video of the launch posted by Justin Chapman, a freelance journalist, shows Mr. Hughes’s steam-powered rocket shooting off into the sky and a parachute falling down to the earth. Moments later, the rocket plummets and crashes near the launch site.
The launch was being filmed for “Homemade Astronauts,” a new television series for the Science Channel, which is owned by Discovery.
In 2018, Mr. Hughes made headlines after he launched himself nearly 2,000 feet into the air before a hard landing in the Mojave Desert, The Associated Press reported.
He once worked for NASCAR, was a self-taught rocket scientist and earned a Guinness World Record, in 2002, for longest ramp jump in a limousine, but Mr. Hughes’s legacy may be dominated by his purported belief in a flat Earth.
The A.P. once quoted Mr. Hughes as saying that he believed the Earth was shaped like a Frisbee, but he also conceded that he couldn’t say for certain that it was.
Mr. Hughes “didn’t really care if the Earth was flat, and was fully ready to concede his error once he could see it with his own eyes in a final stunt that he was working towards,” the post read.
Mr. Shuster, his publicist, maintained that Mr. Hughes’s professed flat-Earth beliefs were simply intended to garner money and publicity for his stunts.
“He was eccentric and believed in some government conspiracies, for sure, but it was a P.R. stunt,” Mr. Shuster said. Above all, he said, Mr. Hughes’s goal was to be an inspiration for all Americans.
