Europe|A Pedophile Writer Is on Trial. So Are the French Elites.
A Pedophile Writer Is on Trial. So Are the French Elites.
For decades, Gabriel Matzneff wrote openly of his pedophilia, protected by powerful people in publishing, journalism, politics and business. Now cast out, he attacks their “cowardice” in a rare interview.
PARIS — Gabriel Matzneff, the French writer under investigation for his promotion of pedophilia, was holed up this month inside a luxury hotel room on the Italian Riviera, unable to relax, unable to sleep, unable to write.
He was alone and in hiding, abandoned by the same powerful people in publishing, journalism, politics and business who had protected him weeks earlier. He went outside only for solitary walks behind dark sunglasses, and was startled when I tracked him down in a cafe mentioned in his books.
“I feel like the living dead, a dead man walking, walking on the lungomare,” he said, referring in Italian to the seafront promenade, in a long conversation, after some persuading.
Hiding is new for Mr. Matzneff. For decades, he was celebrated for writing and talking openly about stalking teenage girls outside schools in Paris and having sexual contact with 8-year-old boys in the Philippines.
He was invited to the Élysée Palace by President François Mitterrand and socialized with the far-right leader Jean-Marie Le Pen. He benefited from the largess of the fashion designer Yves Saint Laurent and his partner, the business tycoon Pierre Bergé.
But Mr. Matzneff has been summoned to appear in a Paris court on Wednesday, accused of actively promoting pedophilia through his books. Mr. Matzneff could face up to five years in prison, yet the case is also an implicit indictment of an elite that furthered his career and swatted away isolated voices calling for his arrest.
In a widening investigation, prosecutors announced Tuesday morning that the police would start seeking witnesses to find other possible victims of Mr. Matzneff.
The support of Mr. Matzneff reflected an enduring French contradiction: a nation that is deeply egalitarian yet with an elite that often distinguishes itself from ordinary people through a different code of morality, a different set of rules, or at least believing it necessary to defend those who did.
A decade ago, Dominique Strauss-Kahn was forced out as the leader of the International Monetary Fund after being accused of sexually assaulting a hotel housekeeper. A supporter dismissed it as “trussing a domestic,” a comment that recalled France’s feudal past.
“We’re in a very egalitarian society where there is a pocket of resistance that actually behaves like an aristocracy,” said Pierre Verdrager, a sociologist who has studied pedophilia.
Mr. Matzneff appealed to the elite’s traditional appreciation of the transgressive figure. Graying leftist intellectuals saw in his books the enduring free spirit of the May ’68 countercultural revolution. A new generation of right-leaning literary figures came to regard him as a symbol of anti-political correctness.
But now Mr. Matzneff and his backers are being held to account by a new movement: the freeing of female voices long suppressed by powerful men.
The reckoning came last month with the publication of “Le Consentement” (“Consent”) by Vanessa Springora, the first testimony by one of the writer’s underage victims.
Though the book held no new revelations about Mr. Matzneff’s sexual history, it triggered an abrupt cultural shift in France.
Mr. Matzneff’s fall, if late in coming, was swift. His three publishers dropped him. The head of the National Book Center said that Mr. Matzneff would lose a prestigious, seldom-awarded lifetime stipend. The Culture Ministry is re-examining two state honors conferred on him in the mid-1990s. He lost his column in the magazine Le Point. Prosecutors opened an investigation.
The statute of limitations is believed to have expired in the case involving Ms. Springora. But, in addition to the charge of promoting pedophilia, Mr. Matzneff could face criminal charges for more recent sex acts with minors in France or abroad.
From his hiding place on the Italian Riviera, Mr. Matzneff rejected the accusations of wrongdoing.
Although not one of France’s greatest writers, Mr. Matzneff still benefited fully from this tradition. He wrote nearly 50 novels, essay collections and diaries that never would have made it to bookstores in an industry more concerned with the bottom line.
French publishers dutifully accepted even diaries that sometimes overlapped and amounted to little beyond bookkeeping. But those works also hold meticulous details about the individuals who helped him and the teenage girls he seduced, including Ms. Springora.
Last month, suddenly emboldened, prosecutors raided the headquarters of Gallimard, a prestigious publishing house, to seize copies of the books. In the case scheduled to start on Wednesday, Mr. Matzneff’s publishers and promoters could also be held to account — with the books as evidence.
“We know of emotionally troubled men who justified pedophilia after reading Matzneff’s books,” said Méhana Mouhou, a lawyer for l’Ange Bleu, the anti-pedophilia organization that has brought the case.
Mr. Matzneff disappeared in late December, just before the publication of Ms. Springora’s memoir. As the scandal exploded in Paris, I pored through his diaries and books. When a brief interview he gave to a French television network hinted at his whereabouts, I went to the Italian Riviera and found Mr. Matzneff — a creature of habit, his diaries made clear — in his favorite cafe.
Initially startled, defensive and angry, the writer admitted that he was “very, very lonely” and began to open up.
Asking that his exact location not be revealed, Mr. Matzneff spoke for three and a half hours.
He expressed bewilderment at the sudden cultural shift in France and his precipitous downfall. He showed no remorse for his past actions and did not renounce any of his writings.
He also confirmed the passages in his books that describe the support he received from powerful individuals, and provided fresh details. He was bitter and angry that former supporters have remained silent, distanced themselves or turned against him.
Mr. Matzneff’s friends did more than celebrate his work. They also, unwittingly and otherwise, helped shield him from the authorities.
In 1986, Parisian police officers summoned Mr. Matzneff, who was 50 at the time, for questioning after receiving anonymous letters stating that he was staying in his apartment with Ms. Springora, then 14.
But when he went to the station, Mr. Matzneff had a talisman in his pocket: an article praising him by President François Mitterrand.
Mr. Matzneff had drawn Mr. Mitterrand’s attention two decades earlier after the publication of his first book, an essay collection titled “Le Défi,” (“The Challenge”).
Mr. Mitterrand socialized with the up-and-coming author and remained an admirer, even after Mr. Matzneff published a full-throated defense of pedophilia in 1974 titled “Les Moins de Seize Ans” (“Under 16 Years Old”).
After he became president in 1981, Mr. Mitterrand invited Mr. Matzneff for lunch at the presidential palace at least once, in 1984, according to the François Mitterrand Institute.
Mr. Mitterrand wrote an article praising Mr. Matzneff that was published in the magazine Matulu in July 1986.
The article was published only a few weeks before the Paris police began investigating the tips against Mr. Matzneff.
“Probably, I’d perhaps cut out the article into my wallet,” Mr. Matzneff said.
In fact, it did, Mr. Matzneff recalled. When detectives saw it, he said, they dismissed the anonymous tips they had received as the work of a literary rival.
“One of the detectives had told me, ‘They’re forms of envy, these anonymous letters, it’s no doubt envy,’” he said.
Beyond the article by Mr. Mitterrand, Mr. Matzneff had more direct help.
First, the prizewinning writer, and a friend, Christian Giudicelli, agreed to hide incriminating letters and photographs of Ms. Springora, Mr. Matzneff wrote.
Then, when they needed a safer place to stay, Mr. Matzneff and the teenager moved to a hotel. The bills were paid by the fashion designer Yves Saint Laurent, who died in 2008, and arranged by his close aide, Christophe Girard, according to Mr. Matzneff.
The new living arrangement allowed the writer to convalesce from an eye surgery, but also to “evade the visits of the juvenile squad, which he calls ‘persecutions,’” Ms. Springora wrote.
“‘For us, it’s a drop in the ocean, it’s nothing, and we love you,’” Mr. Girard said, according to Mr. Matzneff.
Mr. Girard declined interview requests.
It was, and remains, illegal in France for an adult to have sex with a minor under the age of 15. But unlike the United States and other countries with statutory rape laws — where those underage are considered too immature to fully consent to sexual relationships — France does not have an age of consent. As recently as 2018, it dropped efforts to set one.
In France, Mr. Matzneff was careful to stay mostly inside what some considered a “gray zone,” devoting diaries and novels to his relations with teenage girls. It is in the Philippines that he writes about engaging in clear acts of pedophilia, mostly with prepubescent boys.
“Sometimes, I’ll have as many as four boys — from 8 to 14 years old — in my bed at the same time, and I’ll engage in the most exquisite lovemaking with them,” he wrote in his diaries, “Un Galop d’Enfer,” or “Racing Forward,” published in 1985.
A few people were appalled.
The single foreigner present, Denise Bombardier, a journalist from Quebec, denounced his pedophilia.
The reaction from France’s intelligentsia was swift.
Josyane Savigneau, who was editor of a literary supplement of the French newspaper Le Monde from 1991 to 2005, publicly chided Ms. Bombardier and defended Mr. Matzneff’s work.
In a recent interview, Ms. Savigneau recalled being revolted by some of Mr. Matzneff’s writings, but said his books were superior to others that landed on her desk.
Philippe Sollers, a famous novelist and Mr. Matzneff’s chief editor at Gallimard, later dismissed Ms. Bombardier with a crude sexual term. Mr. Sollers did not respond to a request for an interview.
The only public support for Ms. Bombardier came from an unexpected corner: President Mitterrand.
Though he kept churning out books, Mr. Matzneff was far from wealthy and turned to his powerful friends.
By 2002, Mr. Girard, the aide to Yves Saint Laurent, had become the deputy for culture to the mayor of Paris. (He is now serving again in the position.) He lobbied intensely for Mr. Matzneff to win a seldom-awarded lifetime annual stipend from the National Book Center, the center’s current director, Vincent Monadé, told the newspaper L’Opinion.
By 2005, the original publisher of Mr. Matzneff’s 1974 apology of pedophilia balked at republishing it. Mr. Matzneff said that another longtime ally — a powerful lawyer and author named Emmanuel Pierrat — introduced him to another publisher who gave it a second life.
“I don’t disown a single line in it, not a word,” Mr. Matzneff wrote in a preface to the 2005 edition.
Mr. Pierrat, who is now representing Mr. Matzneff, is also president of the PEN Club in France and secretary general of the Yves Saint Laurent Museum. He did not respond to multiple emails and phone calls requesting an interview.
By 2013, Mr. Matzneff’s views were no longer fashionable. His books barely sold. He had learned the year before that he had prostate cancer.
But even in his despair, he could still pull on some old strings.
A major literary award, the Renaudot, had twice slipped through his fingers despite the fierce maneuverings of one juror: Mr. Giudicelli, the writer to whom Mr. Matzneff had entrusted incriminating photos and letters of the 14-year-old Ms. Springora when he feared a police raid.
Besides being a friend, Mr. Giudicelli was also one of Mr. Matzneff’s editors at Gallimard and a frequent traveling companion to Manila.
Gallimard did not make Mr. Giudicelli, or anybody else at the publishing house, available for an interview.
So close are the two men that they referred to each other by the rooms they occupied on their first stay at the Tropicana Hotel in Manila.
“When it comes to conjuring up, here and there, in a short paragraph, memories of mischief and naughtiness about which we hardly feel guilty, my dear Eight-oh-four takes care to conceal his dear Christian under the protective wing of Eight-one-one,” Mr. Giudicelli writes about his friend.
In 2013, Mr. Giudicelli helped secure his friend the Renaudot prize, after studiously confiding Mr. Matzneff’s cancer diagnosis to his fellow jurors.
“It’s an argument we heard a lot: ‘He needs it, the poor guy,’” recalled one of the jurors, Franz-Olivier Giesbert, a writer and editor.
Dominique Bona, the only woman in the 10-member jury and a member of the French Academy, acknowledged that “friendships” played a part in awarding the prize to Mr. Matzneff.
A rare critical voice came from a literary blogger, Juan Asensio, who wrote a scathing piece on the award and Mr. Matzneff’s pedophilia.
“I think that journalists sort of chickened out rather than saying the prize was a scandal,” he recalled.
Mr. Matzneff said he learned in November of the imminent release of “Le Consentement” from friends at Grasset, the book’s publisher. He soon left for Italy as Ms. Springora’s book landed like a thunderbolt in a newly awakened France.
Alone in his hiding place on the Italian Riviera, Mr. Matzneff said he did not know when he would return to Paris. Other than his walks on the lungomare, he dines alone in the hotel restaurant. Up in his room, he rereads old, unpublished diaries. He will not, he says, read Ms. Springora’s book. He suffers from insomnia. He doesn’t write.
“I’m too miserable,” he said.
What began with a book could end only with a book. Only in France.
Daphné Anglès and Constant Méheut contributed reporting.