The point of the attacks was not to set off mass defections between the left and the center, but rather to consolidate support on one side of the party or the other.
HOOKSETT, N.H. — Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont and former Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind., clashed throughout the day on Sunday, in a combative display of their determination to treat the upcoming New Hampshire primary as a two-person race, with former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. continuing to struggle.
After a year when Mr. Biden and Senator Elizabeth Warren dominated the campaign at different stages, Mr. Sanders and Mr. Buttigieg have arrived in New Hampshire with the greatest momentum, according to public polling and a consensus of Democratic strategists in the state. A one-two finish for Mr. Sanders and Mr. Buttigieg here, after their near-tie in Iowa, could reorder the race and hasten a reckoning among Democratic leaders about which man would be the stronger nominee against President Trump.
For all its divisions, the Democratic presidential field has been united for a year around the goal of defeating Mr. Trump, and even as attacks flew on Sunday the candidates continued to pledge that they would lock arms and work together in the general election. But the weekend melee — complete with dark allusions to billionaire donors, allegations of intellectual dishonesty and sarcastic references to political inexperience — showed how difficult that task could be if the primary becomes a prolonged and acrimonious affair.
One way to avoid a long primary would be for Mr. Sanders or Mr. Buttigieg to fully unite either liberals or moderates behind their campaigns. Such unity seems unlikely: Mr. Sanders must contend with Ms. Warren on the left, while Mr. Buttigieg is a long way from clearing the race of moderates like Mr. Biden and Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota, who has drawn fresh interest from many voters since a strong debate performance on Friday night.
But if they could not eliminate their other competitors, Mr. Buttigieg and Mr. Sanders managed at least to overshadow them on Sunday by escalating the rivalry that has emerged between them. In Plymouth, Mr. Sanders denounced Mr. Buttigieg for relying on campaign contributions from the extremely wealthy, slamming his 38-year-old rival by name.
“What we could do without is a plan so expensive that Senator Sanders himself freely admits he has no idea how it’s supposed to be paid for,” Mr. Buttigieg said.
Neither argument was likely to win converts from the opposing candidate’s camp: It would be difficult to imagine supporters of Mr. Sanders suddenly recoiling from the price tag for “Medicare for all,” or for Mr. Buttigieg’s backers to abandon him over his fund-raising practices.
The point of the exercise, however, was not to trigger mass defections between the left and the center, but rather to consolidate support on one side of the party or the other. Mr. Sanders has been focused on driving up turnout among progressives and trying to wrest away liberal support from Ms. Warren, the third-place finisher in Iowa, while Mr. Buttigieg has been appealing both to moderate Democrats, and also to independents and Republican voters who can cast ballots in New Hampshire’s open Democratic primary.
Mr. Buttigieg’s television advertisements have focused on his outreach beyond the Democratic Party, and on Sunday he underscored the point when he asked voters — as he often does — to imagine the first day when Mr. Trump is no longer president. “I don’t even think that’s a partisan statement anymore, to look forward to that,” he added.
At a campaign stop in Hanover, Mr. Sanders’s supporters cheered his criticism of Mr. Buttigieg, sometimes in terms that captured the stark nature of the choice the two candidates have framed for voters. Alison Campion, 26, a researcher at Dartmouth, said she faulted Mr. Buttigieg for failing to “lead by example” in getting money out of politics; Ms. Campion said she believed Mr. Buttigieg’s financial entanglements were more politically problematic than the label for which Mr. Sanders is most often criticized.
“In my world, there’s more support for the word socialist than billionaire,” Ms. Campion said.
The possibility that moderate voters could rally behind Mr. Buttigieg has seemed to pose a dire threat to Mr. Biden, whose weak finish in Iowa has sent at least some of his New Hampshire supporters fleeing to Mr. Buttigieg and Ms. Klobuchar.
Kevin Donohue, a retired federal employee who attended a rally for Ms. Klobuchar on the campus of Southern New Hampshire University, said he had not entirely made up his mind but was leaning strongly toward supporting her. Mr. Donohue, 63, said he was also tempted to vote for Mr. Buttigieg, but had definitively ruled out Mr. Biden after watching him in a televised town hall event last week.
Faced with the former vice president’s imperiled status, his campaign charted a zigzagging course through the weekend, sometimes striking hard at Mr. Buttigieg and at other points taking a restrained and even gentle approach to a trying moment.
On Saturday, Mr. Biden’s campaign released a cutting video that ridiculed Mr. Buttigieg’s limited record in government, lining up Mr. Biden’s formidable experience with matters of state against Mr. Buttigieg’s municipal résumé. In a television interview, Mr. Biden questioned whether Mr. Buttigieg could win support from African-American voters and dismissed him again to reporters.
But on Sunday, Mr. Biden declined to keep up the offensive against Mr. Buttigieg, limiting his criticism on the stump to veiled allusions to Mr. Buttigieg’s failure to win over people of color and speaking broadly about the importance of experience.
He was more pointed in taking on Mr. Sanders over a familiar subject: Medicare for all. He suggested that the senator was not being straightforward about what the far-reaching proposal would cost.
The former vice president also noted that he was “far ahead of everybody” among black voters, but sounded at times like he was more inclined to make his stand in the diverse primary states that vote later this month — Nevada and South Carolina — than to wage an all-out battle against Mr. Buttigieg here.
“Guess what, it’s the base of the Democratic Party,” Mr. Biden said, referring to African-American voters.
Mr. Biden was not the only candidate seeming to move past New Hampshire. Ms. Warren, too, indicated in Concord on Sunday that she was looking to states further down the primary calendar and perhaps anticipating a very long primary campaign.
Among moderates, the risk to Mr. Biden does not come solely from Mr. Buttigieg: Ms. Klobuchar, too, has shown signs of gaining ground since Iowa, and her campaign said she drew her largest crowd yet on Sunday in Manchester.
Ms. Klobuchar continued on Sunday to make a strenuous case to moderate voters that she was the best choice for those “tired of the extremes in our politics,” and several times mentioned that she hoped to win support from independent and Republican voters.
Even amid signs of a shift toward Mr. Buttigieg and Ms. Klobuchar, voters were still expressing anxiety about their final decision. At Ms. Klobuchar’s stop in Hooksett, Janet White, 70, said she had settled on Ms. Klobuchar through a “process of elimination,” excluding several candidates who were “too much to the left” and ultimately rejecting Mr. Biden as well.
Alexander Burns reported from Hooksett, and Nick Corasaniti from Plymouth, N.H. Thomas Kaplan contributed reporting from Dover, N.H., and Katie Glueck from Hampton, N.H.