U.S.|160 Nations Ban These Weapons. The U.S. Now Embraces Them.
Cold War weapons like cluster munitions and antipersonnel mines again are approved for use, but the Pentagon seems to lack a coherent strategy for them.
WASHINGTON — The Trump administration, which came into office pledging to end “endless wars,” has now embraced weapons prohibited by more than 160 countries, and is readying them for future use. Cluster bombs and antipersonnel land mines, deadly explosives known for maiming and killing civilians long after the fighting ended, have become integral to the Pentagon’s future war plans — but with little public rationale offered for where and why they would be used.
In a news conference on Monday, the Pentagon’s chief spokesman, Jonathan Hoffman, said that the policy change “was the result of an extensive conversation” with different departments of the executive branch. It is intended “to provide the commanders on the ground nonpersistent munitions that are necessary for mission success in major contingencies in extreme or exceptional circumstances,” he said.
Mr. Hoffman declined to specify who had requested the policy change.
That November, Mr. Mattis nullified a 2008 memo that suspended the use of almost all cluster weapons and directed the destruction of the current stockpile. Those weapons, built to fight World War III with the Soviet Union, were failure-prone, and gained infamy for killing and wounding civilians as well as American troops.
The Pentagon has been unable to articulate the need for these types of weapons, but industrial lines once thought extinct at defense firms are returning. That is partly because of lobbying efforts by retired senior military officers like Robert H. Scales, a retired Army major general who served as an adviser to Mr. Mattis on overhauling infantry combat. But his argument was based, in part, on a flawed understanding of the effectiveness of cluster munitions in past conflicts, especially the 1991 Gulf war, where analysis afterward found high failure rates and little evidence they had deterred Iraqi forces to the extent at first believed.
The Pentagon’s effort to look to the future has put the military on a path that harkens back to the Cold War, when victory relied on being able to place explosives across broad swathes of ground to limit the enemy’s ability to move across the battlefield.
In 1997, more than 120 countries signed the Ottawa Convention banning antipersonnel land mines that explode indiscriminately. Notably, the United States was not among them, citing a need to use these mines along the border between North and South Korea, and it is not among the 164 nations that are now party to the treaty.
That came in response to an announcement by the White House last week that it would reverse longstanding policies that restricted the use of antipersonnel land mines. Under a 2014 measure by the Obama administration, the use of the weapons — small explosive charges that are usually buried in the ground and detonated when stepped upon — had been limited to the Korean Peninsula.
The moves were only the latest challenges to America’s traditional alliances. President Trump has turned his back on Kurdish allies in Iraq and Syria, threatened to pull troops from South Korea, hinted that he would exit the mutual defense agreement with Japan and even discussed pulling out of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
“What’s really troubling is that, in a way, this gives a green light to others who would be less responsible using these weapons,” Ms. Stohl said.
In the era before precision-guided weapons, unguided cluster munitions — which break open over a target and dispense a number of smaller “submunitions” over a wide area — were seen as a way to make up for inaccurate bombs or artillery fire. Now that laser-guided and GPS-guided weapons are the norm in United States and NATO airstrikes, military officials and humanitarian rights groups no longer see “area attack” weapons like cluster bombs as necessary. The Pentagon has not addressed exactly why it believes cluster weapons are still needed, except for citing their perceived use in a war with North Korea.
American forces last used land mines and cluster munitions in large quantities during the 1991 Gulf war, and cleanup efforts in Kuwait and Iraq to find and destroy unexploded ordnance of both types continue today. Since 1993, the United States has spent $3.4 billion to demine and eradicate unexploded ordnance in the Middle East and Southeast Asia, where civilians still are killed by the remnants left over from the Vietnam conflict. That figure does not include spending to clean up unexploded weapons — including from cluster bombs — on disused military practice ranges, including those on the island of Kaho’olawe in Hawaii and on Vieques in Puerto Rico.
The American military’s recent moves to make land mines and cluster weapons easier to use have elicited widespread criticism.
Some limits on conventional arms remain, including on incendiary substances like white phosphorous and napalm. Their use is restricted in areas where civilians are present, but otherwise permissible against enemy personnel. American warplanes dropped 750-pound napalm bombs in limited numbers in the 1991 Gulf war, as well as in Afghanistan and during the 2003 invasion of Iraq. American artillery units have recently fired white phosphorous-filled shells in Syria and Iraq. The accord limiting how such weapons may be used in warfare is included in the Convention on Certain Conventional Munitions.
Since Mr. Trump took office in early 2017, State Department officials have become less active in yearly meetings that chart the progress of various arms-control treaties, said Mary Wareham of Human Rights Watch.
