The propaganda push suggests the Chinese government might be worried about the lasting damage of the outbreak.
The Chinese government silenced whistle-blowers, withheld crucial information and played down the threat posed by the new coronavirus, allowing an epidemic that has killed thousands to take hold across the country.
Now the ruling Communist Party, facing a storm of anger from the Chinese public over its missteps, is trying to rehabilitate its image by rebranding itself as the unequivocal leader in the global fight against the virus.
The state-run news media has hailed China’s response to the outbreak as a model for the world, accusing countries like the United States and South Korea of acting sluggishly to contain the spread.
“Some countries slow to respond to virus,” read a recent headline from Global Times, a stridently nationalistic tabloid controlled by the Chinese government.
The attempt to rebrand is a gamble for Mr. Xi and the party.
Mr. Xi, China’s most influential leader since Mao, has made it a priority to expand the country’s economic and military might around the world and to demonstrate that China can play the role of responsible superpower.
The coronavirus outbreak has undermined those global ambitions, and the propaganda push suggests the party might be worried about lasting damage. And as the virus spreads to 56 countries and wreaks havoc on global markets, experts say the campaign could revive concerns about China’s secretive approach to managing the crisis.
“The danger for Xi Jinping is that as the virus spreads globally, the role that China’s system of governance played in delaying a timely response will face growing scrutiny and criticism from the international community,” said Elizabeth C. Economy, a senior fellow and director of Asia studies at the Council on Foreign Relations.
The rebranding appears to be “a last-ditch effort by Xi to deflect blame and avoid a demand by the international community for an honest accounting of what actually transpired,” she added.
China is still deep in the throes of a public health crisis, with more than 79,000 confirmed cases of coronavirus infections and at least 2,700 deaths. Factories in many areas have halted production, and the authorities have imposed lockdown measures across much of the country, beginning in January in the central city of Wuhan, the center of the outbreak.
The government is now working to promote the idea that international experts enthusiastically endorse its approach.
A recent story by Xinhua, a state-run news agency, featured experts from several allies of China, including Russia, Cuba and Belarus, lavishing praise on Chinese leaders for showing “openness” and a “highly responsible attitude” in dealing with the outbreak.
Memes have circulated featuring recent praise from a World Health Organization expert for China’s efforts. One shows the expert and a quote from a recent news conference in which he said he would want to be treated in China if he were infected with the virus.
Eager to highlight the country’s successes, Chinese officials and commentators are encouraging other countries to deploy Beijing’s playbook in fighting the outbreak, including its strict lockdown measures.
“The homework that Chinese people wrote with their blood and sweat is right in front of your very eyes, and you aren’t capable of copying it?” said one post widely circulated on WeChat, a messaging app.
Some in the party are directing their criticism at the United States, a popular foe, accusing American officials of “slandering” China by focusing on the shortcomings in its response. They have argued that the American political system is not capable of dealing effectively with an outbreak.
The authorities have dispatched hundreds of state-sponsored journalists to produce sentimental stories about front-line doctors and nurses. Communist groups have created cartoon mascots meant to stir patriotic feelings.
That approach has often provoked blowback from the public. By trying to reframe the crisis as a vindication of the party’s governance model, propaganda officials appear to be trying out yet another message.
David Bandurski, co-director of the China Media Project, a research program affiliated with the University of Hong Kong, said the party appeared to be in crisis and unsure how to grapple with a relentless outpouring of criticism.
Mr. Xi appears eager to reframe the crisis as a triumph for the party and a vindication of his efforts to strengthen its control over everyday life in China.
Mr. Xi has proved to be an agile political operator, and he has emerged from other crises relatively unscathed. But with the public still fuming over the outbreak, he is likely to face lingering questions about the party’s credibility and his leadership, experts say.
Wu Qiang, a political analyst in Beijing and a critic of the party, said a propaganda campaign was unlikely to satisfy the public.
“It is difficult to believe that the Chinese Communist Party has played the role of a hero or leader in the so-called coronavirus prevention in the world,” he said.
He added that Mr. Xi would most likely struggle to regain trust.
