The corporate home of The New Yorker, which reported on Harvey Weinstein and others who have used nondisclosure agreements to silence accusers, steps back from a common settlement tactic.
Condé Nast, the publishing giant behind Vogue, The New Yorker and Vanity Fair, said on Friday that it would no longer use nondisclosure agreements for matters involving harassment and discrimination.
Stan Duncan, the company’s chief people officer, laid out Condé Nast’s new stance in a memo to employees that was shared with The New York Times.
“There are legitimate arguments in favor of NDAs in certain circumstances, which is why their use remains widespread — confidential settlements can spare both employees and employers the cost of litigation, and maintain privacy for all involved,” Mr. Duncan wrote.
The executive added that the company would release people from existing nondisclosure agreements related to those matters on a case-by-case basis.
Mr. Weinstein is currently on trial, accused of rape, in Manhattan.
Condé Nast’s decision to limit the use of nondisclosure agreements was reported earlier by The Daily Beast.
The union that represents employees at The New Yorker and the Condé Nast publications Pitchfork and Ars Technica had proposed that the company drop nondisclosure agreements at the bargaining table for The New Yorker in November, said Susan DeCarava, the president of the union, the NewsGuild of New York.
“We had been having a conversation throughout our union that I think was mirrored culturally and socially about the damage that NDAs cause in workplaces,” Ms. DeCarava said.
Ms. DeCarava said Condé Nast’s announcement was welcome, but urged the company to include the new policy in its formal agreements with the union. She added that the NewsGuild hoped the company would broaden the policy and release anyone who had signed a nondisclosure agreement, without exception.
A Condé Nast spokesman said the company had been reviewing its use of nondisclosure agreements since the merger of its American and international businesses last year.
