Europe|A Hint of Freedom for a Turkish Activist. Then Back to Jail.
SILIVRI, Turkey — A Turkish court on Tuesday acquitted nine people accused of trying to overthrow President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, in a surprising verdict interpreted as an important concession by the government in a trial widely criticized as unjust both at home and abroad.
Among those ordered released was a prominent philanthropist, Osman Kavala, who has spent over two years in detention. But within hours the Istanbul prosecutor announced that he had ordered him kept in custody in connection with an investigation into a coup attempt in 2016.
At day’s end, Mr. Kavala remained in police custody, and he may now face even more serious charges.
Well-wishers who had been waiting for his release near the prison after the verdict eventually began to disperse. According to one news outlet, Mr. Kavala had already been transferred from prison to police headquarters in central Istanbul to be detained on new charges.
Under Mr. Erdogan’s increasingly authoritarian rule, Mr. Kavala’s case has come to symbolize the arbitrary injustice being meted out by the government across the country since the 2016 coup attempt.
Unlike the tens of thousands who have been rounded up for alleged links to the coup, Mr. Kavala and his co-defendants were prosecuted for taking part in protests in Taksim Square, in central Istanbul, in 2013.
Demonstrators occupied the square to halt the construction of a shopping mall in one of the city’s few parks. Mr. Erdogan, who personally supported the development project, saw the protests as a direct challenge to his rule and had them crushed with riot police officers and tear gas.
Prosecutors had demanded life sentences in solitary confinement, without parole, for three of the defendants, including Mr. Kavala, and up to 20 years for the others.
In all, the prosecutors brought charges against 16 defendants, nine of whom were acquitted on Tuesday. The seven others are living abroad and had their arrest warrants withdrawn, although they will have to appear in court on their return.
Human rights organizations and defense lawyers said that the case was deeply flawed and that prosecutors lacked credible evidence. The unexpected acquittals, they said, were undoubtedly a political decision, and came after sustained pressure on Turkey from Western governments to free Mr. Kavala.
The verdict, analysts said, may also reflect the government’s reading of the shifting political winds in the country, which have increasingly buffeted Mr. Erdogan since he and his party suffered a defeat in mayoral elections last year.
The court, packed with friends and supporters of the defendants, erupted into applause and cheers at the announcement of the verdict.
As the eight-month trial went on, the defendants drew growing support, including from the newly elected mayor of Istanbul, Ekrem Imamoglu, who said on Twitter over the weekend that he had attended the protests on several occasions.
In a widespread campaign on social media, other supporters updated their social media accounts in solidarity and posted photos of themselves at the Taksim Square protests.
Few doubted that the verdict Tuesday reflected a decision from the top of government.
Mr. Pekin described the trial as “extremely ridiculous” and warned that the acquittals did not mean Turkey’s justice system was improving. “We have a saying that one flower does not make a spring,” he said.
Mr. Kavala, 63, was met with applause from the public when he entered the court Tuesday carrying a blue plastic bag. He raised his hand acknowledging the support, but did not look around.
Mr. Kavala stooped slightly over the microphone and cited a ruling by the European Court of Human Rights, which found that there were no grounds for Turkey to prosecute him.
Human rights organizations and lawyers said the European Court’s ruling in December may have spurred the Turkish government to order the acquittals to avoid embarrassment.
Mr. Erdogan, who has been pushing for the European Union to reopen chapters of Turkey’s entry to the bloc, has come under pressure from European governments to release Mr. Kavala and end some of the most egregious human rights abuses Turkey.
The case of 11 human rights activists, including two employees of Amnesty International, who were detained after organizing a conference in Istanbul in 2017, is also being closely watched ahead of a hearing in Istanbul Wednesday.
The rearrest of Mr. Kavala was interpreted as a sign that Mr. Erdogan may not be ready to ease up on his opponents.
Mr. Erdogan’s supporters and pro-government media criticized the acquittals, insisting that the Taksim Square protests had been an obvious attempt to overthrow the government, unseat Mr. Erdogan and undermine his plan to run for president the following year.
Some claimed the protests were part of a conspiracy linked to the American-based preacher Fethullah Gulen, who is wanted in Turkey over accusations that he masterminded the coup attempt in 2016.
“It was a clear organization to prevent Recep Tayyip Erdogan from becoming the president,” Melih Altinok, a columnist with a pro-government newspaper, Sabah, said on a television news channel A Haber.
Rights organizations criticized the prosecution as lacking solid evidence and using arguments based on conspiracy theories. Defense lawyers protested that they were not given the transcripts of phone calls used as evidence in the trial and were not permitted to question a prosecution witness.
One defendant, Mucella Yapici, an architect, ended her final statement to the court with a tribute to the demonstrators who died during the 2013 protests, rousing loud applause from the gallery.
