Expectations of a whopping payday set off thousands of lawsuits. But lawyers for the suing cities and states now concede that companies will shell out far less.
The idea that some of the biggest American corporations would not be made to cover a substantial portion of the opioid bill defies common sense to some people. But analysts and lawyers said the calculus to reach these settlements is even trickier than it was with the tobacco settlement.
For starters, four cigarette companies produced a single product — one whose dangers were undisputed. But prescription opioids are beneficial for some patients. In addition, the dozens of companies targeted in the opioid lawsuits “do some very good things,” said Mr. Rice, including making or selling an array of medicines, vitamins and medical devices as well as drugstore products like shampoo and baby lotion.
They include the health and consumer products giant Johnson & Johnson; some of the world’s largest makers of generic medicines; the huge drug distributors McKesson, AmerisourceBergen and Cardinal Health; and the national pharmacy chains, including Walgreens, CVS and Walmart. Opioids usually represent only a sliver of their business. Even plaintiffs’ lawyers say it may not be in the public interest to squeeze the companies too tightly.
But medications pass through many types of businesses. The defendants argue that the federal government bears blame too, because the Food and Drug Administration approved opioids for the market and the Drug Enforcement Administration was supposed to be monitoring sales and distribution.
So far, only two offers for a nationwide settlement have been disclosed. One offer, from Purdue Pharma, the maker of OxyContin, is valued by the company at about $10 billion, including at least $3 billion in cash from the members of the Sackler family, the owners. It has been tentatively accepted by about two dozen states and thousands of local governments, but is far from final.
The financial model of the tobacco settlement took into account the prediction that rising prices and taxes on cigarettes would fund payouts over time. But that structure cannot sustain an opioid settlement that hopes to fund decades of research and treatment because the production of opioids is expected to decline precipitously and prices are not expected to rise.
So which defendants have the means to make a significant impact on recovery efforts?
The distributors argue that they do not have much extra cash. Mr. Percher, a former director of strategic finance at McKesson, explained that while McKesson’s U.S. pharma and specialty division would generate $190 billion in revenue in 2020, making it eighth on the Fortune 500 list, its operating profit would total just $2.8 billion, or 1.47 percent, which wouldn’t even place it among the top 100 companies.
The chains are mostly being sued based on the quantity of opioids they distributed to their own pharmacies. Mr. Percher, the Nephron Research analyst, said that if the chains paid a figure proportional to what the national distributors offered, it would be about $13.8 billion.
The states that support the offer say that a major roadblock is the fee demanded by private lawyers who work both for some states and local governments. “We need to focus on getting dollars into treatment for those suffering, not into the pockets of lawyers,” said Josh Shapiro, the attorney general of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Rice scoffed at that notion, saying that the real impediments are the amounts offered by the opioid defendants.