Photos of suffering children have the power to soften sentiment toward the “other.” Can that still happen in a polarized age?
NASHVILLE — On June 8, 1972, Nick Ut, a Vietnamese photographer working for The Associated Press, shot a now-iconic photo of children fleeing napalm mistakenly dropped on their village by South Vietnamese forces. At the center of the photo is a naked 9-year-old girl named Phan Thi Kim Phuc. She is in agony; her skin appears to be melting. None of the helmeted soldiers in the background are looking at the children. Only the photographer sees her pain.
Now we all see her pain. The photo, which was published by The Times and other newspapers three days later, shocked readers with its clarion depiction of the costs of war. The photo won a Pulitzer Prize in 1973. Later that year, U.S. forces withdrew from Vietnam. Whether or not the photo is directly related to the withdrawal, at the very least it fed the growing antiwar sentiment in this country and may have hastened the end of the war.
“Napalm Girl” belongs to a tradition of photojournalism that furthers the cause of social justice. There’s David Jackson’s 1955 image of 14-year-old Emmett Till in his coffin, murdered for being black in Jim Crow Mississippi. Sam Nzima’s 1976 photo of a teenager carrying a lifeless child in his arms during the Soweto uprising in South Africa. Kevin Carter’s 1993 photo of a starving Sudanese child being watched by a vulture. Nilufer Demir’s 2015 photo of a 3-year-old lying facedown in the surf, drowned with his mother and brother in a desperate attempt to flee the war in Syria. John Moore’s 2018 photo of a terrified 2-year-old Honduran child seeking asylum with her mother at the southern U.S. border. These photographs clarify a particular cultural moment; they distill the vast churn of history into a single image so searing it returns in your dreams to make you weep in the dark.
As with Mr. Ut’s photo of Ms. Kim Phuc, it’s never completely clear whether that image is the actual cause of a communitywide lurch toward empathy, but the correlation, at least, is almost always evident. The federal government did dismantle Jim Crow laws in the segregated South, even if it dragged its feet in doing so. American forces did ultimately leave Vietnam. Apartheid did finally end in South Africa. European countries did eventually open their borders to refugees. After months of defending it, the Trump administration did end its brutal family-separation policy at the southern border, at least officially.
The Times’s recent photography roundup of the past decade got me to thinking about the power of photographs to affect the course of history. So many of these photos were made during times of profound extremity: war, natural disaster, deep social unrest. There are heart-wrenching pictures of survival and death amid the rubble, of an unarmed man and an unarmed woman facing down officers in riot gear, of tribal members protesting the Dakota Access pipeline, of death in the cause of freedom. Images of ugliness cheek by jowl with images of honor, photos of fury side by side with pictures of love.
But the photos that stand out, again and again, are images of children: a baby in a portable crib watching an eviction team dismantling his home, terrified survivors of the massacre at Sandy Hook Elementary School being led from the building, a tiny girl howling at the edge of her father’s open coffin, a baby refugee from the Rohingya minority fleeing Myanmar in a sling on his mother’s hip, a 7-year-old dying of starvation in Yemen.
Such photos have the power to haunt us in ways that other photographs, no matter how moving, rarely do. They trigger an empathy that’s both profound and unquestioning: When we see a child in danger, our immediate impulse is to intervene, and we don’t stop to interrogate that impulse. What kind of person wonders whether it’s right to protect a child?
In part this reaction is biological: An infant’s crying inspires an immediate caretaking response in the brains of adults, whether or not they’re responsible for the baby. Which makes sense, if only in evolutionary terms. Helpless creatures who don’t inspire help from the powerful are helpless creatures who don’t survive.
More than that, though, what we feel when we look at images of children in pain or terror or death is surely tied to our innate capacity for justice. Children did not cause and cannot possibly understand what we are doing to them, and their innocence is a reminder of our own moral obligations, their suffering a spur to action.
The world has changed since David Jackson photographed the brutalized face of Emmett Till and Nick Ut captured the napalm-burned body of Phan Thi Kim Phuc. Last summer, Julia Le Duc photographed the bodies of Óscar Alberto Martínez Ramírez and his 23-month-old daughter, Valeria, facedown in the mud alongside the Rio Grande. The photo went viral on social media, a visceral reminder of the desperation of migrants seeking asylum in this country. And yet this country is no closer to a reasonable immigration policy now than it was when baby Valeria died with her tiny arm wrapped around her father’s neck. Nor are we any closer to a gun policy that protects schoolchildren or an economic policy that protects the working poor.
 Perhaps our distrust of technology, our suspicion that the images have been manipulated, or that we ourselves are being manipulated, makes it too easy to distrust our own response to them, too.
But so long as we continue to be moved, even unconsciously, by the iconic photographs of our age, there is hope. So long as photographs — and novels and poems and songs and plays and paintings and every other kind of art that filters the world through the moral imagination — teach us to see what we might otherwise overlook, there is a chance for change. Our national failure to develop a humane and coherent policy toward any of the conflicts that cause the suffering of children is a temporary failure. Government offices can change hands. Policies can change direction. What doesn’t change is the authority of a human heart open to the pain of others.
Nick Ut’s photo of Phan Thi Kim Phuc taught us something crucial about the casual brutality of war, but it reminds us of something equally crucial: the power of human compassion. Ms. Kim Phuc’s younger brother died from wounds sustained in the same napalm attack that she survived. And she survived thanks to the quick actions of Mr. Ut, who doused her with water and took her to a hospital in Saigon for care. Only after she was safe did he take his film into the darkroom to see what he had seen.
