Raf Simons and Miuccia Prada are partners now. Who’s next?
PARIS — It was a bit of a shock to the fashion world on Sunday — at the end of Milan Fashion Week — when Miuccia Prada announced that Raf Simons would be joining her company as co-creative director. But only a bit of a shock.
“Raf to Prada” rumors had been circulating for months. The more surprising news was that he and Ms. Prada would be equal design partners, a first-of-its-kind long-term arrangement.
In recent years, there had only been one similar partnership, when Christian Lacroix collaborated with Dries Van Noten for one show — just one season. But a partnership with “no end date to the contract,” as Ms. Prada said at the secretive surprise news conference? That was a big deal. And one that might inspire other brands — caught in the sales-driven cycle of hirings and firings — to consider similar moves.
But until that happens, The New York Times has spent the first few days of Paris Fashion Week asking front-row guests which contemporary designers they would like to see team up: fashion as fantasy football.
It was an easier question for Andrew Bolton, curator of the Metropolitan Museum of Art’s Costume Institute, than for others. He has been putting together the museum’s next big exhibition, called “About Time: Fashion and Duration,” which will examine connective moments in fashion history — pairing designs that have similar elements but made in different eras by different designers.
He thought it would be interesting to see Ralph Lauren and Tom Ford work together — two distinctly American designers: one who’s driven by sentimentality and the other by sex (but both by cinema).
“Their inspirations are similar but their aesthetic conclusions are very different,” Mr. Bolton said.
Others thought outside the industry box. Aya Kanai, the newly appointed editor in chief of Marie Claire’s U.S. edition, proposed that the actor Billy Porter partner with Jeremy Scott at Moschino.
Mr. Porter’s star has risen in fashion with each dramatic, gender-bending, fine art-inspired red carpet appearance. And Mr. Scott lives for drama — his latest Moschino show was inspired by Marie Antoinette, complete with models in towering wigs wearing elaborate dresses resembling tiered cakes.
As disrupters, they would be a match, Ms. Kanai suggested.
