His 1972 book about his beloved Brooklyn Dodgers, acknowledged as a classic, was, like many of his 20 or so other books, steeped in memories of his boyhood.
Roger Kahn, whose 1972 book about the Brooklyn Dodgers of the early 1950s, “The Boys of Summer,” melded reportage, sentiment and sociology in a way that stamped baseball as a subject fit for serious writers and serious readers, died on Thursday in Mamaroneck, N.Y. He was 92.
His son Gordon Jacques Kahn confirmed the death, at a nursing home. Mr. Kahn had most recently resided in Stone Ridge, N.Y., in Ulster County, after living most of his life in Brooklyn and Manhattan.
Mr. Kahn’s 20 or so books, many about baseball, include a couple of novels, a portrait of the volatile but winning 1978 Yankees, a biography of Jack Dempsey and a collaboration with Pete Rose on Rose’s own story, published in 1989, just months after he was banished from baseball.
But it’s fair to say that Mr. Kahn’s most memorable work sprang from early in his career.
In the spring of 1952, he was a 24-year-old reporter for The New York Herald Tribune when he was assigned to travel with the Dodgers. It was a rich time in the game’s history, especially in New York, the undisputed center of the baseball universe, home to three teams and three perfervid fan bases.
For 10 seasons, from 1947 to 1956, one New York team or another — the Yankees, the Giants or the Dodgers — won every World Series but one. The Yankees were in the midst of their still unequaled streak of five consecutive World Series victories.
Just a few months before Mr. Kahn joined the Dodgers’ press entourage, the team had lost the pennant to the Giants, their crosstown National League rivals, in a three-game playoff, which ended with Bobby Thomson’s “shot heard ’round the world,” perhaps the most famous home run ever hit.
It is this fecund territory that Mr. Kahn, looking back from a distance of decades, harvested in several books, often entwining memories from his own Brooklyn boyhood and his coming-of-age as a journalist with tales from the clubhouse and the barroom and the diamond.
A handful of previous books — among them “The Long Season” (1960), by Jim Brosnan, and “Ball Four” (1970), by Jim Bouton, both written by active ballplayers — had sought to illuminate the game in close-up, without a mythologizing sheen.
While Mr. Angell’s elegant essays were contemporaneous reports on the game, Mr. Kahn seized on techniques of the so-called new journalism; for one thing, he became a character in his own narrative. And with a title taken from a Dylan Thomas poem, he turned his book into a meditation on fathers and sons, the passage of time, teamwork, civil rights and the nature of men — themes so seductive and enduring that in connection with baseball they ring as clichés today.
Roger Kahn was born in Brooklyn on Oct. 31, 1927, just a few weeks after Babe Ruth and the Yankees swept the World Series from Pittsburgh. His father, Gordon, was a history teacher and baseball fan blessed with such a memory for wide-ranging trivia that he helped provide questions for the radio quiz show “Information Please.” Roger’s mother, Olga (Rockow) Kahn, taught English and had little tolerance for baseball but imbued her son with a love of mythology, Shakespeare and Walt Whitman.
He graduated from Erasmus Hall High School and spent three years at New York University before joining The Herald Tribune as a copy boy.
After his two-year stint with the Dodgers, Mr. Kahn covered the Giants for The Herald Tribune in 1954. He later wrote for Newsweek, The Saturday Evening Post and Esquire.
In the 1960s he wrote two books on subjects other than sports: a consideration of his faith, “The Passionate People: What It Means to Be a Jew in America,” and a report on student unrest at Columbia University, “The Battle for Morningside Heights: Why Students Rebel.” He wrote regularly for The New York Times in the late 1970s.
What has been called the golden age of baseball in New York ended when the Dodgers and Giants announced in 1957 that they would leave for California. After “The Boys of Summer,” Mr. Kahn revisited those years in other books, including “Joe and Marilyn: A Memory of Love,” about the ill-fated marriage of Joe DiMaggio and Marilyn Monroe; “The Era, 1947-57: When the Yankees, the Giants, and the Dodgers Ruled the World”; “Memories of Summer: When Baseball Was an Art, and Writing About It a Game,” and “Rickey & Robinson: The True, Untold Story of the Integration of Baseball,” which examined the relationship between Jackie Robinson and Branch Rickey, the executive who broke baseball’s race barrier by bringing Robinson to the Dodgers.
In other books Mr. Kahn examined the battle between the pitcher and the hitter (“The Head Game: Baseball Seen From the Pitcher’s Mound”) and the low minor leagues (“Good Enough to Dream”).
His novels were “The Seventh Game,” about a pitcher’s personal travails, and “But Not to Keep,” about a journalist’s personal travails. His book about the 1978 Yankees, “October Men,” traced a turbulent championship season.
In the opening pages of “The Boys of Summer,” one passage expressed the purpose of much of Mr. Kahn’s writing: the nostalgic yearning that baseball, and Brooklyn, evoked in so many people. Far fewer readers today would recognize the details, but the longing for something gone will always be familiar.
