Carmelle Tsai and Bradley Wallace, both doctors, have spent their lives taking care of people. Now they will do it together.
In her 20’s, Dr. Carmelle Tsai thought she might spend her life as an unmarried physician and create a family out of the children and communities she served around the world. However, her real hope was that she would find a partner, specifically someone tall, lanky, athletic, at least a little bit nerdy (she describes herself as very nerdy) and Christian. “He needed to be a man who loved Jesus with all his heart,” she said.
In May 2017, she was texting with Dr. Rachel Davis, a friend and fellow physician who is also interested in global health. “I’m pretty sure I was in Tanzania at the time and Carmelle had just returned from Laos,” Dr. Davis said. Dr. Tsai had mentioned that she wished she had a boyfriend to pick her up at the airport, and maybe also to walk her adopted dog, Dash, when she traveled. “Well, I only have one single Christian guy friend left,” Dr. Davis texted back.
By the time he got in touch with her, at the urging of Dr. Davis, she was on her way to Zambia for work. So, they began communicating via texts, emails and Facebook. They discussed their favorite books (the “Harry Potter” series for her, “Lord of the Rings” for him). “We talked about theology, our faith, our backgrounds, our love for medicine and silly things like, ‘What’s your Chipotle order?’” said Dr. Tsai, who grew up in Irvine, Calif.
Friends say both are genuinely altruistic, but not in a holier-than-thou way. In Philadelphia, she always carries restaurant gift cards to give to people on the street who look like they could use one. Dr. Wallace celebrates his birthdays by doing acts of kindness (30 acts of kindness for his 30th birthday, for example). This might include picking up trash (dog excrement included) on the sidewalk, dropping candy off at a hospital, or corralling all the abandoned grocery carts outside a supermarket.
Still, she returned home wondering if they would ever become more than friends. She later learned that Dr. Wallace prayed and fasted after she left, as a way of clarifying his feelings for her and deciding whether to commit to a relationship.
In June 2019, she attended a training in international child rights in Geneva and scheduled a few days in Paris afterward. At the time, he was in Hangzhou, China finishing an exchange program for medical residents and about to head home to Denver. He quickly changed his plans and flew to Paris instead, without telling Dr. Tsai.
When she landed in Paris, on July 1, she found a text from him that read: “Today’s goodbye, tomorrow’s hello. It’s a clue from ‘The Amazing Race’ I’ve set up for you!” Dr. Tsai figured he’d set up a mini-Amazing Race for her, just for fun and from afar. The answer to the clue was “Aloha,” a reference to the Hostel Aloha where she was staying. When she checked in, the receptionist handed her an envelope containing the next clue: “A tower for all our tomorrows.” By then, Dr. Tsai suspected Dr. Wallace was in Paris and possibly planning to propose.
“You better believe I put my dress on and I booked it to the Eiffel Tower!” she said.
She found him there, in a suit and holding a huge bouquet of roses. He knelt, told her he loved her (it was the first time he’d said it aloud), and asked her to marry him. Then, they headed to the Pont Des Arts, a pedestrian bridge over the Seine River, where he pulled out a bottle of water he’d been carrying in his back pocket. “On the bridge, overlooking the Seine, with the Notre Dame in the background, he sat me down and washed my feet,” she said. He said he did so as “a sign of being a servant to her and a lifetime commitment” and also as a way of honoring Jesus, who washes the feet of his disciples in the Bible. Then, they traipsed around Paris, ate crepes, watched fireworks, and returned to their separate hostels.
On Feb. 8, they were married at the Manor House, a mansion in the foothills of Littleton, Colo., that looks not unlike the White House. It was a bluebird day — 24 hours of perfect weather between two massive snowstorms.
At one point, the 170 or so guests sang the gospel song, “Reckless Love.” Almost everyone appeared familiar with the words and sang so heartily it almost sounded as if there was a gospel choir in the room.
Overall, the wedding had a strong participatory feeling, partly because the bride and groom had a wedding party of 25 who seemed determined to “love on” the couple, to use the groom’s terminology.
“Their wedding really was a community activity,” Dr. Davis said.
Where The Manor House, a mansion in the foothills of Littleton, Colo.
Wedding Registry Instead of traditional wedding gifts, the couple asked guests to help purchase medical equipment — a stretcher for transporting patients, oxygen cylinders, a suture kit — needed by Family Legacy. Since 2010, the bride has volunteered for Family Legacy, an organization that provides education and medical care to children in Zambia.
Fireworks Before getting into their getaway car, the couple walked/kissed/smiled/hugged/posed their way through two columns of so-called cold fireworks, which do not create a wildfire hazard and are even cool enough to touch.
Prayers for Two The couple prayed together before the ceremony, on opposite sides of a door so he wouldn’t see her dress.
Two Dresses During the ceremony, the bride wore a Pronovias Vicenta dress, found on preownedweddingdresses.com and an Enzoani Larissa dress from stillwhite.com for the reception. “It’s better for the environment,” she said of her recycled dresses.
Two Homes For now, the couple will have a long-distance marriage, with Dr. Tsai in Philadelphia (and all over the world) and Dr. Wallace in Denver. In the summer, they plan to move to Birmingham, Ala., and live together for the first time.