No one “won” the debate, which must have had Republicans laughing all the way to the bank. What a disheartening spectacle of bombast, braggadocio and rude behavior. Educating voters about the issues? Hardly. Any effort to enlighten was lost as candidates stomped on one another to come out on top. I was in despair.
My pipe dream? I wish our candidates would work together to convince a landslide of voters that this president and what he represents absolutely must be defeated.
As the urgency of the moment became evident, as Super Tuesday sits at the doorstep, as Michael Bloomberg and his billions threaten to change the political landscape, a war broke out on the Las Vegas stage.
Elizabeth Warren attacked seemingly everything that moved, her suddenly sinking campaign clearly deciding that being “tough” was the appropriate manner to get noticed, to breathe life into her candidacy.
Mr. Bloomberg was pummeled by all, his wealth, his stop-and-frisk policy, his nondisclosure agreements all fodder for endless very loud criticism. At times he appeared flustered, a bit befuddled and overmatched. It was not a stellar introduction to the country.
Mayor Pete and Senator Amy Klobuchar standing next to each other and going toe to toe.
Senator Bernie Sanders repeating his mantra over and over, when not denigrating the former mayor of New York City.
And Joe Biden, well, he was there trying to be as coherent and focused as possible.
It made for a more entertaining evening for certain. Whether it was actually a debate is debatable.
It was refreshing to see the Democratic presidential candidates going at it with gusto on Wednesday night. Unlike the previous debates, which were often soporific and anodyne, this one was lively and afforded viewers, particularly those who are still undecided, a sharply delineated contrast among each of the candidates.
Further, it showcased a group of feisty contenders, each of whom exhibited the ability on the national stage to both land and take a punch — critical factors for the eventual nominee to take on President Trump.
By the time Senator Elizabeth Warren finishes dropping napalm on every one of the other Democratic presidential candidates, all President Trump will have to do in the general election is sweep up the Democratic ashes and dump them in the dustbin behind the White House.
This is what happened to Barry Goldwater in 1964, when New York Republicans like Nelson A. Rockefeller attacked Goldwater as an “extremist” crackpot. Of course, Lyndon B. Johnson won the 1964 presidential election in a landslide.
But here we are more than 50 years later and some Democratic presidential candidates are none the wiser. The Democratic Party needs an 11th Commandment of its own, and those who choose to sin against it should be ostracized.
I watched the debate and Mike Bloomberg very closely. I was impressed, at times, with what I saw. I’ve only recently decided I would support Elizabeth Warren in the Super Tuesday primary here in Virginia. Now, I’m not so sure. Mr. Bloomberg had command. He debated well. He held his ground, even as the others punched and punched and punched. Some of those punches landed and some didn’t. He was the only person on the stage I felt could remotely hold himself up against President Trump in a debate.
The debate itself was, at times, absolutely idiotic. Skewering Amy Klobuchar for forgetting (or not knowing) the Mexican president’s name off the cuff. That. Does. Not. Matter. What a waste of time.
Bernie was Bernie. Biden was Biden. Warren was Warren — thank goodness, I’d wondered where she’d gone! Klobuchar was Klobuchar. The media talking heads were the media talking heads; at times I wish they’d stop talking.
While Michael Bloomberg’s Democratic opponents can accuse him of misogyny and racism, the one opponent who cannot is Donald Trump. We have only to look at Mr. Trump’s history of “buying the silence of alleged mistresses,” as your Feb. 20 editorial noted, and putting immigrant children in cages, separating them from their parents, to name just a few of his myriad shortcomings.
Mr. Bloomberg’s negatives could not be weaponized by the president. That would free Mr. Bloomberg to use his superior intelligence and proven administrative ability and leave Mr. Trump with only his childish name-calling as an attack. “Don’t vote for Bloomberg because he’s shorter than I am” is not really an inspiring message.
