Sally Hoelscher makes her debut on Presidents’ Day.
MONDAY PUZZLE — A crossword that celebrates a holiday is nothing new. We’ve solved puzzles that celebrate Halloween, Valentine’s Day, Christmas and Hanukkah. We’ve even solved Presidents’ Day-themed puzzles.
What we have not done thus far is acknowledge Presidents’ Day by touting the achievements of the first ladies associated with them. And that’s a cool idea in my book.
Sally Hoelscher makes her New York Times Crossword debut with a puzzle that will require some specialized knowledge, but remember that this is a Monday puzzle — the crossings will be kind. And you might walk away with some suggested reading.
15A. I always think TULSA when I think Oklahoma, but TIL that TULSA is the second-largest city in that state.
5D. I’ve heard of “nubby,” but NUBBLY was a new one on me. It was a new one in the Crossword, too.
Ms. Hoelscher scored a neat find: the names of five U.S. first ladies who have written memoirs, and their names are symmetrical in terms of letter count. For example, at 17A, the answer to the clue “Author of the memoir ‘Spoken from the Heart’ (2010)” is LAURA BUSH. Similarly, at 36A, the answer to the clue “Author of the memoir ‘Becoming’ (2018)” is MICHELLE OBAMA.
Four of the five first ladies make their full name debuts in the New York Times Crossword.
I have enjoyed word puzzles, and especially crosswords, for a long time. About a year and a half ago, I was working a Times puzzle when I had the thought, “Who makes these puzzles? Could I make crossword puzzles?” After doing a lot of research, experiencing a significant amount of construction trial and error and receiving some helpful advice from editors and other constructors, it turns out that I can. I am delighted to be making my debut in The New York Times!
When I finished reading “Becoming” by Michelle Obama, I wondered how many other first ladies had written memoirs, and that’s how the idea for this puzzle was born. After a couple of revisions, the puzzle was accepted in April of 2019 with the plan of saving it for Presidents’ Day. I didn’t design the puzzle with Presidents’ Day in mind, but I think it’s a good fit. I hope you have as much fun solving my puzzle as I had constructing it.
