Politics|Sanders Is Stirring Cold War Angst. Young Voters Say, So What?
Sanders Is Stirring Cold War Angst. Young Voters Say, So What?
How Democratic voters feel about Bernie Sanders’s views on foreign policy and socialist governments tends to split along generational lines.
MIAMI — In the spring of 1989, as the outgoing mayor of Burlington, Vt., Bernie Sanders and his wife, Jane, traveled to Cuba on an eight-day trip, with the hopes of meeting the Cuban dictator, Fidel Castro.
​The 47-year-old ​Mr. Sanders ​didn’t get time with Mr. Castro, but he ​toured Havana​, met with its mayor and marveled that visitors could take a cab anywhere in the country​. “The revolution there is far deeper and more profound than I understood it to be,”​ he said back home, according to The Burlington Free Press, and commended Cuba ​for providing free health care, free education and free housing.
Many older Democrats with sharp memories of the Cold War have been baffled and even offended by Mr. Sanders’s praise for the country — which is in the spotlight after he repeated some of it on “60 Minutes” this week — and it is one of the reasons they believe a self-described democratic socialist like Mr. Sanders would be a risky presidential nominee.
But for many younger progressives, the negative reactions to Mr. Sanders’s comments — ​which were also aired and debated in his 2016 presidential campaign — seem like boomer panic and a pernicious form of red-baiting, and reveal the divides within the Democratic Party.
“Socialism is a supposedly scary term that we’ve talked about so much, but we really don’t understand,” said Nolan Lok, 18, a chemistry major at the University of California, Los Angeles, where he cast a ballot early on Wednesday, ahead of its primary next week.
Older liberals show varying support for Mr. Sanders’s positions, and the generational split was less apparent in South Florida, where many Cubans, Venezuelans and Nicaraguans do not like his views. Yet progressive voters born after the end of the Cold War — many of them people of color — dismissed the concerns about socialism as anachronistic and irrelevant.
For years in Washington, those left-wing views defined and to some extent diminished Mr. Sanders, an independent congressman and then senator who was widely regarded as a quirky outsider to the Democratic establishment. But now as the front-runner for the party’s nomination, Mr. Sanders is being pressured to explain his anti-imperialist worldview in the face of scrutiny and criticism from his rivals.
Mr. Buttigieg and other Democrats say Mr. Sanders’s views are not only misguided but also reinforce his image as a socialist, which will make him and other Democratic candidates down the ballot easy targets for President Trump and Republicans. And if he were to win the nomination, his stances could jeopardize his chances in Florida, the largest presidential general election battleground, where there is little room for appreciation of the 1959 Communist Cuban revolution.
Mr. Sanders stood by those positions at the debate, where he criticized U.S. policy in Latin America and repeated his praise for Mr. Castro’s literacy program.
“Occasionally it might be a good idea to be honest about American foreign policy, and that includes the fact that America has overthrown governments all over the world in Chile, in Guatemala, in Iran,” Mr. Sanders said.
Many older Cuban-Americans cringed at Mr. Sanders’s remarks, saying he sounded like an apologist for Communist indoctrination. And his views provoke particularly strong resistance in Miami, where the Cuban diaspora remains a powerful political force.
The backlash was evident not only among conservative Cubans but also among liberal ones who helped former President Barack Obama win Florida twice.
Mr. Sanders’s campaign does not view his remarks on Cuba, or his history of praising socialist governments, as problematic for him because it matters more to older moderate voters, a demographic Mr. Sanders already finds hard to reach.
Aides believe he is competitive in Florida in the Democratic primary, and the campaign plans to run commercials in all of the major media markets by next week. It is already deploying staff members to every region of the state.
In South Carolina, which holds its primary on Saturday and where many Democrats are evaluating candidates based on their perceived ability to defeat Mr. Trump, older voters examined Mr. Sanders’s unyielding views through the lens of electability.
“The man had his honeymoon in the old Soviet Union,” said Harvey William, 70, who works in Charleston, referring to a trip Mr. Sanders and his wife made there shortly after they married in 1988. Mr. William, who intends to vote for former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., spoke bitterly about his experiences with socialism growing up in Guyana.
Voters at Mr. Sanders’s events, however, hardly mention his foreign policy views, instead ticking off his domestic policy agenda that includes implementing Medicare for all and making public colleges and universities tuition-free.
Instead, young voters have experienced a structural shift in the economy, including the 2008 financial crisis and the crushing burden of college debt, that has given them a more critical view of capitalism, he said. Professor Isserman, though, warned that Republicans would use the senator’s comments to attack him in a general election.
Blanca Estevez, a member of the National Political Committee of the Democratic Socialists of America from Arkansas, said her political leanings initially confused her mother, given that the family fled the civil war in El Salvador. But Ms. Estevez said she had made some inroads.
Even in Florida, Mr. Sanders has some support among younger Cuban-Americans, though they do not necessarily agree with his views on the Castro dictatorship. Defending Mr. Castro’s literacy program “kind of misses the bigger picture, which is the means don’t justify the ends,” said Julián Santos, 30, a legislative aide who was raised by Cuban immigrant parents in Hialeah, the most heavily Cuban-American city.
Still, Mr. Santos backs Mr. Sanders, as he did in 2016, because of his emphasis on addressing economic inequality and racial injustice.
In states like California, where Mr. Sanders has devoted time and resources to reaching out to the Latino community, some older Democratic voters have come around to him.
Concepción Cruz, a 64-year-old Mexican immigrant who voted early in Los Angeles this week, said she had backed Hillary Clinton in the last election. But her three sons have supported Mr. Sanders since 2015, and despite her initial intention to back Mr. Biden this year, she changed her mind after watching several debates.
Patricia Mazzei reported from Miami, and Sydney Ember from Winston-Salem, N.C. Katie Glueck contributed reporting from Charleston, S.C., Isabella Grullón Paz from New York and Jennifer Medina from Los Angeles. Kitty Bennett contributed research.