Lots of fiction to choose from on this week’s list, including Isabel Allende’s new novel, which revisits the aftermath of the Spanish Civil War, and a novella by Lily Tuck that reimagines “Wuthering Heights.” Other new works of fiction feature a medieval Frenchwoman, an undocumented Sri Lankan immigrant in Australia, a woman whose life changes for the better (or so she thinks), capitalism’s exploitative structures and a dystopia set in the distant past.
There are two visual treats as well: “Return to Romance!” collects comics about love from the early 1960s by an unsung master, and “The Cursed Hermit” is a graphic novel about strange doings at a secluded school.
SEDUCTION: A History From the Enlightenment to the Present, by Clement Knox. (Pegasus, $28.95.) Like an R-rated version of “A Christmas Carol,” Knox’s history whisks readers away to meet enticers past, from Casanova to the flappers of the 1920s, showing how the art of seduction has influenced politics and power, literature and social movements. It turns out we have long been conflicted about this art: Is it villainy or sexual liberation? Knox also discusses the book on a recent episode of the Book Review’s podcast.
INDELICACY, by Amina Cain. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $25.) An aspiring writer marries a man she meets while mopping the floor at the museum where she works. He seems like the ticket to the life she wants — and yet. “You’re a little bit jealous of this woman until you realize how miserable she is,” writes Elisabeth Egan, who chose Cain’s novel for Group Text, the Book Review’s monthly column for readers and book clubs. “She has exactly what she thought she wanted, but the next phase of her life unfolds hypnotically as ‘Indelicacy’ morphs from a modern ‘Pygmalion’ into a fable infused with an old-fashioned moral: Be careful what you wish for.” Cain’s small but mighty novel reads like a ghost story and packs the punch of a feminist classic.
THE CURSED HERMIT, by Kris Bertin and Alexander Forbes. (Conundrum, $20.) In the second of the graphic novel series Hobtown Mystery Stories, a pair of teenage sleuths are thrown into a loopy adventure at Knotty Pines, a vast and secluded boarding school, thick with bad mojo and elaborate wallpaper, where Lovecraftian evil lurks. Picture Nancy Drew but darker, and watch the creepiness go off the charts.
THE RECIPE FOR REVOLUTION, by Carolyn Chute. (Grove, $30.) This sprawling novel about capitalist exploitation and the delusions of growth features a wide-ranging cast, including militia groups, media figures, cultists, callous entrepreneurs, economic outcasts and Republican wives. “The events of the novel take place circa-Y2K, but Chute’s concerns seem very 2020: how reality is named, created, fragmented, trolled, distorted,” our reviewer Nathan Hill writes.
