The American School for the Deaf, founded in 1817 in Connecticut, said at least 37 alumni had also complained that they were subjected to corporal punishment by former staff members.
The learning institution, the American School for the Deaf, which was founded in 1817 in Hartford, Conn., detailed the pattern of abuse in a report after a yearlong investigation by an outside lawyer hired by the school.
The report, which was released Friday and based on interviews with 81 alumni, former faculty and staff members and other witnesses, said the abuse occurred from the 1950s through the 1980s at the main campus, now in West Hartford, and at the school’s Camp Isola Bella summer facility in Salisbury, Conn.
The school said that the findings were reported to the appropriate authorities, and that it had contacted the West Hartford Police Department, the Connecticut Department of Education and the state’s Department of Children and Families when it started its investigation.
The West Hartford police chief, Vernon Riddick Jr., and Gail P. Hardy, the state’s attorney for the Hartford judicial district, did not immediately respond to requests for comment on Monday evening.
“Fortunately,’’ Mr. Yazbak added, “mandated reporting laws and hiring practices have advanced tremendously since the 80s, including the recent requirement of the Employee Verification Form.
Dr. Boatner, Mr. Powers, Ms. Messener, Ms. Potwine and Mr. Bland have all since died.
Mr. Couthen, Mr. Boucher, Mr. DeStefano and Mr. Vintinner could not immediately be reached for comment on Monday.
The report said that Mr. DeStefano was terminated in 1983 after he was confronted about an allegation that he had sexually abused an 18-year-old male student.
Jeffrey S. Bravin, the school’s executive director, declined to comment beyond the report and the statement on the school’s website.
Mr. Heath did not respond to an email request for comment on Monday.
The punishment included being “forced to kneel on broomsticks, kneeling for extended periods of time, being forced to walk on their knees, being slapped and punched, being struck with sticks, belts, paddles and/or rulers, and being restrained with belts, sheets and/or straightjackets,” the report said.
The American School for the Deaf was founded by Mason Fitch Cogswell, a Hartford physician whose daughter, Alice, became deaf from an illness. He worked with Thomas Hopkins Gallaudet and Laurent Clerc, who were respectively the school’s first principal and teacher, to get the school off the ground. Mr. Gallaudet’s son, Edward Miner Gallaudet, helped establish Gallaudet University in Washington, D.C.