

A series of mistakes underscored a longstanding problem in the N.Y.P.D.’s Special Victims division.
One frigid morning in January 2019, a New York University student woke up in her apartment near the school’s Manhattan campus to find a masked man standing over her in bed. 
Two months later, the police matched fingerprints found on an unopened condom wrapper in her room to those of a 22-year-old man named Tyler Lockett, who happened to be in jail on charges of having committed three burglaries in Brooklyn.
What should have been a lucky break for law enforcement, however, soon turned disastrous. Instead of being charged with rape, Mr. Lockett was released from jail in July and the authorities said he attacked three more women over two weeks before he was caught.
Investigators in the New York Police Department’s Special Victims Division made a series of errors leading up to Mr. Lockett’s release, including failing to inform prosecutors he was a rape suspect after his fingerprints were found, according to several law enforcement officials, the student’s mother and a police document.
Those errors underscored a longstanding problem identified in a scathing city audit in 2018: Some of the division’s detectives, facing heavy caseloads and a lack of resources, discourage rape victims from cooperating and push to close cases without a full investigation.
The audit was only one of several recent signs of trouble inside the Special Victims Division. One of its detectives was found to have mishandled the investigation into sexual assault allegations against the Hollywood producer Harvey Weinstein, leading to a key charge’s being dropped.
The sergeant who supervised that detective is among several division commanders who are being investigated on allegations of high-level misconduct concerning offenses such as stealing time and failing to turn over rape kits for processing.
Since the audit, the Police Department has overhauled the division, replacing its longtime commander with Deputy Chief Judith R. Harrison, a former Queens precinct commander. Officials also added more detectives, expanded trauma-sensitive training and made public overtures to victims.
Commissioner Dermot F. Shea, when he was chief of detectives last year, denied the rape investigation involving Mr. Lockett had been mishandled. Last summer, he blamed Brooklyn prosecutors for the fiasco, pointing out they let Mr. Lockett plead guilty and enter a diversion program rather than insisting on a jail sentence.
Chief Harrison, in an interview, said the investigation stalled because the victim does not want to testify and officials do not want to pressure her.
Still, some investigators, rape victims and their lawyers say the handling of the Lockett case suggests that the underlying problems in the division have not been fixed.
The N.Y.U. student’s mother, who was with her daughter at the police questioning, said a senior sex-crimes detective, William T. McLaughlin, doubted her daughter’s story of being raped and talked her out of cooperating with the investigation by telling her — falsely — that her identity would become public if she did.
Detective McLaughlin did not respond to several requests for an interview.
Chief Harrison said in an interview in November that she was not aware of the allegation that Detective McLaughlin had discouraged the victim from going forward. She said detectives are taught to tell victims they will do everything they can to protect their privacy.
“What we don’t want to do is re-victimize a victim ever,” she said.
After the assault on Jan. 12, 2019, the student immediately ran out of her East Village apartment at about 3 a.m. and called 911 from a Papaya Dog shop.
Police officers took her first to a hospital for a medical examination, then to the Manhattan Special Victims squad, where she was interviewed by Detective McLaughlin, an experienced investigator who joined the Special Victims Division in 2013.
She told the detective her attacker had first raped her, then bound her hands with duct tape before making off with her laptop, cellphone and debit card.
The detective, however, seemed skeptical of her account, asking her whether she knew her attacker or had let him into her apartment, the victim’s mother said.
State civil-rights law guarantees a sexual assault victims’ rights to privacy and anonymity. Victims’ names are withheld in court documents, and most professional news organizations do not identify victims without their permission. New York’s rape shield law also forbids defense lawyers from asking a victim about unrelated sexual activity.
Chief Harrison said that investigators began considering Mr. Lockett as a possible suspect in the rape soon after he was arrested on burglary charges in Brooklyn. They believed he had followed the rape victim home from Williamsburg, and investigators noted Mr. Lockett had also followed young women home at night from Williamsburg when he committed the burglaries.
Still, the police had no evidence placing Mr. Lockett inside the victim’s apartment until March, when lab technicians matched fingerprints collected from the condom wrapper to Mr. Lockett’s, Chief Harrison said.
On March 14, Detective McLaughlin created what is known as an investigation card and indicated there was “probable cause” to arrest Mr. Lockett, according to a copy of the form obtained by The New York Times.
The document, called an “i-card” for short, acted like an arrest warrant and appeared on Mr. Lockett’s criminal record. The next day, officers in a fugitive warrants squad noted on the i-card that Mr. Lockett was already in custody in Brooklyn.
Law enforcement officials said the fingerprint match should have triggered several investigative steps, but Chief Harrison said they were not taken. No one visited the victim to persuade her to go forward. Nor did the police call the Brooklyn prosecutors overseeing the burglary cases. In addition, investigators did not ask corrections officials to inform them if Mr. Lockett was released from jail.
Chief Harrison said a police officer did call the victim to ask if she knew Mr. Lockett and she said she did not.
On March 29, Detective McLaughlin downgraded the status of the rape case on the i-card, and it disappeared from Mr. Lockett’s rap sheet, which prosecutors review before deciding whether to offer a plea deal to a defendant.
Chief Harrison said she did not know why Detective McLaughlin had changed the form, but it was probably because there was not enough evidence to arrest Mr. Lockett. The condom wrapper containing Mr. Lockett’s fingerprint was unbroken, she said, and his DNA was not found on the victim’s body, nor on a used condom that the police found in the apartment but do not believe was used in the attack.
Investigators also decided against speaking to Mr. Lockett about the rape while he was in jail, Chief Harrison said, because Manhattan prosecutors advised them Mr. Lockett had a right to have a lawyer present.
Mr. Lockett and his defense lawyers declined to be interviewed by The Times. He has been diagnosed with a psychiatric disorder, according to the authorities and an aunt, who said he moved to New York from Louisiana about three years ago to find work.
On June 14, Detective McLaughlin closed the rape case, marking it “C-4,” a code meaning all investigative leads had been exhausted, Chief Harrison said.
That meant when Brooklyn prosecutors looked at Mr. Lockett’s rap sheet during plea negotiations a month later, the rape allegation did not appear. As a result, prosecutors offered Mr. Lockett a no-jail plea bargain reserved for first-time, nonviolent offenders, said Oren Yaniv, a spokesman for the Brooklyn district attorney’s office.
Mr. Lockett pleaded guilty on July 23 to burglary and petit larceny charges and was diverted to a program run by the Fortune Society, a nonprofit that provides former inmates with health care, counseling and jobs, Mr. Yaniv said. Mr. Lockett was released from the city’s Rikers Island prison complex the same day, but he never showed up for counseling.
Instead, the police said, Mr. Lockett attacked a 22-year-old woman inside her apartment on East 12th Street three days later, then punched and robbed a woman in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, two days after that.

Mr. Lockett was charged with burglary, sexually motivated robbery and attempted rape in the three attacks; he has pleaded not guilty. The Brooklyn district attorney’s office rescinded his plea deal.
Prosecutors said Mr. Lockett identified himself in surveillance video from the victims’ buildings. Manhattan prosecutors said in court papers that he made incriminating statements, admitting he pushed the woman on East 12th Street and apologizing to his victims. “I’m sorry for what I did to them,” he said, according to court papers.
Mr. Lockett denied raping the N.Y.U. student, though he admitted he had robbed her, Chief Harrison said.
The day before Mr. Lockett was arrested, a female Special Victims detective, Shantai Vasquez, went to the rape victim’s family’s home in New Jersey to try to persuade her to go forward with the case. Chief Harrison said officials hoped the victim might feel more comfortable with a detective who was a woman.
“The tone really changed, and we felt like they were on our side,” the victim’s mother said.
Still, the young woman ultimately decided not to participate in the investigation, and the Manhattan district attorney said it would not pursue a case without her testimony. Her mother said her daughter is focused on finishing college and is also going to therapy to help her cope with the rape and her treatment by the police.
Victims of sexual violence can visit a designated hospital or contact the New York City Alliance Against Sexual Assault for confidential assistance by phone at |||PHONE_NUMBER|||  or online at www.svfreenyc.org.
