This was the first debate to include former Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg of New York. He joined five other Democratic candidates: Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont; former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.; Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts; former Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind.; and Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota.
Candidates had one minute and 15 seconds for answers, and 45 seconds for follow-up responses at the moderators’ discretion. The moderators were Lester Holt and Chuck Todd of NBC, Hallie Jackson of NBC and MSNBC, Vanessa Hauc of Noticias Telemundo (whose reporting has often focused on climate issues) and Jon Ralston of The Nevada Independent.
A quick rundown of the candidates’ closing statements.
Should the Democratic nominee be the person with the most pledged delegates?
Klobuchar vs. Buttigieg boils over.
Remember Joe Biden?
Warren is having a strong night, putting her rivals on notice.
Ms. Klobuchar: I’m a winner who loves the people of America.
Mr. Bloomberg: I’m not asking for any money and I’m a manager that can beat President Trump.
Mr. Buttigieg: I’m a candidate who can build the largest coalition to defeat Mr. Trump.
Ms. Warren: I’m from Oklahoma and grew up “fighting” in a family that struggled financially, and now I want to fight for you.
Mr. Biden: I’m the only one who has enacted health care and defeated the National Rifle Association.
Mr. Sanders: I’m the guy for universal health care and taxing the wealthy and real change.
Mr. Sanders thinks the Democratic candidate with the most delegates should become the party’s presidential nominee — regardless of whether they have a majority required to clinch the nomination on the first ballot at the national convention in July.
Everyone else onstage disagrees.
It’s essentially an admission from Mr. Sanders’s rivals that he may finish the primary and caucus calendar with the most pledged delegates, but that they hope to hold him under 50 percent and make their case to delegates in Milwaukee.
“Let the process work its way out,” Mr. Biden said. “Let the process work,” Ms. Klobuchar said.
Mr. Sanders said no.
It has been no secret that Ms. Klobuchar is no fan of Mr. Buttigieg. She put an exclamation point on that fact on Wednesday, as they tussled over experience, their records and what prepares someone to be president.
After Mr. Buttigieg criticized her voting record on judges in the Senate, Ms. Klobuchar slashed back.

Mr. Buttigieg accused her of talking down to him.
The former vice president has been a nonfactor for most of tonight’s debate. Other than a few spare lines from Ms. Warren, he hasn’t been attacked by everyone else.
Ms. Warren jumped back in and reminded Mr. Biden that he once told Mr. McConnell that he hoped he’d win his 2014 re-election bid.
With candidates running out of time to change the race, the attacks became personal.
There are still so many questions about what happened in Iowa. You can see that Pete Buttigieg is presently leading the state delegate count with 27%; Bernie Sanders with 25%. Candidates are already looking toward New Hampshire.
To thank the people of New Hampshire for a great victory tonight.
Breaking news from the Democratic presidential race, where a national poll out this morning shows the former New York mayor is now in second place with 19% support behind Bernie Sanders. Michael Bloomberg, whose rise in the polls is fueled by more than $300 million in ad spending. Mayor Bloomberg has not appeared on a single debate stage or a single ballot, but that will change tonight.
It’s Alex Burns in Las Vegas, where Wednesday night’s Democratic debate was held ahead of the Nevada caucuses this weekend.
From NBC news, the Democratic Presidential Debate, live from Las Vegas, Nevada.
This was a debate we were all really waiting for because it was first time Mayor Bloomberg has appeared on the stage. And really, it’s the first time he has engaged with other Democratic candidates at all since entering the race. Polls released over the last few days have shown Bloomberg overtaking Joe Biden, nationally, as the moderate runner-up to Bernie Sanders, the front runner, thanks to hundreds of millions of dollars that Bloomberg has poured into advertising. But for most Americans, this was the first time that they have really been introduced to the man himself. So going in, we knew that all the other candidates were going to try to make that a rough introduction to scuff up the glossy image of himself that Bloomberg puts in TV ads. And right away, they did.
I think we need something different than Donald Trump. I don’t think you look at Donald Trump and say, we need someone richer in the White House.
Democrats are not going to win if we have a nominee who has a history of hiding his tax returns, of harassing women, and of supporting racist policies like redlining and stop-and-frisk.
Stop-and-frisk, which went after African-American and Latino people in an outrageous way.
Throwing close to five million young black men up against the wall.
That is not a way you’re going to grow voter turnout.
They, of course, went after stop-and-frisk, his invasive policing policy as mayor of New York.
And early on, NBC moderator, Lester Holt, asked Bloomberg to address it.
You went on to say, “And the way you should get the guns out of the kids’ hands is to throw them against the wall and frisk them.” You’ve apologized for that policy. But what does that kind of language say about how you view people of color or people in minority neighborhoods?
Well, if I go back and look at my time in office, the one thing that I’m really worried about, embarrassed about was how it turned out with stop-and-frisk. And we started a — we adopted a policy, which had been in place, the policy that all big police departments use — of stop-and-frisk. What happened, however, was it got out of control.
From the beginning, he struggled with his responses.
All right, mayor.
Bloomberg is a man known for his political agility, or his comfort expressing contrition, or for his thick skin. And it showed.
And if we took off everybody that was wrong off this panel, everybody that was wrong on criminal justice at some time in their careers, there’d be nobody else up here.
And the attacks were just sort of unrelenting. Up until this point, Elizabeth Warren has mostly avoided direct confrontation in debates with other candidates. She has been calling herself, “the unity candidate.” But she took a totally different approach, a far more aggressive approach. And Mike Bloomberg was her favorite target.
I’d like to talk about who we’re running against.
She landed some of the most stinging blows in the debate, drawing a connection between Bloomberg and public enemy number one for the Democrats.
Perhaps, the most contentious exchange of the night, and the toughest one for Bloomberg, was a lengthy back and forth between him and both Warren and Joe Biden about a number of women who have signed nondisclosure agreements with Bloomberg and his company.
We have a very few nondisclosure agreements.
None of them accused me of doing anything other than — maybe they didn’t like the joke I told. And let me just point — [CROWD MURMURING] — and let me point — those would be agreements between two parties that wanted to keep it quiet. And that’s up to them. They signed those agreements, and we’ll live with it.
Warren challenged him over and over to release those women from the NDAs and let them speak openly about their experiences.
And when you say they signed them, and they wanted them. If they wish now to speak out and tell their side of the story about what it is they allege, that’s now OK with you? You’re releasing them on television tonight?
Bloomberg said he would not do it.
Senator, the company and somebody else, in this case — the man or a woman, or could be more than that, they decided when they made an agreement, that they wanted to keep it quiet for everybody’s interest.
They signed the agreements. And that’s what we’re going to live with.
I heard your question.
But the latest is what these attacks reflect about the state of the Democratic race and the urgency that the candidates are feeling in this moment. Bernie Sanders’s lead is looking increasingly strong heading into the Nevada caucuses. And as we’ve talked about many times, part of that has to do with the fact that the more moderate candidates are dividing the votes amongst themselves, making it harder for any one of them to emerge as a clear alternative to Sanders. Now, in comes Michael Bloomberg with all of his money and his power and name recognition. But so far, he has done more to slow down fellow moderates than to thwart Bernie Sanders.
Senator, when you say that you disowned these attacks, and you didn’t personally direct them, I believe you.
But at a certain point, you got to ask yourself, why did this pattern arise? Why is it especially the case among your support?
I don’t think it is especially the case, by the way.
And so that meant it wasn’t just Bloomberg on the defensive. The other Democrats also had to take on Sanders, himself.
Well, you’ll miss that I work in Washington, house one.
Live in Burlington, house two.
And they had to take on each other.
Of the country to ourself.
Are you trying to say that I’m dumb? 
There was more open hostility, more personal bitterness in this two-hour debate than in perhaps all the other debates combined. And that’s because the stakes for the candidates are higher now. And for many of them, really for almost all of them, time may be close to running out.
No one has gone on the attack more tonight than Ms. Warren.
In a single breath she took on Mr. Sanders, Mr. Biden, Ms. Klobuchar and Mr. Buttigieg — the entire rest of the field onstage with her save for Mr. Bloomberg, the subject of many of her prior slashing attacks.
Then she went after Ms. Klobuchar and Mr. Biden for being too eager to work with Republicans — especially the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, who after Mr. Trump is the most-loathed Republican figure among Democrats.
“Amy and Joe’s hearts are in the right place, but we can’t be so eager to be liked by Mitch McConnell that we forget how to fight the Republicans,” she said. And then she finished up with a shot at Mr. Buttigieg.
Ms. Klobuchar, who all night had seemed particularly aggrieved by the attacks from Ms. Warren, who had been an ally in previous debates, sought to distance herself from Mr. McConnell.
“Just because I am willing to talk about common ground, that’s where America is. It is not with Mitch McConnell, who has 400 bills on his desk that could pass if we get rid of him. It is because I am willing to work with people and find common ground and that’s what we want in a president, Elizabeth,” she said.
Mr. Buttigieg, who has drawn much more support from older voters than younger ones, was asked about an essay he wrote as a young man in support of Mr. Sanders.
Mr. Bloomberg took his hardest shot at the economic proposals espoused by Mr. Sanders.
Mr. 
Mr. Sanders then explained his real estate holdings.
Mr. Bloomberg said he pays all his taxes in New York. “I pay all my taxes and I’m happy to do it because I get something for it,” he said.
Mr. Sanders said last year that billionaires should not exist and he stood by that belief while standing a few feet away from one.
“We have a grotesque and immoral distribution of wealth and income. Mike Bloomberg owns more wealth than the bottom 125 million Americans. That’s wrong. That’s immoral,” Mr. Sanders said.
Mr. Sanders said that the rich had distorted the tax code.
Mr. Sanders disagreed, saying “you and your campaign contributions electing people to represent the wealthy and the powerful” actually wrote the tax code.
Mr. Bloomberg said he worked hard to earn his money.
Bloomberg is challenged over redlining.
Mr. Bloomberg, on the defensive for a week about his 2008 defense of the racially discriminatory housing practice known as redlining, insisted that he’s always been against it.
Mr. Bloomberg then praised his own record as an entrepreneur, a talking point more familiar in Republican primaries than for Democrats.
“I was going to say we maybe want to talk about businesses. I’m the only one here I think that’s ever started a business. Is that fair?” he said.
“OK,” Mr. Bloomberg finished.
Warren talked about race outside of criminal justice.
There are six candidates onstage. They are all white. And for the second consecutive debate, the issue of race had only so far come up related to issues of criminal justice.
Ms. Warren made sure to bring up race during the discussion of climate change.
“I want to make sure that the question of environmental justice gets more than a glancing blow in this debate, because for generations now in this country, toxic waste dumps have been located in or near communities of color over and over and over,” Ms. Warren said.
A few minutes later, the discussion turned to small business and multiple campaigns spoke about black and Latino businesses.
Mr. Buttigieg raised the issue of “Latino entrepreneurship.” Ms. Warren brought up an “entrepreneurship gap” between white and black and Latino entrepreneurs, as did Mr. Biden.
“As a matter of fact we’re going to make sure there’s more money available for small businesses in the Latino community and the black community to be able to get the capital to start businesses,” Mr. Biden said.
Warren campaign says first hour of debate was her best fund-raising hour.
Sanders is pressed on his support of a fracking ban.
Mr. Sanders was pressed by Chuck Todd about concerns from some Pennsylvania union leaders quoted in The Times that his support of a complete fracking ban could cost Democrats the state in the fall.
“What I tell these workers is that the scientists are telling us that if we don’t act incredibly boldly within the next six, seven years, there will be irreparable damage done not just in Nevada, not just to Vermont or Massachusetts, but to the entire world,” Mr. Sanders said.
“The Green New Deal that I support, by the way, will create up to 20 million good paying jobs as we move our energy system away from fossil fuel to energy efficiency and sustainable energy,” Mr. Sanders said.
The debate turns to climate change.
Jon Ralston, the editor of the Nevada Independent, finally got a chance to ask a question. He asked about climate — an issue that may provide an opportunity for the candidates to get off each other’s throats for a moment.
Mr. Biden offered his climate stump speech, a call to invest in renewable energy and high-speed rail.
“What I would do is, No. 1, work on providing the $47 billion we have for tech to making sure we find answers, to find a way to transmit that wind and solar energy across the network in the United States. Invest in battery technology,” he said.
Mr. Bloomberg reiterated a boilerplate Democratic climate agenda and cited his environmental philanthropy.
“If you’re president, the first thing you do the first day is join the Paris agreement,” he said.
And Ms. Warren said she would allow some exceptions for a moratorium on new mining and oil drilling on land managed by the federal government if it meant finding minerals required for other renewable energy development.
Things turn ugly between Klobuchar and Buttigieg.
Ms. Klobuchar, who forgot the name of the Mexican president in an interview last week, reminded viewers tonight that she knows a lot of stuff.
First, she apologized for forgetting the name of Andrés Manuel López Obrador.
“I don’t think that that momentary forgetfulness actually reflects what I know about Mexico and how much I care about,” she said.
Then Ms. Klobuchar made clear that she knows a lot of things.
Mr. Buttigieg jumped in to attack Ms. Klobuchar.
Ms. Warren, who earlier in the evening attacked Ms. Klobuchar on health care policy, jumped in to defend her, saying she just had a spell of forgetfulness.
“Let’s be clear, missing a name all by itself does not indicate that you do not understand what’s going on and I just think that’s a mistake,” she said.
Mr. Biden tried to jump in with a patented “Come on, man,” saying that he was the only candidate onstage who has met Mr. López Obrador.
It appeared that all six candidates were yelling at once. Ms. Klobuchar looked angry. It was the spiciest moment of a debate that has been rollicking for nearly an hour.
Warren rips into Bloomberg on his record female employees.
Ms. Warren slammed Mr. Bloomberg for his past record with female employees and the nondisclosure agreements that an unknown number of them have signed after the former mayor noted some of the prominent women he had employed at City Hall and his company.
“I hope you heard what his defense was: I’ve been nice to some women,” Ms. Warren said.
Then she demanded he release those women who have signed nondisclosure agreements from them.
Mr. Bloomberg steadfastly refused.
“Maybe they didn’t like a joke I told,” Mr. Bloomberg said of the women’s objections. “They signed those agreements,” he added.
“Some is how many?” Ms. Warren pressed.
“Fortunately or unfortunately I make a lot of money and we do business all around the world. The number of pages will probably be in the thousands of pages. I can’t go to Turbo Tax,” he said.
Ms. Warren, shouting to be heard, demanded Mr. Bloomberg get his staff to “work overtime” to make his returns available.
Mr. Bloomberg claimed that he made tax returns available every year he was mayor of New York. But that’s not entirely true. When he was in office he allowed reporters to view one page, but not the entirety, of his returns, as the other Democratic presidential candidates have done.
Sanders says Bloomberg has “two stents” too.
The two oldest candidates onstage, Mr. Sanders and Mr. Bloomberg, have something else in common, Mr. Sanders pointed out: two stents inserted in their hearts.
“I think the one area maybe that Mayor Bloomberg and I share, you have two stents as well,” Mr. Sanders said.
“Twenty-five years ago,” Mr. Bloomberg jumped in.
Mr. Buttigieg, who is about four decades younger, offered to take a physical and said his rivals were following Mr. Trump by not releasing their full medical records and lowering the standards of how much health information should be released.
“He said just a letter from a doctor is enough. A lot of folks on this stage are now saying that’s enough. But I am certainly prepared to get a physical, put out the results. I think everybody here should be willing to do the same,” he said.
Klobuchar goes on the defensive.
After a long discussion about Mr. Bloomberg’s record on racial justice in policing, Chuck Todd put Ms. Klobuchar on the defensive for her time as the top prosecutor in Minneapolis.
Ms. Klobuchar reiterated her call for local officials to reopen an investigation of the conviction of a black teenager.
Then Ms. Klobuchar expressed some regret for not prosecuting any of the shootings of black and Latino men by the police while she was a prosecutor. She said she will have to earn the trust of voters of color, few of whom support her, polls show.
Bloomberg expresses remorse and rivals pounce on stop-and-frisk.
Mr. Bloomberg gave a long answer about his support of stop-and-frisk during his mayoralty, saying he was “embarrassed” by it in hindsight.
“I thought that my first responsibility was to give people the right to live,” he said, while arguing he did begin phasing out the police tactic by the end of his administration.
“I’ve talked to a number of kids who have been stopped. I’m trying — was trying to understand how we change our policy so we can keep the city safe. The crime rate did go from 650 down to 300. We have to keep a lid on crime, but we cannot go and stop people indiscriminately,” he said.
The apology, which Mr. Bloomberg looked uneasy delivering, did not satisfy his rivals.
Ms. Warren spoke next.
She accused him of “willful ignorance, day by day by day” as he defended the policy.
Bloomberg and Biden tangle over Obamacare.
In their latest scrap, Mr. Bloomberg and Mr. Biden went after each other about whether Mr. Bloomberg did or didn’t support the Affordable Care Act.
Mr. Bloomberg pronounced himself “a big fan of Obamacare.” He recalled that he advocated for the health care law in Washington in 2009.
But Mr. Biden shot back that Mr. Bloomberg, after the law was enacted, called it “a disgrace.” “You can go look it up,” Mr. Biden said.
Warren eviscerates her opponents on health care.
Ms. Warren, whose support for “Medicare for all” has proved a political liability since October, went on the offensive against her opponents’ plans in a new and aggressive fashion.
The argument she delivered — that Ms. Warren not only has a plan but a plan to enact it — is one that her allies have pressed her to make for months.
“Mayor Buttigieg really has a slogan that was thought up by his consultants to paper over a thin version of a plan that would leave millions of people unable to afford their health care. It’s not a plan, it’s a PowerPoint. And Amy’s plan is even less — it’s like a Post-it note,” she said.
Her rivals appeared taken aback.
“I’m more a Microsoft Word guy,” Mr. Buttigieg said.
“I take personal offense because Post-it notes were invented in my state,” Ms. Klobuchar said.
Ms. Warren got the last word and went into details and hit them all again, noting Ms. Klobuchar’s plan is “two paragraphs” and told the story of meeting a man in Reno who can’t pay for his insulin.
A whiff of desperation in the Democratic pile-on.
The first 20 minutes of tonight’s debate showed one thing: The candidates who have been running for president for the good part of a year have become desperate.
The combination of the arrival of Mr. Bloomberg on the debate stage and the reality that Mr. Sanders is poised to break away from the pack has resulted in a cocktail of conflict — every candidate onstage has attacked somebody else before the first commercial break.
Mr. Sanders, in his opening remarks, breathed fire at Mr. Bloomberg. Mr. Buttigieg took shots at Mr. Bloomberg and Mr. Sanders. Ms. Klobuchar and Mr. Biden took shots at Mr. Bloomberg. And Ms. Warren ticked through the stage, firing at Mr. Bloomberg for a history of sexist comments and backing racially insensitive policies and at Mr. Buttigieg and Ms. Klobuchar — who had been her ally in previous debates — for their health care proposals.
In a sign of how far he has fallen, nobody has attacked Mr. Biden so far — who for months had been the front-runner in the Democratic presidential contest.
It’s all led to a seemingly unsustainable pace of personal and political attacks between candidates who have for months preached unity in the idea that the most important thing is defeating Mr. Trump.
Buttigieg targets both Sanders and Bloomberg.
Mr. Buttigieg tried to rise above the fray after a brutal opening round where multiple candidates ripped into Mr. Bloomberg. But Mr. Buttigieg quickly targeted him — as well as his chief rival in the race, Mr. Sanders.
Mr. Sanders hit back by targeting Mr. Buttigieg over some of his donors.
“Maybe it’s time for the working class of this country to have a little bit of power in Washington rather than your billionaire campaign contributors,” Mr. Sanders said.
“As a matter of fact, you’re the one who is at war with the culinary union right here in Las Vegas,” Mr. Buttigieg said.
“We have more union support than you could ever dream of,” Mr. Sanders said.
Ms. Klobuchar quickly weighed in. “I have an idea of how we can stop sexism on the internet. We could nominate a woman for candidate for president of the United States. I think that might go a long way if we showed our stuff as a party,” Ms. Klobuchar said.
With first question, Sanders and Warren harshly attack Bloomberg.
Senator Elizabeth Warren began Wednesday night’s debate with an attack on the former New York City mayor Michael R. Bloomberg.
 And no, I’m not talking about Donald Trump. I’m talking about Mayor Bloomberg. Democrats are not going to win if we have a nominee who has a history of hiding his tax returns, of harassing women and of supporting racist policies like redlining and stop-and-frisk. Look, I’ll support whoever the Democratic nominee is. But understand this: Democrats take a huge risk if we just substitute one arrogant billionaire for another.
It took less than 10 minutes for Mr. Bloomberg’s opponents to take the multibillionaire to task, with Mr. Sanders questioning stop-and-frisk, Ms. Warren eviscerating him as a sexist, Ms. Klobuchar complaining of his campaign’s calls for her to quit and Mr. Biden saying he did not actually manage New York City very well.
“In order to beat Donald Trump we’re going to need the largest voter turnout in the history of the United States. Mr. Bloomberg had policies in New York City of stop and frisk, which went after African-American and Latino people in an outrageous way. That is not a way you’re going to grow voter turnout,” Mr. Sanders said.
Mr. Bloomberg replied by stating flatly that Mr. Sanders would lose to Mr. Trump.
“You don’t start out by saying I’ve got 160 million people I’m going to take away the insurance plan that they love. That’s just not a way that you go and start building the coalition that the Sanders camp thinks they can do,” Mr. Bloomberg said.
Ms. Warren piled on Mr. Bloomberg even more aggressively.
 I’m not talking about Donald Trump. I’m talking about Mayor Bloomberg,” she said.
“Democrats are not going to win if we have a nominee who has a history of hiding his tax returns, of supporting racist polls like redlining and stop-and-frisk. I’ll support whoever the democratic nominee is. But understand this, Democrats take a huge risk if we just substitute one arrogant billionaire for another,” Ms. Warren said.
Ms. Klobuchar expressed outrage at the suggestion from the Bloomberg campaign that she and other centrist candidates should step aside for him.
The candidates are taking the stage.
The six Democratic candidates walked out single file to audience applause. The newcomer onstage, Mr. Bloomberg, smiled tightly and waved a few times; by contrast, the other candidates grinned far more and waved enthusiastically. Mr. Bloomberg stood next to Ms. Warren, who has been a sharp critic of his campaign; they did not appear to engage with each other at any length.
