Our reporters followed all of the exchanges and fact-checked the candidates, providing context and explanation.
Six of the candidates vying for the 2020 Democratic presidential nomination took the stage on Wednesday night in Las Vegas for their last debate before Nevada’s caucuses on Saturday.
Senator Elizabeth Warren highlighted past comments by Michael Bloomberg, the former mayor of New York, that derided women.
This is mostly true. In 1990, Mr. Bloomberg’s colleagues at his financial data company compiled a book of one-liners purportedly uttered by their boss, including a number of bawdy and sexist comments. Among the quotations was a quip about the British royals, in which Mr. Bloomberg used the terms “horsey-faced lesbian” and “fat broad” to refer to two women in the royal family.
Ms. Warren said Mr. Bloomberg had blamed the 2008 financial crisis on African-Americans and Latinos.
This is exaggerated. Mr. Bloomberg’s comments were made in 2008 as the subprime mortgage crisis was pulling the country into the biggest economic slowdown since the Great Depression. Asked to explain the origins of the crisis in an appearance at Georgetown University, Mr. Bloomberg linked it to federal interference in the mortgage lending business and a wide variety of other factors like “very cheap money” in the form of low Federal Reserve interest rates, a failure by banks to consider that home prices could fall and developers that built more houses than the market could absorb.
Where his critics have focused, however, is on the first part of his eight-minute answer. He started by saying the present economic woes began when “there was a lot of pressure on banks to make loans to everyone.” He then pointed to legislation passed by Congress to end the practice known as “redlining,” in which banks declared entire neighborhoods off limits to lending. These were usually poor, heavily minority communities.
Adding more unpredictability to the situation, he said, were bankers and Wall Street executives who had created such complex instruments to profit from mortgages that they did not, in essence, understand what they were selling.
Mr. Bloomberg and Senator Bernie Sanders came under fire for being extreme opposites whose views are not representative of the Democratic Party.
This is exaggerated. Mr. Sanders is formally running for president as a Democrat, according to his Federal Election Commission filing. However, as a senator he is an independent who caucuses with the Democrats. His F.E.C. filing for his 2024 senate re-election campaign lists his party affiliation as “independent” and his Senate website continues to have an “I” next to his name.
As for Mr. Bloomberg, he was a lifelong Democrat before running for mayor of New York City as a Republican in 2001. In 2007, he changed parties and became an independent. In 2018, as he prepared to run for president, Mr. Bloomberg once again became a Democrat.
Former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. claimed undue credit for being the “first” candidate to introduce a public option.
This is exaggerated. Four candidates — Mr. Biden, Senator Amy Klobuchar, Pete Buttigieg, the former mayor of South Bend, Ind., and Mr. Bloomberg — support a public option, which anyone can buy into but retains private insurance. The concept has been around for many years.
Mr. Biden first released his health care plan in July and Mr. Buttigieg delivered his in September. Ms. Klobuchar released hers in May, though it did not detail its enforcement to the same degree as the other plans did. Mr. Bloomberg entered the race in November and released his plan in December.
Mr. Sanders and Mr. Biden both charged that a Bloomberg policy in New York City went after African-American and Latino people.
This is true. A judge ruled in 2013 that the tactics underlying stop and frisk as practiced in New York disproportionately stopped blacks and Latinos.
This is mostly false. New York’s wholesale stop-and-frisk policy began its death spiral with a report in May 2012 from the New York Civil Liberties Union that revealed more than 685,000 stops had been made the year before. The next month, Mr. Bloomberg announced that the program was going to be overhauled, and over the next year, the number of stops plummeted. Lawsuits were also underway or about to be filed. In August 2013, as Mr. Bloomberg approached his final months in office, a judge ruled against the city and as part of the remedies, appointed a monitor. Mr. Bloomberg strongly objected to the monitor, to no avail. By then, the number of monthly stops had declined by more than 90 percent from its peak.
Mr. Bloomberg accurately cited his record on coal plant closings.
This is true. Mr. Bloomberg was referring to his more than $100 million contribution to the Sierra Club’s Beyond Coal campaign since 2011. According to the Sierra Club, 304 coal-fired power plants have since either retired or have announced plans to close. They estimate that 40 percent of those closings would have not happened had it not been for the campaign. Over all, he has donated about $278.2 million to environmental and climate change causes, according to a recent tally by The New York Times, and as a mayor of New York City, had a strong record on climate change.
Mr. Biden and Mr. Buttigieg misrepresented the possibility that their proposals could raises taxes on small businesses.
This is misleading. Both Mr. Biden and Mr. Buttigieg would raise the corporate rate from its current level of 21 percent — to 28 percent for Mr. Biden and to 35 percent for Mr. Buttigieg. That rate applies to all corporations, regardless of size. Though it is rare for small businesses to organize themselves as corporations, some small businesses do so, and they would face higher taxes under Mr. Biden’s and Mr. Buttigieg’s plans.
For business owners who earn more than $250,000 per year. Mr. Buttigieg would also eliminate a tax break that is used by businesses organized as so-called pass-through entities like limited liability corporations. That elimination could raise taxes on some small businesses, albeit those owned by high-income Americans.
Ms. Warren said Mr. Biden had hoped Senator Mitch McConnell would prevail in his re-election campaign.
Ms. Warren was likely referring to a September 2019 report in The Times about Mr. Biden’s working relationship with Mr. McConnell, the Republican majority leader who during the Obama administration thwarted many Democratic legislative priorities and judicial appointments.
Harry Reid, the former Nevada senator and Democratic leader, told The Times that President Barack Obama had pressed Mr. McConnell to work on a budget package before the 2014 midterm elections, when Mr. McConnell was up for re-election.
Mr. McConnell rejected the offer and said that it would present an obstacle for Republicans in their primaries.
Mr. Biden responded by saying, “Mitch, we want to see you come back,” according to Mr. Reid.
Mr. Bloomberg referred incorrectly to the relative greenhouse gas emissions of China and India.
Mr. Buttigieg pointed to Ms. Klobuchar’s votes on immigration and judges.
This is mostly true. During a 2007 debate on an immigration bill, Ms. Klobuchar was one of 17 Democrats to support an amendment that would have reversed an executive order issued by President Bill Clinton requiring federal agencies to provide materials in language other than English. It passed, but the underlying bill failed.
As to judges, Ms. Klobuchar, a member of the Senate Judiciary Committee, was a forceful critic of Justices Neil M. Gorsuch and Brett M. Kavanaugh after Mr. Trump nominated them to the Supreme Court. But according to a recent analysis by the progressive group Think Progress, Ms. Klobuchar voted in favor of more than 56 percent of the Trump judicial nominees who were eventually confirmed, while the other senators running for president have each voted to confirm fewer than half of Mr. Trump’s judicial nominees.
Fact checks and explainers by Michael M. Grynbaum, Jeremy W. Peters, Alan Rappeport, Linda Qiu, Jim Dwyer, Edward Wong and Sheryl Gay Stolberg.