Nationally, electrocution is outdated. But several condemned men put to death in Tennessee have chosen it. Nicholas Sutton is scheduled to be the fifth tonight.
NASHVILLE — Nicholas Sutton, like other death row inmates in Tennessee, has a choice in how the state will end his life.
The default, as set by state law, would be a series of injections, one to sedate him, followed by others that would paralyze him and stop his heart. Yet Mr. Sutton, like four other inmates executed before him in Tennessee since 2018, has chosen the state’s other option: Two cycles of 1,750 volts of electricity.
Nationally, the electric chair is a method of the past; no other state has used it since 2013. But inmate advocates and lawyers say the condemned men in Tennessee are choosing electrocution because they fear being frozen in place and feeling intense discomfort while drugs work to kill them.
In Ohio, a federal judge recently wrote that part of the state’s lethal injection protocol is akin to waterboarding, and botched procedures in other states have left men writhing in agony.
But that view has been challenged in recent years, as errors and problematic executions, including one in Oklahoma in 2014 in which an inmate regained consciousness, have gained widespread notice. Many pharmaceutical companies have also made it more difficult for states to acquire the proper drugs, not wanting them associated with ending lives.
“Ohio is not going to execute someone under my watch when a federal judge has found it to be cruel and unusual punishment,” Gov. Mike DeWine, a Republican, said last year.
But other states have doubled down. Last week, state officials in Oklahoma announced that lethal injection deaths would resume after a five-year hiatus and a series of botched executions.
Some medical experts contend that lethal injection tests the constitutional limits on cruel punishment. Joel B. Zivot, an associate professor of anesthesiology and surgery at Emory University, said the sedative used in the three-drug cocktail does not inure the inmates to pain and that the paralytic masks the torment they are enduring.
“You just don’t see much,” Dr. Zivot said. “You see a person lying there.” He added that it creates an impression that the inmates are simply “falling asleep and dying.” Instead, he said, the drugs can cause their lungs to fill with fluid, asphyxiating them, and makes them feel like they are burning.
Dr. Zivot, who has evaluated Mr. Sutton, along with other inmates on Tennessee’s death row, said the inmates are often in poor health, with a litany of medical problems, including diabetes, hypertension, high cholesterol and pulmonary ailments.
Nearly four decades had passed without an inmate being put to death in Tennessee when state lawmakers, in 1998, added lethal injection as a method of execution. Two years later, it became the state’s primary method. But according to state law, inmates who were condemned to death before 1999 are allowed to choose between lethal injection and electrocution.
Of the 52 inmates on Tennessee’s death row, more than half received their sentences before the cutoff, according to data from the state’s Department of Correction.
“I think people can learn forgiveness and love and make the world a better place,” Mr. Hall, 53, said before being struck by a burst of electricity, which caused steam or smoke to emanate from his head, witnesses told the news media.
Afterward, Stacie Wooten, the victim’s sister, said Mr. Hall’s death had brought a measure of consolation. “Our family’s peace can begin, but another family’s hell has to begin,” she told reporters, according to The Tennessean newspaper in Nashville.
Mr. Sutton, 58, was sentenced to death for his involvement in the killing of Carl Estep, another inmate in the prison where Mr. Sutton, who was 23 at the time, was incarcerated. He had been convicted of first-degree murder for knocking unconscious his grandmother, who had raised him, and throwing her into a river. He received two other life sentences after he confessed to killing a pair of men, John Large and Charles Almon.
In an appeal for clemency, Mr. Sutton’s lawyers depicted his transformation over more than 35 years in prison.  Corrections officers also said they “owed their lives” to him for rescuing them from being attacked by other inmates.
With his execution scheduled for Thursday night, Mr. Sutton was moved on Tuesday into death watch at the Riverbend Maximum Security Institution, a facility in Nashville situated in a crook of the Cumberland River that houses Tennessee’s death row for men.
He was placed under 24-hour observation in a cell adjoining the execution chamber, allowed to have his toiletries, 12 sheets of stationery, three stamped envelopes and a pencil that he must return to a correctional officer whenever he isn’t using it. There, he awaited the governor’s decision on whether to carry out his execution, which came Wednesday.
