CÉLINE DION at Barclays Center (Feb. 28-29 and March 5, 7:30 p.m.). Despite commonly heard jabs at the sometimes heavy-handed sentimentality of this titan’s songs, the scope of her influence in popular music is undeniable: Artists from Ariana Grande to Frank Ocean to Adele have cited their fandom. Now, some three decades after her English-language debut, Dion continues to triumph. Her latest album, November’s “Courage,” was her first in 17 years to hit No. 1 on the Billboard charts, and with her Las Vegas residencies, she has offered a high-margin playbook for celebrated artists in their second act. On the heels of “Courage,” Dion is back on the road for her first global tour in a decade, which arrives in Brooklyn this week.
GLADIE at Rough Trade NYC (March 5, 8:30 p.m.). After Cayetana, an indie-rock group on Philadelphia’s D.I.Y. circuit, went on indefinite hiatus last summer, its frontwoman, Augusta Koch, renewed her focus on another band to which she lends her crackly, personable voice. Co-founded with Matt Schimelfenig, himself a fixture of the Philly scene, Gladie offers up a sound that skews slightly softer and more pop-inclined than Cayetana’s. The band’s debut album, “Safe Sins,” is due out on Friday, and takes as its subject the complexity of grief. The album’s plain-spoken and emotional lyrics should make for a moving performance.
HALL & OATES at Madison Square Garden (Feb. 28, 7 p.m.). Nearly 50 years after playing their first ever gig together in Germantown, Pa., this duo is still going strong; on Friday, they’ll preview an extensive summer tour with a show at the Garden. Though the pair’s musical catalog has expanded considerably since they were last topping charts with smashes like “I Can’t Go for That (No Can Do)” and “Maneater,” fans needn’t worry that the hits will be neglected. John Oates recently told Forbes that the band feels “a professional responsibility to play what people really are coming to hear.” Verified sale tickets are available for the show, the opening acts for which are the British new-wave band Squeeze and the alt-rocker K. T. Tunstall.
LENA HORNE PRIZE CELEBRATING SOLANGE KNOWLES at the Town Hall (Feb. 28, 8 p.m.). She is the lesser-known of the Knowles sisters, but Solange is herself a creative powerhouse and raiser of social consciousness. As such, she is the inaugural recipient of the Town Hall’s Lena Horne Prize, which is named after the Brooklyn-born singer and civil rights activist and was created to recognize artists “creating social impact with their platforms.” Solange will accept the award on Friday at a star-studded ceremony featuring performances by the Southern soul revivalist Leon Bridges; the rapper and activist Talib Kweli; and Andra Day, the singer known for her empowerment anthem “Rise Up,” and more.
WYE OAK at Music Hall of Williamsburg (March 4, 9 p.m.). Malleability is the name of the game for this duo of Jenn Wasner and Andy Stack, who have released six stylistically diverse albums together since 2007. Both Maryland natives, the pair has maintained a creative kinship even while living on opposite sides of the country and pursuing other musical endeavors, including Flock of Dimes, Wasner’s solo electro-pop project — the influence of which is heard on Wye Oak’s most recent album in the ample synths that have seeped into their sound, transforming the guitar-based folk-rock of early releases into something brighter. On their current tour, the band is drawing from both the Wye Oak oeuvre and their other projects to create a robust set list.
070 SHAKE at Webster Hall (March 5, 9 p.m.). A pair of cameos on Kanye West’s 2018 album “ye” propelled this New Jersey native, born Danielle Balbuena, from relative obscurity to the center of pop music discourse — many have suggested that the gripping emotionality of her feature on “Ghost Town” was the highlight of the album. Balbuena’s own debut — released last month on West’s G.O.O.D. Music label — replicates the depressive, anthemic quality of that breakout moment through introspective tracks that fuse elements of R&B, rap and emo. Her Thursday night show in Manhattan is sold out, but tickets are available on the resale market.
BRANFORD MARSALIS QUARTET at the Rose Theater (Feb. 28-29, 8 p.m.). The history of this quartet, as an entity, begins in the late 1980s, when Marsalis was in his 20s, dabbling in pop music and film scoring. The group became his vehicle for exploring jazz qua jazz, playing vital music that resonated down the corridors of its own history. In the three decades since, it has never become stale or stuck. The quartet now features Joey Calderazzo on piano, Eric Revis on bass and Justin Faulkner on drums, who have settled into a style that mixes explosive post-bop playing with influences from Romanticism and European folk song, as on its most recent album, the Grammy-nominated “The Secret Between the Shadow and the Soul.” Opening for the quartet at Jazz at Lincoln Center is Citizens of the Blues, a young quartet featuring Anthony Hervey on trumpet, Isaiah J. Thompson on piano, Philip Norris on bass and Domo Branch on drums.
CECILE MCLORIN SALVANT at the Village Vanguard (through March 1, 8:30 and 10:30 p.m.). How do you reanimate some of the hoary American songbook’s most troubling artifacts (“If a Girl Isn’t Pretty,” “You Bring Out the Savage in Me”), implicating us all in our collective history, without acting as either a scold or a balm? How do you embrace your imposing, almost unfathomable command as a vocalist while still meeting your audience at eye level? These are the questions that, over the past decade or so, jazz listeners have watched Salvant — now 30, and the unrivaled doyen of young jazz vocalists — work through. This week at the Vanguard she’s joined by a new quintet featuring Alexa Tarantino on alto saxophone, James Chirillo on guitar, Sullivan Fortner on piano and Keita Ogawa on percussion. On Saturday only, she and Fortner will appear in a duo, without the rest of the ensemble.
TYSHAWN SOREY SEXTET at the Jazz Gallery (March 3-7, 7:30 p.m.). A drummer, trombonist, composer, professor and much more, Sorey is the kind of musician — and inveterate project-starter — who’s tough to keep track of. Even within a single performance, he might surge from a passage of pin-drop silence to overwhelming accrual to delicately crafted collective action. His latest undertaking is a sextet featuring five younger musicians on the New York scene: Nathan Reising on alto saxophone, Morgan Guerin on tenor saxophone, Lex Korten on piano, Sasha Berliner on vibraphone and Nick Dunston on bass. These shows at the Jazz Gallery are the group’s first extended run in New York.
SUN RA ARKESTRA AND WILLIAM PARKER at the Town Hall (March 4, 7 p.m.). The Sun Ra Arkestra, avant-garde jazz’s most flamboyant legacy ensemble, shares the bill with a compatriot who is roughly its opposite: the quietly industrious bassist William Parker, who for 40 years has served as a mentor and connector on New York’s hardscrabble free-jazz scene. But don’t get it twisted: The Arkestra’s concerts are a kind of cosmo-jazz hootenanny, sure, but they’re really an invitation to do the sort of counterintuitive truth-seeking that Sun Ra always espoused during his lifetime. Likewise, Parker performances have all the roughness and discordance of his hometown, but they’re joyous affairs, too. Especially when he presents “Inside Songs of Curtis Mayfield,” his interrogation of that soul pioneer’s compositions, with a midsize band. This double feature is presented by Arts for Art, the organization behind New York’s Vision Festival, which is celebrating its 25th year.
MATT WILSON, MIMI JONES AND JEFF LEDERER at Café Bohemia (Feb. 28-29, 8 and 10 p.m.). For a few years in the 1950s, when bebop innovation was thick on the ground across the West Village, Café Bohemia was one of the central havens. Miles Davis and Cannonball Adderley gave historic performances there, some of which became canonical recordings. The club had been closed for over half a century when it reopened late last year at its original location, 15 Barrow Street. This weekend it will once again be the site of a live recording: The drummer Matt Wilson, the bassist Mimi Jones and the saxophonist Jeff Lederer will perform, and the nonprofit organization Giant Step Arts will be capturing the shows for a possible future album.
