Loose measures at a resort where four guests had been found to have the coronavirus raise concerns about contagion.
“What’s going on?” Romane Guilloux, 20, a guest from France, asked about the lockdown imposed on patrons of the hotel, the H10 Costa Adeje Palace, a four-star resort in the south of Tenerife, the largest of the islands.
Several European countries reported their first coronavirus cases on Thursday, and Britain confirmed a case that was linked to Tenerife. Some countries were taking aggressive steps to halt contagion of the virus, from shutting schools to closing mosques.
But at the Costa Adeje Palace, where officials said more than 700 people from 25 countries were staying, confusion reigned. Some guests appeared to be deeply frustrated, uncertain about how long they will have to remain in isolation and upset over what some thought were loose hygiene practices that might increase the chances of the virus spreading.
Guests have been allowed to mingle around the resort’s pools. They have dined in the hotel’s restaurants and wandered in the common areas. The hotel staff has gone home when not working. Such measures have alarmed medical experts.
“That is not isolation,” Dr. Carlos del Rio, an infectious diseases specialist at the Emory University School of Medicine, said about what had been permitted at the resort. All of the guests should remain in their rooms until the local health authorities have a more complete picture of who may have been infected, he said.
The loose discipline at the hotel reminded some experts of the situation on the Diamond Princess, the cruise ship that was on lockdown for weeks in Yokohama, Japan, with 3,700 people on board. Hundreds of passengers and staff members contracted the virus as they remained stuck on the ship.
At the Costa Adeje Palace, even the duration of the isolation period announced by the regional authorities on Wednesday was uncertain.
Teresa Cruz, a regional health official for the Canary Islands, said at a news conference on Thursday that 130 guests would be permitted to leave the resort, because they had arrived after the four people diagnosed with the virus had been hospitalized. The hotel staff could enter and leave the hotel, Ms. Cruz said, if they “adopted necessary protection measures.” She did not specify what measures were required.
“Nobody seems to agree on anything,” Ms. Guilloux, the French guest, said in a phone interview from the pool area of the hotel, where she said she was staying with her parents and sister.
When one of the hotel’s restaurants reopened on Wednesday, hundreds of guests rushed to a buffet, many wearing masks, but some not. Selina Lund, a British vacationer, told the BBC that she and her husband went back to their room after she saw a woman coughing in the restaurant, her mask coming off her face.
Ms. Guilloux said she was concerned when she saw a waiter set up cutlery without wearing a mask. Near the pools, many guests doffed their masks, she added.
William Schaffner, a professor of preventive medicine and infectious diseases at the Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, said such a “very loose lockdown” created the risk that the virus could be circulating among the guests or the staff.
Still, the risk of transmission might be lower in Tenerife than aboard the Diamond Princess, Dr. Schaffner added, because the common spaces were probably larger in the resort, and the chance of transmission while outdoors is lower than within an enclosed space like the indoor areas of the cruise ship.
The regional health officials said they had relaxed some of the movement restrictions at the resort because none of the remaining guests had presented symptoms. Still, on Thursday evening, paper pinned on some doors designated some guest rooms as “isolation zones,” according to a guest who shared a picture of a door.
In the coastal town of Adeje, many residents brushed off concerns on Thursday that the coronavirus would spread beyond the hotel, even after British officials said that someone had tested positive for the virus after leaving the island and arriving in Britain.
Some guests at the Costa Adeje Palace posted photographs of the sunny resort on social media, acknowledging that, at least for now, their situation could be worse.
