Financial markets were pummeled by the news. A whistle-blower complaint said that federal health workers were sent into quarantine areas unprotected and unprepared.
Japan closed its schools for at least a month. Iran canceled Friday Prayers in major cities. Saudi Arabia barred pilgrims from its holiest sites. Stock markets tumbled. U.S. officials called for many more people to be tested.
As cases of the new coronavirus soared in Europe and the Middle East, and infections cropped up in several additional countries — cumulatively at least 48 so far — the signs were everywhere on Thursday that the epidemic shaking much of the world was being viewed with growing alarm.
And the illness, first detected in China in December, appeared to enter a troubling new phase: Infections were found in patients in Germany and the United States who had no known risk factors, like having traveled to an affected area, suggesting that the virus could be spreading undetected in their communities.
Conditions continued to ease in China, where the authorities lifted some citywide lockdowns and the country struggled to revive major segments of the economy that had ground to a halt. Around the world, the new illness, dubbed COVID-19, stirred fears that other nations could suffer as China has.
In both Italy and Iran, with two of the biggest outbreaks, the number of reported infections more than doubled in just two days, approaching 900 combined, and people who had recently been to those countries continued to seed new outbreaks elsewhere. Kuwait reported 43 new cases, all of them tied to Iran.
South Korea, with the largest outbreak outside of China, reported 256 new cases Friday, bringing its total to 2,022, and officials made plans to test an estimated 200,000 members of a church that has become one of the epidemic’s hot zones.
Several countries registered new infections that illustrated the diverse ways the pathogen could cross borders. In Britain, one case was linked to Tenerife in the Canary Islands of Spain, where a hotel remains under lockdown after four guests tested positive.
In the United States alone, thousands of people who had been at risk of exposure to the virus were under quarantine — most often voluntary — and federal officials issued new warnings about the potential spread of the disease, including the possibility that schools could be forced to close.
President Trump has sought to play down the danger of a domestic outbreak, amid bipartisan concerns about a sluggish and disjointed administration response to an epidemic that public health officials say is likely to spread in the United States.
Stock market suffers worst daily drop since 2011.
After a call with President Trump, Florida’s governor belatedly issues a stay-at-home order.
The benchmark index fell 4.4 percent on Thursday, the worst single-day slide for the market since August 2011. It is on pace for its worst weekly performance since the 2008 financial crisis. Stocks in Europe and Asia were also hard hit on Thursday.
The sell-off came after infection figures in Europe and the Middle East continued to soar and after public health officials in the United States and Germany said new patients in each country had no known connection to others with the illness. That complicates efforts to track the virus, isolate infected people and keep the virus from spreading further.
The last time stocks in the United States fell more than 10 percent was late 2018, when investors worried that the trade war and rising interest rates might tip the U.S. economy into a recession. The Dow Jones industrial average also fell into a correction on Thursday, as did shares in London.
Stocks in Europe and Asia were also hard hit on Thursday, and the blow to investor confidence spread far beyond stocks. Crude oil fell more than 4 percent, and money flooded into Treasury markets, pushing prices sharply higher, and yields — which move in the opposite direction — to once unthinkable depths.
Federal health officials on Thursday approved coronavirus testing of significantly more people, a day after a California patient who had no known risk factors tested positive for the virus.
Testing for the infection — which is now done almost entirely by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta — has been administered only to patients who had been to China recently or who were in touch with a person who had a confirmed case of the illness, though exceptions could be made.
The C.D.C. expanded the criteria to include people with symptoms of illness who had traveled to Iran, Italy, Japan and South Korea. They will also cover severely ill patients with acute lower respiratory sickness who are hospitalized, even if no source of coronavirus exposure has been identified, when there is no alternative diagnosis.
The California patient had to wait days to be tested because of restrictive federal criteria, despite doctors’ suggestions. Public health officials said the person was a resident of Solano County, in Northern California, but they have not disclosed any other information to protect the patient’s privacy.
The patient in California and one in Germany had not traveled to any country with an outbreak, or been in contact with anyone known to be infected, suggesting that the virus had spread within their communities.
As Italian cases jump, Europe tries to balance containment against overreaction.
The official, Iran’s highest ranking female official, attended a cabinet meeting on Wednesday, in which she was in close contact with top leaders, including Mr. Rouhani.
Dozens of cases involving people who recently visited Iran have surfaced in recent days in Bahrain, Lebanon, Afghanistan, Oman, Iraq, the United Arab Emirates, Pakistan, Georgia and Kuwait.
The sick cabinet member, Vice President Masoumeh Ebtekar, is Mr. Rouhani’s deputy for women’s affairs. A young revolutionary during the Tehran hostage crisis four decades ago, Ms. Ebtekar was a spokeswoman for the captors of the 52 Americans held at the U.S. Embassy.
The virus can be deadly, but so far, it most often isn’t.
The new coronavirus has sown fear and anxiety, with more than 82,000 cases and nearly 3,000 deaths.
Pence takes control of national health messaging.
The White House on Thursday directed the government’s health officials and scientists to clear all coronavirus statements and public appearance with the office of Vice President Mike Pence, according to several officials familiar with the new approach.
President Trump selected Mr. Pence on Wednesday to coordinate the government’s response to the virus. In turn, Mr. Pence said on Thursday that he had selected Dr. Deborah L. Birx, who directs U.S. efforts against H.I.V. and AIDS, to serve as the Coronavirus Response Coordinator for the White House.
The announcements were intended to show that Mr. Trump and those around him are taking the potential threat to the health of Americans seriously, though Mr. Trump himself has downplayed the danger.
But three people have now been designated as the administration’s primary coronavirus official.
In announcing Mr. Pence’s coronavirus responsibilities, Mr. Trump said, “Mike is going to be in charge, and Mike will report back to me.” Mr. Pence says it will be Ms. Birx. Meanwhile, Alex M. Azar II, the health and human services secretary, remains the chairman of the government’s coronavirus task force — whose meeting Thursday Mr. Pence is scheduled to lead.
The insertion of Mr. Pence and then Dr. Birx into the government’s response further erodes Mr. Azar’s traditional role. Mr. Trump has told people that he considers Mr. Azar to be too “alarmist” about the virus.
Federal officials warned this week that a coronavirus outbreak could force schools to close for a long period.
Even as they struggled to absorb the federal warning, schools were busy making their own plans.
Many districts have already sent home letters about the coronavirus, asking parents to keep sick children away from school and to remember basic prevention measures like hand washing, cough covering and flu vaccination.
Reporting and research was contributed by Sheri Fink, Melissa Eddy, Salman Masood, Marc Santora, Russell Goldman, Carlos Tejada, Kevin Granville, Geneva Abdul, Choe Sang-Hun, Zoe Mou, Daniel Victor, Roni Caryn Rabin, Denise Grady, David Yaffe-Bellany, Ed Shanahan, Andrew Keh, Ben Dooley, Motoko Rich, Vivian Yee, Michael D. Shear, Emily Cochrane, Aurelien Breeden, Raphael Minder, Matina Stevis-Gridneff, Elaine Yu, Richard Pérez-Peña, Emma Bubola, Dana Goldstein, Julie Bosman and Matt Phillips.