1. President Trump appointed Vice President Mike Pence to oversee efforts to prevent a widespread outbreak across the U.S.
Mr. Trump’s statement was provided at a wide-ranging White House news conference, and came after two days of contradictory messages from government officials about the dangers posed to Americans by the virus. At least 60 Americans are confirmed to have tested positive for the virus.
And the number of new infections outside China outpaced those inside the country for the first time, with the virus now in Latin America, Germany and Pakistan. Here are the latest updates.
2. A new phase of the coronavirus is coming, and teams across the Times newsroom have tips on how you can prepare for it.
Get a flu vaccine, have a plan to care for older relatives and bookmark the website of your local health department. Here are other expert tips, like using hand sanitizer, seen above in Milan.
Yes, the stock market is fluctuating. Before you freak out, take a deep breath and read this.
Should you cancel your family vacation? Our Parenting team spoke with experts about how the virus might affect your travel plans this spring.
We’re starting a newsletter that will feature the latest developments about the coronavirus, as well as expert advice about prevention and treatment. Sign up here.
3. After last night’s fiery debate in South Carolina, the candidates returned to the campaign trail to make their case ahead of the state’s primary on Saturday.
Joe Biden picked up a key endorsement from Representative Jim Clyburn, seen above to Mr. Biden’s right, the highest-ranking African-American in Congress and a powerhouse in the state. But our look inside Mr. Biden’s campaign suggests that even if he succeeds in South Carolina, his campaign is on precarious footing because of limited organization, money and early-voting outreach.
Next Tuesday’s primaries in 14 states will dole out a third of the total delegates needed to secure the Democratic nomination. The states include Massachusetts, where Elizabeth Warren just picked up an endorsement from her hometown paper, The Boston Globe.
4. The Syrian government’s assault on a rebel-held province has driven nearly a million people from their homes, and has created one of the worst humanitarian emergencies of a brutal nine-year war.
The fleeing Syrians are trapped between a closed Turkish border to the north, and bombs and shells coming from the south and east. Many are living in tents or sleeping out in the open in the freezing cold. Nine children have died of exposure in recent weeks.
5. At least six people were killed in Milwaukee when a gunman opened fire at a Molson Coors brewery complex, officials said.
The gunman, apparently an employee of the company, was believed to be among the dead. The story was still developing on Wednesday night; read the latest here.
6. Construction of a section of the wall on the U.S.-Mexico border is endangering sacred indigenous sites, and sparking an outcry from tribal citizens and their leaders.
Separately, the number of undocumented immigrants in the U.S. reached its lowest level in more than 15 years, a decline propelled primarily by the number of Mexicans who are voluntarily returning to their country of origin.
6. Thinking of getting dinner delivered tonight? You may want to think again.
Our tech columnist tested the four most popular delivery apps in the country to break down the true cost of convenience — and the results weren’t pretty.
Elsewhere, grocery stores are the latest front of automation, as retailers like Walmart introduce friendly-looking robots that are quickly upending human work.
8. While we’re on the topic of cold weather: Are snow days more common now?
It may seem like yet another iteration of “kids these days” generational griping, but, at least in some cities, the standard for closing school does seem to have lowered over the years — this year’s unusually mild winter notwithstanding. Above, blizzardly conditions whipped through Manhattan in 1978.
Here’s a look at snow days across the country (including some favorite memories from Times journalists), and a beautiful photo essay that will make you pray for a snowy day off, just so you can take out a sled.
9. Two new musicians to keep an eye on.
Lil Baby might be rap’s most reluctant star, but he’s an inescapable radio presence with even more street-level hits. The Atlanta artist, whose new album “My Turn” is out Friday, spoke with The Times about how he has managed to remain low-key while also racking up more than 11 billion streams worldwide.
And in Israel, a Muslim-born pop star, who has converted to Judaism and can sing in Arabic and Hebrew, has captured the country’s heart. Nasin Kadry’s improbable rise, our Opinion contributor writes, is representative of the hybrid culture emerging there.
10. And finally, turbocharged creativity and passion.
Rio de Janeiro’s Carnival has always had streaks of irreverence and political satire, but under the presidency of Jair Bolsonaro, many revelers have come to see the celebration as an act of resistance. Mr. Bolsonaro, a far-right leader, has done little to hide his contempt for the rambunctious festivity, which has only added fuel to its fire.
Have a boisterous night.
