Wednesday: How the Bay Area is confronting climate change. Also: Bernie Sanders takes a wide lead in a new poll.
Recently, my colleagues Somini Sengupta and Chang W. Lee traveled to two very different cities, Manila and San Francisco, with one big thing in common: They’ve been forced to adapt to rising seas. They explored how in this expansive, beautiful and unsettling project.
We’ve all read dire projections of how rising global temperatures are raising sea levels.
I wanted to better understand what that means for people in coastal cities right now. Not in the distant future, but right now. I chose sprawling, fast-growing Metropolitan Manila and the San Francisco Bay Area.
I grew up in California, though very far from the ocean, in the flat, inland suburb of Covina. Like many Californians, I thought living by the ocean would be dreamy, and until recently I had not really give much thought to the risks we have inherited by building right up to the water’s edge. Houses, highways, sewer mains: They’re now at risk. Saving them means building costly walls and barriers — or moving people and property out of harm’s way. Those are hard choices.
Reporting this story sharpened three lessons for me. First, the hazards of the present are shaped by decisions of the past. According to the San Francisco Bay Conservation and Development Commission, more than 20,000 households and 13 miles of highway are at risk of permanent inundation with two feet of sea level rise.
Second, climate change has starkly unequal impacts. How you face the rising sea, I wrote, “depends mostly on the accident of birth,” whether your property is worth millions or is little more than a tin roof.
Third, dealing with the impact of sea level rise means not just moving people away from hazardous parts of the coast, but reimagining these sprawling, car-congested metropolitan areas altogether.
In Manila, we rode tricycle cabs, hired a boat to get around a few times, and sat in traffic for hours. Commutes are typically two hours or more each way. Housing is scarce and expensive in both places.
I heard experts press for a climate solution that on its face has nothing to do with sea level rise: Build more dense, affordable housing, they said, close to jobs, schools and public transportation. That’s politically difficult, including in the Bay Area.
Two weeks before Super Tuesday, a new poll from the Public Policy Institute of California showed Senator Bernie Sanders leading the field of Democratic presidential contenders in the Golden State. He was the choice for 32 percent of likely primary voters, while 14 percent picked Joe Biden, 13 percent supported Senator Elizabeth Warren and 12 percent each supported Michael Bloomberg and Pete Buttigieg.
Last month, the survey showed the race at almost a three-way tie with 27 percent supporting Mr. Sanders, 24 percent supporting Mr. Biden and 23 percent supporting Ms. Warren.
