In the BBC hit “This Country,” siblings Daisy May and Charlie Cooper find comedy and pathos in rural British life.
Both Coopers were then in their 20s and living at their parents’ home in the Cotswolds, a scenic and drowsy region in southwest England, a place all their peers had left. The pair had flamed out in London, she as an actress, he as a sales clerk at Topshop, and were in the middle of five dispiriting years writing scripts and shuffling through unglamorous jobs.
“Not very well,” said Charlie.
The Coopers — she is 33, he is 31 — were recounting these and other setbacks in a dressing room-trailer one August afternoon, during a lunch break as they filmed an episode of Season 3 of “This Country,” which debuted this week on the BBC in Britain. The show is a mockumentary, set in an unnamed Cotswolds village, and follows the not-very-eventful life of Kerry Mucklowe, a loafer played with deadpan perfection by Daisy May, who talks like she’s ready to rule Britannia but can barely get off the couch.
She lives with her unseen, bed-bound mother and careens into local eccentrics with her cousin and best friend, Kurtan Mucklowe (played by Charlie), who has slightly more sense though hardly more ambition.
The show is framed as the work of a documentary crew, dispatched by the BBC to study young people in rural areas who “feel more marginalized than ever,” as text dryly explains before each episode. The patina of social science lends gravity to bare-minimum plots. One centers on Kurtan’s efforts to get a lift from the local vicar to a nearby mall.
But action isn’t the point. Reliably hilarious, occasionally heartbreaking, “This Country” is about Kerry and Kurtan’s fumbling quest for love and approval in a world that scarcely knows they exist.
Their lives are high drama, at least to them, though the show elevates tedium to both a recurring theme and a comic foil. An episode from Season 2 opens with Kerry idling beside Kurtan on a public bench, sighing wearily, then asking the ersatz documentary crew if they ever get bored following the pair around.
Actually, “This Country” has a small and ardent audience. It has won critical acclaim and two Baftas, one for best scripted comedy and another, given to Daisy May for best female comedy performance. Daisy May has started landing movie roles, too, and appears in “The Personal History of David Copperfield,” scheduled for an American release this summer.
“This Country” has yet to catch on in the United States, where the first two seasons are available to stream on Hulu. A spokesman for the network said it has no plans to stream Season 3. Audiences there may have to wait for an American version of the show, recently ordered by Fox, to be written by Jenny Bicks (“Sex and the City”) and directed by Paul Feig (“Bridesmaids”).
The Coopers’ journey from office cleaning to red carpets was midwifed by Shane Allen, the BBC’s controller of comedy commissioning, whose other discoveries include “Fleabag” and “Black Mirror.” In 2015, Allen watched an early, homemade compilation video of Daisy May doing Kerry and was briefly unsure if this woman shouting at her unseen mother was trying to be funny. When he realized she was, euphoria set in.
After meeting the Coopers in a tiny BBC conference room, Allen decided that the banter between the siblings and anecdotes about their childhood should provide the core of the show. The mockumentary approach, with its obvious nod to “The Office,” seemed perfect for the moment.
It’s fiction inspired by autobiography, to be precise. The Coopers grew up in Cirencester, about 10 miles from Northleach, the village where the show is filmed, and many of the show’s characters are drawn directly from the Coopers’ lives. Kerry is based on a schoolmate described by Daisy May as “this really terrifying, asexual Smurf” who masked her insecurity with bluster and bravado.
Kerry’s reprobate father, a barely employed ex-biker, is played by the Coopers’ real-life father, Paul. An uncle named Trevor Cooper plays one of the village’s crotchety oddballs. And the combative, offscreen voice of the mother — credited on the show to “Ivy Woodcock” — is provided by Daisy May herself. It’s recorded at a BBC studio in London, and during tapings in Northleach, it’s played on a loudspeaker beside a second-floor bedroom the woman apparently never leaves.
A look of horror crosses Kerry’s face.
“I forgot!” she shouts back.
During an afternoon in August, the Coopers rehearsed and taped a handful of scenes in Kerry’s home. Neither flubbed a line, or asked for a single retake, as they tried out a variety of punch lines. During downtime, Daisy May cracked up the crew with a hypochondriacal riff about an unprintable physical sensation in her bowels.
“I just assume it means I have cancer,” she said, mostly joking.
When they wrapped up for the day, the Coopers didn’t have far to travel. Both still live in the Cotswolds and have no plans to move. Success has changed little about their lives. Daisy May now has a baby daughter with her husband, as well as a mortgage — the latter seemed an impossibility until recently.
And they occasionally get recognized in public. It’s a long way from the day, just a few years ago, when Daisy May called her agent with the good news that she’d sold a script.
