ALBANY, N.Y. — The Diocese of Buffalo filed for federal bankruptcy on Friday, becoming the latest entity to seek financial protection after a 2019 state law allowed victims of historical childhood sexual assault to sue.
That strategy has been embraced by other organizations affected by the Child Victims Act and similar laws in other states. The Boy Scouts of America, for instance, filed for federal bankruptcy in Delaware this month.
In an open letter, its national chairman, Jim Turley, said he hoped bankruptcy would allow the Scouts to respond to abuse claims through a victim’s compensation trust instead of piecemeal through a string of lawsuits.
The Buffalo diocese has been rocked by a series of crises in recent years under the leadership of Bishop Richard J. Malone, whose mishandling of abuse claims led to an investigation by the Vatican and his resignation in December.
Bishop Scharfenberger said the decision to seek Chapter 11 protection was “arrived at after much prayer” and consultation with financial advisers in the diocese.
The paperwork filed in Federal District Court in Buffalo sought protection from more than 200 creditors and listed 19 of the diocese’s top 20 creditors as sexual abuse victims seeking compensation.
The diocese cited liabilities of more than $50 million and said it had assets of somewhere between $10 million and $50 million.
In recent months, lawmakers in New York have suggested expanding the law to cover adult victims as well extending the one-year look-back window, which has resulted in hundreds of civil suits being filed shortly after it took effect. New Jersey has a similar law that took effect in December.
The bankruptcy filings in Buffalo and Rochester are the latest blows to a church that has already been dealing with declining population in upstate New York and depressed property values in many areas, factors that church officials say have contributed to staff reductions and parishes closing.
The former bishop’s handling of abuse cases received national attention after his assistant, Siobhan O’Connor, told law enforcement and the news media in 2018 that he had kept hundreds of pages of documents on abusive priests hidden from the public.
The turmoil in the diocese has continued after the bishop’s departure: Earlier this month, federal agents arrested a seminary professor, Paul Lubienecki, 62, who was accused of stalking Ms. O’Connor and threatening to kill a journalist who spoke to her.