A projected 32 million Latinos will be able to head to the polls in November. The Democratic presidential campaigns are hoping to engage them.
﻿﻿A record 32 million Latinos are projected to be eligible to vote this November, putting them on track to become the largest minority voting bloc. They are far from single-issue voters, with education, health care, jobs, the economy and immigration all ranking as top concerns.
Democrats are still figuring out how to get Latinos in the party to turn out. They voted at the lowest rate of any minority group in the last four presidential elections, though turnout apparently increased in the 2018 midterms, making them a complicated voting bloc to understand.
Latinos come from more than two dozen countries, and are of varying races, religions and cultures. Trying to find a cohesive message for such a broad and diverse group risks marginalizing some of its members.
That’s why Latino leaders on this year’s Democratic presidential campaigns aren’t doing that. They’re instead trying to understand what Latinidad — or Latino identity — means for themselves and for their work, and to use that understanding to engage their communities.
Like many immigrants brought to the United States when they were young, Jonathan Jayes-Green had a rebellious stage as a teenager, which for him meant moving away from Panamanian culture and embracing American culture instead. He was trying to assimilate and adapt to a new country, culture and language.
For Mr. Jayes-Green, rediscovering his roots came through embracing and loving dance, music and food. Salsa, merengue, arroz con coco and plátano helped him reconnect with himself, but it was a long journey.
“My experience living at the margins of how Latinidad has been constructed, particularly being Afro-Latinx and queer, makes me fight to make sure we continue to expand it for those who want to be a part of it,” he said.
Finding a way to redefine what it means to be Latino is at the core of Mr. Jayes-Green’s work. And he’s excited to be doing that as part of the movement he sees Elizabeth Warren creating with her campaign.
His job is to make sure that all Latinos have a space at the center of that movement. It was important to him to bring people from the campaign to support him last fall at a Supreme Court hearing over the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program, which shielded some young undocumented immigrants from deportation and which the Trump administration is seeking to end. Mr. Jayes-Green is a DACA recipient, also known as a Dreamer.
National Latino engagement director for former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.
Working directly with her community fills her with pride, and listening to Juan Luis, a merengue and bachata singer considered a Dominican national treasure, brings her back to that work every time.
Ms. Jiménez grew up in the Bronx, but she would spend summers in the Dominican Republic with her father. After high school, she moved to Florida.
It took Ms. Jiménez a long time to love her identity, and it wasn’t until six years ago that she realized that her background was valuable.
She learned early on in politics that there would often be only a few Latinos in the room.
But speaking up is essential, Ms. Jiménez said, particularly given the stakes of the 2020 race.
She believes former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. will fight for Latinos, and she says he has been reflective over the millions of deportations that happened under the Obama administration. She pointed to his immigration plan as evidence.
“As an immigrant myself, and someone who worked on this plan, I see a lot of things there that will help a lot of people in our community,” she said.
After Edwin Torres came to the United States, his family moved around the Los Angeles area more than 20 times. Sometimes they were homeless. By the time he graduated high school, he had attended more than a dozen public schools.
The American dream his parents were chasing didn’t make sense to him. “I started thinking that this shouldn’t be happening in this country,” he said.
His parents left El Salvador in the 1990s as civil war ravaged the country, and it took seven years to raise enough money to bring Mr. Torres across the border.
They wanted him to have an education, and it wasn’t until he went to college that he learned to appreciate the sacrifices they had made.
Mr. Torres was part of the first wave of Dreamers approved for DACA. He got a full scholarship to Saint John’s University in Minnesota.
“I came into college with a newfound freedom, a freedom that I’ve never tasted before, a freedom that I was validated, that I had a right to be here,” he said.
Last fall, Mr. Torres stood outside the Supreme Court for the hearing on DACA. His status is set to expire this year.
Mr. Torres worked on local campaigns in Minnesota before joining Amy Klobuchar’s presidential bid last March. He said he was inspired by her ability to rally support for Democrats up and down the ballot.
“She went the extra mile in 2018 to make sure we flipped the House in Minnesota, which then allowed us to have bigger conversations on licenses for all, and other progressive policies,” he said.
During her childhood in Arizona, Belén Sisa felt as if she belonged to the only Argentine family in the state. She wished she had a more normal name, a more normal childhood. She always lay low.
It wasn’t until Ms. Sisa was approved for DACA that she felt empowered and safe enough to get involved in politics.
She was drawn to Bernie Sanders because of his plans to fight exploitation in the workplace and improve access to education and health care.
“Even in the moments where me and my family had no idea who this man was, he was fighting for us,” she said.
She volunteered for Mr. Sanders during his first presidential run, in 2016, and ended up working with the campaign as a Latino outreach coordinator. She’s now the Latino press secretary for his 2020 campaign.
California state director for former Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind.
Cecilia Cabello is a third-generation Angeleno, and each generation lived in a different neighborhood of the city, but not by choice.
Her great-grandparents moved to Los Angeles from New Mexico at the turn of the 20th century. According to family lore, they had a house near what is now Union Station, but they were displaced when the station was built. The family moved to Boyle Heights, until the construction of the 5 Freeway pushed them farther east.
“The story of Latinos in L.A. is really kind of the story of my family,” Ms. Cabello said.
She was raised by her grandmother, who taught her only English. “It wasn’t so much that she was ashamed of who she was, but her trying to protect me from the things that she went through,” Ms. Cabello said.
She was drawn to Pete Buttigieg because he reminded her of Mayor Eric Garcetti of Los Angeles and former President Barack Obama. “I just liked the way he talked about America,” she said.
