Lawrence Ray was charged with moving into his daughter’s dormitory and targeting her friends for exploitation.
Lawrence V. Ray showed up at his daughter’s elite college, in a New York City suburb, in late 2010, shortly after being released from prison, and moved into her dormitory. Soon, he started doing “therapy sessions” with her roommates, convincing them he could help with their problems.
Over time, using threats and coercion, he persuaded the young adults he first met at the school, Sarah Lawrence College in Yonkers, N.Y., to confess to crimes they had not committed and then extorted hundreds of thousands of dollars from them, prosecutors said.
He eventually compelled some of them to work without pay on his family property in North Carolina, and he threatened others with knives. He forced one young woman into prostitution, taking the hundreds of thousands of dollars she made from selling sex to strangers, the prosecutors said.
“For the better part of the last 10 years, Ray has continued to mentally and physically torture his victims,” William F. Sweeney Jr., the head of the F.B.I. office in New York, said at a news conference on Tuesday.
The charges depict Mr. Ray as a man who exploited his victims, initially college sophomores, like a cult leader, learning intimate details of their private lives and their mental health struggles under the pretense of helping them.
He alienated several of the young adults from their parents, convincing them that they were “‘broken’ and in need of fixing” by him, the indictment said.
“For so many of us and our children, college is supposed to be a time of self-discovery and newfound independence, a chance to explore and learn, all within the safety of a college community,” Geoffrey S. Berman, the United States attorney in Manhattan, said at the news conference announcing the charges.
Mr. Ray “exploited that vulnerable time in these victims’ lives through a course of conduct that shocks the conscience,” Mr. Berman said.
Mr. Ray’s extortion scheme relied on false confessions that he extracted from his victims, using tactics like sleep deprivation, psychological and sexual humiliation, verbal abuse, physical violence and threats of legal action, the indictment charged. He got them to falsely confess to damaging property and in some cases to trying to poison him, then used those confessions as leverage, the indictment said.
Mr. Ray was also accused of laundering about $1 million he obtained from his victims, the indictment said. He was arrested on Tuesday morning at his home in Piscataway, N.J., and was ordered jailed overnight after a brief hearing in Federal District Court. Mr. Ray was escorted into the courtroom smiling, dressed in a flannel shirt, cargo pants and work boots with his legs shackled.
The investigation that led to the charges against Mr. Ray was prompted by an article in New York magazine in April titled “The Stolen Kids of Sarah Lawrence,” Mr. Berman said at the news conference.
The startling accusations are all the more remarkable for the environment in which prosecutors say they first played out — the verdant Sarah Lawrence campus, where red brick buildings frame wide lawns and a wisteria arbor dominates the grounds.
Equally remarkable is Mr. Ray’s own strange history, a life where he seemed to seesaw between mob figures, on the one hand, and top law enforcement and military officials, on the other; he even has made claims, largely credited, that he worked for a United States intelligence agency in Kosovo.
He was an F.B.I. informant in the late 1990s, dishing dirt about a Gambino crime family soldier, but his efforts to cooperate with the bureau failed, and he was later charged with more than a dozen other men in a federal racketeering and stock fraud case in Brooklyn.
Perhaps the most unusual public episode in Mr. Ray’s career came in 1997 when he arranged a City Hall meeting for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani with Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev.
Earlier in the 1990s, Mr. Ray became close to Mr. Kerik, whom Mayor Giuliani had appointed as New York’s City’s correction commissioner and later named the police commissioner.
Mr. Ray was the best man at Mr. Kerik’s wedding and paid for part of the celebration; a short while later, Mr. Kerik helped Mr. Ray get a $100,000-a-year job with a construction company, Interstate Industrial Corp. Part of Mr. Ray’s responsibility was to help the business get a license from city regulators, despite allegations it was tied to organized crime.
But Mr. Ray and Mr. Kerik had a falling out in 2000, around the time of the racketeering indictment, and Mr. Ray began cooperating with prosecutors investigating Mr. Kerik, who ultimately pleaded guilty, first to state and then later to federal charges stemming from the renovations and his efforts on behalf of Interstate.
Sarah Lawrence said in a statement that the school had just learned of Mr. Ray’s indictment, and called the charges “serious, wide-ranging, disturbing and upsetting.” The school said it would cooperate with investigators if asked.
Mr. Ray later served time in a New Jersey state prison on charges stemming from a child custody dispute. It was after his release in New Jersey that Mr. Ray moved in with his daughter in student housing at Sarah Lawrence.
During the months he spent living at the school, Mr. Ray “laid the groundwork for psychological conditioning that would eventually lead these young adults to become unwitting victims of sexual exploitation, verbal and physical abuse, extortion, forced labor and prostitution,” Mr. Sweeney said.
In the summer of 2011, the indictment said, some of the Sarah Lawrence students moved with Mr. Ray into a one-bedroom apartment on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, where he continued to exploit them.
The indictment also charged that Mr. Ray subjected his daughter’s friends to interrogation sessions that often lasted hours at a time and escalated into verbal and physical abuse. He would falsely accuse them of damaging his apartment and property and of harming him and his family, the indictment said.
Around 2013, the indictment said, Mr. Ray took some of his victims to Pinehurst, N.C., where he forced them to perform manual labor on his family’s property, including the installation of an irrigation system, purportedly to repay money he claimed they owed him.
He forced one woman to work as a prostitute from 2014 to 2018, and took more than $500,000 from the money she earned, the authorities said. Mr. Ray was also physically violent with her, and once tied her to a chair, placed a plastic bag over her head and nearly suffocated her, the indictment charged.
The indictment also said that Mr. Ray extorted $1 million from five of his victims, which he shared with two unidentified associates. “Some victims drained hundreds of thousands of dollars from their parents’ savings accounts at Ray’s direction,” Mr. Berman said.
On the college campus on Tuesday, a number of students said they had been aware of the New York magazine article and felt relief at Mr. Ray’s arrest. But they expressed concern his actions had evaded the attention of the authorities for so long.
“It’s pretty shocking that it’s taken 10 years to get this guy charged,” said Wyatt Button, 20, a sophomore who is studying film.
Audrey McGonagle, 18, a freshman studying dance, said that although Mr. Ray’s stay on campus was some years ago, she felt uncomfortable when she visited the dorm, Slonim 9, where Mr. Ray had installed himself with his daughter and her friends.
“It’s just creepy,” Ms. McGonagle said.
Ashley Southall, Sean Piccoli and Laura Dimon contributed reporting.