The specter of the divisive Democratic battles of 2016 cast a shadow over the final days of the 2020 contest for Iowa as several candidates questioned the ability of Bernie Sanders to unite the party.
ANAMOSA, Iowa — The specter of the divisive Democratic battles of 2016 cast a shadow over the final days of the 2020 contest for Iowa, as several leading presidential candidates questioned the ability of Senator Bernie Sanders to unite the party as its nominee while the Sanders camp sparred with allies of Hillary Clinton, his rival in the race four years ago.
The negativity and doubts aimed at Mr. Sanders on Saturday reflected a widespread belief among the other Democratic campaigns that he has perhaps the most political momentum heading into Monday night’s caucuses, which he narrowly lost in 2016 to Mrs. Clinton. While the political jousting was not ferocious, it echoed private anxieties among some moderate party officials that an Iowa win could propel Mr. Sanders, a staunch liberal, to more primary season victories and make him harder to beat in the long run.
Stay up to date on primaries and caucuses. Subscribe to “On Politics,” and we’ll send you a link to our live coverage.
The Sanders campaign was also facing some blowback on Saturday after one of its most high-profile supporters, Representative Rashida Tlaib, urged a crowd to boo Mrs. Clinton on Friday after she was critical of Mr. Sanders in a podcast. Ms. Tlaib apologized on Saturday, only to receive words of support from Mr. Sanders’s campaign manager, who was then quickly called out by Mrs. Clinton’s spokesman.
Mr. Sanders made no mention of the rumpus during his campaign stops, largely sticking to his standard message and exuding confidence that he would have a strong caucus night. At times, he even seemed to be enjoying himself, sprinkling his remarks with wry jokes.
The rekindling of fights from 2016 — when many Sanders supporters were reluctant to unify around Mrs. Clinton, the party nominee — provided an opening for a line of attack on Saturday from Pete Buttigieg, one of the leading moderate opponents to Mr. Sanders.
Earlier, in Waterloo, Mr. Buttigieg questioned whether Mr. Sanders’s calls for a “political revolution” would lead to a winning coalition in November.
As Iowans prepare to cast the first votes of the 2020 Democratic nomination process, they’re asking one question: Who can win?
Today: As voting begins in Iowa, marking the beginning of the 2020 election, we’re launching a new show covering the country and the voters in the lead up to November. It’s Monday, February 3.
I hear someone.
Yeah we’ve got some action. Hi, how are you?
My name’s Astead, this is Austin. We’re journalists.
How about I throw her in the basement.
Yeah, no problem. We’ll be here waiting for you.
O.K. come on, Molly, come on.
From The New York Times, this is “The Field.” I’m Astead Herndon, in Iowa.
I get really uncomfortable around dogs. Hi! So we’re journalists. We’re from The New York Times. We’re talking to folks about the caucasus.
Yeah, I’ve got a couple more around. There’s one buried, I think, down there.
We’re pretty sure we’re — not 100 percent.
You’re not 100 percent? Well that’s the type of folks we like to talk to.
All right, well here I am.
Tell me the decision process. Tell me who you’re thinking about.
Wow, there’s a lot of people. Thinking about Elizabeth Warren. And I don’t know, maybe — I like Pete too.

But what makes you nervous? It seems like there’s some anxiety around that.
Electability. Just we have to beat somebody that’s there already.
So how does that electability question impact whether or not you’ll vote for Elizabeth Warren?
Well, I’m wondering if Republicans will vote for Biden. And they may not for Pete, but some of them will. And some of them will for Warren, I think, too. It’s just how many.
So part of your vote is trying to figure out who you think Republicans would vote for in the general election?
Yes, that’s part of it.
I don’t hear Bernie. Is he on your list?
He’s down there, maybe.
What’s the decision there? Why?
I don’t think Republicans will vote for him.
You seemed pretty wracked with indecision.
Yeah. You gather that, huh?
You’ll be happy when this thing is over, huh?
It’s much easier going and asking people all these questions than to be making these choices. It seems like you’re wrestling with it.
Yeah. Yeah, it wasn’t that hard last time.
Who’d you caucus for last time?
We went Hillary. But I didn’t do something right.
We did something wrong.
So a week before the Iowa caucuses, I went with my colleagues, Austin Mitchell and Andy Mills, to the Des Moines region to talk to voters about how they’re feeling. For months, we’ve been seeing a really fluid race in the state. Top candidates like Pete Buttigieg could be leading in one month, Elizabeth Warren could be leading the next. Some polls show Joe Biden leading. And most recently, Bernie Sanders has held a firm lead at the top. Even more, when we started talking to voters, they weren’t just deciding between one or two candidates that were the same ideologically, but maybe even between candidates that seemingly have conflicting policy positions. So you can meet a voter who’s flipping between Joe Biden and Bernie Sanders. You can meet a voter that’s flipping between Elizabeth Warren and Pete Buttigieg.
So we wanted to get a better sense of what was going on on the ground.
We are in the small town of Russell, Iowa.
And over and over, people kept going back to the same moment.
Down some very lonely streets to come here and talk to this lady.
You guys need a hand with anything?
We’re just out here talking to ourselves.
No, you’re fine.
Are you Casey?
I am Casey.
Andy, nice to meet you.
This is Austin.
Austin, nice to meet you guys.
So a couple days ago, Austin and Andy went out to meet Casey DeHoedt.
Yeah, my name is Casey DeHoedt. I’m 36 years old. I’m a full-time supervisor at a warehouse in the area, and I’m a city councilwoman here in Russell.
And for her and for a lot of Iowa Democrats, the story actually begins in 2008.
Yeah, I remember — I remember that pretty well, because it was — it was Obama and it was Hillary.
Voters give Clinton high marks for being strong, experienced, decisive, and compassionate. But is Clinton likable?
And at that time, I don’t think Hillary was particularly popular, but she seemed like she was going to be the pretty clear candidate. And then here comes this meteor out of Chicago, which is Barack Obama.
The question is whether or not Obama, an African-American candidate from the big city of Chicago, can connect with the primarily white rural voters here.
And then Iowa picked him, and I remember being pretty floored.
But on this January night, at this defining moment in history, you have done what the cynics said we couldn’t do.
Iowa sort of saw the lightning and was able to put it in the bottle, and then the rest of the nation was like, yeah, we see it too.
You have done what the state of New Hampshire can do in five days. [CHEERING] You have done what America can do in this new year, 2008.
So 2008 becomes this vitally important year for Iowa Democrats. They have a sense of pride, a real sense of ownership around Barack Obama’s historic campaign. They feel like they saw in him what the rest of the country would eventually see. And that they helped launch an upstart candidate to the Democratic nomination, and then eventually, the historic presidency.
But that’s not the story of the 2016 campaign, is it?
No. [LAUGHS] That was awful.
Can we go back to like right around this time about four years ago, when you were doing this Iowa thing of trying to pick the first candidate?
The Democrats getting ready for their final face off tonight in Iowa before voters go out and caucus next week. Hillary Clinton, Bernie Sanders, and Martin O’Malley. Yes, he’s still in there.
What were you thinking, how were you weighing, what were you liking?
For me, it was pretty obvious early on, Hillary. But ramping up to the caucus day, Bernie was really starting to gain some steam.
— last minute, as most polls show Sanders is closing in on Hillary Clinton’s lead in Iowa and beating her in New Hampshire.
And I was like, I could really switch to this guy right now. But my only thing about Bernie was Barack Obama had a lot of difficulty getting a lot of legislation through because the different legislative bodies thought he was so liberal, that they didn’t really want to do anything with him. I thought, well, my god, if Barack Obama can’t get that achieved, how are they going to let Bernie Sanders, who’s this progressive out of nowhere who’s asking for all these crazy things? So I thought, nope, it’s going to be Hillary. She’s going to be the one who’s more electable in the general.
What happens next is very specific to Iowa’s caucus system. Rather than the traditional voting booth where someone goes in and selects one candidate, caucusgoers show up to a big room, oftentimes a gymnasium or a local community center, and they stand in a group with other people who support their candidate. But that’s not a set thing. People can make appeals to each other, and things can shuffle around before the final vote is taken.
I am so thrilled that I’m coming to New Hampshire after winning Iowa.
And it was Hillary.
The first woman ever to win the Iowa caucuses did it by two-tenths of 1 percent.
Iowa voted for Clinton over Sanders by the smallest margin in caucus history, 49.8 to 49.6.
I thought, well, Hillary’s incredibly qualified. She’s earned it.
And about nine months later, well, we know what happened.
Right now, a historic moment. We can now project the winner of the presidential race. CNN projects Donald Trump wins the presidency, the business tycoon, a TV personality, capping his improbable political journey with an astounding upset victory. Donald J. Trump will become the 45th president of the United States, defeating Hillary Clinton.
And then once Trump was elected, then I felt like “Invasion of the Body Snatchers.” I see all these Trump shirts around and I’m like, wait, where have I been living? And I was just like, my god, they really hated Hillary. I really took it as less of a Trump win as it was a Hillary loss. and I feel like they wanted a change in politics. Bernie would have been a change in politics. Hillary Clinton was the status quo. They didn’t want status quo.
And yet, you chose her because you found her to be the more reasonable and electable candidate. Did the election shake that sense, that you knew what was electable?
Very much. Very much changed that. Had I known then what I know now, I would have switched so fast. I would have definitely gone Bernie. Had I switched and had Bernie been the nominee for the party, he would be president right now.
Well, when it comes to this year, how confident are you that this time around, you can find the candidate that is more electable?
So Casey calls it having her mind blown. My colleague, Alex Burns, says that some Democrats feel as if their brains have been broken. But it’s this effect where Democrats do not trust themselves to make the right electoral decision. They no longer trust their own instincts about determining what electability is. Do they go with the candidate who speaks to their sense of inspiration, an Obama-like figure, someone who can maybe rally the party through soaring rhetoric or the like? Or do they try to think of who is most electable to other people? But they don’t even know what that is. For a lot of people, they thought that was Hillary Clinton, and that didn’t turn out well. And so with just days to go, you’re seeing Iowa Democrats really frozen.
With days until your caucus, while you’re still undecided, what is it that you’re most afraid of?
That’s a good question. I’m worried that the first week in November, that Wednesday after the general election, again waking up and going, “Dammit, I did it again, I voted for the wrong candidate,” knowing that I felt better about a different candidate.
So we wanted to talk to more undecided voters like Casey.
We are in the Beaverdale neighborhood of Des Moines, Iowa. We are walking through this residential neighborhood to knock on some doors and ask Iowans how they’re feeling.
There’s a surprising amount of snow on the ground.
I just hope it doesn’t get any colder.
Yeah, it’s a fine line between the strong knock and the police knock, which you don’t want to do. Hi, how are you? My name’s Astead. This is Austin and Andy. We’re reporters with The New York Times. How’s it going?
Oh gosh, fine. I have a sleeping baby though.
Oh. Oh, that’s cool.
She just woke up.
We wondered if we could ask you a couple of questions?
I can’t. I’m in the middle of a conference call actually. Sorry.
Sorry to interrupt you.
Are you someone who’s thought about who you’re going to caucus for?
Actually sir, I’m somebody who has to go get his wife. She’s getting off at 1 o’clock. You want to report that in The Times?
I mean hey, that’s big news.
If I’m not there in time, it’ll be big news.
All right, thank you sir.
Obviously, there were some people who were totally decided.
No doubts about it?
Yeah, I think we’re caucusing for Bernie.
Was it a hard choice to pick Bernie?
I’ll be caucusing for Bernie Sanders.
Are you someone who just made that choice, or this is something that’s been true for a long time?
Andrew Yang, 2020.
Yeah? Not undecided, you know.
Is there anyone else here that is trying to make a decision still that might be willing to chat with us for a bit?
Yeah, she likes Joe Biden. Sam, are you going to caucus for Joe Biden?
No, I’m caucusing for Pete Buttigieg.
Can we chat with her for just a little bit?
She says she’s too hungover.
Hungover roommate, do you want to share your thoughts on your candidate?
Hungover roommate, do you want to share your political opinions?
No, I want to vomit.
See, hangover people vote for Pete Buttigieg. I’m clear-minded, though, so that’s why I’m for Yang.
Hey, I’m sorry. I thought you were somebody else. I don’t have time. All right, bye bye.
We’re just — we’re just reporters just trying to gauge the caucus on Monday. Are you planning on going?
Yes. I thought you were selling something. O.K. I’m on my way out. But honestly, I can’t decide. I’m not a Bernie lover, so if you guys are Bernie bros that like — O.K. so then it’s sort of like, I want to vote for — I want to vote for someone who people in Michigan, Ohio, and Pennsylvania will vote for. That’s who I want to vote for.
And do you have — is there anybody in the front of mind that you think is best for that?
Elizabeth, and I love Amy. I’d really like to vote for a woman.  But I feel like there’s so much prejudice against us Bettys, you know what I mean? I’ve got to think about it in bigger terms than who I want. I’m kind of obsessive about politics.
I can hear the TV on in the background.
Well, it’s got to be loud now for when I’m getting ready.
Have you made a decision on who you’re going to caucus for?
I have it down to two. The two I came down to are the one I support the most and the one I think probably has the best chance to win. So I think, I’m going to caucus I think for Amy Klobuchar, and then I’d imagine she’s not going to have enough, so then I think I’ll probably go to Joe Biden.
Yeah, what was that like for you?
Yeah. Well it felt like — I’d love to go with just a gut feeling, I love somebody really a lot. I don’t have that person so much this year, like when Obama was around, you know? That was really nice to have that gut feeling. So you have to just do it more intellectually, gather more information. The more you can get and the more wise decision you can make and go from there. Does that answer your question?
Yeah. But with that intellectual decision, it seems it’s not just a personal intellectual decision. You’re trying to project a little bit into the minds of others.
When it comes down to the who I think can win part — definitely.
And how have you been factoring that?
I’m hearing a lot of people that don’t think anybody but Biden can really win. Not sure I totally agree with that, but I think this year’s election is special because we need to make sure that we win. And about everybody I talk to, the main focus is making sure Trump doesn’t have another four years. And it’s not so much get that candidate you love. It’s get him out.
Finding anybody to talk to?
We are finding a few people. Everyone seems to be pretty nice.  Can we just ask two questions?
Got to get to work.
Are you planning on voting next week?
Who’s your number one?
That’s why we want to ask you about it.
Too complicated to answer it.
When do you think you’ll make your decision?
It’s all about electability, so it’s hard to decide what factors are going to control electability. So it’s complicated.
You just want to win in November?
Absolutely. 
Six months ago, the Democratic primary was all about the ideological divides. There were the progressives, who were promising systemic change and upheaval, and the moderates, who wanted to work more within the system. But now, it’s just about who can win.
Do you have time to chat?
Oh. Hi, I’m Pat Body.
Hi, Pat. I’m Andy.
Hi, Pat. Austin.
So after a day of knocking on doors, a very cold day of knocking on doors, we decided to go to a coffee shop nearby. We found Pat sitting at the table.
I think what people do not necessarily appreciate unless they’ve spent some time here is just how seriously we take this job. I have several friends. We’ve all tried to make sure we’ve seen pretty much every candidate in person.
And how many people involved with different campaigns do you think you’ve spoken to?
Oh, I’ve spoken to almost all of the candidates. I may have missed Marianne Williamson, but I think I have spoken to every other candidate in the field. I don’t think I’m alone in that.
When you say spoken to, do you mean like we are speaking right now?
Yeah. I’ve probably been to a total of 20 plus or more events, and some of them have been long-form conversations. There was a Steyer event at a friend’s house just the other day. I saw Elizabeth Warren at our representative’s pharmacy. There were like 10 of us there and Elizabeth Warren.  Did that help answer your question?
So believe it or not, Pat’s process is pretty typical of the Iowa caucusgoer. They take real pride in meeting multiple presidential candidates and vetting them and asking them tough questions. And they see it as their personal duty, because they’re the state that votes first in the primaries. And like a lot of other Iowa Democrats this year, Pat’s making this decision on the basis of who’s best positioned to beat President Trump. And she was struggling.
Who are the candidates that you are really fighting between in your mind?
Warren, Booker, Buttigieg, and then of course Steyer came into the picture. Quite frankly, the vast majority in the field was really appealing.
But at a certain point, she just changed the way she was thinking.
I think a lot of us were thinking about electability for a long time, and I finally realized I don’t have the expertise to pick electability. It’s hard.  The Electoral College is in the mix. It’s just a very difficult choice to make that way. So I’m going to pick on the basis of who do I think would make a great president.
And when she did that, her choice became pretty clear.
Mayor Pete Buttigieg. I was really looking for someone that was a combination of climate and character and the ability to unify the country. So when I put all of those pieces together, that added up to Pete Buttigieg.
So where are we right now? What is this?
We are at the Urbandale field office for Pete for America, about to attend the last precinct training for Pete’s precinct captains in Urbandale.
And there’s Pete signs up everywhere. We’ve got some coffee and crackers, people settling in.
So we wanted to spend time with the Buttigieg campaign, because it’s notable that here in Iowa he’s doing significantly better than he’s doing in other parts of the country. And part of the reason that’s been true is that voters here see him as an Obama analogous figure. They see another young Midwesterner, someone who would be a historic president as the first openly gay president. And also someone who speaks their rhetorical language about inspiration, about coming together, about knitting the country’s moral fabric back together. And his campaign has been hearing the same things about electability that we’ve been hearing. And so to close the deal in Iowa, they’re making an argument to try to get more Iowans to think like Pat, to embrace the idea that the most electable candidate is the one that inspires you the most.
His intellect drew me first. Yeah, that was the first thing. I thought, you know, there’s no doubt. And the more I look at him, goodness. He speaks several languages. He’s a vet. He’s everything you could possibly want.
Him being a veteran is one of the keys for me. He knows what it’s like to be on the receiving end of those deployment orders.
I was really impressed with him. He was very intelligent, very straightforward.
I like the fact that he’s young. I mean, I’m just — I’m tired of old white men.
What a minute, let me rephrase.
There are men here.
And I wanted to listen to somebody with some new ideas, with some ideas of Middle American values, and that’s why I picked him. I’d love to see Pete on the debate stage with Trump.
Oh, wouldn’t you?
We really appreciate everyone coming. We’re all here for one reason, and that’s because we believe Pete is the candidate that we need right now. And you know what Pete needs?
Yes. 
I’m done. You guys got it.
People will be sold on Pete. They just need to hear his message. And when you finally get someone to talk to and you can convey that message to them, they become a believer. They become a supporter, and they will join our team.
So can you tell me your name?
I’m retired. I was a financial planner for 40 years.
So Julie’s one of the volunteers at the event. And she’s been personally inspired by Buttigieg.
I heard him for the first time on a blogcast with Preet Bharara. And I was driving in my car, and I tuned in about five minutes after it started, and I had no idea who he was. And I listened for the remaining 40 minutes of the blogcast, and I remember sitting in my driveway thinking, my gosh, who is this guy? He is so smart. He was answering multipoint questions just so articulately. So I canvass most weekends. I have for the last couple of months. So I’ve knocked on about 400 doors. I’ll probably hit 500 by the end of this weekend.
And you knock on doors, what’s the issues that come up the most often?
How to beat President Trump.
As a group, Democrats are so traumatized by the entire Trump experience that we’re kind of like a group of deer in the headlights. So the bottom-line conversation always comes around to, I’ll support anybody in the field. I like this person or I like that person. But so often I’ll hear, well, Pete’s in my top three, but I like so-and-so, and maybe it needs to be Joe Biden because maybe he’s the most electable. So the conversation just goes around and around. And then we just talk about — or I talk about the things that draw me to Pete. When I listen to him speak, my blood pressure goes down instead of up. I’m tired of the politics of outrage. I’m tired of being outraged.
Speaking of politics of outrage, I mean, I think about Bernie Sanders. Would the prospect of a Sanders nomination as a Democrat make you nervous?
Yes, because I personally don’t think he’s electable. I don’t think that his extreme left-wing policies will garner the support he needs, particularly in the Electoral College states that we need to win. So on those levels it concerns me. I don’t personally have a strong feeling one way or the other about Bernie. It’s just a fear of looking at his politics, having a life of experience watching how this country functions. And feeling that if the country as a majority wanted a democratic socialist government, the Congress would be full of democratic socialists. We would be electing those people, and we don’t. So sure it’s a concern.
I asked Julie this because of another dynamic that’s happening among Democrats. So Sanders is also pulling ahead in New Hampshire, the second state to vote after Iowa. And so one of the problems that all this indecision is causing for the other campaigns is that a clear rival to Sanders is yet to emerge in the first two states. Their support is fractured. And no candidate has won both Iowa and New Hampshire and then gone on to lose the Democratic nomination.
Doesn’t that mean, though, that the Biden, Buttigieg, Klobuchar wing needs to pick a person and stick with it?
We’ll get there. We’re early in the process. The electability issue to me — I guess my main feeling is that knowing our history as Democrats, in the last 60 years we’ve won when we’ve nominated somebody that’s young, inspirational, outside the Washington politics. When we try and go with somebody that’s safe and electable, we lose. And I just — I do feel that Pete can put together that coalition.
So Julie’s essentially bringing us back to where we started, to 2008 when Iowa captured that lightning in a bottle and helped spring Barack Obama to the Democratic nomination. And with that logic, 2016 is the aberration, and Democrats shouldn’t use that fear of electability as a framework for choosing candidates going forward.
My personal belief is that anyone who has any faith in their powers of political prognostication after 2016 is either delusional or much more plugged in than I am. One of the two, maybe both.
This is Jay, another Buttigieg volunteer.
So I think that most Iowans do know our outsized import, in the sense that if a candidate does well here, it’s a launching pad. Generally you get that big bounce in the polls. You’re going have a position to do better in New Hampshire, Nevada, South Carolina. And if you can show, like Barack Obama did, that you can win over Iowans, the rest of the country pays attention to that. We do — I think some Iowans do get in a little chicken and the egg. So it’s like, we look at the rest of the country and go, who’s doing well there? Because I want somebody who can win across the country. And then the rest of the country is kind of looking at us. It’s like, all right, well who can do well in Middle America, right? And so there is this sort of feedback loop that we can get caught in and there’s just no off ramp. Which is why for me, it just makes a ton more sense to support the candidate that excites you and trust that the things that are exciting to you are exciting to your neighbors and people around the country as well.
So you’re saying you’re trying not to play the electability game but that your most important issue is winning in November?
All of my most important issues flow from winning in November, right? So in that regard, sure, electability is my primary concern. There’s no scenario in which I’m going to go full-throatedly support a candidate that I suspect can’t win. More what I’m saying is, I don’t know. I don’t know who can win, who will win. I will say I think every Democrat can win. I’m not super responsive to arguments that’s like I’m backing this candidate because the rest of them won’t win. I think we run the risk of overlearning the lessons of 2016.
But the Obama campaign worked in 2008, because what Iowans were feeling was also what Democrats across the country were feeling. And also what the general electorate was feeling. It is unclear that any Democrat in this race has the ability to recreate the coalitions which led him to the presidency. And in that view, there is a risk of under learning lessons from 2016.
So on caucus night, we all talked about it. We’re going to get there early. We’re going to help out as much as we can. And everyone’s going to wear their button. All right? All right. Any last questions? Otherwise I’m going to let you guys dismiss. All right, thank you.
Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, returning to Iowa after a week attending the Senate impeachment trial of President Trump, took an implicit jab at Mr. Sanders during an event in Cedar Rapids as she made the case that she could appeal to a broad range of voters.
“I’ve been building a campaign that’s not a campaign that’s narrow — that’s not a campaign that says it’s us and nobody else,” Ms. Warren told voters at an event in Cedar Rapids. “But a campaign that says come on in because we are all in this fight together.” Ms. Warren did not refer to Mr. Sanders by name, but her language echoed an ongoing Democratic line of attack about Mr. Sanders, a democratic socialist, being an us vs. everyone else candidate.
In another attempt to project unity, Ms. Warren hailed candidates who had left the race, and said she was proud that some of their staff members had decided to join her campaign. Ms. Warren’s internal numbers, according to a person familiar with the data, show that half of her 2020 support comes from people who caucused for Mr. Sanders in 2016, and the other half comes from people who caucused for Mrs. Clinton.
Similarly, Senator Amy Klobuchar knocked Mr. Sanders’s plan for “Medicare for all” within minutes of returning to the campaign trail after being tethered to Washington for impeachment. Though she too did not mention Mr. Sanders by name, Ms. Klobuchar pointed to the Affordable Care Act as a way to rebuild the “blue wall” of Midwest states that she said would bring Democrats victory in 2020.
Former Vice President Joseph R. Biden took swipes at both Mr. Sanders and Mr. Buttigieg as he spoke to an undecided voter, Jaimee Warbasse, at an event in Cedar Rapids.
Mr. Sanders seemed to take the jabs in stride on Saturday, focusing instead on making the case for his own electability against Mr. Trump.
Later, at a stop in Iowa City, he suggested that he would run a stronger kind of general election campaign than his rivals.
“I honestly do not believe that a traditional same old, same old type of campaign is going to generate the excitement and the energy that we need to bring new voters into the process,” Mr. Sanders said.
An ongoing back-and-forth over the 2016 presidential race has been one of the side narratives unfolding in recent days, with a particular focus on the lack of Democratic unity that followed the fierce primary battle between Mr. Sanders and Mrs. Clinton. Mrs. Clinton has recently belittled Mr. Sanders, saying “nobody likes him,” and on Friday she was sharply critical of how his 2016 campaign and supporters did not unite strongly around her after she won the nomination.
But Mr. Sanders’s campaign manager, Faiz Shakir, tweeted out support for Ms. Tlaib, writing “you’re all good” and “don’t change,” which drew a retort from the Clinton spokesman, Nick Merrill.
With polls showing a highly competitive Iowa race, no Democrat has shown an effective way to take on Mr. Sanders, the Vermont senator who is now in his second presidential run and is leading in some recent Iowa polls. Sanders aides view any clash with Mrs. Clinton as an opportunity to rally supporters, who bristle at any reminder of the 2016 campaign and who view her as the embodiment of the establishment they despise.
Sydney Ember reported from Indianola, Grinnell and Iowa City; Reid J. Epstein from Waterloo and Anamosa; and Katie Glueck from North Liberty and Cedar Rapids. Astead W. Herndon contributed reporting from Cedar Rapids and Nick Corasaniti from Bettendorf.