Weather: Partly sunny, with a high in the upper 30s.
Alternate-side parking: In effect until Ash Wednesday.
The deadly stabbing of Tessa Majors, an 18-year-old Barnard College student who was killed late last year in a park in Manhattan, rocked New Yorkers’ sense of safety and recalled a time decades ago when the city had more than 1,000 homicides a year.
But to many, what was more shocking was that the police were seeking three middle schoolers in the attack.
Days after Ms. Majors’s death, a 13-year-old was arrested in the episode — a cellphone robbery gone wrong, according to the authorities.
But months later, two other teenagers remained at large.
That changed this past week, when two 14-year-olds — both classmates of the 13-year-old — were charged with murder.
The police arrested Rashaun Weaver, 14, on Saturday, charging him in Criminal Court in Manhattan with second-degree murder and robbery. Investigators had long believed that he wielded the knife that killed Ms. Majors as she walked in Morningside Park after dark on Dec. 11.
Both are being tried as adults, which New York State law permits in certain cases of violent crimes.
In December, the 13-year-old was charged with second-degree felony murder in family court, after investigators said that he had not participated in the stabbing, only the robbery that preceded it.
The teenager, whom The Times is not naming because he is not charged as an adult, told the police at the time that he and two others had gone to Morningside Park to rob people.
According to my colleague Edgar Sandoval, detectives said the 13-year-old had told them that Ms. Majors was stabbed so forcibly that feathers from her winter coat spewed into the air.
In a courtroom, Mr. Weaver and Mr. Lewis were ordered held without bail at a juvenile detention facility.
A lawyer representing Mr. Lewis told the judge that the prosecution’s evidence was not as strong as it was made to seem. “If the video is so clear, why wasn’t he arrested much sooner?” the lawyer, Alexis Padilla, said.
Investigators said they did not anticipate charging anyone else in the killing of Ms. Majors.
When Did Bloomberg Turn Against Stop-and-Frisk? When He Ran for President.
To put it bluntly, the easiest way to help is to sort your recyclables correctly.
Tell me the basics.
New York City requires residences to separate materials: glass and plastics in one bin, and paper in another. Everything should be clean — no food smears!
OK, but what glass? What plastics? What paper?
Here’s the Department of Sanitation’s guide. There’s some familiar stuff mentioned: glass jars, tin cans, aluminum foil, metal lids, newspapers, printer paper, cardboard, milk cartons and plastic bottles and jugs.
But did you know you can recycle metal cabinets? You can, along with mostly metal appliances, wire hangers, tools, curtain rods and even some license plates.
As for the paper bin, you can add paper bags (handles are OK), softcover books, wrapping paper, receipts and envelopes (even those with little clear windows). You can even add paper cups; the waxy lining is OK if the cup is clean.
Plastic befuddles me.
You’re not alone. Yogurt cups and plastic takeout containers stump many people, partly because early on they couldn’t be recycled. But now they can. Also allowed are plastic cookie tray inserts and clamshell packaging.
Nonfood packaging like blister packs can also go in the bin, along with plastic toys, crates, buckets, furniture, flower pots, mixing bowls and plastic appliances.
Do not recycle paper takeout containers. Do not recycle pizza boxes that are soaked with grease. Also forbidden are any glass items other than bottles and jars, like broken drinking glasses, mirrors or light bulbs.
Soft plastic wrap and flexible plastic containers for shampoo or toothpaste cannot be recycled, nor can soft paper like tissues and napkins. Batteries and electronics need to go to special recycling sites.
One more warning that should be obvious, but, according to a garbage collector, apparently isn’t: You can’t recycle dirty diapers.
It’s Thursday — do your part.
It was our third date, and at his suggestion, I had picked a place from my “list”: the alphabetized compilation of restaurants I had been wanting to try since moving to the city a year earlier. I kept it on my phone.
We were seated next to a man and a woman who appeared to be about 20 years older than us. Judging by their conversation, they were also in the early stages of dating.
They had already ordered by the time we decided what we would have, and their food came first. Their choices mirrored our own, from the artisanal ham and Burgundy truffle beignets to the Parmesan-crusted cod and steak au poivre (split).
At one point, the woman took out her phone.
“I’m so glad I can check this restaurant off my list!” she said.
My date and I looked at each other. Was this us in the future?
Toward the end of the meal, the woman interrupted us.
“Can I show you my latest TikTok video?” she asked.
OK, definitely not us in the future.
