It would have derailed the lives of many of the ancestors we celebrate.
Dr. Ramírez is a professor of Latin American and Latino studies.
Americans love stories about immigrants — especially when they are about our parents, grandparents, and great-grandparents. We admire these people’s courage and grit. We acknowledge their sacrifices and the vital roles they played in getting us where we are and building this country. My own grandfather, an immigrant from Mexico, worked as a taxi driver and a gravedigger, among other occupations, to support his family. Today we count professors and lawyers among his progeny.
Since the implementation of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act in 1996, legal immigrants have been prohibited from receiving more than half their income from cash benefits, such as Temporary Assistance for Needy Families or Supplemental Security Income from the Social Security Administration.
Additionally, the new policy expands the definition of “public charge” to include anyone who has used noncash public benefits — like nonemergency Medicaid, public housing assistance, or Supplemental Nutrition Assistance — for more than a year over a three-year period.
The wealth test targets immigrants seeking permanent resident status based on a petition filed by an American citizen or a permanent resident family member. This may sound like a narrow sliver of the population. In fact, the wealth test’s impact will be felt by many. The Migration Policy Institute estimates that the new rule could prompt some 23 million noncitizens and their U.S. citizen family members not to apply for or to withdraw from public benefit programs. This figure includes 4.7 million adults and 7.6 million children, all of whom are citizens.
By setting its sights on petitions filed by family members of prospective permanent residents, the wealth test attacks a core principle of our immigration law: family reunification. Such reunification has long been a bête noire of opponents of immigration and white supremacists who fulminate about reclaiming America. Two years ago the White House issued a statement calling for an end to family reunification on the spurious grounds that it attracts unskilled immigrants, lowers wages, increases the deficit and undermines national security. Weeks later, President Trump complained to senators about too much immigration from what he called “shithole countries,” like El Salvador and Haiti, and not enough from places like Norway.
The wealth test is but another attempt by the Trump administration to revamp the immigration system so that it’s based on “merit” (money and education, in other words), rather than family ties or humanitarianism. While a merit-based immigration system may appear fair and practical, it is humiliating in its utilitarianism. It reduces people to economic resources, and legal permanent residency and citizenship to transactions.
Proponents of the wealth test often say their immigrant forebears didn’t depend on cash assistance for needy families, rental assistance or food stamps. These programs are part of the safety net built in the 20th century. Before the welfare state existed, poor immigrants had to give up their children when their husbands died or disappeared. Along with the G.I. Bill, federal housing loans, workers’ compensation and Pell Grants, the safety net protects and enriches our country. Indeed, those who say their ancestors didn’t get government help as newly arrived immigrants would have to admit that their ancestors also never enjoyed the government benefits, like Medicare and Social Security, that now make these critics comfortable.
The wealth test’s supporters say immigrants should be self-sufficient and productive members of society. Yet having legal permanent residency, as opposed to being undocumented, makes it easier to integrate into society. Likewise, having reliable health care and enough nutritious food to eat make for more productive members of society. If the goal is to assure that immigrants are self-sufficient and productive, the immigration service could look to Sweden, and work with organizations that provide English-language classes and job training to immigrants. Instead, our government forces immigrants to choose between a green card and feeding their children.
It is time to rebuild the safety net, not tear it down. Immigrants remain as central to our future as they are to our past.
Catherine S. Ramírez is associate professor of Latin American and Latino Studies at the University of California, Santa Cruz.