The conservative talk show host, who announced he had advanced lung cancer, sat next to the first lady, Melania Trump, for the president’s speech.
During his State of the Union Speech, President Trump awarded the conservative radio host Rush Limbaugh the Presidential Medal of Freedom.
In an unusual departure from protocol, Rush Limbaugh was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President Trump during the State of the Union address on Tuesday night, one day after the conservative talk show host revealed that he had advanced lung cancer.
Mr. Limbaugh, 69, sat next to the first lady, Melania Trump, in the gallery of the House of Representatives, where he joined Venezuela’s opposition leader, a top border patrol agent and several other guests of Mr. Trump.
On a night thick with tension of the impeachment proceedings against Mr. Trump, the presence of Mr. Limbaugh represented a stark contrast with Democrats in the House chamber, many of whom withheld their applause for much of the speech.
The first lady presented the medal, which is usually bestowed during a ceremony at the White House, to Mr. Limbaugh.
“Here tonight is a special man beloved by millions of Americans,” Mr. Trump said.
The president added that Mr. Limbaugh had received a Stage 4 cancer diagnosis.
Mr. Limbaugh rose from his seat and saluted Mr. Trump before pumping his fist. Mr. Trump said that in recognition for all that Mr. Limbaugh had done for the nation, his inspiration for millions of Americans and his charity work, he was giving him the country’s highest civilian honor.
The Presidential Medal of Freedom was first awarded in 1963. Previous recipients have included Norman Rockwell, I.M. Pei, Audrey Hepburn, Tennessee Williams, Duke Ellington, Milton Friedman, Felix Frankfurter, Walter Cronkite, Jonas Salk and Edward M. Kennedy.
Speaker Nancy Pelosi remained seated as Mr. Trump heaped praise on Mr. Limbaugh, who announced Monday on his show that he had experienced some shortness of breath and that his lung cancer diagnosis had been confirmed by two medical institutions.
Mr. Limbaugh said on Monday that he planned to keep working, but would miss some shows while undergoing tests and determining a course of treatment. His eponymous show, which airs every weekday from noon to 3 p.m., is a top-rated program on Premiere Radio Networks, a subsidiary of iHeartMedia.
The selection of Mr. Limbaugh for the honor was not devoid of criticism. Some health care activists recalled Mr. Limbaugh’s ardent opposition to the Affordable Care Act, while others mentioned Mr. Limbaugh’s attack of Sandra Fluke, a law student whom he mocked in 2012 as a “slut” and a “prostitute” after she spoke to a congressional hearing about birth control.
Mr. Trump has previously awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom to Tiger Woods, Roger Staubach, Orrin Hatch and Miriam Adelson, a philanthropist and the wife of Sheldon Adelson, a billionaire donor to Mr. Trump.
The president also bestowed the honor on Babe Ruth and Elvis Presley posthumously.