A lawyer for Harvey Weinstein told jurors on Thursday that he was the victim of an “overzealous prosecution” and that prosecutors were acting like moviemakers, inventing an alternative world in which women are not responsible for their own behavior.
During a five-hour closing argument, the lawyer, Donna Rotunno, argued that Mr. Weinstein’s accusers had chosen to engage in consensual and often transactional relationships with him to advance their own careers.
Ms. Rotunno said prosecutors from the Manhattan district attorney’s office had woven “a sinister tale” during Mr. Weinstein’s rape trial, depicting him as a monster and his accusers as innocent, passive victims. But, she asserted, the prosecution lacked the evidence to prove it.
The trial is widely seen as a watershed moment for the #MeToo movement, which gained momentum in October 2017 after Mr. Weinstein was publicly accused of assaulting and harassing numerous women.
Mr. Weinstein, 67, a former powerhouse producer in Hollywood known for films like “Pulp Fiction” and “Shakespeare in Love,” has pleaded not guilty to five felony charges, including rape, criminal sexual assault and predatory sexual assault. Prosecutors will present closing remarks on Friday. The jury of seven men and five women will begin deliberating on Tuesday.
Ms. Rotunno said her client had become “a target of a cause and of a movement.” She implored the jury not to give in to public pressure, but to focus on the facts in the case.
For a month, Mr. Weinstein listened as six women took the stand and testified that he had sexually assaulted them. He declined to testify himself.
He faces charges based on the allegations of only two of his accusers: Jessica Mann, a former actress who testified that he raped her in a Midtown Manhattan hotel in 2013, and Miriam Haley, a former production assistant on his show “Project Runway,” who said he forced oral sex on her at his TriBeCa apartment in 2006.
Both women acknowledged on cross-examination that they not only had friendly communications with Mr. Weinstein after their alleged attacks, but later had consensual sex with him.
The presiding judge, Justice James M. Burke, allowed four other women to testify about their own encounters so that prosecutors can establish a pattern of behavior, even though their allegations are too old to be charged as crimes under New York State law. The actress Annabella Sciorra, for instance, took the stand under the legal theory that her testimony would support the charges of predatory sexual assault, which carry a life sentence.
Ms. Sciorra testified that Mr. Weinstein pushed his way into her apartment and raped her after giving her a ride home from a dinner party in the early 1990s. The other accusers — Tarale Wulff, Dawn Dunning and Lauren Young — were all aspiring actresses who said Mr. Weinstein lured them to hotels on the pretense of helping their careers, and then sexually assaulted them.
Over and over, Ms. Rotunno returned to her central theme that Mr. Weinstein’s accusers were not passive victims of assaults, but active participants in consensual acts. “Women have choices,” she said.
Ms. Rotunno said that Ms. Haley’s relationship with Mr. Weinstein was something close to a romance, which began after he had gotten her the “Project Runway” job. “They have to label it as a professional relationship because if they labeled it as what it was, we wouldn’t be here,” Ms. Rotunno said.
“She was using him for jobs,” Ms. Rotunno said.
Ms. Rotunno argued that what Ms. Mann had described as a rape was sex between consenting adults. She said the evidence showed that Ms. Mann went willingly to Mr. Weinstein’s hotel room, got undressed and laid down on his bed. Ms. Mann never tried to stop Mr. Weinstein, and after the encounter, the lawyer said, she went to brunch with him.
Ms. Rotunno highlighted dozens of friendly and sometimes flirtatious emails Ms. Mann had sent to Mr. Weinstein from 2013 to 2017. Each time Ms. Mann got a new telephone number, Ms. Rotunno noted, she made sure Mr. Weinstein had it. “Five or six times she says, ‘Oh, here’s my new number,’” Ms. Rotunno said.
Ms. Sciorra, who gave some of the strongest testimony, had misremembered what happened, the defense lawyer argued. She pointed to evidence the actress had told a friend at the time that “she did something crazy” with Mr. Weinstein, but did not describe the encounter as rape.
Ms. Rotunno said Ms. Young, Ms. Wulff and Ms. Dunning had also changed their stories over time, and she suggested they came forward only in the interest of fame.
