With impeachment behind them, House Democrats must determine how to balance their policy agenda with a determination to continue investigating President Trump.
WASHINGTON — House Democrats, back on their heels after President Trump’s acquittal of impeachment charges, wrestled on Thursday with a question that could determine their party’s fate in November: Now what?
As Mr. Trump took an ostentatious victory lap at the White House, Democrats were grappling with how to balance their policy agenda and their determination to continue aggressive investigations of a president they view as a threat to the country.
With just five months left in the legislative year and nine before the elections, Democrats concede they have to make some tough decisions.
“It’s something we need to talk about,” said Representative John Yarmuth, Democrat of Kentucky and the chairman of the House Budget Committee. He said that the issue came up during the weekly closed-door meeting of committee leaders.
Democrats believe they won back the House majority in 2018 with a laser focus on health care and the economy. But they are also revolted by an unrepentant president and reluctant to abandon investigations into his conduct that might yield evidence of wrongdoing. With Mr. Trump emboldened by his acquittal, some say investigating him is more important than ever.
Speaker Nancy Pelosi seemed ready to make a pivot on Thursday, less than 24 hours after the Senate verdict that he was not guilty ended a five-month impeachment drama that consumed the Capitol.
At her weekly news conference, Ms. Pelosi spent the bulk of her opening remarks talking about Mr. Trump’s State of the Union address — “appalling,” she said — and pushing back on his claims that he is responsible for the nation’s economic turnaround.
But she also vowed not to let up on oversight of his policies and personal conduct.
“We will continue to do our oversight to protect and defend the Constitution,” Ms. Pelosi said.
Putting that into practice may prove fraught. Democratic leaders must decide in the coming days whether to carry on with the investigation into Mr. Trump’s effort to pressure Ukraine to investigate his political rivals, which led the House to impeach the president on charges of abuse of power and obstruction of Congress.
The biggest question at the moment is whether to issue a subpoena for John R. Bolton, the former national security adviser, after senators refused to consider new testimony in the impeachment trial. Doing so could yield damaging new information, but it also risks making Democrats look like sore losers.
On Wednesday, Representative Jerrold Nadler of New York, the Judiciary Committee chairman and an impeachment manager, said that the House should subpoena Mr. Bolton, who has written a tell-all book that contains a direct account of Mr. Trump’s decision to leverage nearly $400 million in military aid for Ukraine in exchange for the investigations.
But Democrats also recognize that Mr. Bolton may be less receptive to speaking to the House now that Mr. Trump has been acquitted. On Thursday, Neither Ms. Pelosi nor Representative Adam B. Schiff of California, the House Intelligence Committee chairman and the leader of the impeachment prosecution team, would say what they intend to do.
“We really haven’t made any decisions yet,” Mr. Schiff said.
Some of the Democrats’ long-running investigations into Mr. Trump are continuing quietly, and others are proceeding in the federal courts, where the House is party to a handful of consequential legal fights over access to Mr. Trump’s tax returns, other financial information and witness testimony and documents related to Robert S. Mueller III’s Russia investigation.
Several of the fights could go to the Supreme Court and perhaps be decided before November’s elections. If Democrats were to win access, say, to Mr. Trump’s federal tax returns, or a court forced Donald F. McGahn II, the former White House counsel, to testify about Mr. Trump’s attempts to thwart the Russia investigation, it could produce a new round of high-profile hearings about whether the president had broken the law — an inquiry that would surely reverberate in the presidential campaign.
Lower-profile work by the House Oversight and Reform, Judiciary and Foreign Affairs committees has scrutinized the Trump administration’s border policies, the decision to include a citizenship question on the 2020 census, politicization of the State Department and the responses to devastating hurricanes in the Caribbean.
But the question is one of emphasis, and how Democrats answer it could shape voters’ views of them heading into the next election. Representative Donna Shalala, Democrat of Florida, who served as health secretary to President Bill Clinton, repeated a single phrase when asked what Democrats should do next.
“Health care, health care, health care,” said Ms. Shalala, who is working on legislation to lower the cost of prescription drugs and to end surprise medical billing.
As is the case with most intraparty Democratic debates, moderates and progressives fall into different camps. Moderates want to talk to voters about “kitchen table” issues. Progressives want to send the message that the House will continue to act as a check on a president clearly emboldened by his acquittal.
But progressives like Representatives Ilhan Omar of Minnesota and Jamie Raskin of Maryland said that Democrats should redouble their efforts to rein in Mr. Trump.
“We must make sure that this administration does not continue to break the law,” Ms. Omar said.
Even so, there were signs on Thursday that the House’s marquee inquiries will shift into a lower gear. Norman L. Eisen and Barry H. Berke, who served as special counsels to the Judiciary Committee for its long-running abuse of power investigation and then formed part of its core impeachment team, are both expected to depart in the coming weeks.
The internal discussion over next steps comes as the relationship between Mr. Trump and Ms. Pelosi has hit a new low, raising questions about whether it is even possible for them to work together on legislative matters. Both the president and the speaker have said that they want legislation to lower the cost of prescription drugs and to fix the nation’s crumbling infrastructure.
But if the events of Thursday were any guide, they can barely stand to be in the same room with one another. At a White House celebration of his acquittal, Mr. Trump boasted about having taken a shot at Ms. Pelosi during the National Prayer Breakfast earlier that day.
As Democrats contemplated the road ahead, Republicans were giddy, portraying the House’s failed impeachment case as a misguided overreach.
