After a cruise ship docked in Cambodia, passengers streamed off the ship, maskless, and fears are rising that the country could become a vector of transmission.
SIHANOUKVILLE, Cambodia — When Cambodia’s prime minister greeted passengers on a cruise ship amid a coronavirus scare on Valentine’s Day, embraces were the order of the day. Protective masks were not.
Not only did Prime Minister Hun Sen not wear one, assured that the ship was virus-free, his bodyguards ordered people who had donned masks to take them off. The next day, the American ambassador to Cambodia, W. Patrick Murphy, who brought his own family to greet the passengers streaming off the ship, also went maskless.
“We are very, very grateful that Cambodia has opened literally its ports and doors to people in need,” Mr. Murphy said.
But after hundreds of passengers had disembarked, one later tested positive for the coronavirus. Now, health officials worry that what Cambodia opened its doors to was the outbreak, and that the world may pay a price as passengers from the cruise ship Westerdam stream home.
Prime Minister Hun Sen’s decision to allow it entry appeared to be a political calculus as much as anything else. The region’s longest-serving ruler and a close ally of China, he is known for his survival skills.
But Mr. Hun Sen’s critics worry that the aging autocrat might have acted rashly.
But on Monday, Mr. Hun Sen directed officials in Phnom Penh to treat passengers from the Westerdam to a sightseeing jaunt.
“To tour the city is better than staying in rooms or at the hotel feeling bored or scared,” said a post on Mr. Hun Sen’s Facebook page.
The lack of urgency in Cambodia, where officials milled around the ship on Monday without protection, points to the obstacles in trying to contain a virus that experts warn is spreading faster than SARS or MERS.
Even if temperatures are accurately gauged, people may be taking medications that lower their temperature, like some arthritis drugs.
On Monday afternoon, more than 100 Westerdam passengers took up Mr. Hun Sen’s offer of a capital tour, piling in buses to see the royal palace and other sites.
Despite cases of coronavirus popping up in Southeast Asia, Mr. Hun Sen has campaigned against masks, arguing that they are better at spreading fear than stopping germs. At a news conference last month, he announced that he would kick out anyone who dared wear a mask.
Even as other governments instituted China travel bans that angered Beijing, Mr. Hun Sen traveled to the Chinese capital and met with Xi Jinping, China’s leader, in another photo op.
The sense of solidarity makes sense in a country heavily dependent on China for its fortunes, after having turned its back on a West that was demanding progress in human rights in return for aid and investment.
A torrent of Chinese cash has remade Cambodia, nowhere more so than in Sihanoukville, a once sleepy beach town that is now a sprawling construction site of gilded casinos and towering residential blocks. More than 90 percent of businesses in the city are now Chinese owned.
On Monday, Oeun Yen, a masseuse here, worried about the massages she had given three female passengers from the Westerdam before the virus case was confirmed by Malaysia. She was not afraid at first, she said, because the prime minister had assured people all was fine.
“Now I am more concerned,” she said.
In a country where Mr. Hun Sen has dissolved the biggest opposition party and political assassination is not uncommon, such mild concern is as much as many ordinary residents are willing to muster.
But there is also widespread skepticism of the government’s contention that only one person in Cambodia has so far tested positive for coronavirus, a Chinese citizen who has since returned home.
On Monday, Mr. Hun Sen announced yet another publicity stunt: He wants to invite the passengers of the Westerdam to a party.
Masks won’t be welcome.
Reporting was contributed by Sun Narin in Sihanoukville; Roni Caryn Rabin and David Yaffe-Bellany in New York; and Richard C. Paddock in Denpasar, Indonesia.