The bombing of the Navy destroyer in Yemen in 2000 killed 17 sailors. Al Qaeda claimed responsibility, and Sudan was accused of having aided the terrorist group.
The Trump administration has been looking at lifting the terrorism designation for Sudan “for quite some time,” said Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, speaking to reporters on a plane to Germany, before visiting several countries in Africa and the Middle East.
“The Sudanese reminded me that they would love to get off that list and we always measure twice and cut once before we remove someone from a list like that,” Mr. Pompeo said.
Sudan’s announcement of a compensation deal comes as the African nation undergoes a fragile transition after the fall last year of president Omar al-Bashir, who ruled with an iron fist for nearly three decades. Sudan’s interim ruling council, composed of civilian and military officials, is now seeking to shake off decades of diplomatic and economic isolation. Being removed from the American list of state sponsors of terrorism would be a significant step.
Prime Minister Abdalla Hamdok, a prominent economist, visited Washington in December in a bid to lobby the Trump administration to remove Sudan from the State Department’s list of state sponsors of terrorism. The two countries agreed in December to exchange ambassadors again after a break of 23 years.
In 2017, the Trump administration lifted longstanding sanctions against Sudan, saying Khartoum had made progress on counterterrorism efforts and expanded access to humanitarian aid in war-torn regions.
American officials have pressed Sudan for reparations in recent months, the state department said, saying compensation for the victims of terrorism remained a priority if the United States was to remove Sudan from the list. Under presidents Obama and Trump, the United States has targeted in airstrikes those it suspected of plotting the Cole attack.
Sudan is still in the process of negotiating a settlement with families of those killed in the bombings of the United States embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998. The nearly simultaneous attacks in Nairobi and Dar es Salaam killed 224 people and wounded thousands.
Lara Jakes contributed reporting from Washington.