New York|Water Mains Are Bursting All Over New York. Can They Be Fixed?
Water Mains Are Bursting All Over New York. Can They Be Fixed?
The city spends $400 million a year to repair water mains that have been underground for decades and are increasingly brittle.
New York City has nearly 7,000 miles of water mains, enough to send water to Seattle and back.
The city also has 97,607 miles of underground electric lines, 4,416 miles of gas mains, 104 miles of steam pipes and thousands of miles of telephone and cable-televison lines.
And then there is a labyrinth of train tunnels and other assorted equipment, all jammed together beneath the streets.
But much of New York’s underground infrastructure, once visionary and widely imitated, has become old and fragile. The average age of water mains is 66 years, making them as old as boomers born when Dwight D. Eisenhower was president.
A reminder of the brittle condition of the city’s infrastructure has played out in several water main breaks in the last month. Two water mains on the Upper West Side broke within days of each other, sending water gushing into the streets, making them impassable.
The incidents also underscored how close together the underground systems are, because both of those breaks paralyzed multiple subway lines for hours.
On Monday, a water main gave way on the Lower East Side, closing streets and gushing water for hours.
With the health of New York’s underground infrastructure becoming an increasing concern, the city has mounted an ambitious campaign to replace old water mains, perhaps the most vulnerable part of the system.
The de Blasio administration plans to spend $800 million over the next two years on new water mains and related infrastructure.
The city recorded 459 water main breaks in the last fiscal year, about 1.2 per day, though few were big enough to attract widespread attention.
Officials defend the city’s infrastructure maintenance, in part by measuring water main breaks another way.
The national average is 25 breaks a year for every 100 miles of water mains, he said. A group that keeps a national tally of figures from local governments has set a target of 15 breaks a year for every 100 miles of mains.
In New York, there were 62 fewer breaks in the 2019 fiscal year before Monday’s incident — from July 1, 2018, to June 30 last year — than in the comparable period the year before, according to agency figures. The agency says there were 166 breaks from last July 1 through the end of January, down from 185 in the same period a year earlier.
The city has been spending about $400 million a year, Mr. Sapienza said, to replace water mains in the last five years.
The city also does preventive maintenance on existing mains, sending out crews every day to listen for leaks.
The crews also work on “modulating pressure” and something they call “exercising valves,” which sounds like Pilates for pipes. It involves opening valves — slowly, and not necessarily all the way — just to keep them somewhat limber.
“Modulating pressure” refers to opening or closing valves at different times of the day to keep pressure in mains from building as demand rises and falls. High pressure can weaken pipes, making leaks more likely.
Crews also have equipment that can pick up the telltale sign of a leaky pipe: a distinctive whooshing sound.
But most of all, they have their own experienced ears.
“It could be a couple hundred feet away, but you’re going to hear it,” said Anastasios Georgelis, the deputy commissioner for water and sewer operations. “If they hear anything, and they know the sound, they give it in,” sending information on the location to the agency’s headquarters in Flushing, Queens.
The agency then sends another crew out to do more detective work, sometimes with electronic transducers that can pinpoint the location of a leak.
The crews are busy this time of year because this is the season for water main breaks. The city says 44 percent of water main breaks happen in December, January and February, when temperatures chill pipes at night and warm them by day. Valves and joints expand and contract. The motion can contribute to leaks and breaks.
The environmental protection department has recorded more than 400 water main breaks a year nearly every year since 1998.
But despite the number of breaks and how tightly packed things are under the streets, it is relatively rare for the subway to be upended when something does go wrong.
Aside from the two water main breaks in January that caused major delays, only twice in all of last year and once in 2018 was service affected by a ruptured pipe, according to figures from the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, the state-controlled agency that runs the subways.
One of the breaks last month sent waves crashing into the steps of Lincoln Center and disrupted subway service along a stretch of the Nos. 1, 2 and 3 lines.
The other flooded the station at 103rd Street and Central Park West, interfering with the A, C and D lines.
The two water mains that ruptured had both been inspected just last year, officials said, and a laboratory is testing them to determine what went wrong. Officials said the mains that ruptured were laid around 1912.
After the break on Central Park West last month, some transit officials grumbled that the city took too long to close the ruptured pipe, making the situation worse than it should have been.
A spokesman for the transit authority, Tim Minton, later struck a more conciliatory note, saying that there was “great collaboration and good cooperation” with the environmental protection department, a city agency.
“We all wish the infrastructure is not aging as it is, that there were not as many incidents,” he said.
The city says that it replaces roughly one mile of water mains every week. Some of the pipes that are replaced are old, but Mr. Sapienza said that age alone is not necessarily a reason for replacement.
Robert Adamski, who after leaving the environmental protection agency in 2013 wrote a report for the American Society of Civil Engineers, calculated that at the current rate, it would take 150 years to replace every water main — twice the life expectancy of most mains.
Mr. Adamski’s report was part of a national report card on infrastructure in 2015. While in the report he said that the city had stepped up maintenance in the last several years, he gave the city’s infrastructure a C-minus over all. The drinking-water system rated a C, but the sewer system a D.
Mr. Bowles, of the Center for an Urban Future, said the city needs to lower the average age of mains to about 40 or 50 years.
“That may take a decade or two, but I think we’ve got to speed up the replacement cycle,” he said.
But the work is complicated given the tangle underground.
“We can’t just come in with a big excavator and peel away the street and the soil,” Mr. Sapienza said.