The administration’s plan to divert more military funds to building a border wall is the latest example of the long-running erosion of Congress’s power of the purse.
WASHINGTON — When the Pentagon announced this month that it would divert billions more dollars in military funding to the construction of President Trump’s border wall, bipartisan outrage ricocheted across Capitol Hill.
The dysfunction has taken hold in large part because of decisions that members of Congress themselves have made. But it has become particularly pronounced under Mr. Trump, who has moved aggressively to divert government money when it suits his agenda.
“Congress’s appropriation power, which is pretty much the last unchallenged power that Congress has, has very significantly eroded,” said Sean Q. Kelly, a professor of political science at California State University Channel Islands.
The root of the problem predates Mr. Trump. For years, Congress has jammed through huge omnibus spending bills that set funding for an entire fiscal year in the final days of legislative sessions. Lawmakers have also passed a patchwork of short-term spending bills to keep the government from shutting down, which has happened three times during the Trump administration. And while presidents have always had the power to transfer and reallocate funds, Mr. Trump has made far wider use of that authority to subvert the will of lawmakers.
The administration is expected to announce another diversion of funds to help pay for construction of a wall on the southern border, Mr. Trump’s signature campaign promise, in the coming months. The president declared a national emergency last year to allow him to use money not appropriated for the wall to build it.
And while the Senate acquitted Mr. Trump this month of impeachment charges stemming from his decision to withhold military funding from Ukraine, the Government Accountability Office, a nonpartisan federal watchdog, found that Mr. Trump’s actions violated the Impoundment Control Act, which limits a president’s ability to refuse to spend money allocated by Congress.
Several lawmakers, including some who are still deeply involved in crafting the dozen must-pass spending bills each year, acknowledge that the annual fiscal process no longer works as it once did. A large factor, several say, is the demise of earmarks, the power to steer money to lawmakers’ pet projects in order to persuade them to take tough votes. Long scorned as a tool of corruption, Congress ultimately banned the practice after a series of scandals that culminated in the imprisonment of the lobbyist Jack Abramoff.
Some lawmakers in both parties have quietly begun discussing reviving earmarks in a bid to help grease the gears of the spending process. Representative Nita M. Lowey, Democrat of New York and chairwoman of the House Appropriations Committee, embarked on a listening tour among her colleagues about rebranding earmarks as “community project funding” and implementing more guardrails to avoid abuse. Mr. Trump has also suggested bringing the practice back in some form.
But the idea has been shelved for the time being. House Democratic leaders hope to pass all 12 spending bills by the end of June, and any effort to revive earmarks was seen as too complex and politically fraught to pursue in such a short time frame and in an election year.
Fiscal conservatives — particularly Republicans who ran for Congress as budget hawks bent on lowering the debt and reducing government spending — are reluctant to undercut that message now by embracing earmarks. Mick Mulvaney, the acting White House chief of staff who railed against spending during his years as a South Carolina congressman, acknowledged in a recent private question-and-answer session that Republicans are less interested in deficit reduction now that a member of their party is in the White House.
A Democratic aide, insisting on anonymity to describe internal discussions, said that party leaders planned to revisit the discussion of earmarks next year, given the near-unanimous support for it among their members in Congress. Other aides and lawmakers pointed to the Select Committee on the Modernization of Congress, a bipartisan committee formed to offer suggestions on how to improve and update the legislative branch, as a possible avenue to explore more substantial reforms to the system.
In the meantime, the administration has taken advantage of the natural murkiness that comes with funding programs and policy — and encountered little resistance from lawmakers.
While the Government Accountability Office found that Mr. Trump’s decision to withhold $391 million in security assistance for Ukraine violated the law, there is no action or penalty that can be taken as a result.
This month, when Russell T. Vought, the acting head of the White House’s Office of Management and Budget, appeared before the House Budget Committee for the first time since defying congressional subpoenas in the impeachment inquiry, only one lawmaker — Representative John Yarmuth, Democrat of Kentucky and the committee’s chairman — even asked about the agency’s obligation to implement congressional spending priorities.
Mr. Yarmuth and other top Democrats have said that they plan to pursue legislation that would toughen the Impoundment Control Act, and Senate Democrats have introduced legislation to curb the reach of the national emergency power. But neither measure is likely to survive in the Republican-controlled Senate.
Wendy J. Schiller, a professor of political science at Brown University, called it a “story of unintended consequences” that is unlikely to be immediately reversed by future administrations.
