Opinion|In Marriage, It’s Not About the Dishes. It’s About Respect.
In Marriage, It’s Not About the Dishes. It’s About Respect.
Readers share tips for avoiding the pitfalls of gender stereotypes in relationships.
Ms. Harris and Ms. Tarchak are senior editorial assistants.
“There are powerful historical reasons heterosexual marriages are subject to more tension, miscommunication and resentment than same-sex relationships,” Stephanie Coontz writes in the Op-Ed “How to Make Your Marriage Gayer.” There she explores the findings of a study showing that marriages between gay men appear to be the most equitable, and therefore the happiest, while heterosexual women, who are more often expected to fill stereotypical gender roles, seem to be the least satisfied.
We asked readers to tell us about the dynamics of their own relationships. A selection of their observations follows, including advice on how to navigate away from traditional roles and expectations. These comments have been edited for length and clarity.
Tell us about your marriage in the comments.
The state of parental leave in the United States is ridiculous. Men go back to work in the first week and women, who can barely get out of bed, are expected to take care of everything at home. Eighty-hour-a-week job expectations mean that one spouse leans into their career and the other leans into the home and 99 percent of the time that seems to fall along traditional gender lines.
I’m a heterosexual female, almost 70, divorced for almost 40 years. I had a number of significant heterosexual relationships in the first 20 years after my divorce, but one day I realized I wasn’t going to overcome my gender socialization. I’ve lived happily alone since. Oh, now I have a dog. Wish I’d known about them much earlier. — Deborah Hooker, Clayton, N.C.
While masculine in appearance, my wife and I both acknowledge that I am more gender fluid than other married men, something we believe plays a role in balancing the power dynamics in our marriage. I’m more in touch with my feminine side and that’s helped to blur the line between what many married couples traditionally consider to be appropriate behavior for a man. — Steve Kaverman, Cañon City, Colo.
I’m femme, presenting bisexual, in a partnership with a butch lesbian. I grew up wanting to fall into the “woman’s” place in a lot of ways, and because my girlfriend identifies with many masculine qualities, she enjoys “man’s” work. But there is always an open dialogue between us because we are very aware of the expectations you can fall into. We work together on most things or will ask each other for help. We feel very comfortable doing that in a way most of my female friends don’t. — Elizabeth Gibson, West Chester, Pa.
I am a transgender woman, still early in my transition, and my partner is a cisgender woman. Our relationship has been mostly free of heterosexual power dynamics, even before I began transitioning. Child care and homeownership haven’t come into play yet, but I’m proud of how well we manage to divide the tasks we have. That goes for emotional labor, too. The straight couples I know do not share the burden of being an emotional center. That almost always falls on the woman. — Micah Lily Osler, Manhattan, N.Y.
I am in a heterosexual, biracial relationship (I am a white female, he is a black male). I don’t know if it’s because of our difference in race, but we challenge gender roles frequently and my partner is highly attentive to my needs, much more so than any white male I’ve dated in the past. He is also the primary cleaner and is meticulous about laundry. We are traditional in some ways, but we also closely observe one another and regularly pitch in to help. — Holly Nelson, Albany, N.Y.
My wife is in a wheelchair and has limited ability to do many activities. I do virtually all the shopping, cooking, dishes, bills and bookkeeping. I also do physical caretaking. Our emotional life, however, is balanced. She is a fearless communicator and has helped me start to become one too. The sex can be repetitive and constrained because of her condition, which is a source of frustration. But it’s also intimate, funny and sometimes joyous. Who would have thought the best sex in my life would be with a woman in a wheelchair? We do what we can — and must — to live together and love each other. — Julian Gerstin, Brattleboro, Vt.
I’m a male in a heterosexual marriage with two young children. I can get them ready for school, pack the lunches, cook the dinner, go to the parent-teacher conferences. But then my wife will feel she is failing or has been left out. Sometimes men place expectations on women in relationships, but women can come in with a lot of baggage as to what they think they’re supposed to do, regardless. — Andrew N, Queens, N.Y.
In our relationship, power dynamics are related to mostly one thing: money. We’ve been in a homosexual relationship for 15 years, living together and sharing our lives for a year and a half. I am half as “rich” as he and I am constantly worried about it. I had a very authoritarian childhood, and in this sense would ideally be in a relationship where I was the greater “breadwinner” so that I could take charge and have more of a say. I am still the dominant one in many ways, but I am deeply unsatisfied that we are so unbalanced, materially, even though he never brings it up. — Raymond Louis Llompart, Manhattan, N.Y.
I am a heterosexual male. I married my wife in 2010 when I was in law school and thought I was part of the enlightened movement toward more egalitarian relationships. I did more of the cleaning, dishes and cooking while I attended school, and my wife worked. Then we had our first child and all those egalitarian ideals disappeared. She became a stay-at-home mom and now does nearly all the household chores. Although idealistic when we got married, we were unsuccessful at challenging traditional roles and duties. — Jacob Burgess, Nashua, N.H.
I don’t do any household chores that I don’t want to do. Because of this, my home is rarely spotless, but I am not stressed. If my husband wants certain chores done before I am inclined to do them, he will do them without complaint or resentment. He knows that if I force myself to do them I will be irritable, overwhelmed and unhappy. He, like most men, prefers peace and happiness to a spotless home. — Katie, Metairie, La.