The United Arab Emirates used a novel approach to build the Hope spacecraft, which launches for the red planet this summer.
BOULDER, Colo. — In December, a spacecraft named Hope was motionless in the middle of a large clean room on the campus of the University of Colorado, mounted securely on a stand.
Emirati engineers worked here, close to the ski slopes of the Rocky Mountains and far from the sands of the Middle East, learning from their American counterparts. It was part of the Emirates’ planning for the future when petroleum no longer flows as bountifully, to invest its current wealth in new “knowledge-based” industries.
As a newcomer, the U.A.E. has taken a novel approach. It could have tried to do everything itself, developing homegrown technology similar to what India has done. That would have taken years longer. Alternatively, it could have bought someone else’s spacecraft design, which would have been the quickest path.
Instead, the country has sought partners with long experience in sending machines into space. This, its space team believed, would help avoid many of the pitfalls of trying to pull off such missions for the first time, while training future engineers who will be expected to step up to bigger roles in the next mission. In the process, the country’s leaders hope to sow seeds for future companies.
Last year, for a nascent astronaut program, the Emirates bought a seat on a Russian Soyuz rocket. They sent Hazzaa al-Mansoori for an eight-day stay at the International Space Station.
But the Indian spacecraft did not have scientific instruments sensitive enough to make significant discoveries. By contrast, MAVEN has determined how quickly the Martian atmosphere is being stripped away by the solar wind: about four pounds a second. This information is an important clue in the puzzle of understanding why early Mars, which was warmer and wetter, turned into the cold, barren, almost airless place it is today.
“You need to understand the role that Mars plays in the loss of its atmosphere,” Ms. al-Amiri said.
When a planet-wide dust storm raged on Mars in the summer of 2018, MAVEN observed that the amount of hydrogen in the upper atmosphere rose. The three instruments on Hope — an infrared spectrometer, an ultraviolet spectrometer and a camera — would be able to help explain how the dust pushed the hydrogen upward.
Until Monday, it had never been anywhere near the United Arab Emirates. That day, the finished spacecraft landed in Dubai, after a 7,800-mile trip from Denver inside a Ukrainian Antonov cargo plane.
The first product of the collaboration, DubaiSat-1, was built in South Korea, with Emirati engineers spending months there, essentially learning as apprentices. The Russians launched it in 2009. The 400-pound satellite’s camera has been used for urban planning, disaster relief and environmental monitoring.
At the time of the launch of DubaiSat-2 in November 2013, Emirati leaders were brainstorming more ambitious space projects.
Ms. al-Amiri said Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum, the ruler of Dubai and prime minister of the U.A.E., asked if it might be feasible to send a spacecraft to Mars.
To date, only NASA, the European Space Agency, India and the Soviet Union in the 1970s and 1980s have successfully sent probes to Mars.
Mr. Sharaf, who was then a deputy program manager for DubaiSat-2, said after couple of weeks of study that a Mars mission seemed plausible. “We think it’s something we should look into more,” he recalled telling higher officials.
Mr. Sharaf said Sheikh Mohammed also wanted to offer inspiration for youth in the wider Arab world. “That’s why he called the spacecraft Hope,” Mr. Sharaf said.
Emirati officials, including Mr. Sharaf and Ms. al-Amiri, started reaching out to space organizations around the world, including the Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics, a research institute at the University of Colorado that has been working on space missions for more than half a century.
They visited Colorado in the spring of 2014, quizzing laboratory officials about what kind of scientific investigation might be worthwhile to pursue at Mars.
The laboratory submitted a winning proposal. Arizona State University and the University of California, Berkeley were given roles in developing and building the spacecraft’s instruments.
For the University of Colorado, a collaboration with the Emirates is not free of controversy. While the U.A.E. is often considered more progressive and open than many of its neighbors, it supported Saudi Arabia’s intervention in Yemen, a civil war that has killed thousands of people, before mostly pulling out last year. The country has also jailed political dissidents.
Daniel N. Baker, the laboratory director, said that officials from the university, Colorado and even NASA, supported the project. “From my point of view, the criteria that we apply is we like to have like-minded people, people who are driven by excellence,” Dr. Baker said.
Engineers from the U.A.E., some who worked in South Korea on the satellites and some who were right out of college, started arriving in Colorado. Two teams — an Emirati group led by Mr. Sharaf, and one from Colorado led by Peter Withnell — worked side-by-side.
The mission is a stretch for the Colorado laboratory as well; it is the largest spacecraft it has ever built. In the past, it had mostly built scientific instruments for missions rather than the spacecraft itself.
Sending a spacecraft to Mars poses bigger challenges than putting a satellite in Earth orbit. Radio communications now have to travel millions of miles, not a few hundred, and are blocked periodically by the sun or Mars. The spacecraft will have to take care of itself for stretches of time.
The Emirati team is much younger — 90 percent of them are under 35 — than its American counterparts. “When I started I was 30,” Mr. Sharaf said.
A third of them are women, a high percentage in an engineering field that has often been dominated by men. For the Emirati science team that will be studying the Mars data, the percentage of women is even higher: 80 percent. Until an effort to recruit men, the science team was entirely women.
That includes Mohsen al-Awadhi who, six years ago, was working as a maintenance engineer for Emirates, the Dubai-based airline. “I knew almost nothing about space,” he recalled.
While working full-time on the Mars mission, he also completed a master’s degree in aerospace engineering.
Another challenge for a country like the U.A.E. undertaking a planetary science mission: a lack of planetary scientists.
Project leaders decided to convert some engineers like Hoor al-Maazmi into apprentice scientists.
When she was in college, Ms. al-Maazmi was interested in nuclear and mechanical engineering, not space research. “It wasn’t that much of a dream for me, because it wasn’t really possible,” she said.
Now, she is using computer models to predict what Hope might see when data starts arriving next year, and she intends to pursue a doctoral degree in planetary science.
Hope will not be the last Emirati planetary mission.
