The museum, nine decades in the making and costing at least $388 million, was originally set to open in 2017.
LOS ANGELES — The long-delayed Academy Museum of Motion Pictures will open on Dec. 14, completing a nine-decade quest by the Hollywood establishment to celebrate itself year-round.
The academy recently announced that it had reached 95 percent of its fund-raising goal; Robert A. Iger, Disney’s chief executive, has overseen the campaign. The museum is also working on another bond offering of roughly $100 million, according to Deadline, an entertainment news site, that would push the project’s cost to around $450 million, unless some new money is used to retire debt.
Anchoring the six-floor Academy Museum will be a 30,000-square-foot exhibition tracing the artistic and scientific history of cinema from a filmmaker’s perspective, starting in the late 1800s in France, and including an array of movie installations. Galleries will focus on early female directors, international silent film, Soviet cinema, the Hollywood studio system and Indian independent film, among other topics. The museum will also feature temporary exhibitions, starting with a retrospective on Hayao Miyazaki, the Japanese animation titan behind films like ‘’Spirited Away’‘ (2001) and ‘’The Wind Rises’‘ (2013).
The motion picture academy will have local competition. The Los Angeles County Museum has its own film program and has hosted popular movie-related exhibitions like one on the filmmaker Tim Burton. Well-established local organizations like American Cinematheque already coordinate public screenings of significant art films. And construction has begun near downtown Los Angeles on the Lucas Museum of Narrative Art, which will house items collected by George Lucas, including 20th-century American illustrations, comic books, costumes, storyboards, stage sets and other archival material from ‘’Star Wars’‘ and other movies. The Lucas Museum, shaped (without question) like a ‘’Star Wars’‘ vessel, and its surrounding campus will cost an estimated $1 billion.
