Vance Pearson was once the deputy to the former union president Gary Jones, who has been portrayed as one of the orchestrators of an embezzlement scheme.
A former top official of the United Automobile Workers union pleaded guilty Friday to conspiring with fellow officials in a scheme that siphoned hundreds of thousands of dollars in members’ dues to support spending on villa rentals, lavish meals, golf clubs and golf outings.
The official, Vance Pearson, a former head of the U.A.W.’s vast Region 5, which has run from Missouri to the West Coast, could face up to five years in prison and $250,000 in fines.
Mr. Pearson was a onetime deputy to the former U.A.W. president Gary Jones, who has not been charged but is portrayed in documents filed by prosecutors as one of the orchestrators of the embezzlement scheme. Mr. Jones resigned as president last year.
Mr. Pearson’s plea also includes new information about Dennis Williams, Mr. Jones’s predecessor as U.A.W. president, who has not been charged but appears in earlier filings as well.
“Today’s guilty plea is one more leap forward in our drive to prosecute corruption at the highest levels of the United Auto Workers union,” said Matthew Schneider, the United States attorney leading the investigation.
As part of the plea deal, prosecutors agreed not to bring additional charges against Mr. Pearson as long as he cooperates with the investigation. The two sides accepted guidelines that would produce a sentence of between 24 and 30 months, though a judge could revise the length.
Mr. Pearson also agreed to hand over $81,000 from a so-called union flower fund he controlled. The fund’s stated purpose was to pay for flowers for deceased U.A.W. members and their families, but union officials often tapped it for personal expenditures, according to prosecutors.
He will also forfeit $38,000 from a campaign account intended to support union elections, which he controlled, and a set of Titleist golf clubs bought with union money.
Mr. Pearson’s guilty plea stems from a yearslong federal investigation that has uncovered the improper use of millions of dollars of funds and bribery of union officials by auto executives, leading to multiple convictions. In some cases, money was spent on personal travel and high-priced items including Rolex watches.
Three former Fiat Chrysler executives have been sentenced on charges that they allowed U.A.W. officials to divert money from worker training to personal travel and shopping. One of the Fiat Chrysler executives was found to have used training funds to buy a Ferrari sports car and renovate his home. Mr. Pearson is the 12th defendant to plead guilty in the scandal.
The allegations have also prompted a lawsuit by General Motors accusing Fiat Chrysler of bribing union officials to get a leg up on G.M. by manipulating labor costs.
At the center of the embezzlement scheme was an accounting device known as a “master account,” which union officials set up at hotels in cities like Palm Springs, Calif., ostensibly to cover expenses during union conferences.
But in practice, according to prosecutors, union officials billed to the accounts hundreds of thousands of dollars in expenses incurred outside the hotels for weeks before and after the conferences, including villa rentals, cigars and golf apparel.
In previous court filings, prosecutors have said that Mr. Jones directed union officials to set up the accounts, and that Mr. Pearson was involved in doing so.
The plea agreement on Friday provided additional detail regarding Mr. Pearson’s involvement, including his falsely telling a U.A.W. accounting official that an expense of over $19,000, which had been labeled “outside vendors,” was for meals. In fact, according to the plea agreement, the spending was for golf green fees and over $10,000 in golf paraphernalia bought by U.A.W. officials, including Mr. Pearson and Mr. Jones.
The plea agreement also indicates that Mr. Williams, another former U.A.W. president, had a more active role in the scheme than was previously revealed, stating that he urged Mr. Pearson and Mr. Jones to use union money for expenses that benefited him and other officials.
For example, when Mr. Pearson ordered over $13,000 worth of cigars and cigar paraphernalia in November 2016, the purchase was “to a great extent” made at the request of Mr. Williams, according to the agreement.
The agreement also states that Mr. Williams directed Mr. Pearson to procure a private villa for him in California for months at a time between 2015 and 2018, as well as for a friend of Mr. Williams and for another senior U.A.W. official.
Mr. Pearson, according to the agreement, also helped make arrangements that allowed Mr. Williams’s spouse to charge expenses to the union through the Loews Coronado Bay Resort in California. He helped conceal expenditures by Mr. Williams’s spouse and other spouses of union officials, including an outing to the San Diego Zoo Safari Park.
Mr. Jones and Mr. Williams appear in court filings only as “Official A” and “Official B,” but union officials have confirmed that the pseudonyms refer to them.
A lawyer for Mr. Williams did not respond to a request for comment. A lawyer for Mr. Jones declined to comment.