The disruption of China’s manufacturing network, and slowdown of its economy, have rippled through to airlines, automakers, tech companies and more.
A loss of $29 billion in airline revenue. China auto sales down by 92 percent. Interruptions for Procter & Gamble’s 387 suppliers in China.
As the coronavirus outbreak rattles the global economy and disrupts supply chains, international companies across nearly every industry are confronting a stark reality: Business will not go on as usual.
Airlines are expected to lose billions in revenue this year.
The International Air Transport Association this week warned of a deep downturn in earnings among global carriers related to the collapse of travel in Asia because of the virus.
The virus outbreak could reduce global airline revenue by about $29 billion in this year, resulting in a small industry contraction compared with 2019, it said.
Virtually all of the losses are expected to hit airlines in the Asia-Pacific region, which are facing a 13 percent decline in passenger demand for the year, according to the association’s analysis.
Some airlines have begun to acknowledge the outbreak’s effects, with Air France-KLM Group and Australia’s Qantas Group separately warning on Thursday of a potential financial hit.
Qantas said that the coronavirus could reduce its profit for the fiscal year that ends June 30 by $66 million to $99 million, while Air France-KLM estimated a hit to earnings of as much as $216 million between February and April this year.
More than 20 international airlines have suspended or restricted routes that end in Wuhan, the center of the outbreak, and other major Chinese cities.
And airlines in Asia are cutting flights elsewhere. Singapore Airlines said it would temporarily cut flights between the city state and major destinations like New York, Paris, London, Tokyo, Seoul and Sydney.
Auto sales tumble.
Auto sales in China collapsed this month, with the Chinese Passenger Car Association saying that sales at dealerships had plummeted 92 percent in the first half of February compared with the same time last year.
China is the world’s biggest car market by a wide margin. So a nose-dive in sales there hurts the global industry.
Jaguar Land Rover warned that the coronavirus could soon begin to create production problems at its assembly plants in Britain.
Apple’s iPhone manufacturer warns about impact.
With much of China still on lockdown, businesses are struggling to get workers back and factories running.
In a release this week, Foxconn, the world’s largest contract manufacturer of electronics and a key player in Apple’s supply chain, indicated just how difficult that will be. Foxconn said its revenue would take a hit from the spread of the coronavirus, and that it would be “cautious” in resuming work at its factories in China. Plants outside of the country, in places like Vietnam and Mexico, were at full capacity, the company said.
Procter & Gamble says its finances will suffer.
Procter & Gamble, the consumer products behemoth, said in a federal filing this week that disruptions to supply and demand caused by the outbreak would “materially” affect the company’s quarterly results.
The French government said it would urge companies to review their “over-dependence” on China for raw materials and parts as the outbreak exposes weaknesses among French manufacturers that have outsourced their supply chains there.
The French finance minister, Bruno Le Maire, singled out automakers, which have been having trouble getting parts like brake pedals, and the pharmaceutical industry, which gets 80 percent of the raw materials for some drugs from China and Asia.
China’s central bank cuts rates.
China’s banks are lowering borrowing costs for companies and households to try to soften the economic blow of the coronavirus.
The move follows a rash of policies from China’s central bank to shore up an economy hobbled by weeks of a near nationwide shutdown of business. On Thursday, the People’s Bank of China said it lowered the one-year loan prime rate to 4.05 percent from 4.15 percent, and slashed the five-year loan rate to 4.75 percent from 4.8 percent.
Adidas says sales in China have plummeted 85 percent.
Adidas, the German sportswear maker, said that its mainland China business had been decimated by the outbreak.
Sales in the region dropped by about 85 percent since Chinese New Year on Jan. 25, the company said, compared with the same period a year ago. Fewer shoppers in South Korea and Japan also contributed to the falloff in sales, a result of the sharp drop in Chinese tourism that has also affected the aviation and hospitality sectors as well as the fashion retail business.
