My Neighbor Is Putting Others at Risk. Can I Help Him Sell His Place?
I have lived for many years in a shotgun duplex house in New Orleans and had a harmonious relationship with my next-door neighbor. After he died, two of his sons took up residence. One son, who was ailing, began to decline, using drugs and alcohol; he died about a year ago. His brother moved in to take care of him, but he, too, began to lose weight, look rough and was seen drunk on the block.
In the past year, the house’s electricity and water were cut off. Strange people have been sleeping there with the doors open; the remaining son doesn’t appear to have a key to the front door. An extension cord was plugged into a neighbor’s place to run a few lights on the house. The son was leaving scrap metal and cans in the alley that divides our properties. We’ve had some talks about the debris, and he has tried to minimize his impact on me. But problems persist. A tree fell in the backyard, and the roots and trunk are on my property. In the middle of the night, I caught one of the regular squatters filling multiple buckets from my outdoor faucet.
Now I worry about the ways people will heat a house with no gas. Only a few feet separate our houses. My youngest son lives with me, and I have tenants; I am responsible for their safety. After talking with my neighbor’s daughter, I learned that her father left the house to his sons, but nobody in the family will spend the money to get the property out of probate, and the brother died intestate. I also learned that the remaining son hasn’t paid property taxes in several years. My patience is running out. I don’t want to report a neighbor to the city, but I cannot live like this indefinitely.
We talk about “mixed motives” as if they represent an unusual condition. But people are complicated, and so are the situations in which we find ourselves. Maybe our motives are very often a mixture of things, and the worthier ones aren’t necessarily undermined by the less worthy ones.
In this case, your neighbor has a substance-abuse problem and no real means of support; he lives like a squatter in his only asset, the clear legal possession of which he hasn’t managed to secure and the value of which is declining because he isn’t capable of looking after it. His multiple violations and unpaid taxes put him at risk of losing the house and being left with nothing. Yes, you could accelerate this eventuality by reporting him for those violations (and, given your concern for the safety of your household, you could have reason to do so), but another neighbor, too, might report him. And the unpaid taxes could prompt official attention even without such reporting. Better, all told, to see if he can settle his father’s will, deal with his brother’s intestacy, sell up for a good price and put the money into a fund he can use to look after himself.
It’s true that the disorder next door makes your daily life more stressful and may well diminish the value of your property. Your own motives in helping him to deal with his legal and financial difficulties are indeed mixed. But that’s not troubling so long as you encourage a course of action that’s in his own interests. An honorable lawyer, if you can get him one, can certainly protect his interests if they diverge from yours. The downside you identify to this outcome is that the newfound money might simply fuel his dependence on drugs and alcohol. But indigence is no solution to addiction, and these are risks you could help mitigate by getting him wise financial advice and by encouraging him to seek help for his abuse problem (though it will come to nothing if he doesn’t see it as a problem). In a neighborhood with increasing property values, he should gain enough from a sale to be able to house himself properly with heat and hot water. And it’s hard to see how he could be worse off than being kicked out of the house with nothing.
TikTok’s standard fare consists of users dancing to pop songs, often emulating what they see in music videos. When it comes to the moves — and attire — that adolescents copy from the pop stars they admire, there can be a range of opinions about what’s over the line. You say you doubt that anyone else in the school is likely to realize what you realize, and yet you don’t seem privy to information that others don’t have. My point is you’ll want to be sure about your judgment here.
I notice, too, that you had to be shown this TikTok video, and that you use the word “apparently” in discussing the person’s self-presentation on social media. It sounds as if the student may have used the app’s privacy settings to limit who could see it. If the student intended to share the video only with friends — or, anyway, with approved followers — and not with the wider world, a questionable choice may seem less worrisome.
Something else is worrying you, though. The video confirms your suspicions that things aren’t right in the student’s home. Not necessarily because the parents haven’t discouraged the performance — I suspect many parents would be surprised to learn what’s in their children’s social media posts — but because someone from a “good family environment” wouldn’t have been tempted to upload this material in the first place. You mention extended absences, and the scare-quotes you put on “home-schooled” suggest you think no such schooling happened — that the student’s parents are a mess. Maybe so; maybe another judgment check is in order.
Still, given your concerns — about your classmate and yourself — you might talk to a school counselor, explaining that you are worried about a classmate but don’t want to get into details unless he or she agreed to keep your name out of it. If the counselor shared your worries, a school official could have a conversation with the parents and perhaps enlist a social worker or take similar measures. It’s possible that something extreme and disturbing will turn up. But your classmate’s home life could simply be chaotic — or, anyway, out of the ordinary — in ways that are unlikely to be changed by outside intervention.