DealBook|Was Instagram the Steal of the Century?
Was Instagram the Steal of the Century?
In the same week that Alphabet drew back a curtain on YouTube’s money machine, we also now have a better sense of how big Facebook’s Instagram subsidiary is — and it’s even larger.
Instagram collected about $20 billion in ad revenue last year, Sarah Frier and Nico Grant of Bloomberg report, citing unnamed sources. That’s more than a quarter of all of Facebook’s sales last year — and a sea change from 2012, the year that Facebook bought Instagram, when the service had no ads.
And Instagram doesn’t share any revenue with users, as our colleague Shira Ovide points out.
The revelation underscores why Facebook is fighting critics who want the company broken up. The tech giant is under investigation from the antitrust authorities, and lawmakers like Senator Elizabeth Warren have said it shouldn’t be allowed to exist in its current form.
Question of the day: Which deal will be considered better 10 years from now: Facebook’s $1 billion takeover of Instagram, or Google’s $1.65 billion acquisition of YouTube? Send us your thoughts.
The chaos of the Iowa Democratic caucuses came down not to hacking, but to a faulty app created by a company whose previous work was riddled with failures, the NYT reports.
• The app was created by Shadow, which was founded by veterans of Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaign.
• But the company almost went bankrupt when its previous products failed. It was bailed out by Acronym, a highly touted progressive digital advocacy group.
• Shadow took on a seemingly impossible task: creating an app to tabulate caucus results within two months. The work was so rushed that the company didn’t even have time for Apple to approve the app.
“Precinct leaders failed to access the app or reported being locked out as they sought to punch in numbers to report them to state party officials,” the WaPo reports.
The electric-car maker’s shares have been on a tear this year, prompting some to wonder whether it’s in bubble territory. Here are a few potential factors behind the company’s dizzying run.
• Critics are getting squeezed. Short-sellers — investors who have borrowed Tesla shares and sold them, betting that the stock will fall when they buy back shares to cover their bets — are suffering as the stock rises. Many of them may be covering their bets by buying more shares, in what’s known as a short squeeze.
• Hugely enthusiastic backers. The prominent investor Ron Baron added to the exuberant expectations for Tesla yesterday, saying that the company could have $1 trillion in total revenue over the coming decade.
More: Saudi Arabia’s sovereign wealth fund sold nearly all of its shares in Tesla in the fourth quarter — before the company’s stock began its current run.
Analysts and business executives have worried that the current coronavirus outbreak could affect global supply chains. That fear is increasingly becoming reality.
The carmaker Hyundai said it was idling plants in South Korea because of a shortage of Chinese parts. They are the first major factory lines outside China to be temporarily shut down.
When the German lender began a business relationship with Donald Trump, it took on a borrower whom few on Wall Street were willing to work with. That has since put Deutsche Bank under a spotlight — and made it privy to Mr. Trump’s true finances, David Enrich writes in the NYT magazine.
The bank has documents detailing the finances and operations of his businesses. And it has records about internal deliberations over whether and how to do business with Trump — a paper trail that most likely reflects some bank employees’ concerns about potentially suspicious transactions that they detected in the family’s accounts.
Bonus: Mr. Enrich has obtained the talking points that Deutsche Bank gave employees before his book’s publication.
Walt Disney’s earnings report yesterday may have been a mixed bag, but Wall Street mainly cared about one figure: the number of subscribers to its Disney Plus streaming service, writes Brooks Barnes of the NYT.
That number is expected to grow this spring as Disney Plus enters new markets beyond the U.S., Canada and three other countries.
Mr. Iger has bet Disney’s future in part on streaming, and the subscriber number puts the service in a strong position to compete with the likes of Netflix (167 million subscribers worldwide) and Amazon Prime (150 million subscribers worldwide).
• Disney expects to lose over $300 million from the temporary closing of its Shanghai and Hong Kong theme parks because of the coronavirus outbreak.
• Profit declined sharply at ESPN, long Disney’s biggest moneymaker.
