She belongs in a way I never could. I’m comforted — and worried.
Dr. Jilani is a pediatrician and humanitarian aid worker.
I now find myself in a mixed marriage, mother to a 3-year-old mixed-race girl who easily passes for white. Her fair skin, auburn hair and light brown eyes do not even hint at her Pakistani background. When I tell people at gatherings that I speak Urdu at home, some are very concerned about whether my daughter will be confused. Yet some are the same families clamoring for their children to get accepted into French-immersion kindergartens. Strangers have asked me whether I am her real mother or have assumed that I’m her nanny. It’s not their belief about my profession that’s disturbing — it’s their certainty that my daughter and I can’t be related because of the colors of our skin.
Among her peers, my daughter fits in the way I craved. While it has been only 20 years since the U.S. Census Bureau first allowed Americans to choose more than one race on their census form, between 2000 and 2010 the number of white and black biracial Americans more than doubled, and the population of adults with a white and Asian background increased by 87 percent. The number of mixed-race Americans is increasing three times as fast as the population of the United States as a whole.
That hyphen held our traditions, our dichotomies, our complexities, our spicy food and an even spicier culture, rich with tradition. That hyphen was the bridge to our past.
A few years later, those glorious Manhattan pillars of American might crumbled. Though I did not know what the world held in store for us in the coming years — the threats, the insults, the judgmental looks — what I did know was that we were already tried, convicted and sentenced before we even knew what our crime was. Tragically, Dad had gotten it right all along, and now it was vital that we did too. Now, more than ever, we should show off our Texan drawl. We should protect our homes by displaying American flags, and we should categorically deny our ethnicity.
But I didn’t pass. As I sat in large leather chairs at medical school interviews all over the country, with sweaty palms peeking through a navy business suit, I was asked whether I would wear a burqa as a doctor. (I have never worn a head scarf.) I was told that my religion was the reason Nigerian women were stoned every day, and was asked whether my father had taught me how to make bombs in our garage. Luckily I came armed with Norman-Rockwellian-Americana stories filled with glorious tales of the grateful immigrant: hardworking and nonthreatening. I became a caricature of what they wanted.
This is the tumultuous conflict that my daughter will never have to know. I only wish it was because cultural attitudes had shifted, rather than because she has less melanin than I do. Her skin color has given her a sense of belonging, something I never had. Instead, I worry whether she will be the one snickering, not allowing her classmate to sit next to her on the bus. After all, my bullies in school all looked like the daughter I have now.
I am grateful for, and envious of, the opportunities at her fingertips. The henna that my daughter wears for celebrations is seen as charming, whereas I was told I looked as though I had a disease. The dreaded checkboxes on the forms of my childhood had only “Asian,” relegating a diverse continent full of various ethnicities to one label.
Today, my cultural identity lies enveloped in sweet tea on Southern porches, crawfish festivals in New Orleans, along with samosas for iftar at Ramadan. I am a Muslim Pakistani-American doctor who knows the words to almost all of Elvis’s songs. I had already done Umrah — a sacred pilgrimage to Mecca — four times before I turned 30. I was raised all over the world, but mostly in Texas, which explains why I still say “y’all.” Ultimately, I am America’s daughter, a child of the South: one of immigrants, the middle class, public schools and a work ethic that the Pilgrims would have envied. Still, it was never enough.
Seema Jilani is a pediatrician and humanitarian aid worker.