Both Peggy Orenstein and Cara Natterson have children who — deliberately, I assume — are mentioned only occasionally in their excellent books about raising better boys. Instead, Orenstein relies on the revealing and sometimes painfully intimate interviews she conducted over the course of two years with boys aged 16 to 22, and Natterson draws from years of practical experience as a pediatrician, and her ability to boil down complicated scientific studies to their tablespoon of curative parental medicine.
But the personal stakes for both authors are clear, and urgent. These writers are worried. Both realize that, in our efforts to protect and raise up our daughters, we have neglected our sons’ emotional and physical development. We’ve left their sex education to pornography; we’re clueless about their hormones (turns out, puberty happens long before the first fuzz of a mustache); and we underestimate their vulnerabilities and desire for connection. Our boys get awkward and quiet; we parents get awkwarder and quieter. And then they’re launched into the world without the tools and self-awareness they need to do some good — or, at the very least, to do no harm.
Orenstein’s “Boys & Sex” is a natural follow-up to her 2016 best seller “Girls & Sex.” The young men we meet here tend to be hyperarticulate — to the extent that I was initially skeptical of their eloquence. Wyatt, a college junior who leads consent workshops on campus, describes getting pushback from a woman who tells him he doesn’t need to ask permission to take her shirt off, and deems it “exactly the quagmire I want to avoid.” Another college kid, Caleb, admits that he thinks of hookups as “very binary — either you overthink it because you care, or you dissociate yourself from it entirely.” You can imagine Aaron Sorkin scripting these guys.
However unexpected it is, though, the boys’ willingness and ability to share is also decidedly eye-opening. In a wrenching chapter on the pressures felt by young men of color on predominantly white college campuses, Orenstein’s interviewees share stories of invisibility, of racist fetishes perpetuated by porn, of having to designate a sober “watch-out person” at frat parties because when a black boy is accused of anything by a white girl, the stakes are higher. These honest, insightful young men help Orenstein reach the conclusion that “African-American and Asian-American men are flip sides of the racialized, gendered coin, with white men controlling the toss (heads you lose, tails I win).” Every few pages, the boy world cracks open a little bit like that.
There’s much less from Latinos, which relates to my only criticism of this book: The men of color Orenstein quotes are, she admits, “a select, circumscribed group,” and the same could be said more broadly for most of the book’s interviewees, who seem to come from disproportionately economically secure backgrounds. To her credit, Orenstein acknowledges her biases. And, through story after story, she forced me to see mine: I was wrong to presume that young men couldn’t be beautifully well spoken and lucid about issues of love and sex. In fact, that assumption is so common, it’s at the root of our problems.
Orenstein takes the same eagle-eyed approach to jock culture, rape culture, L.G.B.T.Q. kids and porn. Oh my God, the porn. If you think the problem with porn is that it’s a simple Google search away and gives boys the mistaken impression that breasts should look like cantaloupes, you’ve got about 15 years’ worth of updates coming. Orenstein sees a lot that she can’t unsee, and we can’t unhear her warnings: Porn is so pervasive, so ingrained in pop culture, so extreme in its fetishes and so dehumanizing of women that many young men are desensitized to live, consensual sex. That’s right, erectile dysfunction at age 19 is now a thing.
But it’s not all bad news. In a chapter called “A Better Man” — which should be included in every first-year college student’s admissions packet — she tells the story of Anwen and Sameer, classmates who go from awkward one-way crush to coerced sex (now known as rape, for those of us who graduated before Y2K) to genuine, imperfect forgiveness and campuswide progress. They achieve this arc through a process called “restorative justice” that involves finding a middle ground of accountability that reforms Sameer and helps heal Anwen.
Even in the most anxiety-provoking moments of “Boys & Sex,” it’s clear that Orenstein believes in the goodness of boys and the men they can become, and she believes in us, as parents, to raise them.
As for how? There’s a great, galvanizing chapter at the end of Orenstein’s book. But for rational, evidence-based advice on how to talk to your son about every internal and external force he’ll experience from fourth grade through college, Cara Natterson’s zippy, bighearted “Decoding Boys” is the guide you need. Better yet, read these books in tandem. Natterson, who has written best-selling body guides for kids, is ambitious in her scope. She acknowledges that explaining neurobiology, testicular growth, the gun crisis, screen addiction, sexting, consent and how to talk about it all is too much for 200 pages. But those are the intertwined realities of parenting a boy in 2020, and none of us can opt out.
Natterson is empathic and funny in her approach to topics like myelination — the growth of insulation around the brain’s nerve cells, which has an impact on decision-making — and the fact that boys’ puberty starts years before most of us see the signs of it. Weave these concepts together and we have a generation of boys who are maturing physically earlier and emotionally later than we previously realized. Enter Kavanaugh. And Parkland. And Juul ads. And PornHub-induced desensitization (yes, it comes up here too).
1. The best way to prevent addiction is by delaying the potentially addictive behavior. Explain brain maturation to your kid so that when you say “no, not yet,” you’re a scientist, not a ruthless dictator.
3. Boys are less identifiable than girls in nude pictures because they generally aim their phone down their pants as opposed to up their shirts where you might see a necklace or freckle. That said, it all counts as child pornography and can be prosecuted as such.
4. No phones in the bedroom at night. Charge all devices in a common room.
Her most important point: Boys’ sudden silence in early adolescence is as much a product of our society as their brains. “Puberty,” Natterson writes, “radically changes how our kids talk to us and how we talk to them, and this shift empowers the communicators (who are more often girls) while leaving the noncommunicators (typically the boys) at a distinct disadvantage.” The boys in Orenstein’s book prove they can and will talk; Natterson tells you how to make it happen.
While I was reading Orenstein’s and Natterson’s books, my sons had a lockdown drill at school. It was scary enough to prompt tears and an email to me from a teacher, so we talked about it. A new study came out about the risks of vaping, so we talked about that too. Then we got a new iPad and, instead of surreptitiously turning on YouTube’s restricted mode, I told my boys I was doing it — and explained why. I know I won’t always have the right words, but we’re going there. And that, as I learned from these books, is the point.