Readers assess Bernie Sanders’s chances against Donald Trump and offer advice to the Democratic candidates.
As a lifelong Democrat, I will be voting for Bernie Sanders if it turns out that he wins the nomination. I would vote for any Democratic candidate in November once I am in the voting booth. Donald Trump must not be allowed another four years in office. That much is very clear.
I agree with Charles M. Blow (“Don’t Doubt That Bernie Can Win,” column, Feb. 24) that Senator Sanders stands a good chance of defeating Donald Trump despite the democratic socialist imprint. I believe that Senator Sanders will get the black and Hispanic vote as well as the moderate and the independent vote.
The same people who held their noses and voted for Donald Trump in 2016 because they came to mistrust (or despise) Hillary Clinton will do the same thing in November, but this time it is Mr. Trump who is despised and mistrusted. November cannot come fast enough.
Whether one agrees with Bernie Sanders’s political and social policies — and I happen to be one who does — I won’t vote for him in the primary because this country is not in the mood for a democratic socialist mode of living.
So if it is Senator Sanders versus Donald Trump in the general election, there is a pretty good chance that Mr. Trump will win. The Russians want four more years of Mr. Trump and will try to rig this election so that it is a Trump-Sanders contest.
Many thanks to Paul Krugman (column, nytimes.com, Feb. 23), David Leonhardt (column, Feb. 24) and Charles M. Blow for offering advice to Bernie Sanders about enlarging his tent as his campaign rolls on. What a welcome contrast to the articles that assume that most of us agree that Senator Sanders should be stopped somehow.
No matter whom we nominate, that nominee will face a host of smears, disinformation and possibly even criminal mischief from the White House and the G.O.P. The best antidote is to keep up a steady mantra asking what the Trump administration and the Senate as led by Mitch McConnell are doing to keep the Russians and other hackers and bot-makers out of our election.
“I will answer questions only about the things I believe in, and the policies I would, if elected, try to carry out regarding such things as the economy, foreign policy, education, immigration, infrastructure, health plans, global warming and gun control.
“If the Republicans retain their majority in the Senate, your ‘Medicare for all’ proposals will be dead on arrival, and there is no guarantee that they would pass even if the Democrats control both the House and the Senate.
In our last presidential campaign, Donald Trump’s message was, What have you got to lose? Now we know: dignity, respect, truth, compassion, trust and spine.
Democratic candidates, please aim your arrows away from one another and train them on the obvious target.
