346 pp. Bitter Lemon. Paper, $14.95.
At a birthday party on a sweltering day in the 1970s, 17 people consume poisoned sake and soft drinks that were delivered as a gift to the wealthy Aosawa family. Only the blind daughter of the household, Hisako Aosawa, doesn’t partake. Instead, she sits and listens as everyone around her moans, vomits and dies in agony. Who instigated this massacre? Why? How? You will finish Onda’s “The Aosawa Murders” more puzzled than you began, and that’s the beauty of this stubbornly nonlinear novel.
Indeed, why should answers to mysteries that implicate and devastate scores of people over decades ever come easily? “The Aosawa Murders” all but demands rereading. Fortunately, that’s no hardship. After turning the last page, it’s a delight to plunge back into the dark, intoxicating world Onda conjures and discover pieces of the puzzle that you missed the first time.
The story, brilliantly translated by Watts, is patched together from scraps of rambling, deeply personal interviews, excerpts from a novel about the crimes, a confessional letter and crisp newspaper reports. We get close to a dozen different perspectives on the crimes, from the faintly resentful reminiscences of the Aosawa housekeeper’s daughter, to the lyrical musings of one of Hisako’s childhood acquaintances who was obsessed with the enigmatic girl and later wrote a fictional account of the case. Early in the novel, she tells her unnamed interlocutor: “Walking around the city, as we are now, is like a synaptic experience — it’s all connected but separate. There’s no center anywhere, only a series of loosely linked neighborhoods. You could walk and walk and never feel like there’s any end to it.” There is no better way to describe this strange, engrossing novel.
350 pp. Soho Crime. $27.95.
The year is 1963 and the city is Saigon, still a humid backwater but about to become the red-hot center of a geopolitical firestorm. One sign of impending trouble: A gorgeous young Vietnamese woman has been tearing around the city on the back of a scooter, assassinating prominent American Army officers. At the scene of each of her hits, investigators find a playing card bearing the image of a red female in traditional Vietnamese dress.
Charged with stopping the so-called Red Queen are two amiable, not particularly ambitious Army cops. Ellsworth Miser, the narrator, has been biding his time in Saigon “hoping this swell little war would stay that way.” Clovis Robeson, understandably, would simply rather hang around Southeast Asia than take over his family mortuary business. The pair are content to drink at the local bars and run their side hustles, but the Red Queen’s ingenuity and the status of some of her targets get their attention.
Cracking this case turns out to be tough and dangerous. No one in Saigon can be trusted, from the lowliest domestic to the country’s highest officials, let alone the dodgy American spooks lurking in the background. The plot speeds along faster than the Red Queen’s Vespa, as the sleuths shoot from one grisly crime scene to the next (the Queen stabs a particularly luckless victim with the broken stem of a wineglass). There are pit stops for opium cigarettes and bourbon cocktails, decorous conversations at diplomatic parties, steamy bedroom adventures, and visits to morgues, prisons and temples. 
The cops’ fictional pursuit of the Red Queen intersects with historical events and there are some delightful real-life cameos here, particularly the portrait of a wry and courtly Henry Cabot Lodge Jr., then the ambassador to South Vietnam. We meet dozens of equally vivid fictional characters, among them a toothless Army sergeant who, midway through the novel, gleefully shows off his portable antique guillotine. The late Jurjevics, who spent most of his career as an editor, knew how to structure a story. You can be sure that, like Chekhov’s proverbial gun, the guillotine is put to maximally effective use by the novel’s end. Brace yourself.
293 pp. Ecco/HarperCollins. $26.99.
Byeongdo may or may not be ready to open up to Seonkyeong, giving her crucial insight into the motivations of a serial killer. (Seo acknowledges her flagrant debt to the vastly superior “The Silence of the Lambs” by giving Seonkyeong the nickname “Clarice.”) Meanwhile, Seonkyeong’s personal and professional lives begin to merge with the arrival of her 11-year-old stepdaughter, Hayeong. Rescued from the scene of a suspicious fire that killed her grandparents with whom she had been living since the equally suspicious death of her mother, Hayeong and her filthy teddy bear now move in with Seonkyeong and her husband. In her first week at the house, after Seonkyeong launders her teddy bear, Hayeong throws an epic tantrum, brutally eviscerating the bear and then attacking Seonkyeong with a pair of scissors. Seonkyeong rewards her with a puppy. Because Hayeong is small and fragile, Seonkyeong is slow to start worrying about her stepdaughter’s creepy behavior. (It takes her so long, in fact, that you wonder how good Seonkyeong is at her job.) Is Hayeong capable of doing worse than mutilating teddy bears? If so, will Seonkyeong figure this out in time? What light can Byeongdo’s back story shed on Hayeong’s past and behavior? The novel has all the fuel for a blazing thriller, and twists aplenty, but the spark never ignites.