Inter Miami and Nashville will debut this weekend, with four more cities right behind them, and the Los Angeles Galaxy hopes Javier Hernández can carry it past L.A.F.C.
As it enters its 25th season, Major League Soccer has developed a bit of a swagger.
“I see in 25 years the whole world watching our game on television,” said Gregg Berhalter, a former M.L.S. player and coach who now leads the United States men’s national team.
This optimism for the future comes as the league has grown from 10 teams to 26 this season. In two years, there will be 30. And as soccer’s popularity in North America has grown, M.L.S. is now firmly living up to the “major league” in its title.
Will M.L.S. stick with its model as it expands?
At the same time that M.L.S. boasts about challenging some of the world’s best leagues, it is firmly sticking with a business structure and league format that is out of the ordinary in world soccer, especially compared with the biggest leagues in Europe.
While the league has moved closer to the European style in its branding and marketing — this year’s two new clubs are named Inter Miami and Nashville S.C. — M.L.S. still has a single-entity ownership structure, hard limits on payroll, a season-ending playoff tournament and no relegation, the system by which underperforming teams are dropped from the league each year and replaced by new ones.
Few leagues are rushing to copy those bedrock elements of M.L.S., and that raises the question of whether such an unusually structured league can really hope to join the best in the world, particularly financially.
Wholesale change is unlikely, M.L.S. owners and officials said, because they see these atypical features as strengths.
With salary limits, one well-heeled team can’t quickly buy its way to success, as happens in many leagues around the world. That parity, and unpredictability, is something M.L.S. markets as part of its appeal. “Not every team invests the same amount, not every team is equal, but we want every team to have a shot at the playoffs,” said Mark Abbott, the league’s president. But the same limits also might be preventing the creation of elite teams that could regularly beat the best Mexican clubs in continental competitions, or even challenge European superteams on the field and in the player market.
M.L.S. is one of the few soccer leagues in the world in which there is no chance of a poor team losing its place in the league. Relegation “is one thing I never thankfully experienced as a player,” said David Beckham, an owner of Inter Miami. “It makes it exciting. But there needs to be real stability in the league before you get to that point.” To M.L.S. officials, the issue is more practical. “People are not going to invest hundreds of millions of dollars if they might be relegated,” Abbott said.
Can M.L.S. compete with Liga MX?
This season, to mark M.L.S.’s 25th anniversary, it will face its neighbor head-on: For the first time, the midseason M.L.S. All-Star Game will pit a team of M.L.S. stars against a Liga MX all-star team. The game is July 29 in Los Angeles.
Who are the new players this year?
The big-name signing is Javier Hernández, the high-scoring Mexican striker known as Chicharito, who will replace Zlatan Ibrahimovic as the L.A. Galaxy’s star attraction.
Beckham said this week that he wants to bring great players to Miami, “but they have to be the right players. That’s one of the many things I learned from Sir Alex Ferguson,” he added, dropping the name of his legendary boss at Manchester United. The right player for Beckham seems to be attacking midfielder Rodolfo Pizarro, one of a number of players poached out of the Mexican league ahead of this season, along with midfielder Lucas Zelarayan (Columbus) and striker Alan Pulido (Kansas City).
Who are the new teams?
In part because of its charismatic owner, David Beckham, and its yearslong germination period, Inter Miami has gained the bulk of the attention. The “Inter,” for what it’s worth, does not imply a tie with the better-known Inter Milan, but rather is a shortening of the team’s formal name, Club Internacional de Fútbol Miami.
If a Miami M.L.S. team sounds familiar, that’s because the Miami Fusion competed for four years in M.L.S. before the league shut down the club in a retrenchment after hiring Garber in 1999. As it waits for a new stadium to be built near the Miami Airport, Inter Miami plans to play for two or three years in Fort Lauderdale, in a stadium on the same site where the Fusion once played.
Ian Ayre, the chief executive of the other new team, Nashville S.C., was until 2017 the chief executive of Liverpool. He said this week that he has found the culture change of joining M.L.S. refreshing, and far more collegial than he was used to in Europe.
Is 30 teams too many?
M.LS. will add teams in Austin, Texas, and Charlotte, N.C., in 2021, and in Sacramento and St. Louis in 2022, bringing the league to 30. The money from their expansion fees will be welcome for the league, and each team has grand plans to spend millions more on its stadium, but the rapid increase in the size of M.L.S. has brought its own set of problems.
There are enough teams already so that this season, for the first time, each team will have three opponents it won’t face at all, home or away, during the regular season.
Garber said that there is “no plan in place” to expand beyond 30, a number that will make M.L.S. the largest top-flight soccer league in the world.
L.A.F.C. set the M.L.S. points record in a dominant 2019 regular season, only to lose at home in the conference final. The bookmakers are looking for L.A.F.C. to finish the job this year, with its top challenges coming from Seattle, the defending league champion, and Atlanta, which lifted the trophy in 2018.
Miami is considered good enough for at least a mid-table performance in its first season, but Nashville is 100-1 or more, the longest shot in the field.