So far, the Everything Store has dodged some of the scrutiny dogging Google and Facebook.
The Teamsters joined several other major labor unions in filing a petition Thursday asking the Federal Trade Commission to open a wide-ranging study into Amazon’s business practices. The unions, which represent more than five million American workers, hope to sic the antitrust regulator on a company increasingly reaching into the industries they represent.
The petition asks the F.T.C. to use its broad powers to gather nonpublic information about a company’s or industry’s effects on commerce. In a 28-page document with 149 footnotes, the unions lay out areas they think the F.T.C. should explore, including whether Amazon requires companies to use more of its services to succeed on its marketplace.
In an Op-Ed published in The New York Times this month, Jay Carney, who runs the company’s communications and policy teams, argued that Amazon used its scale for good. “Because Amazon is a large company with hundreds of thousands of employees, as well as contractual relationships with hundreds of thousands of other businesses of all sizes, what we do can generate positive ripple effects across the country,” he wrote.
Mr. Carney said the company’s minimum wage of $15 an hour had pushed other employers to increase pay, and “in keeping with what political leaders say they want to see from companies, Amazon has plowed $270 billion into the domestic economy since 2010.” That sum includes money Amazon has spent on payroll, buildings, equipment and other business investments.
Amazon has yet to disclose receiving requests for information from antitrust investigators at the Justice Department or F.T.C., and it has not been publicly targeted by state attorneys general, unlike Google and Facebook. The company has continued its push into even faster deliveries and recently announced it was building a warehouse dedicated to the kind of house-brand products that critics say push smaller competitors out of the market.
In their petition, the unions ask the F.T.C. to study whether Amazon forces its third-party merchants to buy its delivery fulfillment services if they want to rank high and succeed on the site, a move that they say could harm competing shipping and logistics providers.
Amazon said its fulfillment services were optional, but many sellers loved them “because it gives them peace of mind knowing that shipping logistics and customer service are taken care of 24-7, year-round,” a spokesman, Jack Evans, said in a statement.
A spokeswoman for the F.T.C., Betsy Lordan, said the agency had received the labor groups’ petition.
Tom Smith, head organizer at the communication workers’ union, said it turned to the F.T.C. because much about Amazon’s business is still a mystery, even to a union that has followed it for two decades. “We see a company that we know very little about, that is very secretive, that there are just tons of unknowns,” Mr. Smith said.
The grocery workers’ union was particularly interested in a question the petition asks the F.T.C. to study: whether Amazon depresses wages in areas where it is a major employer. The petition estimated that half of all warehouse workers in Mercer County, N.J., were employed by Amazon. Federal data shows that warehouse wages in the county have fallen 18 percent since 2014, when Amazon opened its largest fulfillment center in the state there, according to the petition.
Mr. Evans said that Whole Foods represented just 4 percent of grocery sales domestically, and that Walmart and Kroger sell far more. “This competition ultimately leads to innovation for consumers, as you can see across the grocery industry right now,” he said.
The Service Employees International Union, with two million members in health care, the public sector and other industries, also joined the petition.
The labor groups are making a novel use of the F.T.C.’s right to conduct research into how a market or industry works, using its legal authority to compel companies to provide private information. The results of these studies can influence policy changes at the agency or inform its efforts to police an industry.
“Generally, if you want to investigate a company you open up an investigation and you investigate them using the normal enforcement authority,” said Michael Kades, the director of markets and competition policy at the Washington Center for Equitable Growth and a former F.T.C. lawyer.
“I think the unions here are thinking, ‘There’s a lot of concerns raised by Amazon and the F.T.C. kind of has a blind spot,’” said Mr. Wu, who reviewed a draft of the groups’ petition.
