The New Delhi force has been widely criticized for standing by during some of the worst religious violence in years. Its investigations, too, have prompted accusations of anti-Muslim bias.
Security personnel in northeastern Delhi on Friday. The police were searching homes and combing through burned-out properties.
NEW DELHI — Indian police officers on Friday swooped down on neighborhoods in the capital that have been racked by religious violence this week, arresting more than a dozen people amid a brewing controversy over where to place blame for the bloodshed.
Lines of officers searched homes and combed through burned-out properties where some suspects were thought to be hiding as more residents, especially Muslims, fled the area.
So far, the authorities’ investigation has focused on opposition and Muslim leaders, including Tahir Hussain, a city councilor from a progressive political party. The police have put Mr. Hussain under investigation on suspicion of murder, saying they found a crate of Molotov cocktails on the roof of his house. Mr. Hussain has denied the accusations, calling them political persecution.
“I am innocent and ready to face any investigation,” Mr. Hussain said in an interview with an Indian television channel, adding that it was those responsible for setting fires who should be arrested.
At the same time, the authorities are coming under criticism for having filed no charges against politicians from Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s Hindu nationalist party, some of whom have been widely accused of making anti-Muslim statements and inciting the violence, which has killed at least 42 people.
Another contentious issue is the fate of S. Muralidhar, a justice at the Delhi High Court, who earlier this week sharply criticized how the New Delhi police have performed. On the same night that Judge Muralidhar heard a case against the police and asked some tough questions, the case was taken away from him and he was shifted to a court in another state.
Critics say this was done to protect the government. But government officials said it was a transfer that had been in the works for several weeks. Lawyers said the move was highly unusual, in that judges are usually given two weeks to wrap up their affairs before such a transfer.
Since Sunday, mobs of Hindus and Muslims have been clashing in a working-class area in the eastern reaches of New Delhi. Many Muslims have accused the police of allowing Hindu mobs to attack them.
Of the 30 slain people who have been identified so far, most are Muslims, and many of the victims died from gunfire. The property destruction has also been lopsidedly anti-Muslim, with many Muslim-owned motorcycles, cars, houses, shops and factories reduced to ashes. At least four mosques were set on fire during 48 hours of rioting. About 500 people are reported to have been detained, with close to 200 formally arrested.
Mr. Modi’s Bharatiya Janata Party, which controls India’s government, has been widely accused of marginalizing India’s Muslim minority, which, at 200 million, is one of the world’s largest Muslim populations. Many critics accuse the government of taking the side of Hindus in the clashes, which began as Mr. Modi was hosting President Trump.
The Organization of Islamic Cooperation, a group of 57 nations, and the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom, among other groups, have raised concerns and urged India to bring the perpetrators to justice.
Ravi Shankar Prasad, a federal minister for law in Mr. Modi’s government, said the governing party did not approve of the statements made by some of its leaders who have been accused of inciting violence.
Many Muslims have been abandoning homes in the areas hit by the violence. On Friday, a steady stream of Muslim residents, many carrying mattresses or bundles of clothes on their heads, marched out of the Mustafabad neighborhood, where many of their houses had been reduced to ashes.
Fear still looms large on both sides. On Friday, children played cricket as paramilitary forces guarded the streets. Many Hindu and Muslim residents were afraid of crossing into each other’s neighborhoods.
Rani, 36, who uses only one name, said her son Nitesh was shot on Monday when he went out to buy milk. He is now in a hospital.

