Several of the nation’s top health officials are among those sitting on an advisory panel formed by President Trump.
Dr. Fauci grew up in Brooklyn. His father was a pharmacist. attended Holy Cross College and graduated from Cornell University Medical College in 1966. His life shifted significantly in 1981, when he was working at the N.I.H. and gay men began showing up with devastated immune systems.
Dr. Adams became the U.S. surgeon general in 2017, after serving for three years as the health commissioner for Indiana. He holds the rank of vice admiral in the U.S. Public Health Service, and oversees about 6,500 public health officers, many of whom work in underserved areas around the world.
Dr. Adams, 45, trained as an anesthesiologist. He is a strong advocate of needle exchanges to stop the spread of diseases, and in Indiana, helped establish one that is credited with contributing to the end of an unusual H.I.V. outbreak among people in a rural community who were injecting a prescription painkiller.
He made news early in his tenure by talking about the toll that drug addiction has taken on his own family.
In recent weeks, as concern over the coronavirus has grown, he has taken to Twitter and to television, advising the public to keep calm. He has also asked the public to stop buying masks, so that there will be enough for health care providers.
In a rare surgeon general advisory in 2018 — the first since 2005 — he urged Americans to carry naloxone, a medication that can save the lives of people overdosing on opioids.
Earlier this year, Dr. Adams warned that too many smokers are not being advised by their doctors to quit. In a report issued in January, the surgeon general advised smokers to choose from a variety of cessation methods that have been proven effective — and cautioned that e-cigarettes have not.
“The biggest take-home from this report is that far too many people who want to quit aren’t getting access to the cessation treatments that we know work,” he said at the time.
Dr. Adams grew up on his family’s farm in Mechanicsville, Md. He earned his bachelor’s degrees in biochemistry and psychology from the University of Maryland, Baltimore County; a master of public health degree from the University of California, Berkeley; and a medical degree from Indiana University School of Medicine.
Before becoming health commissioner Dr. Adams was an assistant professor of anesthesiology at Indiana University Health.
Seema Verma became the administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services in March 2017, after serving as a top health policy adviser to Vice President Mike Pence when he was the governor of Indiana.
Her agency, which spends more than $1 trillion a year on programs providing health care to more than one-third of all Americans is the biggest within the Department of Health and Human Services. Since Ms. Verma took the helm, she has advocated repealing the Affordable Care Act and, short of that, reining in the law’s expansion of Medicaid to millions of low-income adults.
Working with Mr. Pence in Indiana, she was an architect of that state’s conservative approach to Medicaid expansion, which emphasized “personal responsibility” by requiring many beneficiaries to pay premiums or risk being locked out of coverage for six months.
At C.M.S., Ms. Verma has encouraged states to require many of the adults who became eligible for Medicaid through the Affordable Care Act to work, volunteer or train for a job, and prove to their state that they are doing so, or lose coverage. Those “work requirements” have been struck down by several courts for failing to comport with the objective of Medicaid as defined under federal law — providing health coverage to the poor.
Her relationship with Alex M. Azar II, the health and human services secretary, has been rocky, to the point that the White House stepped in to mediate late last year. She also came under fire from Democrats for spending several million dollars on public relations contracts that were partly meant to raise her public profile; the contracts are now under review by the department’s inspector general.
Ms. Verma, 49, founded a health policy consulting firm, SVC Inc., in 2001, which also advised Kentucky and Ohio on how to shape their Medicaid expansion programs and worked with a number of other states. After her confirmation as administrator of C.M.S., she sold the company to Health Management Associates.
A first-generation American whose parents immigrated from India, Ms. Verma was born in Virginia and has listed Missouri, the Washington, D.C. suburbs and Taiwan as places she lived earlier in life. She graduated from the University of Maryland and has a masters in public health from Johns Hopkins University.
