Weather: Look for light rain this afternoon, with patches of fog and a high in the low 50s.
Alternate-side parking: In effect today. Suspended tomorrow for Ash Wednesday.
Harvey Weinstein seemed stunned, and refused to move.
He was inside the Manhattan courtroom where he had just been found guilty of two felony sex crimes. This made him the first high-profile man ousted from a position of power during the #MeToo movement and then criminally prosecuted.
The Times’s Jan Ransom was inside the courtroom. She said the once-influential movie producer, who recently had back surgery, was seated when the verdict was read. Eventually, he placed his hands in front of his body and was handcuffed. Then court officers escorted Mr. Weinstein as he limped out of the courtroom.
A jury convicted Mr. Weinstein, 67, on Monday of criminal sexual assault in the first degree and rape in the third degree. He was acquitted on three other charges, including predatory sexual assault. He was sent to jail to await sentencing on March 11.
He could be sentenced to between five and 29 years in prison.
Dozens of women had come forward with accusations against Mr. Weinstein. Six women testified at the trial that he had sexually assaulted them, though Mr. Weinstein had faced charges in connection with only two of them. The others were allowed to testify to establish a pattern of behavior.
Accusations of sexual misconduct and assault have swirled around Mr. Weinstein for years. In 2015, he avoided prosecution in connection to a groping episode, but was indicted in 2018 in New York after dozens of women came forward to accuse him in the media.
Investigations in The Times (you can read it here) and The New Yorker had focused intense scrutiny on Mr. Weinstein’s behavior.
Critics of Mr. Vance have said that he should have pursued charges against Mr. Weinstein sooner.
In 2015, an Italian model recorded the mogul discussing how he had recently groped her. “I’m used to that. Come on. Please,” Mr. Weinstein is heard saying on the recording. “You’re used to that?” asked the model, Ambra Battilana. “Yes,” he said, adding, “I won’t do it again.” Outside the Manhattan courtroom yesterday, Ms. Battilana said she felt “pure joy” at the verdict.
Mr. Weinstein’s legal troubles extend beyond New York. Last month, Jackie Lacey, the Los Angeles County district attorney, unveiled new rape and assault charges against Mr. Weinstein. She said that over two days in February 2013, Mr. Weinstein assaulted two women in separate attacks.
Could the Trump Administration Stop Congestion Pricing?
Fix for a Hated N.Y.C. Highway: How About an $11 Billion Tunnel?
The show ran from 1968 to 1970 on WNEW-TV in New York and featured a variety of guests. There were celebrities including Harry Belafonte and the champion pool player Cisero Murphy, as well as local street performers and police officers. According to The Times’s Sam Roberts, the show was credited as being New York City’s first regular program written, produced and presented by black people.
The producer was Charles Hobson, a Brooklyn native who died on Feb. 13 in the Bronx. He was 83. His daughter said the cause of death was heart failure.
It’s Tuesday — watch local television.
On a Saturday afternoon in 1994, my father took me, my brothers and a few of our cousins to McSorley’s, which, of course, claims to be the oldest continuously operating tavern in the New York.
It was 100 years to the day, my father said, that his father, my grandfather, had been born in the apartment upstairs.
After we’d had a round or two, my father raised his glass.
