Learning|So You Got Financial Aid for College. But How Do You Pay for the Rest of It?
More families are now struggling to fill the tuition gap after their financial aid falls short, forcing them to make some difficult decisions.
That’s one reason Lydia Muse is living at home in Fort Collins, Colo., instead of finishing her sophomore year at the Rhode Island School of Design. She’s taking a year off to work a part-time retail job and perform mission work with her church, as her mother, Brandy Muse, figures out how to pay for a second year.
What happened to the Muse family — where a financial-aid formula says one thing about what a student can afford but a package of grants and loans provides only a fraction of what is needed — is prevalent at American colleges and universities. It’s called “gapping” by financial-aid insiders, and Generation Z students (loosely, people born from 1995 to 2010) will increasingly be feeling its effects.
Today, fewer than 60 colleges still claim to both be need-blind in admissions and meet full need, according to a list compiled by Mark Kantrowitz, a financial-aid expert and publisher of Savingforcollege.com. That means those schools — mostly the wealthiest and most selective institutions — make their admissions decisions without looking at a family’s ability to pay and promise to meet their full financial need.
The financial void families must fill between the price of college and the aid they receive has steadily widened in recent years, according to calculations by Mr. Kantrowitz. The average gap amount is roughly $11,000 at public colleges, up 72 percent since 2008; and $16,000 at private colleges, an increase of 43 percent since 2008.
“There’s simply fewer people who can or want to pay,” Mr. Zucker said. He said only 21 percent of first-year students at private schools don’t receive any financial assistance from their institutions.
Denver is need-aware in admissions and does not meet full financial need for a portion of its applicant pool. In his career, Mr. Gudvangen has worked at both need-blind schools that provided enough aid to students as well as schools that gap students.
While families may manage to fill the gap in financial aid the first year of college, tuition prices are set one year at a time, limiting the ability to plan ahead. That’s what Nancy and John Flaherty face.
Their daughter, Courtney, is a sophomore at the College of William & Mary in Virginia, which charges more than $60,000 to out-of-state students. The Flahertys’s expected family contribution was about half that, and William & Mary’s aid package fell about $5,000 short the first two years, which the couple paid for by drawing from their savings.
The University of Dayton, however, has eliminated that uncertainty: It lays out to all incoming students what four years of expenses and aid look like.
Since the program was put in place in 2013, Dayton’s six-year graduation rate has inched up from 79 percent to 82 percent. A smaller share of students are borrowing, and when they do, they’re taking on smaller loans. Retention has increased as well. Mr. Reinoehl credits the four-year pricing strategy for the improvements.
Even so, like most colleges, Dayton can’t meet the full financial need of every student. And when showing parents a four-year financial-aid package, the gap at Dayton could surpass $100,000 at the far end.
Nonetheless, what Mr. Reinoehl and other admissions and financial-aid officials often encounter are parents who feel intense pressure to allow their children to attend their dream college, even if they face a large gap between what they’re expected to pay and what aid the college offers.
Jeffrey Selingo is the author of the forthcoming “Who Gets In and Why: A Year Inside College Admissions,” due out in September from Scribner. He is on the board of trustees at Ithaca College.