One of New York’s busiest art fair seasons kicks off this week with the Art Show at the Park Avenue Armory. Nine sprawling exhibitions will follow next week. Here’s our critic’s guide.
The opening of The Art Show on Thursday kicks off a carnival of New York art fairs that won’t stop until March 9. The city will host at least 10, offering hundreds of booths of modern and contemporary art, from blue chip to brand-new, and even a sampling of antiquarian books. For the gallerists, the process can be nerve-racking. But for everyone else, it’s a blast.
The more you see in a given day, the better the odds you’ll discover something to love — and even if you don’t, sensory overload has a thrill of its own. And with so many of the exhibitors flying in from abroad, you can essentially travel the world in an afternoon. Just don’t think you’ll get to everything. I recommend wearing sneakers, resisting the urge to over-caffeinate, and putting two — or at most three — of these fairs on your itinerary. Here’s an overview of some of the more substantial fairs.
This fair is for you if you want a little bit of everything. The organizers of the enormous Armory Show call it “the essential New York art fair,” and they’re not wrong. Now for its 26th edition, the show includes nearly 200 exhibitors from 32 countries and deftly straddles art worlds past and future. It’s not just the historical work showing alongside paintings that are practically still wet. This year, all of Pier 90 will be devoted to the increasingly fashionable practice of curator-led presentations, with sections helmed by Anne Ellegood and Jamillah James, both of the Institute of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles, and Nora Burnett Abrams of the Museum of Contemporary Art Denver, among others. On Pier 94, you’ll find the same exciting cacophony of multifarious booths that longtime attendees have come to expect. March 5-8; Piers 90 and 94 at 711 12th Avenue; thearmoryshow.com.
This fair is for you if you’re in it for the excitement. Now that NADA is a “gallery open” instead of a fair proper, Spring/Break stands alone as the week’s cool-kid party — young, exciting and a little chaotic. This year its 100 or so emerging galleries and independent curators, all of them bringing projects on the theme of “excess,” will be rubbing shoulders across two floors of Ralph Lauren’s former headquarters on Madison Avenue, between 58th and 59th Streets. The quality of the works may vary, but the energy is undeniable. March 3-9; 625 Madison Avenue; springbreakartshow.com.
This fair is for you if you want nothing but the best. Carefully curated and stylish to a fault, TriBeCa’s Independent tends to feel more like a biennial than a trade show, with nearly a third of its exhibitors from outside the United States. The curation cuts both ways: You can be sure all the work will look good, but you won’t get the gambler’s high that comes from hunting through a noisy crowd for a piece that really strikes you. Look out this year for confidently colorful painting, especially the charming intricacies of the self-taught artist Dorothy Iannone, curvy brass sculpture by Hanna Sandin, and a reprise, in case you missed her show at Canada Gallery, of Katherine Bernhardt’s E.T. paintings. March 6-8; Spring Studios at 50 Varick Street; independenthq.com/new-york.
This fair is for you if you’re a sucker for sincerity. Paper, as opposed to canvas, plaster, or steel, has a special resonance for anyone who ever went to elementary school — it’s the medium that makes us all remember when we were artists, too. For professionals, though, paper offers a thousand possibilities, from quick sketches to works as powerful and distinctive as painting on canvas. March 6-8; just north of the Manhattan Bridge at Pier 36, 299 South Street; thepaperfair.com.
This art fair is for you if you love magic. For more than two decades, this gallery has been hosting a kind of art-fair tasting menu in its Bleecker Street space. (It also has a location in Paris.) Something about the size, and the timing, gives it a magical appeal — it’s like a dollhouse come to life. This year’s edition, titled “The 11 Women of Spirit, Part 1,” is a compact group show of work by 11 female artists. (Part 2 comes in May, in concert with Frieze New York.) March 2-8; Zürcher Gallery at 33 Bleecker Street; galeriezurcher.com.
