Some educators are experimenting with their approaches to teaching to make course materials more relevant to various cultures and communities.
In high schools across the country, there have traditionally been a set of curriculum guidelines that teachers are hesitant to disturb.
But as the population in the United States becomes more ethnically and racially diverse, re-educating teachers about how to be aware of the cultural differences in their communities has been gaining traction.
Some educators are experimenting with new approaches of teaching to motivate students and to examine concepts like racism, social justice, inequality and discrimination. These teachers are reimagining and shifting conventional curriculums to reflect their more diverse student bodies.
At the forefront are teachers like Christopher Emdin, 40, a science educator and the author of “For White Folks Who Teach in the Hood … and the Rest of Y’all Too.” He has been a leader in the #HipHopEd initiative, which integrates urban youth culture with learning. The Science Genius program, for example, uses hip-hop music and rhymes in teaching science.
Mr. Emdin — who said he did not like school growing up — co-founded an initiative in 2012 with the rapper GZA to use hip-hop to teach science in 10 New York City public schools. It is about “remixing education,” he said.
Today, he advises educators on ways to incorporate these techniques into their classrooms. “Writing these raps, poems over beats, is a way of giving students’ voice,” he said.
Teaching Tolerance, the education arm of the Southern Poverty Law Center, has produced social justice teaching standards that many teachers are using, from kindergarten through high school, to guide curriculum development.
The change has been gradual. One factor: Teachers are still predominantly white even as the student population grows increasingly diverse, she said. While students of color are expected to make up 56 percent of the nation’s elementary and secondary public schools by 2024, 82 percent of public schoolteachers identify as white, according to a report by the United States Department of Education.
That figure has barely changed in more than 15 years. And only 7 percent of the nation’s public schoolteachers are black.
Another powerhouse behind the transformation of teaching is the National Council of Teachers of English, with more than 25,000 members and subscribers worldwide. Lorena Germán, an immigrant from the Dominican Republic, is the chair of the council’s Committee Against Racism and Bias in the Teaching of English.
Ms. Germán, who came to the United States as a child, teaches at the Headwaters School in Austin, Tex. She said she experienced classroom racism as a child in Lawrence, Mass. “They wanted to bring us into a classroom that required us to dismiss our way of being in order to assimilate — as if ours had no value,” she said.
Ms. Germán’s ninth-grade students, for example, study graffiti and debate questions such as: Is it vandalism? Where does it come from? What does it mean? What does it contribute to society? Does it count as text? Is there a message there?
She is also a member of #EduColor, a platform that “seeks to elevate the voices of public school advocates of color on educational equity and justice,” according to its website.
In 2018, she co-founded #DisruptTexts to help “teachers build a community and find alternatives to the white male-dominated literary canon,” she said.
The cultural classroom change is happening, but it is far from mainstream. Ms. Ebarvia said that there could be pushback among teachers but that was also encouraged by the growing number of those willing to engage in conversations about how to educate a new diverse generation.
To re-educate herself, Ms. Ebarvia is continually looking at racism in her own life. “To teach, I must do that self-reflection, and that’s hard work,” she said.