Common financial advice, demystified and unpacked.
This piece is part of “The Price of Modern Parenting.” Read more about the gig economy, the cost of adoption and out-of-pocket expenses for preterm births.
Everyone knows that being a parent is expensive, but knowing how best to save money and talk about it with your children can be a little less straightforward. To help clear the confusion, we broke down five common myths about parenting and finances.
Myth 1: You shouldn’t talk to your kids about money.
Melissa Adams, a certified financial planner in Connecticut, said she started talking to her son about money when he was about 4. When he asked why she had to go to work, she explained that her job helped pay for the house. About a year later, when he complained about not wanting to attend a tennis lesson, she told him they had already paid for the lesson. “Tennis costs money?” he shouted, amazed. Kids don’t always understand how money plays in to the tangible aspects of their lives, Adams said, and discussing finances “without making them feel bad or nervous” can teach children the practical value of a paycheck.
Myth 2: Buying is always better than renting.
For many parents, buying a home is the pinnacle of success: It provides stability and a steady place for their children to grow up. But homeownership isn’t for everyone, Adams said, and many fail to consider just how pricey it can be — from down payment costs to maintenance, insurance premiums and moving fees.
In the Bay Area, where Berna Anat, a financial literacy educator who runs the website “Hey Berna,” lives, the pressures to buy a home can “morally and emotionally push people into financial places they’re not ready for, and they may not truly want.” Before deciding to buy a home, Anat said, families should consider why they want to buy in the first place. Is it to pass a place down to future generations? Or is it to live up to an expectation? If it’s the latter, you might be less set up to pursue homeownership.
Myth 3: You don’t need to worry about making a will until your children are older.
Nobody likes to dwell on worst-case scenarios, but if you’re a parent without a will, it’s a good idea to prioritize making one — no matter your kid’s age. Doing so will set your child up for future financial success, said Angelle Richardson, a family therapist and assistant professor of community and trauma counseling at Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia. First, consider who you would want to step in as a legal guardian in case you die, then write up your will. For more on how to do this, read our guide here.
Myth 4: Budgeting systems that work for one family will also work for yours.
The worst budget system is no budget system, but picking a budget method that doesn’t suit the personality of you or your partner is just as likely to backfire. There isn’t one foolproof budget plan that works for every parent, Adams said. Some people are detail-oriented; others prefer to think about the larger picture. And while some research suggests that joint accounts work best for couples, that may not be right for every family — “you have to figure out what works well for you,” Adams said.
In general, she said that families should look at their monthly expenses and tally up how much they spend on essentials (like rent, car insurance, utilities and student loans) and nonessentials (like meals out and new clothes). Then, set limits for each category and monitor your progress.
If you and your partner have different approaches to budgeting, it can breed distrust, Dr. Richardson said. Talking with your partner about the emotions you associate with money (like safety or comfort) and what your family’s finances looked like growing up can help make your conversations around financial planning more productive and practical.
Myth 5. Being financially ready to start a family is more important than being emotionally ready.
“Nobody can really tell you what parenting is going to be like until you experience it yourself,” Dr. Archuleta said. And this includes how much money you’ll need. She has seen couples put off becoming parents until they have saved a certain amount — which is fine, she said, but you can’t anticipate every potential cost of raising a child, or even of birth itself. “You can put money away, you can do those kinds of things, but also, life is going to happen,” Richardson said.
Making sure you’re emotionally ready to have children may be just as — if not more — important than having a certain amount tucked away in a savings account. Otherwise, you might place unrealistic expectations on yourself as a parent (or on the birth itself), or feel caught off guard by the stressors and sudden ups and downs of early parenthood.
Plus, it can be challenging to grapple with the identity shift that comes with being a caregiver. Preparing emotionally can set you up to handle the expected (and unexpected) obstacles that come with raising kids. Read more in our guide to managing expectations and preparing for parenthood.
