Many black voters rallied around Joe Biden in Saturday’s primary, eager to send a message that their views of electability are not shaped by predominantly white states like Iowa.
NORTH CHARLESTON, S.C. — In 2008 and 2016, black voters in South Carolina’s presidential primary set the last two Democratic nominees on their way, backing Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton by huge margins. Rival candidates never managed to catch up in the race for delegates to clinch the nomination.
Black Democrats played a far different role in this year’s primary vote, coming to the aid of a candidate who is struggling, former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. They were the decisive factor in Mr. Biden’s victory in South Carolina on Saturday night, but it was far from clear if that support would catapult him to victory in other states in the ways that Mr. Obama and Mrs. Clinton enjoyed.
Early exit polls indicated that, more than in 2008 and 2016, black voters spread their support across several candidates and split along generational and ideological lines. Senator Bernie Sanders edged ahead of Mr. Biden among black voters who were 29 and younger, and Mr. Sanders, the race’s current front-runner, appears formidable in the polls in many upcoming primaries.
For many black voters, the South Carolina primary took on significant meaning in another way, too. In interviews across the state in recent days, many said they were eager to send a message to the national Democratic Party: that their views on electability — which candidate is best suited to beat President Trump — would not be shaped by outcomes in the predominantly white states Iowa and New Hampshire, which backed former Mayor Pete Buttigieg and Mr. Sanders in contests earlier in February.
South Carolina signifies a turning point in the campaign: Candidates have been courting black voters in the state for more than a year, and now the Democratic hopefuls will see if their personal appeals and policy plans catch fire with the first predominantly black electorate to vote in the race.
Is the Church Still the Center of the Black Vote in South Carolina?
Democrats are fighting for the crucial black vote in the South Carolina primary tomorrow. Churches have long played the primary role in mobilizing black support, but some activists are pushing for change.
Mr. Biden, who lost badly in Iowa and New Hampshire but improved in last weekend’s Nevada caucuses, appeared on track to win a majority of black Democrats in South Carolina, with voters citing his familiarity with their concerns and his potential to appeal to moderate Republicans in a general election. But the final margins may reveal fault lines around gender, age, regions and viewpoints.
Other Democratic hopefuls from across the ideological spectrum — liberals like Mr. Sanders and Senator Elizabeth Warren, as well as the billionaire Tom Steyer and moderates like Mr. Buttigieg — were aiming to demonstrate that African-Americans are not a monolithic voting bloc.
Many black Democrats made that point over the last year, as some favored white candidates like Mr. Biden over black contenders like Senators Kamala Harris and Cory Booker, and others embraced a wide variety of political and ideological positions.
Mr. Biden led in South Carolina polls all year, but Mr. Sanders and Mr. Steyer gained ground recently, and Ms. Warren and Mr. Buttigieg were seeking to show that they have black support in the primary.
At a ministers’ breakfast in North Charleston on Wednesday hosted by National Action Network, the civil rights organization led by the Rev. Al Sharpton, several voters echoed his point — stating that the question of “what Democratic candidate is most electable” in the primary could not be settled until black voters throughout the South weighed in on the nominee.
Chris Richardson, 39, said he was not surprised that many black voters in South Carolina were unfazed by Mr. Biden’s poor results in Iowa and New Hampshire. He flipped the question around: Why would anyone assume they’d care?
Among the most important results in South Carolina is the margin of victory in different parts of the state, which will help determine the awarding of delegates. Mr. Sanders currently leads in delegates, followed by Mr. Buttigieg, Mr. Biden and Ms. Warren.
The final margin of victory for Mr. Biden will also determine if he can argue that he has a “firewall” of black support in the highly competitive race; a big victory would also help him make his case in other racially diverse primaries, including the big ones in North Carolina and Virginia on Super Tuesday next week.
One major factor in the race that won’t be settled in South Carolina is the electoral might of Mr. Bloomberg, who is not competing in the state but will be on the primary ballots on Super Tuesday. Mr. Bloomberg has spent hundreds of millions of dollars courting voters, with particular attention to black and Latino voters in delegate-rich states such as Texas and California, which vote Tuesday.
Aides to Mr. Biden have begun openly complaining that Mr. Bloomberg might siphon some black voters from the former vice president and effectively deliver the nomination to Mr. Sanders.
Akunna Cook, a former executive director of the Black Economic Alliance, said Mr. Bloomberg “could become a spoiler” for Mr. Biden even with a win in South Carolina, because some moderate voters might still decide to back Mr. Bloomberg on Super Tuesday.
In South Carolina, the campaign of another self-funding billionaire — Mr. Steyer — gave Mr. Biden’s team a miniature preview of what it is up against. Mr. Steyer dominated the state’s airwaves and invested millions in organizing to chip away at Mr. Biden’s black support with some success.
But this past week, Mr. Biden got a clear lift: The state’s most powerful Democrat, Representative James F. Clyburn, endorsed him in an impassioned speech Wednesday that cited Mr. Biden’s intimate understanding of the state.
In a Friday appearance on CNN, Mr. Clyburn said he hoped Mr. Biden would win South Carolina by “15 or 16” points, setting the bar at a clear victory — but far less than the 47.5-point margin of victory for Mrs. Clinton in 2016 (over Mr. Sanders) or the 29-point win by Mr. Obama in 2008 (over Mrs. Clinton).
No matter who wins South Carolina, the yearlong primary campaign in the state has shown the power — and diversity — among black voters within the Democratic Party.
The large field of two dozen candidates provided opportunities for black activist groups to pressure hopefuls on issues that seemed secondary to many past Democratic candidates, including robust criminal justice proposals, economic agendas that target the racial wealth gap and the possibility of reparations for the descendants of slaves.
The campaign has also exposed cracks along age, college education level, geography and gender, leading black voters to split across candidates more than they have in previous cycles.
There are churchgoing supporters of Mr. Biden and others drawn to the business acumen of Mr. Bloomberg and Mr. Steyer. Younger black voters — drawn to the promise of a “political revolution” — seem likely to boost Mr. Sanders, and policy-focused voters looking for a candidate pitching unity can back Mr. Buttigieg or Ms. Warren.
“I see the momentum of Bernie, I see the number of black people for Biden, but I’ll be with Elizabeth Warren till she drops out,” said Herbert Bodison, a 65-year-old resident of North Charleston.
Shareef Boddie, a 23-year-old from Goose Creek, said he was torn among three candidates: Mr. Sanders, Mr. Biden and Mr. Buttigieg. He planned to make his decision on the way to the polls.
“I may go for Bernie Sanders, because he plans on relieving college debt from students. And that’s a big thing,” Mr. Boddie said.
The range of opinion is the electoral manifestation of the oft-repeated mantra “black voters are not monolithic.” But it could also curb the determinative power of black voters in the Democratic nomination process, considering that they have historically rallied around a single candidate, helping that contender grab all-important delegates in key congressional districts and providing an inside track to the nomination.
Rashad Robinson, president of the racial justice organization Color of Change, said black Democrats in this primary had done more than choose the winner: They forced the field of candidates to reshape how they discuss the black community.
Mr. Darby, the Charleston minister, said he believed the whiteness of the Iowa and New Hampshire electorates affects how they view the primary’s central question of electability.
He contended that many white voters in those states could “afford” to base voting decisions solely on policy outlines and ideological promises, while many black voters were conditioned by history to assume the worst about politicians. He said he was not surprised that Mr. Biden was beaten by popular candidates in those states but was favored in South Carolina.
He compared Mr. Trump’s presidency to a house fire, and said black voters were better at recognizing the urgency.
