The video was edited to appear as if Speaker Nancy Pelosi were ripping a copy of President Trump’s State of the Union address while he honored a Tuskegee airman and military families.
The decision highlighted the tension between critics who want social media platforms to crack down on the spread of misinformation and others who argue that political speech should be given wide latitude, even if it’s deceptive or false.
The roughly 5-minute clip shows Ms. Pelosi repeatedly ripping his speech in between snippets of him paying tribute to the airman, Charles McGee, as well as other guests he had invited to the State of the Union, including military families. In fact, Ms. Pelosi ripped a copy of Mr. Trump’s speech immediately after his address to Congress on Tuesday.
Drew Hammill, Ms. Pelosi’s deputy chief of staff, on Friday demanded that the video be removed.
“The American people know that the President has no qualms about lying to them — but it is a shame to see Twitter and Facebook, sources of news for millions, do the same,” Mr. Hammill wrote on Twitter.
“The latest fake video of Speaker Pelosi is deliberately designed to mislead and lie to the American people, and every day that these platforms refuse to take it down is another reminder that they care more about their shareholders’ interests than the public’s interests,” he wrote.
On Saturday, Mr. Stone said that the video did not violate Facebook’s policy on manipulated media.
In the case of the video posted by Mr. Trump, “the reason I was making the point about the fact that the things featured in this video actually happened is because that’s a key element of our policy on content like this,” Mr. Stone wrote on Twitter.
A Twitter spokeswoman said on Saturday that, beginning on March 5, the company would start applying labels that read “manipulated media” on heavily edited videos like Mr. Trump’s.
Mr. Trump’s campaign said that the video, titled “Powerful American Stories Ripped to Shreds by Nancy Pelosi,” was clearly a parody.
“If Nancy Pelosi fears images of her ripping up the speech, perhaps she shouldn’t have ripped up the speech,” Tim Murtaugh, a Trump campaign spokesman, said on Saturday.
The video isn’t legally actionable and shouldn’t be taken down, said Jonathan L. Zittrain, a Harvard Law School professor and a founder of the Berkman Klein Center for Internet & Society. But, he said, Facebook and Twitter should probably label the video.
“It’s important for social media sites that have massive reach to make and enforce policies concerning manipulated content, rather than abdicating all responsibility,” Professor Zittrain said.
Of course, deceptive political ads aren’t a tool exclusive to the internet age, Kathleen Hall Jamieson, director of the Annenberg Public Policy Center at the University of Pennsylvania, said.
In 1968, Richard M. Nixon’s presidential campaign created an ad showing his opponent, Hubert Humphrey, addressing the Democratic National Convention interspersed with scenes of fighting in Vietnam, demonstrators being beaten in the streets of Chicago and poverty in Appalachia, she said.
In another ad, from 1960, John F. Kennedy’s presidential campaign edited clips of Mr. Nixon to show him sweating, appearing distracted and nodding and seeming to agree with Mr. Kennedy while Mr. Kennedy was speaking, Professor Jamieson said.
Facebook’s decision not to remove the video came after it honored a request by Ms. Pelosi’s office and took down a video on Thursday that was doctored to make it appear as though she were swallowing Tide pods.
