The House impeachment managers sought to put the Senate on trial while the president’s defense team argued he that had done nothing wrong.
House impeachment managers and President Trump’s legal team delivered their closing arguments to senators. A final vote is expected on Wednesday.
WASHINGTON — In their final appeals in President Trump’s impeachment trial, House Democrats argued on Monday that he had corrupted the presidency and would continue to put American interests at risk if the Senate failed to remove him from office. Mr. Trump’s defenders, denouncing the case against him, said he had done nothing wrong and should be judged by voters.
Making their closing arguments from the well of the Senate, the House managers and the president’s lawyers invoked history and the 2020 presidential campaign as Democrats and Republicans prepared to take the fight over Mr. Trump’s fate to the broader public arena. Neither side expected to change the outcome of the final vote on Wednesday, when the Senate is all but certain to acquit the president, largely along party lines.
The Democratic impeachment managers, led by Representative Adam B. Schiff of California, warned that Mr. Trump had tried to rig the 2020 election in his favor — by withholding military aid from Ukraine in an effort to pressure the country to investigate his political rivals — and had put a blot on the presidency that would stain those who failed to stand up to him. Calling the president “a man without character or ethical compass,” Mr. Schiff insisted that now was the time for members of his own party to choose between normalizing corruption or removing it.
Casting the impeachment managers’ case as shoddily constructed, the president’s defense team issued a scathing indictment of the House Democrats’ argument, contending that removing Mr. Trump from office would subvert the will of the electorate and fundamentally alter the functioning of the separation of powers. Their final word sounded as much like a campaign pitch as a legal defense.
In an awkward confluence of events, Mr. Trump will have an unimpeded platform to make his own final case on Tuesday, when he is to deliver his annual State of the Union address from the floor of the very House that impeached him in December.
The abbreviated closing arguments constituted the substantive end of Mr. Trump’s impeachment trial, the third such proceeding in American history. In a mark of just how entrenched both sides were in their positions, senators skipped a period of deliberation and instead made their way to Senate floor one by one to announce their positions ahead of Wednesday’s final vote on the House’s abuse of power and obstruction of Congress charges. In 1999, the Senate spent three days weighing President Bill Clinton’s fate during his impeachment proceeding.
One moderate Democrat, Senator Joe Manchin III of West Virginia, broached the idea on Monday of censuring Mr. Trump after the trial concludes, a largely symbolic gesture that he said could attract bipartisan support.
But given the stark polarization in the chamber — where most Republicans are reluctant to criticize Mr. Trump and Democrats are almost uniformly in agreement that he should be removed for his behavior — there was no serious discussion of that option.
Despite the president’s lawyers’ frequent references to the Iowa caucuses, few senators needed a reminder of the political calendar. Just after the arguments concluded, three senators sitting in judgment of Mr. Trump who are running for the Democratic presidential nomination — Bernie Sanders of Vermont, Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts and Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota — raced to catch planes back to the Midwest for rallies. A fourth, Senator Michael Bennet of Colorado, traveled to New Hampshire, which will hold the 2020 race’s first primary next week.
So far, the senators who have stated their decisions on acquittal or conviction have lined up along party lines, with Democrats echoing the House managers as they announced support for conviction and Republicans insisting the president’s removal was unsupportable on varied grounds.
“Simply asserting — at least 63 times — that their evidence was quote unquote overwhelming doesn’t make the House of Representatives’ allegations proven or an impeachable offense,” said Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, the longest serving Senate Republican, on Monday as he announced his acquittal vote.
But several moderate Republicans and Democrats, whose votes could swing against their parties, had yet to declare their intentions. It would take a two-thirds vote of the Senate — 67 senators — to convict and remove Mr. Trump, an outcome that appeared far out of reach. Still, the president is eager to be acquitted by a bipartisan vote and to avoid the spectacle of having even one Republican vote to convict him.
Mr. Manchin said he was still undecided.
Monday’s closing remarks made evident just how far apart the two sides remained after two weeks of heated arguments before the Senate. They disagree not only on how to interpret the facts of the case, but on what actually constitutes an impeachable offense, too. Lawyers for the president advanced a theory rejected by most scholars that neither abuse of power nor obstruction of Congress met the definition of high crimes and misdemeanors.
The House managers insisted that they had compiled a mountain of evidence capped by new disclosures by John R. Bolton, the former national security adviser, that Mr. Trump had acted corruptly and with his own interest in mind when he conditioned nearly $400 million of military aid to Ukraine and a meeting at the White House on investigations into his political rivals.
Mr. Schiff portrayed it as part of an insidious pattern of conduct — dating to Mr. Trump’s embrace of Russian election interference on his behalf in 2016 — that continues to put the country at risk.
Mr. Trump then tried to shield himself and hide his wrongdoing from the public and Congress, the managers said, by mounting a defiant campaign of obstruction, blocking witness after witness from testifying while refusing to produce a single subpoenaed document.
Mr. Trump’s lawyers condemned the impeachment managers’ case as a hastily thrown together partisan enterprise, noting that the only bipartisan vote in the House was in opposition to impeachment.
Mr. Trump’s defenders vigorously denied that he withheld the military aid to Ukraine and a White House meeting with the nation’s president as leverage for investigations into his political rivals, dismissing ample evidence to the contrary. But their claims were narrowly tailored, carefully skirting the new disclosures from Mr. Bolton.
The dueling arguments were a prelude to the senators’ final vote, capping the five-month impeachment drama.
Michael D. Shear, Patricia Mazzei and Emily Cochrane contributed reporting.