A professor at the University of Oklahoma provoked outrage by saying the phrase “OK, boomer” was like a racial slur for black people. He later apologized to students.
The president of the University of Oklahoma on Tuesday condemned the remarks of a professor who told his class that the phrase “OK, boomer” was comparable to a racial slur against black people, provoking outrage from students in the class and around campus.
Peter Gade, the director of graduate studies at the university’s journalism school, made the remarks in a class on Tuesday, during a discussion of social media and journalism. In the comparison, Mr. Gade used the slur.
Many students were aghast that a white tenured professor would be comfortable comparing the phrase, an internet meme that is quickly becoming a generational flash point, to an epithet associated with the horrors of slavery and racism.
And within hours, the university’s interim president responded with a statement that criticized the professor and touched on issues of history, ethics and speech.
“While the professor’s comments are protected by the First Amendment and academic freedom, his comment and word choice are fundamentally offensive and wrong,” said the interim president, Joseph Harroz Jr.
Mr. Gade, who has been a faculty member at the university since 1998, did not immediately answer an email or return a call seeking comment. Hours after class, Mr. Gade sent an email to students, apologizing.
In the class on Tuesday, Mr. Gade and his students were discussing how technology and social media were changing journalism when a student said that news organizations needed to adapt to stay relevant with younger audiences, according to The OU Daily, a student newspaper.
Mr. Gade said that the student’s comment was like saying, “OK, boomer,” referring to a phrase that has alternately been called a dismissive, even ageist retort against older people and a rallying cry of younger generations.
The class tittered at that remark, but then fell into shock as he continued: “Calling someone a boomer is like calling someone a” racial slur, Mr. Gade was quoted by the newspaper as saying.
Molly Kruse, a 21-year-old senior who was in the class, said that the word jolted her.
“I said, ‘Dr. Gade, I don’t think you should be using that word here,’” she said in an interview.
Ms. Kruse said she was too stunned to remember the professor’s response, but other students later told her he quickly moved on from the topic. Ms. Kruse, however, said she walked out of the class at that moment and went to the dean’s office. Other students later joined her.
Those instances have been infuriating, but Mr. Gade’s use of the word was particularly upsetting, he said.
“I was wrong. I am sorry. I realize the word is hurtful and infuses the racial divisions of our country, past and present. Use of this word is inappropriate in any — especially educational — settings,” he added.
Ms. Kruse said she hoped the incident spurred changes at the university.
Mr. Francisco, 22, said scholars at the university had developed a program called “Unlearning,” which teaches staff members how to recognize racism, sexism and homophobia and to promote inclusion.
“There have been a lot of faculty and staff who have taken these trainings,” he said, but they are not mandatory.
“The faculty who really need it are not taking it,” Mr. Francisco said.
In a separate statement, university officials said that the First Amendment protected Mr. Gade from disciplinary action.
Deans from the Gaylord College of Journalism and Mass Communication, the journalism unit of the university, will attend Mr. Gade’s next class on Thursday, Ms. Kruse said that students had been told.
