New outbreaks in Europe and the Middle East are accelerating amid concerns that the global response is fractured and uncoordinated.
LONDON — In Iran, a spike in coronavirus infections has prompted fears of a contagion throughout the Middle East. In Italy, one of Europe’s largest economies, officials are struggling frantically to prevent the epidemic from paralyzing the commercial center of Milan. And in New York, London, and Tokyo, financial markets plummeted on fears that the virus will cripple the global economy.
From Asia to Europe to North America, the lethal spread of the coronavirus accelerated on Monday, putting a heavy strain on a world already fractured by trade wars, populist politics and sectarian conflict.
The emergence of Italy, Iran, and South Korea as new hubs of the outbreak underscored the lack of a coordinated global strategy to combat the coronavirus, which has infected nearly 80,000 people in 37 countries, causing at least 2,600 deaths. The number of infected people in the United States reached 53 on Monday, up from 34 on Friday, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
A delegation of the World Health Organization, sent to China to assess the epidemic, warned Monday the world was not ready for a major outbreak. Infectious disease experts said a unified response is critical to mitigating the damage and slowing an outbreak that they say can no longer be stopped.
For weeks, most of the world’s focus has been on China, which has placed tens of millions of people under strict lockdowns to try to staunch the spread of new cases. But on Monday, the newer outbreaks in South Korea, Italy and Iran were testing very different political systems, with very different health systems.
“Countries will start underreporting cases, so they don’t seem to be suggesting a terrible tragedy has hit them or they don’t want to be accused of unsettling the rest of the world,” Dr. Osterholm said.
On Monday, South Korea, the hardest hit country outside China, reported 231 more cases, bringing its total to 833 cases and seven deaths. By Tuesday, another 60 infections had been recorded, bringing the total to just under 900. The South Korean president, Moon Jae-in, put the country on the highest possible alert, opening the way for the government to lock down cities and take other sweeping measures.
In Italy, the authorities quarantined more than 50,000 people in 11 towns clustered in the northern Lombardy region, partly in an effort to prevent the virus from spreading to Milan, where an outbreak could cripple the Italian economy. Italy has reported at least six deaths.
On Monday, authorities in Lyon, France, stopped a bus from Milan and confined the passengers inside after suspicion of a case onboard, the newspaper Le Parisien reported. Passengers on an Alitalia flight from Rome to Mauritius decided to return home after being told they would have to go into quarantine.
Dr. Sridhar said the emphasis should now be on vaccination campaigns and equipping medical centers with adequate respiratory facilities. She also said hospitals needed to take measures to stop being spreading grounds for the virus.
In Britain, which has 13 confirmed cases, a spokesman for Prime Minister Boris Johnson issued a statement on Monday saying the country was well prepared for any additional infections.
“We are using tried and tested procedures to prevent further spread and the N.H.S. is extremely well prepared and used to managing infections,” the statement said, referring to the National Health Service.
Yet even in Europe, there are troubling signs of a lack of coordination. When the Italians went into crisis mode over the weekend, officials in Brussels struggled to convince other European Union member states to share information swiftly and coordinate on how to respond to the outbreak.
Such weaknesses sound eerily similar to China, which drew harsh criticism for its secretive approach and slow initial response after the outbreak first emerged in Hubei Province.
China’s president, Xi Jinping, acknowledged that it was the country’s most serious public health crisis, and “the most difficult to prevent and control,” since the founding of the People’s Republic. Underscoring the point, the country’s leaders on Monday were forced to postpone their biggest political conclave of the year, the National People’s Congress.
The W.H.O. team in China concluded that the draconian measures imposed by the government there may have saved hundreds of thousands of people from infection.
“There’s no question that China’s bold approach to the rapid spread of this new respiratory pathogen has changed the course of what was a rapidly escalating and continues to be a deadly epidemic,” said Bruce Aylward, a Canadian doctor and epidemiologist who led the W.H.O. delegation.
But with the virus spreading rapidly, Dr. Aylward warned that other countries would need to respond swiftly and aggressively, too. “We have all got to look at our systems because none of them work fast enough,” he said.
Steven Lee Myers and Sui-Lee Wee contributed reporting from Beijing, and Matina Stevis-Gridneff from Brussels.