Also a record producer, he shaped London’s fertile club scene in the late 1980s and ’90s and helped meld rock and dance music.
Andrew Weatherall, an omnivorous D.J., producer and musician known for his impact on England’s acid house scene and for uniting rock and rave on the group Primal Scream’s album “Screamadelica,” died on Feb. 17 in London. He was 56.
His managers said the cause was a pulmonary embolism.
Mr. Weatherall moved to London in the late 1980s and began playing records at parties, attracting attention from D.J.s spinning acid house — a subgenre known for mixing rock music with psychedelic textures from the 1960s and so-called acidic sounds from the Roland TB-303 synthesizer.
The D.J. Danny Rampling's weekly party, “Shoom,” began in December 1987 in the basement of an old fitness center near London Bridge. Nicky Holloway’s “Trip” night at the London Astoria brought acid house to the West End in 1988. Mr. Weatherall, who was not specially trained, became a fixture at both.
Though he did not seem to care about building a reputation, he nevertheless gained a steady following with his distinct remixes, which burst the parameters of genre. Remixing and producing music for artists like New Order, Happy Mondays, Björk, Siouxsie Sioux and My Bloody Valentine, he had a broad and uncategorizable body of work.
Mr. Weatherall began working with the band Primal Scream in the late 1980s, remixing “I’m Losing More Than I’ll Ever Have,” which was renamed “Loaded” and selected as the lead single for the group’s album “Screamadelica” in 1991. That album, which merged Mr. Weatherall’s psychedelic techno and deep house production with Primal Scream’s classic rock sound (and the work of other producers), became the group’s first commercial success and went on to win the British record industry’s first annual Mercury Music Prize.
Andrew James Weatherall was born on April 6, 1963, in Windsor, Berkshire, to Robert Weatherall, a businessman, and Carol (Whitworth) Weatherall.
He began going to music festivals and discos at the age of 14. After graduating from grammar school, he found jobs as a construction worker and a freelance journalist before moving to London. In 1990 he created his own label, Boy’s Own Productions, and in 2001 he started Rotters Golf Club, an electro record label.
He is survived by his father; his brother, Ian; and his partner, Elizabeth Walker.
Though Mr. Weatherall traveled between scenes and sounds, he never lost his focus on how music can foster real connections.
