The state still has no confirmed cases of coronavirus, but it has set in motion preparations and funding to deal with an expected influx of cases.
ALBANY, N.Y. — Reacting to concerns about the quickening spread of coronavirus, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said on Wednesday that the state would set aside some $40 million to fight the virus, as well as plan for possible quarantines at homes, hotels and hospitals.
In addition to the $40 million from the Legislature, Mr. Cuomo said he would ask federal authorities permission to test patient samples in a laboratory in New York, rather than waiting several days for results from the C.D.C. in Atlanta.
The virus has killed more than 2,000 people in China, the epicenter of the outbreak. The total number of cases globally has now reached 80,980 and nearly 3,000 have died.
The state’s actions came a day after federal health officials asserted that the virus, which causes respiratory problems in patients, was likely to spread in the United States, where a few dozen cases have been confirmed so far, including more than 40 from a cruise ship.
In New York City, where officials say seven potential patients have been tested and cleared, Mayor Bill de Blasio has expressed confidence that the city is prepared, citing previous scares involving even more deadly diseases like Ebola in 2014.
Confirmed cases have now been reported in more than 40 countries.
Those measures could include limiting or staggering public transit ridership, according to a document prepared by City Hall and the New York City’s Emergency Management Department in 2014 that focused on how the city might respond to a flu pandemic.
Speaking at a news conference, Patrick J. Foye, chairman of the M.T.A., said the authority had increased its own supply of masks and other materials in preparation for an outbreak but did not offer details on the contingency plans being discussed.
The authority has also posted thousands of signs on subways and buses encouraging riders to wash their hands and avoid close contact with sick people.
