The process bypassed the formal procedures used by past presidents and was driven instead by friendship, fame, personal empathy and a shared sense of persecution.
WASHINGTON — Early Tuesday morning, Bernard B. Kerik’s telephone rang. On the line was David Safavian, a friend and fellow former government official who like Mr. Kerik was once imprisoned for misconduct. Mr. Safavian had life-changing news.
Mr. Safavian, who had ties to the White House, said that he was putting together a letter asking President Trump to pardon Mr. Kerik, the former New York City police commissioner who pleaded guilty to tax fraud and other charges. Mr. Safavian needed names of supporters to sign the letter. By noon.
Mr. Kerik hit the phones. Shortly after 10 a.m., he reached Geraldo Rivera, the Fox News correspondent and a friend of Mr. Trump’s. Mr. Rivera, who described Mr. Kerik as “an American hero,” instantly agreed to sign the one-page letter. Mr. Kerik called Representative Peter T. King, Republican of New York, and when Mr. Safavian reached Mr. King around 10:30, he too agreed to sign.
At 11:57 a.m., Mr. Kerik’s phone rang again. This time it was the president.
At 1:41 p.m., Mr. Trump approached reporters before boarding Air Force One and mentioned that he had pardoned Mr. Kerik. At 2:10, the White House announced that Mr. Safavian had been pardoned as well.
The clemency orders that the president issued that day to celebrity felons like Mr. Kerik, Rod R. Blagojevich and Michael R. Milken came about through a typically Trumpian process, an ad hoc scramble that bypassed the formal procedures used by past presidents and was driven instead by friendship, fame, personal empathy and a shared sense of persecution. While aides said the timing was random, it reinforced Mr. Trump’s antipathy toward the law enforcement establishment.
All 11 recipients had an inside connection or were promoted on Fox News. Some were vocal supporters of Mr. Trump, donated to his campaign or in one case had a son who weekended in the Hamptons with the president’s eldest son. Even three obscure women serving time on drug or fraud charges got on Mr. Trump’s radar screen through a personal connection.
While 14,000 clemency petitions sit unaddressed at the Justice Department’s Office of the Pardon Attorney, Mr. Trump eagerly granted relief to a former football team owner who hosted a pre-inauguration party, a onetime contestant on “Celebrity Apprentice” and an infamous investor championed both by Rudolph W. Giuliani, the president’s personal lawyer, and by the billionaire who hosted a $10 million fund-raiser for Mr. Trump just last weekend.
Mr. Trump’s advisers acknowledged that the process was unique to this president, but stressed that he had become personally committed to countering the excesses of the criminal justice system, a mission fueled by his own scalding encounters with investigations since taking office. In addition to his pardons, Mr. Trump in 2018 signed the First Step Act providing sentencing relief for many criminals.
Indeed, Mr. Trump takes personal pleasure in dispensing mercy. He called Patti Blagojevich, who is married to the former governor, right after signing the papers on Tuesday. He likewise called Ricky Munoz to tell him that his wife, Crystal Munoz, was coming home.
Advisers said there is little rhyme or reason to how Mr. Trump chooses clemency recipients. He meets with advisers every few weeks to discuss various cases. Once he makes a decision, he tends to announce them right away, without bothering to draft a communications strategy, reasoning that there is no point in anyone sitting in prison longer than needed.
Mr. Trump recognizes that his friends-and-family approach generates criticism, but has repeatedly cited his 2018 pardon of I. Lewis Libby Jr. as proof that he is willing to absorb attacks that others would not. President George W. Bush refused to pardon Mr. Libby, who served as chief of staff to Vice President Dick Cheney and was convicted of lying to the authorities.
Mr. Trump has known some of those he favored this week for years, including Mr. Kerik and Mr. Milken, the so-called junk bond king who tried at least twice to obtain a pardon from Mr. Bush without success. Mr. Trump called Mr. Milken “a brilliant guy” in his first memoir and has hosted him at his Mar-a-Lago estate in Florida. He called Mr. Kerik “a friend of mine” and “a great guy” in 2004 when Mr. Kerik was forced to withdraw his nomination for Mr. Bush’s secretary of homeland security because of ethics issues.
In addition to Mr. Giuliani, Mr. Milken’s pardon was supported by Mr. Trump’s son-in-law Jared Kushner and his developer friends Howard Lorber and Richard LeFrak. Also supportive was Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin, a longtime friend who last year flew on Mr. Milken’s private jet from Washington to Los Angeles and helped secure a real estate tax break that could benefit Mr. Milken.
Paul Pogue, the former owner of a Texas construction company, was pardoned for tax charges after his family contributed more than $200,000 in the last six months to help re-elect Mr. Trump. In August, his son Benjamin and daughter-in-law Ashleigh posted a picture on Instagram of themselves with Donald Trump Jr. and his girlfriend, Kimberly Guilfoyle, in the Hamptons. “What an experience spending the weekend with these two and more!” Ms. Pogue wrote.
In announcing his pardon, the White House cited Paul Pogue’s charitable work around the world, including the creation of two nonprofit organizations that help rebuild churches and provide aid to people after natural disasters.
Ariel Friedler, the former executive of a software development company who pleaded guilty to conspiring to hack a competitor, found his way in the door through Chris Christie, the former governor of New Jersey and a close ally of Mr. Trump’s.
Mr. Christie said on Wednesday that he met with Mr. Friedler in person and agreed to represent him in a pardon application after being referred by a former prosecutor he knew. Mr. Christie said he heard nothing since 2018 about the case until Mr. Trump called him out of the blue last Thursday to ask about it.
“He said, ‘Listen, I’ve reviewed the application, but tell me what you think about this guy and what happened to him,’” Mr. Christie said. A former prosecutor himself, Mr. Christie said he told the president that the government had overreached.
“Do you really think this guy has a good heart?” he recalled Mr. Trump asking.
Angela Stanton, an author and television personality with a record stemming from a stolen-vehicle ring, was championed by Alveda King, a niece of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. A Fox News contributor and outspoken Trump supporter, Ms. King appeared with Ms. Stanton at a “Women for Trump” summit meeting in 2018.
While most of this week’s recipients had political ties, Mr. Trump’s defenders pointed to three women whose sentences he commuted without any notable political background. But even those three — Ms. Munoz, 40, Tynice Nichole Hall, 36, and Judith Negron, 48 — came to his attention because of someone he already knew, Alice Marie Johnson.
Mr. Trump commuted Ms. Johnson’s life sentence for a nonviolent drug conviction in 2018 after the reality television star Kim Kardashian West made a personal plea. Since then, Ms. Johnson has become his prison reform whisperer and appeared in a multimillion-dollar Super Bowl ad for his campaign.
During an October appearance at Benedict College, a historically black school in South Carolina, Mr. Trump told Ms. Johnson to give him the names of others who had been mistreated. Ms. Johnson then traveled to Washington to meet with prisoner advocates and they identified about 10 women for the White House.
Ms. Munoz, serving nearly two decades on a marijuana charge, said that she was called to the office of her case manager and counselor on Tuesday. “When I went into their office, they said, ‘Who do you know? Do you know some people?’” She did not understand at first. But the person she knew had secured her a commutation.
Among those activists these days is Mr. Safavian, the government’s top procurement official under Mr. Bush who was sentenced to a year in prison for covering up ties to the corrupt lobbyist Jack Abramoff. Now the general counsel for the American Conservative Union, Mr. Safavian lobbies for legislation and programs granting leniency and job training for lower-level drug offenders as well as white-collar former convicts like himself.
As with the others, Mr. Safavian had friends in the right places. The head of the conservative union, Matt Schlapp, is a strong supporter of Mr. Trump, and his wife, Mercedes Schlapp, worked as the White House strategic communications director before moving to the president’s campaign.
As he pushed for Mr. Kerik’s pardon, Mr. Safavian said he did not realize that he would receive one himself. “Quite frankly, it was out of the blue for me,” he said. “I was in the drive-through window at McDonald’s when I got the call that the president had just signed my pardon.
Peter Baker and Elizabeth Williamson reported from Washington, and J. David Goodman and Michael Rothfeld from New York. Reporting was contributed by Annie Karni, Zach Montague, Alan Rappeport and Michael D. Shear in Washington; Maggie Haberman and Jesse Drucker in New York; Mitch Smith in Chicago; Patricia Mazzei and Jack Begg in Miami; and Manny Fernandez in Houston.