Nathaniel R. Hendren, who was an officer in St. Louis, was accused of fatally shooting his female colleague, Katlyn Alix, while on duty in his apartment in 2019.
A former St. Louis police officer accused of killing another officer while playing Russian roulette pleaded guilty on Friday and was sentenced to seven years in prison, the authorities said.
The former officer, Nathaniel R. Hendren, 30, pleaded guilty to one count of first-degree involuntary manslaughter and one count of armed criminal action in the shooting death of Katlyn Alix, another officer with the St. Louis Metropolitan Police Department, according to Kimberly M. Gardner, the St. Louis circuit attorney.
Mr. Hendren was sentenced to seven years on the manslaughter charge and three years, to be served concurrently, on the second charge, Ms. Gardner said in a statement.
The shooting on Jan. 24, 2019, drew national attention because Mr. Hendren was on duty at the time. Ms. Gardner had also accused the Police Department of obstructing the investigation in its rush to initially label the shooting an accident.
Mr. Hendren had been on duty when he met Officer Alix, who was off duty, at his apartment where the two began “dry-firing” their handguns, according to the plea agreement.
Officer Alix then took the gun from Mr. Hendren, pointed it at him and pulled the trigger. It did not fire.
Mr. Hendren retrieved the gun, pointed it at her and pulled the trigger. It fired and Officer Alix was fatally shot in the chest, the authorities said.
Mr. Hendren’s partner, who was present and not identified, told the authorities that he felt uncomfortable they were playing with guns and began to leave before he heard the gunfire, according to a probable cause statement.
“The reckless behavior that took place that early morning has left an unfillable void for her grieving husband, her parents and a host of loving family and friends,” she said.
Officer Alix graduated from the police academy in 2017. Allison Hawk, a spokeswoman for the Circuit Attorney’s Office, said Mr. Hendren graduated from the academy in 2017 in a different class from Officer Alix.