And a Brooklyn influencer holds a book party in her townhouse.
Red carpets can be stressful places at the best of times, but opening night of “West Side Story” in Times Square on Thursday was especially hectic.
Around two dozen protesters stood to one side of the marquis on Broadway, demonstrating against Amar Ramasar, a cast member who has been accused of sending sexually explicit photos of his girlfriend.
At the other end was Stephen Sondheim, the show’s 89-year-old lyricist, who was having a hard time with the red carpet photographers. “Enough, enough!” he said, taking a swipe at one photographer with his cane.
With more 1,700 hundred seats, the Broadway Theater is one of the area’s largest, and foot traffic to get in was heavy. Alec Baldwin, Vanessa Hudgens, Debi Mazar and Chris Cooper walked the media gantlet, alongside musical theater talent like Celia Keenan-Bolger, Sherie Rene Scott and Sierra Boggess.
After the performance, a video-driven retelling of an American classic, the cast, including Mr. Ramasar, Shereen Pimentel, Isaac Powell, Yesenia Ayala and Dharon E. Jones, received warm applause. The young stars quickly changed to join several hundred guests at the IAC headquarters in Chelsea for an after-party.
Among those in the lobby, where a D.J. blasted earsplitting pop songs, were Spike Lee, Russell Tovey, Marisa Tomei, Debi Mazar and Diane von Furstenberg.
Ivo van Hove, the director, said he was “surprised” by the protest earlier in the night, but that it did not detract from the opening.
Her early guests — a cross-section of designers, young socialites and editors — happily obliged. Jenna Lyons, the former creative director of J. Crew, trooped upstairs, followed by Naomi Watts, Paul Arnhold and Wes Gordon.
“This is where the magic happens,” Ms. Watts said, upon entering the bedroom the hostess shares with her husband, Victor Calderone, a D.J. and music producer.
Ms. Calderone proudly showed off the floor-through master suite, which includes a dressing room and a bathroom with a fireplace. She was wearing a black cocktail dress by Carolina Herrera (designed by Mr. Gordon) and lots of gold Tiffany jewelry.
Downstairs, Ignacio Mattos, the chef and restaurateur (Altro Paradiso), prepared a meal of red snapper served with Robert Mondavi Winery wines. Guests including Casey Fremont, Ulla Johnson, Douglas Friedman, Waris Ahluwalia, Rachelle Hruska, Sean MacPherson and Reinaldo Leandro were excited to see a blue Tiffany bag at each place setting, although there was muted disappointment that it contained only a deck of cards.
