Opinion|Will the Appalachian Trail Stop an $8 Billion Pipeline?
Will the Appalachian Trail Stop an $8 Billion Pipeline?
It’s up to the U.S. Supreme Court.
Mr. Harlan is a journalist.
BIG IVY, N.C. — I live in Appalachia, and on Sunday mornings I hike the Appalachian Trail across the mountains I call home. It is my church. I drink from its springs and rest in the shade of its ancient forests.
For decades, the trail has been my refuge. I have run for miles through tunnels of rhododendron, crossed paths with bears and camped with my children beneath starry skies.
A few years ago, however, the 600-mile Atlantic Coast Pipeline broke ground, and crews began clear-cutting a scar across the mountains to move fracked natural gas from West Virginia to customers in Virginia and North Carolina. On my trail treks in Virginia, I watched the bulldozers creep closer.
Then suddenly, on a crisp fall morning in 2018, the bulldozers stopped. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit vacated a permit allowing the pipeline to cross the trail deep beneath the ground.
Now the Supreme Court is scheduled to hear arguments on Monday on what will happen to the $8 billion project. It’s a showdown between some of the country’s leading fossil fuel utilities and an environmental group, the Cowpasture River Preservation Association.
The outcome could upend pipeline construction here and elsewhere in the country, should a planned pipeline cross one of the nation’s 11 national scenic trails.
Stretching 2,192 miles from Maine to Georgia, the Appalachian National Scenic Trail is the longest and most popular hiking-only footpath in the world. Quite unexpectedly, it also has become a formidable and possibly final dirt line of defense against the Atlantic Coast Pipeline.
The Supreme Court case boils down to this: Energy companies received a permit from the U.S. Forest Service allowing pipeline construction through national forests that the agency oversees. But the Appalachian Trail is a unit of the national park system, which the Forest Service does not manage. The National Park Service does. Moreover, federal law prohibits any federal agency from authorizing a pipeline in the national park system.
The Atlantic Coast Pipeline won’t be the only natural gas pipeline affected by this case. The Mountain Valley Pipeline, already under construction, would cross underneath the trail and then parallel for some 90 miles, with deep cuts visible in the wooded mountainside. At least 10 other proposed pipelines also plan to cross the trail.
The potential implications of this case are enormous. If pipelines cannot cross the Appalachian Trail, energy companies will have to reroute or cancel them completely, perhaps opening the door for more large-scale investments in renewables. A ruling for the trail could set off a shift away from natural gas to renewable energy.
Pipeline protests have erupted across the country, especially here in Appalachia, and it’s not just crunchy hikers and tree-huggers rallying to stop the Atlantic Coast Pipeline. Many conservative rural landowners oppose the pipelines, which they say would cross their property and threaten public safety.
Pipelines are dangerous: From January 2010 to November 2018, fossil fuel pipelines in the United States have resulted in more than 5,500 accidents, 800 fires, 300 explosions, 600 injuries and 125 fatalities, according to a 2019 analysis by nonprofit group FracTracker. That’s an explosion every 11 days and a fatality every 26 days, the group said.
Ultimately, the collision between supporters of the Atlantic Coast Pipeline and those who want to protect the Appalachian Trail is a clash between two visions for our country: a fossil-fueled future, or a more sustainable economy based on renewables.
For more than a century, fossil fuel industries have won these battles, especially in places like Appalachia. Now, as the Supreme Court case suggests, a beloved dirt path can have powerful political and economic muscle. Outdoor recreation contributed $412 billion, or 2 percent, to the nation’s gross domestic product in 2016, more than oil and gas extraction, according to the federal government’s Bureau of Economic Analysis. The number of jobs tied to outdoor recreation vastly outstrips those in coal, oil and natural gas combined.
The Appalachian Trail and scenic trails like it have become important to many rural economies. Over 144 million Americans — more than a third of the nation’s population — participated in an outdoor activity in 2017. Where I live in rural Appalachia, communities abandoned by fossil fuel industries are reinventing themselves to attract rapidly growing numbers of outdoor enthusiasts.
We already have 300,000 miles of pipeline in this country, more than enough to meet our current and future energy needs. We should be investing in a renewable energy infrastructure instead of pipelines carrying fracked natural gas that leak, spill, pollute, explode and kill.
Will it be the route of the pipeline or the path through the forest? Changing course won’t be easy. But there is hope: A trail and its supporters are standing their ground against fossil fuels’ dominion — and pointing another way forward.
