Parents feel emotionally and financially stressed by caring for young children and older relatives at the same time.
This piece is part of “The Price of Modern Parenting.” Read more about the sandwich generation, the cost of adoption and out-of-pocket expenses for preterm births.
Millions of Americans like Brice are providing this kind of care for young children and aging parents (and millions more will likely join them, as the number of people who are 65 or older is projected to increase by 2050, and Americans are having children later). To gain more insight into how the sandwich generation is managing these added responsibilities, NYT Parenting partnered with YouGov, an international polling and market research company, for an informal survey of more than 5,000 people about the financial and life sacrifices they have made or plan to make around taking care of older relatives.
Not all of our respondents were parents. But among a sample of nearly 800 who said they were current caregivers of older family members, 32 percent said they have made financial sacrifices, and 28 percent said they have made career sacrifices, to be there for their loved ones.
On average, survey respondents who are caring for both children and older relatives estimate that they have lost more than $10,000 because they had to do things like reduce their working hours, increase their expenses or leave a job entirely as a result of these responsibilities.
Brett Carneiro, 37, a father of a 7-year-old son, a 5-year-old-daughter and a 9-month-old boy in Durham, N.H., said that he stayed self-employed as a digital marketing consultant in part because there was no way he could have cared for his children and his parents while keeping down a traditional job. “I would have had to resign,” he said. Working for himself was “the only way to control the money-making part of my life without being terminated.” He felt that he missed out on career advancement and made financial sacrifices to meet his parents’ needs.
If you think you’ll become your parents’ caretaker in the future, experts suggest that you start talking to them about their financial situation now, because it may take years for them to be willing to accept your help. Carneiro said that while it was “unpleasant” to have conversations with his parents about their finances, he’s glad he did because he was able to take over when they were no longer able to manage their financial affairs.
A looming elder care crisis may be on the horizon, as there are not enough home health aides to support the number of aging seniors, and increasing numbers of middle-class Americans who need long-term care may not be able to afford it. Dr. Nicte Mejia, M.D., M.P.H., a neurologist in Boston, cares for many patients with Parkinson’s disease who are in their 60s or older. She sees her patients’ relatives doing late-night shift work to free up time to care for their loved ones during the day, and even quitting their jobs to care for older relatives who want to live out their last years at home rather than in a nursing facility. “The bigger issue is how we pay for health and health care in this country,” Dr. Mejia said.
Despite the financial strain, 23 percent of our respondents who are caregivers to an aging relative said that it has strengthened their relationship with them, and that’s something Tanya Brice felt in her bones. Her mother was an addict, but was in recovery during the last years of her life, and Brice felt that they were able to work through a lot of resentment during that time.
“She said, ‘I know this is hard for you,’” Brice said. It was a wonderful experience for her to “see that you don’t have to be a perfect parent, and people can work out their differences from their childhood in a healthy way.” Janice Brice died in November 2019. “I would give anything to be able to talk to her again,” her daughter said.
