Mr. Biden, 77, long the front-runner, has fallen behind two younger Democrats looking to seize the moderate mantle, and his candidacy is fragile.
MANCHESTER, N.H. — Joseph R. Biden Jr.’s fifth-place finish in the New Hampshire Democratic primary on Tuesday plunged his campaign further into peril and uncertainty, jeopardizing his fund-raising efforts and potentially upending his path to the nomination.
It is a devastating outcome for a former vice president with widespread name recognition, deep relationships across the party and a lengthy roster of endorsements both in New Hampshire and around the country. After his fourth-place finish in Iowa last week, Tuesday’s poor showing threatens to read as another rejection of Mr. Biden’s central campaign argument: that he is the strongest candidate to defeat President Trump.
For months, Mr. Biden — until recently the leader in national polls — had appeared to be the clear choice of more centrist Democrats who rejected far-reaching proposals like “Medicare for all” championed by the most progressive candidates in the race. Yet there have also been signs of Mr. Biden’s struggles to excite voters, and to build a robust campaign organization after entering the race later than many of his rivals.
And on Tuesday, Mr. Biden, 77, lagged two younger Democrats looking to seize the moderate mantle: former Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind., and Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota.
New Hampshire was the first clean test for the Democratic candidates. Here’s an analysis of the results, and what they mean for the race.
So we finally have actual election results from the state of New Hampshire. They are clear, and they are authoritative and they are a little bit complicated. “Hello, America.” “We are here to stay.” “Our campaign is built for the long haul.” “We’re going to Nevada. We’re going to South Carolina. We’re going to win those states as well.” Bernie Sanders has won the state by a little bit. Two other candidates who had quite a strong night — Pete Buttigieg and Amy Klobuchar. Not such a good night for Joe Biden or for Elizabeth Warren or for anybody else. “New Hampshire.” “New Hampshire.” “New Hampshire.” “We’re here together.” “New Hampshire.” “You all up here in New Hampshire.” After the debacle in Iowa, national attention has focused even more intensely on New Hampshire as the first real clean test of political momentum in this race. “People are still undecided.” “Uh, Bernie.” “Bernie Sanders, all the way.” “Mayor Pete.” “Amy Klobuchar.” “Oh, Joe Biden.” “I’ll just probably decide Tuesday, five minutes before I go in to vote.” New Hampshire is a classic swing state. “Ronald Reagan is the winner in the state of New Hampshire.” “Bill Clinton won it.” “It’s neck and neck.” “New Hampshire goes to Obama.” In 2016, Hillary Clinton prevailed over Donald Trump, but by a tiny margin. It’s a state that’s very much in play for 2020. “Four more, Trump. Four more years!” New Hampshire might gauge whether a candidate is able to appeal to certain other constituencies they will need in the general election. We have seen over the last week a real rivalry emerge between Bernie Sanders and Pete Buttigieg. “Hot, fresh and vegan. Get your Bernie-on-a-stick.” New Hampshire is really home turf for Bernie Sanders. He comes from right next door in Vermont. And he also drew strong support, as he did in 2016, from younger voters and more liberal voters. “Young voters want Bernie because he’s fighting for their future. He’s not fighting for his future. He’s in his future.” [cheering] Bernie Sanders came into New Hampshire claiming momentum out of Iowa, based on his lead in the popular vote. “Finally, the votes were counted in Iowa. Took them a little while. We won the vote by 6,000 votes.” He has been somewhat more aggressive with his primary opponents here … “We don’t have a Super PAC.” … talking about the difference between himself … “We don’t want billionaires’ money.” … and candidates in the race, like Pete Buttigieg, who take money from billionaires and other big donors. “We are running a campaign for working people, funded by working people. And that is why we are going to win here in New Hampshire and all over this country.” [cheering] The biggest thing this might mean for Bernie Sanders is that he has clearly reasserted himself as the dominant leader on the left wing of the Democratic Party. And then there’s Pete Buttigieg. “Back in the Obama campaign, we called it ‘no drama Obama,’ and I haven’t come up with the right rhyme for Buttigieg.” [cheering] Pete Buttigieg has claimed, among the moderate candidates, a sense of momentum in New Hampshire that other folks were not able to take. “We can’t risk dividing Americans further. The idea that you’ve either got to be for a revolution or you got to be for the status quo leaves most of us out.” His message here has been pretty similar to his message in Iowa, but really focused on the idea that he’s the candidate who can win crossover support in the general election. “We need a politics that brings all of us in because all of us need a new and better president.” After finishing at the top in both Iowa and New Hampshire, Buttigieg now has a tremendous opportunity to put himself forward at the national level as the leader of moderate Democrats. Announcer: “Senator Amy Klobuchar!” The word that Amy Klobuchar supporters are using to describe what happened here is ‘Klomentum.’ She came to New Hampshire after a fifth-place finish in Iowa without a whole lot of wind in her sails. “It’s been funny suddenly seeing media come to all of our events.” [laughter] Things just turned around for her dramatically. If Klobuchar had not finished so strong in New Hampshire, it might have been the end of her campaign. “If you are tired of the extremes in our politics, and you are tired of the noise and the nonsense, you have a home with me.” She gets the chance to fight onward to Nevada and South Carolina and Super Tuesday. I would not make any plans that are based on knowing a Democratic nominee anytime soon. Well, I am going to Las Vegas next, so I probably would have a chance to do that.
Both Mr. Buttigieg and Ms. Klobuchar have so far shown little ability to appeal to voters of color, and Mr. Biden, who has polled strongly with African-American voters, is counting on later-voting, more diverse states to revitalize his campaign. But he will need resources to compete aggressively in Nevada, South Carolina and especially in the 15 states and territories that vote early next month on Super Tuesday, including the large and expensive states of Texas and California.
His two straight losses will complicate his fund-raising efforts, Democratic operatives warn, at a moment when some Biden donors have also been quietly considering former Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg of New York.
“How do you raise the money? How do you convince donors small and large that they should continue to invest in you?” said Leah Daughtry, a veteran party strategist who ran the 2008 and 2016 Democratic National Conventions, sketching out the challenges for the Biden camp as well as for other struggling candidates, including Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts.
On Tuesday, Mr. Biden did not even stay in New Hampshire for a previously planned primary night event. Instead, he flew to South Carolina, which has a predominantly black electorate in Democratic primaries and will be the first state to reflect the preferences of the voters who have most buoyed his candidacy.
After he arrived, Mr. Biden addressed supporters at the New Hampshire event by live stream, where he vowed that the next two contests would go very differently than the first two.
“We’re going on and we’re going to win in Nevada and in South Carolina,” he said.
In a phone call with reporters on Wednesday, Representative Cedric L. Richmond of Louisiana, a national co-chair of Mr. Biden’s campaign, stressed that upcoming states would not take their cues from heavily white Iowa and New Hampshire.
Mr. Richmond also came out swinging at three of Mr. Biden’s chief rivals: Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, Mr. Buttigieg and Mr. Bloomberg.
Kate Bedingfield, a deputy campaign manager for Mr. Biden, told reporters on Monday that Mr. Biden would “absolutely” have the money to compete on Super Tuesday. She said she also believed Mr. Biden’s perceived South Carolina firewall would hold whatever the outcome in New Hampshire, citing his longstanding relationships with black voters.
But there is increasing competition in that state, from candidates including Mr. Sanders, who won New Hampshire, and Tom Steyer, the hedge fund billionaire who is spending heavily in South Carolina.
Some leading South Carolina Democrats say that there are warning signs for Mr. Biden on the ground there, too.
On Wednesday, the Steyer campaign confirmed that Ms. Cobb-Hunter had signed on with that operation as a senior adviser, a move first reported by The Associated Press.
In recent weeks, Mr. Biden and his team sought, increasingly aggressively, to keep expectations low in New Hampshire. But they still continued to campaign here in recent days, to the frustration of some supporters in and out of South Carolina, who told aides that he should abandon New Hampshire and beeline south to shore up his standing and work toward a resounding victory.
Mr. Biden’s final 24 hours in New Hampshire showed a candidate trying the kind of multitasking that is never ideal on the campaign trail: simultaneously seeking votes from New Hampshire residents while also looking toward contests in more favorable states. He even took time Monday to call top South Carolina supporters, expressing his commitment to the state.
At a rally on Monday night, he spoke confidently of how he would fare “heading south and across this country.” And on Tuesday, just moments before he visited a Dunkin’ filled with reporters waiting for him, his campaign announced he would be heading to South Carolina later in the day.
Yet in the last days of the race, there were ominous signs for Mr. Biden here.
His numbers in state and national polls dropped. His message veered wildly between a wide range of subjects and he was inconsistent in his willingness to lash his rivals. Voters who fit the profile he was targeting — older, moderate, skeptical of the progressive candidates — repeatedly expressed their interest in centrist alternatives to him, like Ms. Klobuchar and Mr. Buttigieg.
On Sunday, there were notable logistical difficulties, too. First, the press bus following Mr. Biden had to unexpectedly be taken out of commission, forcing his bus to pull over on the side of a road, too.
Katie Glueck reported from Manchester, and Thomas Kaplan from Nashua, N.H.