Trump allies are saying Stone didn’t really threaten a witness. They’re wrong.
Randy Credico is the witness from Robert Mueller’s investigation whom Roger Stone, Donald Trump’s longtime adviser, has been convicted of threatening. A few months ago, Credico texted me, “If Stone goes to jail I’m a walking dead man.” On Thursday, after the president’s intervention to get Stone a lighter sentence convulsed the Justice Department, I spoke to Credico, a left-wing comedian and activist, and he elaborated on what he’d meant. “The guy goes to prison and I’m to blame, and you’re being called a rat, you’re worried about somebody with a red hat, a MAGA hat, doing a Jack Ruby on you,” he said.
His fear has national implications, because a central question in the Stone sentencing is whether Credico truly felt endangered when Stone promised to cause him harm. Despite what the administration’s defenders say, the answer is yes.
It was out of a combination of anxiety and idealism that following Stone’s conviction, Credico wrote to the judge in the case, asking that she show Stone mercy. “I don’t want to see a guy go to prison because of me,” he told me. “It’s going to be on my conscience, plus it’s going to anger a lot of people out there who called me a rat.” Now, because of that letter, Credico finds himself near the center of the unfolding scandal over Donald Trump and Attorney General Bill Barr’s intervention in Stone’s sentencing. His words are being used by Trump allies to argue that the prosecutors in the Stone case went overboard. “Unfortunately, they’re exploiting it for their own agenda,” he said of his letter.
As you most likely know by now, in November, Stone was convicted of obstruction, making false statements and witness tampering, all stemming from Robert Mueller’s special counsel investigation. Stone, whom members of the Trump campaign saw as an intermediary with WikiLeaks, told Congress, falsely, that Credico was his sole back channel to the hacking organization. Stone threatened Credico not to contradict him, warning him that he’d kidnap Credico’s beloved dog, Bianca, and telling him, “Prepare to die,” with an expletive at the end.
Following this unprecedented political meddling, the four main prosecutors on the case withdrew, and one left the Justice Department altogether. On Thursday, in an authoritarian escalation, Trump tweeted an attack on the jury forewoman in the Stone case, singling out a private citizen for abuse because she’d dared to find one of his henchman guilty.
All of this represents a terrifying new nadir in the Trump presidency. Under Barr, the Justice Department is becoming a tool of presidential vendettas, protecting people who commit crimes on Trump’s behalf while conducting investigations into his enemies, including an inquiry into years-old leaks that appears to be focused on James Comey. Barr has even set up an intake system for Trump’s personal lawyer, Rudy Giuliani, to feed dirt gathered from Ukraine to the Justice Department, all while Giuliani is himself reportedly under criminal investigation for his shady foreign activities.
On Thursday the attorney general appeared on ABC News to assert his independence, telling Trump to stop tweeting about Justice Department cases. But given the slavish way Barr has enacted Trump’s agenda, there’s no reason to see his words as anything but cheap P.R. meant to quell mounting fury at the way he’s corrupting his agency.
Outrage seems rather too mild a word. There is now one set of laws in this country for people who serve Trump and another for everyone else. During Trump’s impeachment trial, the House managers repeated a quote attributed to Ben Franklin over and over again: “A republic, if you can keep it.” We haven’t kept it. The question now is whether we ever get it back.