A federal judge in Kansas who was publicly reprimanded last year for sexually harassing employees resigned on Tuesday, amid heightened scrutiny of workplace misconduct in the federal court system.
The judge, Carlos Murguia, of the United States District Court in Kansas City, Kan., has served as a district court judge since 1999.
On his resignation, effective April 1, he will become at least the third federal judge in four years to leave the judiciary after facing allegations of harassment or misconduct, underscoring a growing apprehension about a court system that some say has lacked rigorous protections against judges’ bad behavior.
In December 2017, a high-profile federal court judge in California, Alex Kozinski, retired after multiple women accused him of sexual harassment. In September 2016, a district court judge in Texas, Walter S. Smith Jr., retired amid accusations that he made inappropriate and unwanted sexual advances toward an employee.
“Harassment and discrimination in the federal courts is not an issue of one bad apple; it is a systemic problem,” Representative Jerrold Nadler, Democrat of New York, said in a statement Wednesday. This month, Mr. Nadler and a bipartisan group of lawmakers sent a letter to federal court officials questioning safeguards against workplace misconduct.
Court officials revealed in September that an investigation into Judge Murguia had found that he had made sexually suggestive comments and sent inappropriate text messages to some employees. Judge Murguia continued to harass employees even after one of them told him to stop, according to an order written in September by Chief Judge Timothy M. Tymkovich of the Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit.
“I therefore tender my resignation with a heavy heart and profound apologies, out of respect for the federal judiciary, my colleagues, my community and — most importantly — my family,” Judge Murguia wrote.
He resigned “without eligibility for pension or any retirement benefits,” according to a statement from Chief Judge Julie A. Robinson of the United States District Court in Kansas City.
 Federal judges serve for life and can be removed only through impeachment.
After Mr. Kozinski’s retirement in 2017, Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. said that the federal court system had to do more to protect employees from sexual harassment. In March 2019, court officials strengthened provisions about inappropriate behavior in their code of conduct.
But some advocates say the changes did not go far enough. Investigations into misconduct typically end once a judge retires or resigns, said Deeva Shah, a founder of Law Clerks for Workplace Accountability, which seeks to root out harassment in the courts. Ms. Shah said that the investigations should continue past that point, and that employees should have more avenues to report harassment by judges outside their district or circuit, where officials may be sympathetic to the judge.
Earlier this month, the lawmakers who questioned the federal court system’s safeguards said in a letter that the reprimand of Judge Murguia had documented “very troubling” behavior.
“We still need to know what has been done to protect the employees who were harmed, fully investigate what happened and why this misconduct went unreported for so long, and develop policies and procedures to prevent this kind of misconduct from happening again,” he said.
At a congressional hearing last week, a former clerk to Stephen R. Reinhardt, a prominent liberal appellate court judge who died in 2018, said that Judge Reinhardt “routinely and frequently” sexually harassed her and other female clerks, and raged against the #MeToo movement.
Russell Wheeler, a visiting fellow at the Brookings Institution who researches the federal judiciary, said that Judge Murguia’s resignation was an “exceptional circumstance.” Such matters are more often dealt with informally and privately.
“District judges rarely leave the bench entirely, especially in a situation like this,” he said.
Judge Murguia is the first Hispanic person to sit on the United States District Court in Kansas City, according to the court’s website. President Bill Clinton nominated him to the court in 1999.
He grew up in the Argentine community in Kansas City, and graduated from the University of Kansas School of Law in 1982. He then worked on immigration issues at a nonprofit organization in Kansas City from 1985 to 1990, and was a state district court judge there from 1990 to 1999, according to the Federal Judicial Center.