Less than a year after the original closed, Jonathan Waxman is reopening in a space nearby, with much of the old menu.
It looked like the typical New York restaurant — that is, real estate — story. In May, the chef Jonathan Waxman’s restaurant Barbuto closed after nearly 16 years as a treasured fixture of the West Village. The quirky building had been sold, and the landlord wanted the space for a different use.
Barbuto, Italian for bearded and a reference to Mr. Waxman’s own facial hair, was a neighborhood hangout that drew an artsy celebrity crowd thanks in large part to the chef’s marquee prestige, and his cooking, which filtered Italy through a California lens.
Barbuto’s former spot on Washington Street, a no-frills industrial space, had an open kitchen fueled with roaring fires, furnished with bare tables and, along one side, garage doors that opened to the street in good weather. That Mr. Waxman could find a new space that is fairly similar and close by, on Horatio Street, is surprising.
Other reboots of beloved restaurants, like the Four Seasons, have failed. Then again, there are plenty of recent examples of successful transplants: Danny Meyer’s Union Square Cafe, Hakan Swahn’s Aquavit, Jean Denoyer’s La Goulue and, in Los Angeles, Wolfgang Puck’s Spago. But none of these were able to turn around at the warp speed of Barbuto.
The new space is larger than the old, permitting a longer stretch of bar, though for now, the number of seats, 74, remains the same. The open kitchen with an impressive pizza oven and space for tables has been replicated. Floor-to-ceiling windows wrap two sides of the room overlooking West Street and the Hudson River. There are no garage doors to roll open, but there is an outdoor terrace.
The menu is essentially a reprise, anchored by dishes like chicken dappled with a green sauce; a salad with anchovies tucked in its shadows; gnocchi à la minute and other al dente pastas. Mr. Waxman will add soups, and more desserts, as Heather Miller, the pastry chef at Jams, is moving to Barbuto.
113 Horatio Street (West Street), |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , barbutonyc.com.