Her colossal paintings depict people of color at a scale that makes them impossible to ignore. Now nearly 40 canvases come to the New Museum.
When the artist Jordan Casteel arrived on campus as a college freshman, her mother marched her into the dining hall — not for a meal, but to greet the kitchen staff. They had met the president and dean, but these were the people, her mother explained, who would truly be taking care of her.
Ms. Casteel recalls being shy, but her mother was right: The first person she approached, a baker named Betty, became a surrogate parent. “She cooked me Sunday meals, would bring me birthday cakes,” said Ms. Casteel. Nearly a decade later, they still talk on the phone. “There’s really something magical that can happen when you take that risk,” she said.
This particular alchemy, the kind that begins with a nervous hello and transforms strangers into family, lies at the core of Ms. Casteel’s practice. Nearly 31, she has attracted widespread acclaim for colossal portraits of friends and neighbors, works celebrated for their tenderness, keen social commentary and technical brio. Her first institutional show in New York — an exhibition of nearly 40 canvases spanning seven years — opens at the New Museum on Feb. 19.
Ms. Casteel, who exclusively paints people of color, is passionate about exalting members of her community who might not otherwise see themselves on the walls of art museums. In recent series, she has portrayed her undergraduate students at Rutgers University, Newark, where she is an art professor, as well as street vendors and business owners in Harlem, where she lives with her partner, the photographer David Schulze.
Currently looming above the High Line, at West 22nd Street, is a wall-size rendering of one such person: Fallou Wadje, a Senegalese-born clothing designer, who sold her hand-painted wares outside the Studio Museum at the time of Ms. Casteel’s residency. Of all the people working inside the building, Ms. Wadje said the artist was the one who always stopped and talked with her. The two became friends, and, in 2017, Ms. Casteel painted “The Baayfalls,” a portrait of Ms. Wadje with a fellow member of the Baye Fall, the Sufi Muslim order for which the piece is named. When High Line Art invited Ms. Casteel to present one of her works as a 1,400-square-foot mural, she chose it without hesitation.
“To have an immigrant story so prominently placed at this time in this world, in New York City — it just feels right,” she said. The painting, her first public art commission, will be up through December.
Ms. Casteel is most at peace when she is alone in her studio, but she is a gregarious friend and neighbor, quick to crack jokes and burst into fits of raspy laughter. A recent afternoon found her in Benyam, an Ethiopian restaurant near her Harlem apartment, wearing black jeans, high-top sneakers, and a loose sweater that hung around her tall willowy frame.
When Ms. Casteel came inside, the restaurant’s chef and co-owner, Helina Girma, rushed over to rub her hands warm. Ms. Casteel is a regular here; a reproduction of “Benyam,” her 2018 portrait of Ms. Girma and her two brothers and business partners, hangs beside the bar. “There’s a difference between living here and being of and with the people who live here and caring about people more than just on a surface level,” she said.
At home, Ms. Casteel grew up with prints and exhibition posters by artists of color, but the museums she visited rarely told stories that felt relevant to her family’s history. “I wasn’t seeing them in institutions or feeling that they were being valued in those institutions,” she said.
Ms. Casteel’s artistic career caught her somewhat by surprise. She studied anthropology and sociology at Agnes Scott College in Decatur, Ga., until she took a painting class during a semester in Italy. She found herself happy in a way that she “hadn’t been before” and switched majors. After a stint teaching special education in Denver, she enrolled in the painting M.F.A. program at Yale University.
Ms. Casteel found a sense of direction in the summer of 2013, when George Zimmerman was acquitted of killing Trayvon Martin. She returned to Yale thinking about how she might use portraiture to counteract images of black men as victims or violent criminals.
But the artist found ways to subvert these tropes. She painted her subjects in their homes or other intimate settings, and posed them so their genitals were obscured. Ms. Casteel also chose to depict the men at a scale impossible to ignore. (She loves the idea that a collector buying one of these works might have to rearrange the furniture “to make room for this giant black body.”) Each man makes riveting eye contact with the viewer.
Finally, Ms. Casteel painted some of her models in traffic-stopping shades of lavender, green and glacial blue, forcing the viewer to contend with “blackness” as a concept and as a construct.
In the past decade, museums and the market have increasingly embraced figurative painters of African descent, and Ms. Casteel is often discussed in conjunction with other black artists, including Amy Sherald, Kerry James Marshall, Kehinde Wiley and Barkley Hendricks, who died in 2017. Their various approaches are so distinct, however, these associations strike some experts as artificial.
“It’s almost like saying that just because a group of people are all speaking the same language, they’re all saying the same things or all belong to the same lineage of thought,” said James Haywood Rolling, Jr., a professor of art education at Syracuse University.
