Richard Allan, an amateur historian, told a local news outlet that he removed the marker with a crowbar because it was too obscure and easy to step on.
Sometime before dawn on Feb. 6, a man took a crowbar to the sidewalk in the historic town square in Charlottesville, Va., a few blocks away from a statue of the Confederacy’s top general, Robert E. Lee, that was at the center of heated protests in 2017.
The marker’s whereabouts is still unclear. But on Friday, C-Ville, a local news outlet, reported on an admission: Richard H. Allan, who is an amateur historian, an activist and a resident of Albemarle County, said that he had taken the auction block marker.
“It is the height of insult to place the history of Charlottesville enslavement on the ground where people with dirt on their shoes can stand upon it,” Mr. Allan told the outlet.
“On a rainy night when I could not get to sleep, because of feelings of sadness and disgust, I found myself doing what I had been considering for over two years,” it quoted him as saying.
Mr. Allan, 74, who did not respond to a request for comment, was arrested on Tuesday afternoon, the police said, and charged with two felonies: grand larceny and possession of burglarious tools. He was held at the Albemarle-Charlottesville Regional Jail but was released by Wednesday, the police said.
The removal of the plaque, Mr. Allan’s arrest and the community response have once again raised questions among Charlottesville’s activists and residents about how the city grapples with its history.
In 2017, a white nationalist rally brought guns, swastikas, Confederate flags and deadly violence to the city of 48,000. It spurred a reckoning for a tourist-friendly city that was once a gathering place for American revolutionaries, including several founding fathers who enslaved people.
Amid conversations over how best to acknowledge the extent to which Charlottesville’s history was formed by racism, enslavement and discrimination, the removal of the auction block plaque by a white activist has raised new questions about who should shape that narrative, and how.
Eugene Williams, a black civil rights leader who helped desegregate the schools in Charlottesville, said that the removal of the plaque might prompt some useful conversations. “The more is said about slavery, the better it will be for all people,” Mr. Williams, 92, said in an interview on Tuesday.
Mr. Allan was not the only one to leave his mark on the plaque in Court Square. Richard Parks, another activist in the Charlottesville area, told The Washington Post he had lately been using chalk to cross out the word “slave” on the plaque and write the word “human” in its place. He also said he had been in touch with Mr. Allan in recent weeks.
Brian Wheeler, a spokesman for Charlottesville, said the city had removed that new plaque. Mr. Parks could not immediately be reached for comment.
The bronze plaque that was stolen last week was first placed in the sidewalk — just outside 0 Court Square, an old brick building not far from the City Hall, the Court Square Tavern and the Albemarle County Circuit Court — in 2014. But for decades before that, there was another plaque at that same address, at eye level.
When it was removed, Mr. Williams wanted to know why. “It appears that to Charlottesville’s government, black history does not matter,” he wrote a June 10, 2014, letter to the The Daily Progress, a local newspaper.
But RaShall M. Brackney, the chief of the Charlottesville police, who is black, questioned the attention Mr. Allan and Mr. Parks had gotten. “It’s two people who are absolutely controlling the narrative,” she said.
“And is that the position that we want to find ourselves in again, where someone else is controlling the narrative of Charlottesville, its residents and those persons impacted — particularly the enslaved persons who were auctioned off at that very site?” she added, noting that Mr. Allan has said that his own ancestors enslaved people.
The brick building at 0 Court Street — also known as “Number Nothing” — was home to a trading business in the early 1800s and was later as used as office space. Historical documents suggest that Presidents Thomas Jefferson, James Madison and James Monroe — all of whom owned slaves — used to gather in front of the building to talk.
Mr. Wheeler, the city spokesman, said that Charlottesville had been discussing replacing or augmenting the sidewalk marker at least since December 2016.
Removing the sidewalk plaque with a crowbar took about 15 minutes, Mr. Allan said in his interview with C-Ville. “I deeply apologize if removing a metal plaque that people can stand on with dirt on their shoes offends any citizen of our county,” he added.