The public struggles of White House adviser Kellyanne Conway and her husband, George T. Conway III, are not shtick, friends say, and they are not having fun.
WASHINGTON — George T. Conway III has described the work of his wife, Kellyanne Conway, for President Trump in terms usually reserved for hostage situations: brainwashed by a cult, suffering from Stockholm syndrome, an overwhelmed mother protecting a destructive man-child.
And if you think it’s all shtick, some wink-and-nod act by a couple who fights by day and snuggles by night, planning a payday after Mr. Trump leaves the scene, think again, say some people close to America’s oddest political couple.
“Those who think this is a 14-dimensional chess game are mistaken,” said Rick Wilson, who with Mr. Conway and several other Republicans formed the Lincoln Project, an effort to beat Mr. Trump in the 2020 election.
In a sense, the passions in the Conway household have come to represent the societal agonies of the Trump era, a couple and a nation deeply divided, unsettled by the storms around the presidency, and asking themselves, when it’s all over, can there be reconciliation?
The Conways bring to mind a previous Washington “It” couple: Mary Matalin, who worked for President George Bush, and James Carville, the Democratic strategist who helped engineer President Bill Clinton’s 1992 victory over Mr. Bush. Ms. Matalin and Mr. Carville turned their political dissonance into a lucrative brand, joking about their vast differences.
The Conways agree politically on most things because Mr. Conway, for all his anti-Trump activities, remains deeply conservative. But the couple does not appear to be having much fun.
To mark Mr. Trump’s acquittal by the Senate, Mr. Conway wrote a sarcastic, bitter column, concluding, “I believe the president’s call was perfect. I believe he is deeply concerned about corruption in Ukraine.” Mr. Conway live-tweeted his derision as the president celebrated last week in the East Room of the White House. “Let it out, @realDonaldTrump. Let it all out,” he mocked.
For someone who labored in Republican legal vineyards for decades — in the 1990s, he was a lawyer for Paula Jones, who accused Mr. Clinton of sexual misconduct — Mr. Conway did not cut much of a swath in Washington social circles. He rode his wife’s coattails into the nation’s capital.
“She was the superstar for two and a half years, and now George is the superstar,” said Sally Quinn, a journalist, author and Washington hostess who has been inviting Mr. Conway, but not Ms. Conway, to her parties in Georgetown.
The Conways met in the summer of 1999, when Mr. Conway was a securities lawyer and partner at the New York firm Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz and Ms. Conway was a Republican pollster who appeared frequently on television. Mr. Conway told a mutual friend, the conservative commentator Ann Coulter, that he wanted to meet Ms. Conway, known then by her maiden name, Kellyanne Fitzpatrick. The future Ms. Conway drove out to a Hamptons beach house, rented by Ms. Coulter, and the couple remained planted at the house’s kitchen table, chatting for hours.
They married in 2001 and moved into a Trump tower in Manhattan. Mr. Conway impressed the future president by taking his side in a condo board battle over removing the name “Trump” from the building, and he introduced Ms. Conway to Mr. Trump.
Politics was less bruising then. In 2005, Ms. Conway teamed up with Celinda Lake, a Democratic pollster, to write a book about how American women were erasing political lines. By reputation, Ms. Conway was smart and empathetic, the type who remembered birthdays and weddings.
The Conways now have four children: the twins, George IV and Claudia, 15; Charlotte, 11; and Vanessa, 10; and a pair of Corgis, Skipper and Bonnie, which Mr. Conway nicknamed Concerned and Troubled after the terms that Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine, has used to describe her reaction to Mr. Trump’s behavior.
Friends say the Conways are staying together for their children, although the couple is not always in the same city. Mr. Conway spent chunks of time last year in New York before leaving his firm, while Ms. Conway remained in Washington, where the Trump crowd has largely blackballed her husband.
In November, Mr. Conway attended a “Resistance” party at the New York apartment of Molly Jong-Fast, an author and daughter of Erica Jong. The comedian Kathy Griffin posted a photograph on Instagram of Mr. Conway hiding coyly behind the liberal journalist Soledad O’Brien. Nearby were E. Jean Carroll, a writer who has accused Mr. Trump of rape, and the Hillary Clinton stalwart Philippe Reines.
The gulf between the Conways developed slowly before turning into a chasm. After Mr. Trump’s victory, the Conways jumped into Washington with both feet, buying a 15,000-square foot house with eight bedrooms and 11 bathrooms. “Kellyanne Conway Just Bought This $8 Million D.C. Mansion,” blared Town & Country magazine, though Mr. Conway’s legal partnership accounts for most of the couple’s net worth of about $40 million.
Mr. Conway wept for joy on election night and called his wife’s achievement “the best thing that ever happened to her.” He turned down two potential posts in the Justice Department, calling the administration “a dumpster fire,” though he told the president at the time that he supported him.
In those days, Ms. Conway went out alone, or with Adrienne Arsht, a philanthropist and arts patron with homes in Miami and across the street from the Conways. Ms. Arsht, who calls Ms. Conway “a lovely neighbor, a great mother” and “a fabulous cook,” played down their relationship.
In February 2019, at a British Embassy party for female members of Congress, Ms. Conway approached Ms. Quinn, the New York Times columnist Maureen Dowd and the NBC News journalist Andrea Mitchell.
It fell to Ms. Conway to spin Mr. Trump’s attacks on her spouse.
Mr. Conway has not let up. In October, he used clinical terms in The Atlantic to say Mr. Trump’s narcissism made him unfit for office.
At Ms. Quinn’s home recently, Mr. Conway and William F. Weld, the former Massachusetts governor and Mr. Trump’s long-shot 2020 primary challenger, embraced like lost brothers, then posed for a photo with the former Democratic presidential candidate and self-help author Marianne Williamson.
