AUSTIN, Texas — She thrust a flyer into the hand of a tall young man who looked annoyed. She promised to give a woman a gift for hearing her out. And she practically wrapped her arms around another woman who bounded away shaking her head, uninterested and impatient.
Ms. Yi is the chairwoman of the Asian Complete Count Committee in Austin, a volunteer group that partners with the Census Bureau to raise awareness about the census among Asian-Americans. And this year, she said, it is more urgent than ever that Asian-American communities like the one in Austin — where Vietnamese-American men and women crowded into a ballroom in the middle of a strip mall last month to celebrate the Lunar New Year — be counted.
Asian-Americans are the fastest growing population in the nation. But organizers and activists like Ms. Yi, 63, worry that Asian-Americans remain largely misunderstood. The population includes people from places as different as Nepal, Iraq, Vietnam and Taiwan, in occupations ranging from store clerk and taxi driver to lawyer and banker. The census, the activists say, is one of the best tools available to help capture that multiplicity, secure better resources and funding and harness untapped political power.
Over the past year, Asian and Pacific Islander American Vote, a nonpartisan community mobilization organization, has trained more than 750 local groups in how to do census outreach in Asian-American and Pacific Islander communities, also called A.A.P.I.
That most Asian-Americans are foreign-born, and many are recent arrivals with limited English, only makes reaching them harder. A.A.P.I. Data estimates that just under one-third of Asian immigrants arrived in the United States within the last 10 years, and thus have little or no prior experience with the census.
One of the men, Dil Bahadar Oli, 22, who came to America a year ago as a refugee, said he had concerns about giving personal information for the census. After Mr. Neupane, a Nepali activist, explained the details and purpose of the count, Mr. Oli said he would be comfortable taking part if his Nepalese friends and relatives who have been in the United States longer were doing the same.
“If you reach them, it’s not that hard,” Mr. Neupane said afterward.
In Austin, the Asian-American population has been doubling in size every 12 years or so, and this year is expected to surpass black residents as the third largest group in the city, after white and Hispanic residents. Austin ranks among the 10 American cities with the largest share of Asian-Americans in their populations.
Ms. Yi, who emigrated from Xinjiang in western China four decades ago, has been making the rounds feverishly at community meetings, cultural events and house parties to spread the word about the census in the area. She said she encountered plenty of skepticism about the necessity and safety of giving information to the government.
Federal law protects the confidentiality of personal information that respondents provide to the Census Bureau, but Ms. Yi said many Asian-Americans are nervous anyway. The Trump administration’s proposal to add a citizenship question to the census created anxiety and confusion that has lingered, she said, even though the Supreme Court blocked the proposal.
The canvassing Ms. Yi was doing at the Lunar New Year festival was nothing new for her. She has been engaged with state politics for decades. But at the festival, she was met with plenty of blank looks when she brought up the census and extended a fact sheet written in English and Vietnamese.
“You need to be counted, it doesn’t matter what your status is,” Ms. Yi told Nguyen Dao, 28, who moved to Texas from Vietnam five years ago to study and had never heard of the census before.
Mr. Dao, now a permanent resident, listened to her pitch about funding and political representation.
