Parris Goebel is the 28-year-old choreographer behind Jennifer Lopez’s Super Bowl halftime show.
So she dived right in when given the assignment of a lifetime: choreographing for Jennifer Lopez, at the Super Bowl halftime show.
The job demanded ongoing collaboration with the N.F.L., the technical team behind the digital stages, the lighting crews, the camera crews and in this case, Shakira’s full teams of dancers, musicians and crew.
Was this the first time you were working with Jennifer Lopez?
Jen gave me my first job in the industry when I was about 19 years old. She was the first global artist to book me. I was still living in New Zealand at the time. She really nurtured me as an artist.
How do you begin visualizing choreography for a performance of this magnitude?
It’s like building a house, it just doesn’t happen straight away. There are so many layers that you could keep building and building and building.
How did you select the group of dancers?
It was a collaborative process. I basically sent Jen my dream team. She was really passionate about having a lot of Latinos in it, so we kept looking so that she had her people and her team representing. That was really important to her. But she really trusts me, so anyone I put forward she’s cool with.
What was preparing for the halftime show like? When did your work really begin?
We started about three months before the Super Bowl. It was a lot of workshopping.
The halftime stage is put together in five minutes. The show lasts for around 13 minutes, with Shakira and J. Lo getting around 6 minutes each. There are endless moving parts, and it’s lightning-fast. How did you train for that kind of performance?
We had all the dimensions tapped down at rehearsal. The last week before the Super Bowl, we rehearsed in “the bubble,” the space where the actual stage was built out with the stairs and everything. Having 80 dancers coming on and off that stage in six minutes is it’s own thing, so we had to really train with that and make sure we weren’t hitting each other.
On Instagram, you posted a video of rehearsal, where you created a dance break to a “Mi Gente” remix with “Love Don’t Cost a Thing.” How did that come together?
What may viewers at home not know about J. Lo’s performance?
I think probably how athletic it was — what she was doing was not easy. And I’m sure people know that, but I don’t know if they know know that. She could do the choreography straight away, but you have to build your stamina to make it look easy. She makes it look so effortless, it just shows you that she’s a true entertainer.
Every time our dancers would run it, it’s at one hundred percent.  They get sore, they had injuries, all of the things that athletes also experience.
