For Jeff Sessions, Roy Moore and other Republicans vying for a chance to take back Doug Jones’s seat, winning over voters may mean winning over the president first.
In early November, President Trump announced he would be traveling to Tuscaloosa, Ala., to attend the University of Alabama-Louisiana State University football game. When Representative Bradley Byrne, a three-term congressman and United States Senate candidate from Mobile, learned of this plan, he immediately called an Alabama booster named Jim Wilson, who would be hosting Trump in his luxury box near midfield at Bryant-Denny Stadium. Wilson, as fortune would have it, is a distant relative, friend and financial supporter of Byrne’s, and Byrne thought perhaps he could get him into the box.
“I asked him: ‘Ol’ cuz, ol’ buddy, ol’ pal,” Byrne says. But Wilson told Byrne that he himself had access to only three tickets, which belonged to him, his wife and his brother; the rest were now controlled by his V.I.P. guest. So Byrne called the White House to “make our case that we would like to be in the box with the president,” he says.
Byrne, who came to Washington with a reputation as a Chamber of Commerce Republican, was not always so eager to be associated with Trump. In 2016, after the release of the “Access Hollywood” tape in which Trump could be heard speaking in vulgar terms about women and boasting about sexual assault, Byrne called Trump’s comments “disgraceful and appalling” and argued that Trump was “not fit to be president of the United States.” But once Trump was elected, Byrne, like most Republicans, fell in line. Since beginning his Senate candidacy, he had voted with the president nearly 98 percent of the time.
In October, Byrne introduced a resolution calling on three House committees to investigate Hunter Biden’s business dealings in Ukraine. That same month, he was one of about 30 House Republicans who interrupted the House Intelligence Committee’s impeachment investigation by storming the committee’s secure offices; normally mild-mannered, he reportedly yelled in the face of Adam Schiff, the committee’s chairman. The subsequent 24 hours, according to a Byrne campaign official, were his best day of online fund-raising as a Senate candidate.
Now that he was running for Senate, such contrition was a matter of necessity. The Senate seat in question is currently occupied by Doug Jones, a Democrat who defeated the former State Supreme Court judge Roy Moore in a 2017 special election to replace Jeff Sessions, after Sessions stepped down to become Trump’s first attorney general. Alabama is thoroughly Republican, and the state is widely considered the best shot the Republican Party has to pick up a Senate seat in November. Perhaps for this reason, since Byrne’s entry nine months earlier, the Republican primary had become an uncomfortably crowded affair.
A crucial factor — perhaps even the deciding factor — in the state’s Republican primary, on March 3, is likely to be which candidate can persuade Republican voters that he is the most slavishly devoted to Trump, who won Alabama by 28 points in 2016 and enjoys a net approval rating of 23 points there, the second-highest of any state. And as any student of Trump’s administration knows, the president’s favor is often a function of proximity. So Byrne was elated when he made Trump’s guest list for the Alabama-L.S.U. game — and more so when, arriving in the box on game day, he saw that he was the only Senate candidate invited. Sessions and Moore skipped the game altogether. Tuberville was in attendance but stuck in a luxury box a few doors down.
When Trump, entering the box shortly before kickoff, appeared on the stadium’s giant screens, he was greeted with thunderous cheers from the crowd of over 100,000. But Byrne didn’t find the roar to be sufficiently deafening. He rose from his seat and frantically waved his hands to the crowd while shouting: “More! More! More!” A Sessions adviser later likened Byrne’s gesture to a seizure.
There was a time when a Senate race in Alabama might have turned on matters of direct relevance to Alabamians. When Jeff Sessions was first elected to the Senate in 1996, a major issue in the race was the fact that his Democratic opponent, a state senator, had opposed tort reform efforts in the state’s Legislature. But as parties have become more uniform, Americans more geographically sorted by ideology and cable news more pervasive, even school-board elections have turned into referendums on national arguments. And few state-level elections have been as nationalized as Alabama’s 2017 Republican Senate primary, in which the candidates became proxies in the struggle among Republican Party factions scrambling for power in the unsettled landscape of Trump’s early presidency.
Luther Strange, whom Alabama’s governor had appointed as Sessions’s interim replacement, was the candidate of Senator Mitch McConnell, the majority leader, and of the Republican business community. “We’re in for Luther — money, marbles or chalk,” the strategist Karl Rove, who helmed a McConnell-affiliated super PAC, said at the time. Mo Brooks, a Tea Party-affiliated congressman, had the backing of conservative media celebrities like Sean Hannity. Perceiving Brooks as Strange’s greatest threat, Rove’s super PAC ran millions of dollars in attack ads against him. In Alabama primaries, if no candidate receives a majority of the vote, the top two finishers advance to a runoff — which meant that the damage inflicted on Brooks allowed Roy Moore to make it to the runoff against Strange. There, Moore was able to win with the support of Brooks and Hannity, as well as Stephen K. Bannon, who had recently left the White House and saw Moore’s campaign as a foundational fight against the Republican establishment.
Moore was already a bad general-election candidate because of his far-far-right views. He had twice been removed from the Alabama Supreme Court, once for refusing to take down a two-ton Ten Commandments monument he had installed in the court building, a second time for not abiding by the United States Supreme Court’s decision to legalize gay marriage. He became a much, much worse candidate when, after winning the G.O.P. nomination, multiple women credibly accused him of sexually propositioning and in some cases molesting them years earlier, when they were young teenagers. (Moore denied all the accusations.) Many prominent Republicans, having reluctantly resigned themselves to supporting Moore once he became the nominee, abandoned him after the pedophilia claims surfaced. McConnell warned that Moore was likely to face an ethics inquiry and expulsion if he came to Washington. Shelby announced that he wouldn’t vote for Moore and would instead cast his ballot for a write-in candidate. He urged others to do the same, and in the end, close to 23,000 Alabamians did. Moore lost by 21,000 votes.
One morning in late January, the principal beneficiary of the 2017 fiasco was sitting in a conference room of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee on Capitol Hill. “My brain is really pickled,” Doug Jones apologized. He had been spending most of his recent days and, often, nights in the Senate chamber, serving as a juror in Trump’s impeachment trial; at that point, Jones said, he had taken 240 pages of longhand notes on the proceedings. A week later, he would vote to convict Trump.
Jones has a surprisingly robust approval rating of 41 percent (with 35 percent disapproval) and an enviable war chest: By the end of last year he had raised $7.5 million — more money than all his Republican opponents combined. He has led a bruising effort to overhaul a state Democratic Party that in 2017 was, in his telling, “a pretty dysfunctional, nonworking shell of an entity” with a meager budget, a tiny staff and no infrastructure. And he now expects the party to help with get-out-the-vote and other efforts — something his campaign had to run and pay for itself last time.
But the reality is that none of this is likely to be enough to save him come November. Before Jones’s victory, Democrats had not won a statewide federal election in Alabama since Shelby was elected to the Senate in 1992. (He switched parties two years later.) Republicans are confident 2017 was an aberration and note that Trump himself will be on the ballot this year. Brent Buchanan, who runs the Republican polling firm Cygnal, says: “A sack of soybeans, so long as it has an R on its label, will beat Doug Jones in 2020.” But will Alabama Republicans pick the right sack of soybeans?
“Don Jr. is not the president,” Moore acidly noted. He was sitting behind his desk in the Montgomery office of his nonprofit group, the Foundation for Moral Law, which he founded 17 years ago, shortly before his first removal from the Alabama Supreme Court, to “restore the knowledge of God in law and government.” Three stories below, on the Dexter Avenue sidewalk, stood a recently erected statue of Rosa Parks. But the window shutters in Moore’s office were closed, restricting his view to the contents of the room, which included busts of the Confederate heroes Robert E. Lee and Stonewall Jackson, as well as an extensive collection of Ten Commandments reproductions.
Moore seems to know it. He has given few speeches and raised little money. At times, he has seemed more interested in refighting the last election than in trying to win the current one. “This is all about 2017,” he told me. “I know that there was a collusion — Democrats and Republicans, not just Democrats.” He handed me a printout of a conspiratorial Medium.com essay about supposed skulduggery in that race, involving an online disinformation campaign, and urged me to read it. It was one of many things, I imagined, that gave Republicans pause about Moore, even if it was precisely the sort of conspiracy theorizing Trump himself has so often embraced.
As he spoke, a young woman crept into Moore’s office, trying not to interrupt our interview. “I’m sorry,” she whispered to Moore, “I need your card.” He told her to take his wallet. “I trust this girl,” he said to me. The woman laughed and quickly exited.
“Really!” the aide exclaimed, the relief evident in his voice. Moore explained to me that the woman was a recently graduated home-schooler who helped out at his office. He continued to praise her talents, then sighed. “She’s a sweet girl,” he said.
On a January evening in Guntersville, Jeff Sessions paid a visit to Wintzell’s Oyster House, a kitschy seafood restaurant popular in Alabama, the local branch of which was the site of the monthly meeting of the Marshall County Republican Party. Not long ago, getting these stalwarts’ votes would have been a forgone conclusion for Sessions. When he was re-elected to his fourth term in the Senate in 2014, he won 97 percent of the vote. But in a Republican Party that has transformed into a cult of personality, Sessions has a huge problem: The cult leader hates him. His project, in Guntersville and everywhere else, was to persuade his former and hopefully future constituents otherwise.
The early endorsement ushered Sessions into the Trump campaign’s inner circle. His recollections of his experiences there resembled an aging roadie’s remembering his salad days with Motley Crue. “I spent a bunch of time traveling with him,” Sessions said in an almost dreamy voice. “He’s got unbelievable energy. He’d get back at 1 o’clock at night, and here he is getting ready to go the next day. He’s up on the phone the next day tweeting. Remarkable!” Sessions marveled. “He is so tough. What did Kanye West say? I love it. He said, ‘He has dragon energy!.” The crowd, which was entirely white and appeared to be mostly near or past retirement age, burst into applause.
Serving as Trump’s attorney general was Sessions’s dream job — before going into politics, he spent 12 years as a U.S. attorney — and he happily resigned from his Senate seat to go to work remaking the Justice Department in his own image, moving it far to the right on immigration, civil rights and social issues. But two months into his tenure, Sessions recused himself from overseeing the F.B.I.’s investigation into Russian election interference in the 2016 election on the grounds that he had worked on Trump’s campaign.
That instantly earned him the enmity of the president, who was soon bashing Sessions both privately (complaining to White House aides, according to Bob Woodward’s book “Fear,” that Sessions was “mentally retarded” and a “dumb Southerner”) and publicly (tweeting to his tens of millions of followers that “Our A.G. is scared stiff and Missing in Action”). In November 2018, Trump fired Sessions, later telling NBC’s “Meet the Press” that appointing him attorney general was “the biggest mistake” of his presidency.
“Somebody asked me tonight — I usually don’t just talk about it, but I got asked a couple times, ‘Why did you recuse yourself?.” Sessions told his audience in Guntersville. The jaunty tone in his voice became strained. Many in the crowd put down their utensils, and a hush fell over the room. “Let me just tell you. There are rules in the Department of Justice. There are regulations in the Department of Justice. I was a part of the campaign. I was a national defense chairman of the campaign. I had an official title in the doggone campaign.” Sessions said those rules and regulations were clear that department officials couldn’t participate in an investigation of a campaign if they had a role in it. “I didn’t think I had a choice, actually,” he said, almost plaintively.
“Why didn’t you talk to Trump before you did that?” an older woman in a sequined MAGA hat shouted. Sessions took a step back and began to stammer. “That’s what we want to know!” the woman yelled.
“Um, he knew before — I’m just not going to get into arguing about the president,” Sessions said.
Last April, Sean Spicer, the former White House press secretary and another Trump administration castaway, traveled to Alabama to have dinner with Tommy Tuberville, who coached Auburn’s football team for 10 seasons starting in 1999. Tuberville retired from coaching in 2016 and was thinking seriously about running for the Senate. Spicer, who in addition to serving as a special correspondent for the entertainment news show “Extra” and competing on “Dancing With the Stars” had started a political consulting business, was there to push him off the fence.
Shortly thereafter, Tuberville entered the race. With the help of Spicer (who would leave Tuberville’s campaign a few months later), he appeared on “Fox & Friends” the Monday after Easter, when Trump was at Mar-a-Lago and almost certainly watching the show. “I want to support President Trump,” Tuberville told the hosts, saying that unlike Byrne, he supported Trump in 2016. “I believe in him. He has a great work ethic. The guy’s a winner.” Trump seemed to take notice. Over the subsequent months, according to people who spoke with the president, he would inquire about how “the coach” or “Coach Tommy” was doing in the Alabama Senate race.
Last fall, as Sessions appeared to be on the verge of entering the race, Tuberville and his campaign came up with a plan: get Trump to endorse him, which would keep Sessions from jumping in and persuade Byrne to drop out. The 2017 election had taught him and his strategists the value of the direct approach. That year, White House aides thought they had persuaded Trump to remain neutral in the Republican primary for the Alabama special election. But on the eve of the election, Luther Strange got through on the phone to Trump and asked him for his endorsement. Shortly thereafter, Trump tweeted out his support.
Of course, one consequence of Trump’s being his own person is that Byrne does not really get to be Byrne. “This is not the Bradley Byrne I know,” says Hillyer, who once belonged to the same church and supper club as Byrne and considers him a friend. “He has been acting the part of a mindless partisan and trying to out-Trump Trump.” Indeed, he and the other Alabama Republicans in the race have been reduced to the role of supporting actors in their own election, their relationships with voters dependent on their relationship with the president.
This can be a bitter pill to swallow — especially, it would seem, for someone like Sessions, who was railing against immigration and trade back when Trump was starring on “The Apprentice.” When I suggested to him that he was championing what he now calls “the Trump agenda” long before Trump ever did, Sessions let out a mirthless laugh. “Well, people here don’t know that,” he said.
