In “Letter From a Region in My Mind,” James Baldwin wrote that “there is a limit to the number of people any government can put in prison.” This was in 1962, and since then this country has seemed bent on putting the lie to Baldwin’s claim — incarcerating at a pace and ferocity that has never been seen in the known world. The number of people imprisoned in the United States has ballooned from around 200,000 in Baldwin’s day to more than two million. This trend yielded the phrase “mass incarceration” — and sparked a nationwide movement to reverse it. But we have mostly ignored the disaster that follows a bid: probation or parole.
More than four million people are currently under state or federal supervision, threatened with re-incarceration for everything from failing a drug test to spending time with friends or family with a criminal record, or falling asleep in the wrong house. (During a study on parole in Connecticut conducted by Yale Law School’s Samuel Jacobs Criminal Justice Clinic, I witnessed the parole board send a man back to prison for six months because he’d been sleeping at his son’s mother’s apartment, only to allow him to be paroled to that address upon his release.) Most people don’t understand the difference between probation and parole: The former is authorized by a court — a suspended or completed sentence with supervision as the price for freedom; the latter follows a parole board’s grant of early release, again with supervision exchanged for freedom. Within the increasingly documented landscape of incarceration, the work of a probation and parole officer — a “P.O.” — has been little chartered. Enter Jason Hardy’s memoir “The Second Chance Club,” an account of four years he spent as a P.O. in New Orleans, and of his encounters with a few of the more than 200 people under his supervision.
I came home from prison in 2005. Over three years, I had two P.O.s. One forced me to submit to two urine tests a week, despite no history of drug use; the other, perplexed that an organization would fly me to Vermont for a writer’s workshop, left me to my own devices before letting me off the paper early. Hardy exists somewhere between those two poles. He found the job listing while down a late-night rabbit hole researching mass incarceration online. Scraping along on $10 an hour at J.C. Penney, he applied to work for the Louisiana Division of Probation and Parole, wanting to unwind mass incarceration. A bachelor’s degree and lack of a criminal record qualified him for a position few others wanted.
A struggle to be seen governs these pages — though, sadly, Hardy, for all of his good intentions, is often the one who fails to see. In “The Second Chance Club,” he mostly recounts stories of drug addiction and dealing. I’m reminded of Nikki Giovanni’s poem “Nikki-Rosa,” in which she hopes that “no white person has cause / to write about me / because they never understand / Black love is Black wealth.”  More than half of “The Second Chance Club” passes before Hardy realizes that his “judgments were based on glimpses” and that he “missed way more than I saw.” The same could be said of this book — a story based on glimpses, that misses far more than it sees.
What do you call a person with a criminal conviction who has been incarcerated and is now on probation or parole? Convict? Felon? Offender? In Hardy’s book, the word “offender” appears 488 times. “Offender” becomes interchangeable with a person’s name, a flag announcing Hardy’s (and our own) unwillingness not to stigmatize people who have a criminal conviction. As a writer, he should understand how the repetition of “offender” transforms a person into a stereotype; as a P.O., he should know that those under his supervision deserve the dignity such repetition denies. But he fails, miserably, and that failure isn’t just a reflection on him but on all of us, because it is not just Hardy who fails to see beyond the stigma.
Probation officers in New Orleans carry pistols and handcuffs. The job demands you stay prepared to escort someone back to a cell. But having the power to incarcerate changes something inside you. Early on, Hardy learns that his co-workers think of their work as disaster prevention, and in “The Second Chance Club” the disaster is a drug overdose. The P.O.s’ enemies are local drug dealers and private attorneys whose campaign contributions guarantee that the dealers never see jail time. Writing of a group counseling session involving young drug dealers, Hardy quotes one as saying, “Thomas Jefferson didn’t give a [expletive] who got in his way. Why should I?” In the same paragraph, Hardy explains that “drug dealers in New Orleans saw themselves not as the descendants of slaves but as the descendants of masters.” There is a world where all absurdities are true. But where Hardy misses the point is that he presents the ridiculously incongruous as representative.
He imagines that while middle-class kids like him “were training to be better off than their parents, poor kids were training to survive.” That this assumption is contradicted by the life stories of some of Hardy’s co-workers does not matter. The myth serves the need for many to believe they are on a noble mission to save those who cannot save themselves. Scene: An older woman described as wearing pajamas and sunglasses held together with masking tape admits to having smoked crack earlier in the day. As Hardy and Charles, another probation officer, take her to jail, the outlook that pervades the book is revealed: “I know it sucks to detox in jail,” Charles says, “but if I don’t take you, and you go out and OD, that’s on me.” And with that, a series of structural problems relating to racism, poverty, unemployment and flawed criminal justice policy become personal failures. For decades, the state of Louisiana divested from community programs and invested in jails and prisons. But instead of imagining this as an explanation for rising incarceration rates, Hardy concludes that what drives imprisonment are “dons” who, despite considerable personal gifts of intelligence and talent, are committed to drug sales.
