Sarah Price helps actresses and royalty but claimed no credit for any looks this past weekend. Nor will she ever!
LONDON — Early on a Friday evening not long ago, the fashion stylist Sarah Edmiston Price was on the second floor of the Notting Hill townhouse she uses as an office, happily picking through a rail of her favorite vintage finds. She flipped past a shimmery putty-colored Tom Ford for Gucci jacket and a hand-painted Dolce & Gabbana gown and pulled out a slinky electric navy dress by Roberto Cavalli.
Ms. Price, who declines to give her age, speaks with a soft Irish accent, often with long pauses between words, like she is about to impart a big secret. Except she isn’t.
She never talks about her 28 clients, who include Princess Eugenie, actresses, models, high-profile businesswomen and “different royal families around the world.” (Asked about Eugenie specifically, she held a finger to her lips and smiled.) She shuns freelance help, personally chooses her couriers, and snaps photos of “my women,” as she calls them affectionately, only from the neck down, lest any images go astray.
Though she is praised in fashion circles as having elevated Princess Eugenie’s style — headlines even before the princess’s wedding in 2018 talked about how the ninth in line to the throne had “wowed the crowd” and “nailed it” — Ms. Price would never claim credit.
Samson Dougal, an alumnus of Alexander McQueen who works frequently with Ms. Price, said: “There’s always a deeper message with her. She does so much more than just pulling clothes.” Mr. Dougal, whose designs for Princess Eugenie include the pale blue ’60s-inspired dress she wore to Meghan Markle and Prince Harry’s wedding and a pale pink silk biker jacket she wore the day after her own wedding, first worked with Ms. Price four years ago on a dress for “another princess. She has endless princesses,” he said.
In 2006, she moved to New York to attend the Fashion Institute of Technology, got a job as an assistant at the then-recently-revived Halston (Ms. Zoe was the label’s creative director), and picked up her first client there, the wife of one of Halston’s investors.
She spends hours getting to know the subsequent ones, first over lunch. Then there is a closet riffle, which usually reveals when someone thinks she was her best-looking. Ms. 
In between fittings, she communicates with clients (and their staffs) via a flurry of WhatsApp messages. The word “urgent” is to be saved for — here Ms. Price paused to choose her words carefully — a dress that has arrived somewhere with multiple entrances, and been signed for, yet no one can find it.
She does have a few go-tos, like capes (“or a cape kind of drama,” Mr. Dougal said), and is partial to a low back, as on Princess Eugenie’s Peter Pilotto wedding gown, even if the client complains she is too flabby, mole-covered or pale for one. Ms. Price does not believe in problem areas. She tells her women: “Your problem area is between your ears.” Still, she will never talk anyone into wearing anything.
“My God, I’d rather die,” she said.