After Joe Biden’s fourth-place finish in Iowa, some supporters fear that a damaging result in Tuesday’s primary could hurt his financial resources to compete in later contests.
MANCHESTER, N.H. — His donors and supporters around the country are uneasy. His poll numbers in New Hampshire and nationally look increasingly shaky. He faces intense competition for moderate Democratic support and uncertainty about his viability in future contests.
As New Hampshire votes on Tuesday in its presidential primary, former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. is confronting the possibility of a fourth- or even fifth-place finish, an outcome that could present existential political and financial threats to his once poll-topping presidential campaign and upend his bet on dominating later-voting, more diverse states like South Carolina.
He has been banking on showing strength in the South and the West, but there are increasing signs of fluidity in the Democratic race in those regions.
Mr. Biden has sought to keep expectations low in New Hampshire, going so far as to say in a debate on Friday night that he would “probably take a hit” in Tuesday’s primary.
And there are already signs that he is eager to move on.
On Monday, Mr. Biden held a phone call with top South Carolina supporters in which he expressed excitement about visiting the state, which has a predominantly black electorate in Democratic primaries, and promised to be there soon, according to people on the call. They added that he and a senior adviser, Symone D. Sanders, had both suggested that the race for the nomination would be heavily influenced by the outcome of the Feb. 29 primary in South Carolina, a state that is more representative of the party and that stands in contrast to heavily white Iowa and New Hampshire.
Yet a damaging loss in New Hampshire could put constraints on the resources Mr. Biden will have available to compete in subsequent contests. Several donors and other Democrats inclined toward Mr. Biden have privately expressed jitters about a fourth-place finish or worse in New Hampshire, and are closely watching the result. Another weak outcome, after Mr. Biden’s fourth-place finish in the Iowa caucuses, would be alarming, some have said.
He said his campaign had been raising about $500,000 per day; the amount could not be independently verified. His campaign raised about $250,000 per day in the fourth quarter of 2019, the last period for which candidates have reported their fund-raising to the Federal Election Commission.
If Mr. Biden is collecting $500,000 per day, he would still be lagging far behind Senator Bernie Sanders’s fund-raising pace in the month of January, when Mr. Sanders raised roughly $800,000 per day. Mr. Biden would also be trailing what Hillary Clinton raised per day in February 2016.
At a breakfast with reporters on Monday hosted by Bloomberg News, Kate Bedingfield, a deputy campaign manager on Mr. Biden’s team, said, “We’re absolutely going to have the resources that we need to compete on Super Tuesday.” She said she believed that Mr. Biden’s perceived firewall in South Carolina would hold regardless of the New Hampshire primary results, pointing to his deep relationships with black Democrats there.
Several candidates, including Mr. Sanders and the billionaire Tom Steyer, have been making concerted attempts to cut into his lead with black voters, efforts that could accelerate if Mr. Biden is viewed as even more vulnerable after Tuesday’s vote.
Ms. Bedingfield also previewed how the campaign might try to frame a disappointing loss in New Hampshire: by alluding to the state’s demographics and warning the news media against writing anyone off before voters of color participate in a significant way.
Mr. Biden has kept up the hunt for votes in New Hampshire in the final days before the primary. On Monday morning, he brought doughnuts to a school bus depot in Nashua and asked workers there to consider supporting him. “Look me over, O.K.?” Mr. Biden said after explaining that he had worked as a school bus driver in upstate New York when he was in law school.
In a brief visit to a field office in Salem, Mr. Biden repeatedly projected an upbeat attitude, and almost immediately brought up South Carolina, which he suggested he would visit soon. “I feel good,” he told a small group of volunteers. “It’s feeling good,” he said at another point. “We’re feeling good,” he declared. “It just feels good,” he affirmed.
Mr. Biden could surprise in New Hampshire: He has long made overtures to Republicans and independents, and undeclared voters are an important constituency in the primary. Some of his crowds have seemed livelier than the ones he drew in Iowa, where his events often felt gloomy and small. He has the support of prominent Democrats in the state from across the ideological spectrum and has continued to emphasize experience and portray himself as the best prepared and battle-tested Democrat to take on President Trump.
But on the ground, signs of Mr. Biden’s challenges are palpable. Over and over, voters who would seem to be natural Biden supporters — moderate, opposed to proposals like “Medicare for all,” fond of the Obama era — said they were drifting toward other candidates.
Janice Dennis, 57, an Uber driver who takes care of her grandchildren, said she had once been a Biden supporter. She even had her daughter’s commitment card for Mr. Biden in her car on Monday morning. But she was impressed by Senator Amy Klobuchar in Friday night’s debate, she said, and worried about the energy level of Mr. Biden, 77, and his ability to take on Mr. Trump. She also suggested that he wasn’t sufficiently forward-looking.
Warren Curtin of Litchfield, N.H., a retired letter carrier and a ticket-taker for the Boston Red Sox who attended an event for former Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind., in New Hampshire last week, said he wanted to build on the Affordable Care Act rather than put in place Medicare for all, and said he was staunchly opposed to the most progressive candidates in the race, Mr. Sanders and Senator Elizabeth Warren. He was exactly the kind of voter Mr. Biden is targeting in New Hampshire — but Mr. Buttigieg, he said, was his first choice. He liked the young former mayor’s ideas, he said. As for Mr. Biden, whom he saw a few weeks ago?
One potentially bright spot for Mr. Biden: Some of his supporters in later-voting states say that they are uninterested in following the leads set by the first two contests in the primary race.
