A lawsuit will accuse New York State of abusing its authority in issuing a rule that has upended the industry.
Real estate agents in New York have raced this week to make sense of a new, far-reaching rule declaring that tenants no longer have to pay a broker’s fee.
On Friday, two of the state’s most influential industry groups said they would challenge the rule in court.
The Real Estate Board of New York, a powerful lobbying organization, said it would file a lawsuit on Monday accusing the New York Department of State, which issued the legal guidance, of abusing its authority and failing to follow proper steps before adopting the rule.
Earlier this week the agency said the legal guidance was an appropriate interpretation of the rent laws that went into effect last year, which ushered in expansive protections for tenants, including limits on other fees like those paid to file an application.
The Real Estate Board, which represents major developers, property owners and brokers in New York City, will be joined in the lawsuit by the New York State Association of Realtors, a statewide organization with nearly 60,000 brokers.
In the lawsuit, the groups are expected to accuse the Department of State of failing to follow a state act that spells out how agencies are expected to issue rules and regulations.
The two groups said the Department of State, before issuing the guidance, should have sought input from the real estate industry and presented it for review before the state’s Board of Real Estate.
But tenant advocates, who have cheered the fee rule, said on Friday that the state’s guidance was valid and predicted that the lawsuit would fail.
“The state issues interpretive guidance all the time on laws, and this is within their right to do that,” said Judith Goldiner, who oversees the Legal Aid Society’s civil law reform unit.
The state published the legal guidance on Tuesday night, stunning the real estate industry by saying that last year’s sweeping rent laws, which do not explicitly mention broker commissions, barred tenants from having to pay a broker’s fee.
It also surprised lawmakers in the Legislature who had approved the laws.
In New York City’s competitive rental market, tenants are often required to pay a fee, sometimes up to 15 percent of the annual rent, to a broker even if they found the apartment on their own by using websites like StreetEasy and Craigslist.
For a $2,000 per month apartment, a broker’s fee could reach $3,600, which would have to be handed over when a lease was signed.
Few cities in the United States have a similar network of brokers who collect fees from renters and control everything from listings to appointments to leases. Elsewhere, landlords either handle the marketing and leasing of units, or pay a broker to provide that service.
The Department of State said that a broker can still collect a fee but it must be paid by the landlord unless the tenant hired the broker to help find a unit.
In recent days, brokerage firms have scrambled to interpret the legal guidance. Some brokers have told tenants that they are representing them and having them sign disclosures saying so, allowing them to still collect fees from renters.
Others, whether they are confused or being deceptive, have told renters that the rule is a suggestion, not the law. Brokers have also warned tenants that if a landlord pays the fee the cost would likely be passed on to them in the form of higher monthly rents.
Ms. Goldiner said the Legal Aid Society was advising tenants this week that if a broker demands a fee to get an apartment, to pay it if they can and then take legal action in small-claims court or file a complaint with the Department of State.
