A New York judge temporarily blocked a new state rule barring brokers from charging tenants.
A New York State judge on Monday temporarily blocked the state’s week-old ruling that had effectively barred tenants from having to pay a broker fee, issuing at least a short-term reprieve to an industry scrambling to respond.
The justice, Michael Mackey of the New York Supreme Court in Albany County, issued the temporary restraining order on Monday after the Real Estate Board of New York, among other real estate groups and firms, sued the Department of State over the ruling.
The judge’s order means that brokers can continue to collect a commission from tenants for rentals, as had been the longstanding practice. The decision was expected to stay in place until at least March 13, when Justice Mackey has asked the Department of State to respond in court.
The restraining order, which is not unusual in such cases and allows both sides to present a case, does not necessarily foreshadow that the broker fee ruling will be blocked for good. Justice Mackey did not address specifics of the case.
Real estate groups, in their suit, argued that the ban on broker fees never came up last year as part of the sweeping rent laws adopted by the state Legislature and that the Department of State was effectively imposing a new rule without giving their industry a chance to weigh in.
The restraining order “means that thousands of hardworking, honest real estate agents across New York State can do business in the same way they did” before the state issued the rule, the presidents of the two groups said in a statement.
Tenant advocates cheered the broker fee ruling last week and predicted that it would be upheld despite the legal challenges.
The Department of State issued the ruling late last Tuesday and addressed a slew of outstanding questions about last year’s landmark rent laws in New York State. Buried in the memo, the department declared that broker fees, which were not specifically mentioned in the laws, must be collected from landlords unless a tenant hires a broker to find a unit.
In New York City’s highly competitive rental market, brokers still control listings, viewings and signings and tenants almost always have to work with a broker to rent an apartment, even if they find it on websites like StreetEasy or Craigslist. Few cities across the country have such a system.
The fee is usually 15 percent of the annual rent, a substantial payment typically paid by tenants before they can move in. The department’s ruling, however, flipped that relationship and put the onus on landlords to pay that fee.
The lawsuit filed on Monday included comments from some of New York City’s largest brokerage firms, which portrayed the industry as being in dire straits after the ruling.
“Douglas Elliman is currently working on hundreds of current rental transactions in which potential tenants are now threatening not to close the transactions and are refusing to pay commissions,” wrote Hal D. Gavzie, the company’s executive manager of leasing.