BLACK FUTURE FESTIVAL at the Brooklyn Children’s Museum (Feb. 17-23). The museum is inviting its young fans on some astral travel that won’t take them far from home: They’ll journey to TRIPTIC, an imaginary galaxy of Afrofuturism created by this festival’s artist in residence, Kwame Brandt-Pierce. Based on mythology from various African cultures, this fantasy destination will encourage children in their own creativity. Visitors can explore alien objects and species, sculpt a superpowered TRIPTIC tree and use their voices and bodies to construct a soundscape for this uncharted land. They can also investigate the past: A daily tour of the museum’s collections will acquaint them with artifacts from the African diaspora.
FAMILY PROGRAMS at the Museum of the Moving Image (Feb. 14-23). Kiki is a kid who doesn’t need a bicycle, scooter or roller skates. She has her own method of transportation: a broom. A good-hearted young witch who must leave home to make her way in the world, she sets up the business at the heart of “Kiki’s Delivery Service,” an animated film from the acclaimed Studio Ghibli that the museum will show daily from Monday through Feb. 23. But Kiki isn’t the only movie heroine young museum visitors can encounter during the midwinter school break. Starting on Friday, they can follow the adventures of the dauntless Jo March and her sisters in almost daily showings of Greta Gerwig’s “Little Women,” which emphasizes the feminism of Louisa May Alcott’s classic. Before or after many of the screenings, children can work on their own filmmaking projects at the museum’s drop-in Moving Image Studio.
KIDS WEEK at the Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum (Feb. 15-22, 10 a.m.-5 p.m.). Why not spend school vacation on board a ship? This one won’t sail anywhere, but it does promise adventure. The Intrepid, an aircraft carrier turned museum, is beginning its annual midwinter festivities with a weekend devoted to art and music. The Saturday highlights include appearances by the Story Pirates and the ensemble Joshua David Stein and the Band Books, which gives musical accompaniment to tales for children. Sunday brings TheaterWorksUSA, with two performances of “Rosie Revere, Engineer, & Friends,” and the author and artist Drew Brockington, who will discuss his “CatStronauts” graphic-novel series. The theme for Monday through Wednesday is wildlife, with all kinds of live animal demonstrations, and the rest of the celebration focuses on science, including presentations by NASA experts.
‘MUSH! A TRIBUTE TO SLED DOGS FROM ARCTIC EXPLORATION TO THE IDITAROD’ at the AKC Museum of the Dog (through March 29). Children often think of dogs as pets, but these reliable companions are hard workers, too. Probably few toil as fiercely as the breeds that pull sleds, which get a special salute in this show, one of the museum’s many attractions for young dog lovers. “Mush!” displays art and artifacts, including dog paintings, drawings and videos; camp stove equipment used by the polar explorer Admiral Richard E. Byrd; and the expressive photographs of Jeff Schultz, whose “Faces of Iditarod” series features both canine and human subjects. But what could be more fun than meeting and petting sled dogs themselves? On Saturday, from noon to 2 p.m., the museum will host four Chinooks, a relatively rare breed, and on Feb. 23, two Alaskan malamutes.
‘SESAME STREET LIVE! LET’S PARTY!’ at the Hulu Theater at Madison Square Garden (Feb. 14, 11 a.m.; Feb. 15-16, 10:30 a.m. and 2 and 5:30 p.m.; Feb. 17, 11 a.m. and 2:30 p.m.; Feb. 20, 11 a.m.; through Feb. 23). If you’re under 5, you couldn’t hope for a better invitation. “Sesame Street,” that welcoming TV destination for preschoolers, is once again bringing its live theatrical show to New York. But like the series, this production promises some education along with the frolicking. Not all the neighborhood residents onstage have the same idea of fun, and this musical will illustrate how cooperation and compromise can create an event at which everyone is happy. Little ones can look forward to dancing along to familiar tunes like Oscar the Grouch’s “I Love Trash” and Cookie Monster’s “C Is for Cookie.” And they can even learn a little Spanish from Rosita.
