Opinion|Are You in a Gang Database?
Are You in a Gang Database?
The bar for being labeled a gang member is low, and the consequences are serious.
Dr. Bloch is an assistant professor at the University of Arizona.
I found out I was in a gang database — a shared criminal intelligence system used by policing agencies to store information on identified gang members — in 1996 after a dozen members of the Los Angeles Police Department crashed through my front door. The officers were from an anti-gang and graffiti task force and the arrest warrant identified me as a leader of not one, but two, graffiti gangs. When I found out that officers had torn through my family’s apartment looking for spray paint and markers as per the search warrant, it reminded me of the actual gang members who had done the same just a few years earlier.
As a local graffiti writer I had spent my adolescence running from gangs that resented how “taggers” like me wrote in the neighborhoods they claimed as their own. Now I was labeled a gang member. I had been labeled a gang member because I must have looked like one. Or it may have been because a judge is more likely to issue a warrant for a kid in a gang than a kid who writes on walls. I will never be sure. I was a vandal, but I was not in a gang, and the legal consequences for each are vastly different.
At my arraignment, my “gang” identity was brought up to frame the many charges for vandalism I was facing. Like the more than 94 percent of state-level felony defendants in America, I plea-bargained and received a fine, probation and community service, but avoided jail time. It was the gang label, not the criminal charges, that scared me most. I realized then, as I understand now, that gang categorization is often more of a legal tactic than a matter of identity.
Recent accusations of Los Angeles Police Department officers falsely identifying people as gang members are nothing new, and the problem is certainly not just a local issue. The Los Angeles Times reported last month that 20 officers from the Metropolitan Division assigned to crime suppression duties were suspected of having willfully falsified information on field interview cards during traffic stops. Information on such cards is relied upon later to determine who should be entered into a gang database. Self-identifying as a gang member, in addition to tattoos and officers’ descriptions of “gang related” clothing, are used to make a gang distinction.
Such gang member categorization sometimes based on superficial if not completely fabricated indicators is part of a longstanding campaign of deportation of young people supported at the federal level, and increasingly so under the Trump administration.
The Department of Homeland Security and a subsidiary agency, Immigration and Customs Enforcement, rely on gang databases that pull together local law enforcement determinations about gang membership. The Obama administration did the same.
From Los Angeles to Long Island, where Operation Matador was announced in 2017 to target suspected members of La Mara Salvatrucha, or MS13, federal officials, with the help of local police, have actively and often erroneously targeted immigrant minors based on purported gang affiliation.
The “gang member” label that federal authorities have been gleaning from gang databases is not based on the determination of a court, and is applied without due process. A local officer’s observation about attire, tattoos, affiliation or in my case, vandalism, can set a life-altering legal process in motion. While entry into a gang database alone does not automatically trigger deportation proceedings or incarceration, being identified as a gang member does embolden federal agents to selectively carry out deportation procedures and allows prosecutors to call for sentence enhancements.
In Los Angeles, such gang categorization has gone on since a year before the passage of the Street Terrorism Enforcement and Prevention (STEP) Act in 1988. The legislation sought to reduce gang-related violence through targeted anti-gang policing. But a lot has changed since three decades ago when there was an all-time highs in crime across the city.
In 2019, the matter of misidentification became more widely known after a mother brought her case to the attention of the L.A.P.D. A supervisor looked back at body camera footage that supported her claim that her son had been falsely categorized as a gang member.
People in minority communities have been misidentified as gang members for years, but until recently, individuals on CalGang were not notified of the designation. Neither were the parents of minors. Many people who were added before Jan. 1, 2017 still do not realize they are in a gang database until they reach a criminal or immigration judge or are considered for a job in government. Most other state gang databases do not require notification.
Although it happened to me personally, it was not until I had earned my Ph.D and began researching the insidious forms of gang abatement and the legality of anti-gang policing that I realized how low the bar was for being labeled a gang member, and how high the stakes could be.
The allegations against officers out of the Los Angeles Police Department’s elite Metro Division concerning “gang framing” are troubling. Not only because, as the department’s chief, Michel Moore, puts it, “falsifying information on a department report is a crime,” but because such crimes of misidentification have been going on for years with untold consequences.
