The Upshot|Would Your Wages Rise Under ‘Medicare for All’?
Would Your Wages Rise Under ‘Medicare for All’?
Research suggests the answer is yes, but not in all cases, and with significant differences across jobs and labor markets.
Hidden in the larger debate over “Medicare for all” is a fundamental economic question: Who pays for work-based health insurance?
Last year, work-based coverage per person cost $7,188, with employees directly contributing 18 percent on average. Family coverage cost $20,576, of which employees paid 30 percent.
But what seems obvious isn’t always what’s correct. Regardless of what’s on your pay stub, many health economists believe that your employer’s contribution toward health insurance comes out of your wages.
So will Medicare for all cause wages to rise if employers have to spend less on benefits? Research suggests the answer is “yes,” with the caveat that it may not be matched dollar for dollar for everyone. The precise relationship depends on the nature of the labor market, which varies across markets and jobs.
One option under Senator Bernie Sanders’s Medicare for all plan would reduce employer spending on health insurance by $9,000 per employee and raise taxes on the wealthy. Senator Elizabeth Warren’s plan would also raise taxes on the wealthy, but would aim to tax employers an amount intended to match what they would have spent on health care anyway.
In a Democratic debate in September, Mr. Sanders differed with Joe Biden in saying wages would rise if employers were no longer involved with health benefits. Many Americans are skeptical; in a Kaiser Family Foundation poll, 63 percent said their wages would stay the same if their employers’ health costs fell.
Another from the same journal, in which the Harvard health economist Michael Chernew is a co-author, used national surveys of public-sector workers and employers’ data and produced similar findings.
Nevertheless, even in the private sector, there are exceptions, with some studies finding that health care costs for workers are not always perfectly offset by wages. Just as in the public sector, this could happen if the labor market is not perfectly competitive. For instance, to the extent workers cannot find other jobs, they may be forced to pay more for their benefits, either through rising premiums without more pay to compensate for it, or through greater cost sharing.
In other cases, some firms may incur higher health care costs that they cannot pass along to workers without losing them to competitors. Much of the increase in health care costs is due to price growth, perhaps without a commensurate increase in the benefits of care.
The wage issue is just one of the trade-offs involved with Medicare for all; there are also healthy debates about how much taxes would rise and how much costs would fall.
Ultimately, someone would have to pay for Medicare for all, so not everyone would be better off. But to the extent the cost of health insurance is shifted away from employers and to the federal government under Medicare for all, it seems wages would rise, at least for some people.