What a therapist, scholar, monk, C.E.O. and others can teach us about bringing our best to everything we do, every day.
By the end of the year, I felt tired and overwhelmed, ready to peel away onionskin layers of regret. That’s most likely why, when I wandered by a Little Free Library, Nick Hornby’s book “How to be Good” called out to me, the bright yellow cover a beacon, the title offering redemption for mistakes large and small.
The book tells the story of a doctor boldly (and hilariously) navigating the rocky road of self-improvement: “Just because I wasn’t good,” the protagonist muses, “it didn’t mean I was bad.” But as I reached the novel’s end, I realized I had not arrived at the answer to what exactly it means to be good. So, I asked Mr. Hornby.
Because many of us have a complicated relationship with what it means to be good, it can help to reframe the subject and widen it. “Some people flinch when they ponder whether or not they or others are ‘good’ because the words ‘good’ and ‘goodness’ have long been associated with obedience,” the author and former “Dear Sugars” podcast host Cheryl Strayed shared in response to a query from The Times.
Goodness is an act of being and doing, requiring that we not only engage but reflect on the intentions behind our actions. Goodness may give rise to immediate satisfaction or demand sustained sacrifice (as those who have fought to bring about social change can attest). Regardless, using it as a lodestar helps point us to what really matters.
The insights below — gathered from a variety of people who think a lot about what it means to be good — are far-reaching. Some suggestions are small, others audacious. Make them your own. Allow them to spark a bit more goodness in you.
Ask hard questions.
Put challenges in perspective.
Buy with intention.
Invest in the greater good.
And, no matter what, keep trying.
“I think all one can ever really do is to try and keep goodness close to you as an ambition — make sure that it’s one of the ways in which you think.
Simran Sethi is a freelance journalist exploring culture and connection. Her work has appeared in Guernica, The Guardian and The Wall Street Journal. You can follow her on Instagram and Twitter @simransethi.