Vigdis Adelaïs Gudbrandr was born in Rouen in 1070, the daughter of a wealthy Christian family, her mother a Norman aristocrat and her father descended from Vikings. When she was 17, the blond-haired, blue-eyed beauty ran away with David Todros, a visiting yeshiva student from Narbonne. Her enraged father sent his knights to bring her back, offering a fine reward. But to no avail: She married David, converted to Judaism (taking the name Sarah Hamoutal Todros) and traveled with her husband to Moniou, a small village in the south of France, where the first of her four children was born. A few years later, soldiers of the First Crusade sacked the village and burned the synagogue; her husband was murdered and two of her children abducted. Tragedy and disaster pursued her for the rest of her life, setting her on the road to Marseille, Palermo, Alexandria, Cairo, possibly Nájera in Spain and back to France, on a quest as desperate as it was brutal.
Hertmans’s task in reconstructing the life of Hamoutal is formidable, as he knows better than anyone. One salient document, a letter Hamoutal carried with her from France, was recovered in 1864 from the genizah of a Cairo synagogue. This faded and torn page of 11th-century parchment is now preserved between sheets of plastic in a binder in the university library at Cambridge.
Hertmans makes an appointment to examine it. Beyond that, his research methods are primitive; his plan is to go to the places where he thinks she might have gone. He sets out in his car for Rouen, intending to view the remains of the yeshiva where David studied.
My first inclination was to balk at this authorial intrusion, but Hertmans is so honestly frustrated and miserable in the modern world that I felt sorry for him. His sources contradict one another; he keeps trying to touch something David or Hamoutal touched; he gets lost in time; thinks he sees her on the street; he strives. In the 10th-century crypt of a church in Clermont-Ferrand, he imagines Vigdis in prayer, bidding farewell to her Christian god. Sadly, he knows what she couldn’t have known: that in a few years, in a field outside this same church, Pope Urban II will call on the faithful to undertake the First Crusade, and that “this will have the incidental, irreversible effect of ruining her life in the distant village in Vaucluse.” History: You just can’t see it coming.
Driving at night on a “black, deserted highway, staring into passing headlights as if a film’s opening credits were going on forever,” Hertmans despairs of finding Hamoutal. “My delusive longing to sense some genuine vestige of this woman has culminated in the awareness that she’s no longer present anywhere, except in my imagination.” His research will take him from Cambridge to Cairo, but he’s always eager to get back to Monieux, to look out his window or walk in the ancient, dry, unproductive landscape Hamoutal must have known. He sits in a field of dry grass all afternoon, “watching the shifting light on the plateau.” He wants to be buried there. The reader can’t help wishing him well. He’s quite a character.
In both “The Convert” and his previous novel, the highly praised “War and Turpentine,” Hertmans habitually treats the reader to his process. This has inspired critics to invoke the hallowed name of W. G. Sebald, and to bandy about the label “literary hybrid” — a vile designation, calling to mind a hybrid car, or beefalo. There’s just no need for such hairsplitting. The novel is an astonishingly capacious form; like Whitman, it can contain multitudes.
“The Convert,” briskly translated from the Dutch by David McKay, is an imaginative flight, full of darkness and light, lively characters, life-altering conflicts, violence and kindness, birth, death and, oddly, a lot of snakes. It is, as it says right there on the cover, nothing less than a novel. And it’s a really good one.