Opinion|I Was the Judge in the Stop-and-Frisk Case. I Don’t Think Bloomberg Is Racist.
I Was the Judge in the Stop-and-Frisk Case. I Don’t Think Bloomberg Is Racist.
He had a pure heart but an empty head.
Ms. Scheindlin, a former district court judge, presided over the 2013 stop-and-frisk lawsuit.
In 2013, I ruled in Floyd vs. City of New York that the tactics underlying the city’s stop-and-frisk program violated the constitutional rights of people of color. While Michael Bloomberg was mayor of New York, black and Latino people were disproportionately stopped, and often frisked, millions of times, peaking at 690,000 in 2011. After my ruling, the number of stops plummeted to 11,000 in 2018. And crime did not rise.
Despite this, Mayor Bloomberg continued to zealously defend stop-and-frisk, including in eyebrow-raising comments at the Aspen Institute in 2015 which recently resurfaced. He apologized for the policy only days before jumping into the presidential race. 
I don’t think so. Not if you look at many other valuable things he has done for minorities. I don’t believe he ever understood the human toll of the stops of black and Latino men, 90 percent of which did not result in a summons or arrest. But the stops were frightening, humiliating and unwarranted invasions of black and brown people’s bodies.
At the time of the Floyd trial, and still today, I am convinced that Mayor Bloomberg believed that the stop-and-frisk policy — which began under Rudy Giuliani, his immediate predecessor, but grew significantly during Mr. Bloomberg’s tenure — was protecting African-Americans, who were disproportionately the victims of crime.
Although it has been widely disproved, he believed in the “broken windows” theory of policing, where stopping small infractions would prevent an escalation of crime. He believed his police commissioner, Ray Kelly, who told him that young black men would leave their guns at home if they thought they would be stopped.
This was misguided because a stop based on racial profiling instead of reasonable suspicion is unconstitutional. But this does not mean he hates black people. The most I can say is he had a pure heart but an empty head; the stop-and-frisk program was very poorly executed.
It is easy to write in general terms about the humiliation of being stopped and frisked. So consider two examples which reveal the impact on the victims and the futility of the policy.
 He held the phone in one hand and the mouthpiece on a cord in the other. Two white plainclothes officers approached him. One officer said it looked like he was smoking weed and shoved him against the fence. The man explained that he was talking on his phone, not smoking marijuana, and that he was a drug counselor. Without asking permission, the officers patted him down and reached into his pockets. No contraband was found.
There were many other stops described by the victims in painstaking detail during the Floyd trial. But the point should be obvious: Mayor Bloomberg, and so many others who were born and raised into what is now known as white privilege, don’t put themselves in the shoes of these victims. As an older white woman, I will never be stopped and thrown up against a wall. I know that. And Mayor Bloomberg does too.
No one is perfect. But there is another side to Mr. Bloomberg that may not be as well known: his achievements in creating opportunities for many minority New Yorkers while mayor and his commitment to good works in his post-mayoral years.
In 2005, he started the WeCare initiative, which provided job opportunities to low-income people. The next year, he created a citywide antipoverty program around a new Center for Economic Opportunity, which received half of its $100 million initial funding from the city. This program, too, focused on job creation. In 2009, he spearheaded an agreement with the Building Trades Employers’ Association to ensure more construction job opportunities for women and minority-owned businesses and ensured that 45 percent of apprenticeship slots would be filled from underrepresented groups. Two years later, he started the Corporate Alliance Program, dedicated to increasing the value of public contracts to women and minority businesses, with a 47 percent increase in contracts in 2010 to these groups. In 2006, just 379 such enterprises were certified to do business with the city. By Mr. Bloomberg’s final year in office, that number grew to 3,700. The Bloomberg administration placed job-recruitment centers in many city Housing Authority buildings.
When these achievements are viewed in combination with his post-mayoral advocacy in support of immigrants rights, environmental protections, abortion rights and gun regulation, I am convinced that he has done much to atone for his unforgivable overuse of stop-and-frisk. He should now be evaluated on his entire record.
If he is the best person to head the Democratic ticket this fall, then his failed stop-and-frisk policy should not prevent him from assuming that most important role. After all, defeating a committed racist — one who called for the death penalty of the Central Park Five and who called the neo-Nazis in Charlottesville, Va., “very fine people” — should be everyone’s priority.
Shira A. Scheindlin is an arbitrator and mediator and of counsel at the Stroock law firm.