Politics|Who Killed the Caucuses?
Who Killed the Caucuses?
Everyone is really sorry about what happened in Iowa. But nobody will take the blame.
In Iowa, the buck stops with no one.
We are now into the fourth day of what I’ve taken to calling the Great Caucus Catastrophe of 2020. There are still no definitive results. And so far, no one seems willing to take responsibility for the meltdown.
Sure, there have been apologies. Regrets, they have a few. But no one has uttered three simple words: It’s my fault.
The Democratic National Committee blames the Iowa Democratic Party. Today, Tom Perez, the D.N.C. chairman, called for a recanvass, a process the state party says it will undertake if specifically requested by a campaign.
The state party, meanwhile, blames an app created by a Democratic tech firm to report the results.
Yet, the app is only one problem of many. Party officials bowed to pressure from Senator Bernie Sanders and his team to release three sets of results rather than just the traditional delegate count — yet they didn’t design a system that could handle the additional work of twice collecting the total vote count.
They withheld the technical details of the app, making it hard for outsiders to vet it for security concerns and usability. And clearly the training was insufficient, considering that some of the precinct captains couldn’t even download it.
Precinct captains who called a phone hotline to report results waited for hours on hold, with some repeatedly getting hung up on during caucus night.
As we reported yesterday, the party set up 85 phone lines to handle calls from more than 1,600 caucus sites. Troy Price, the chair of the state party, blamed supporters of President Trump for flooding the line.
Even the results that Iowa Democrats have released are “riddled with inconsistencies and other flaws,” according to a New York Times investigation.
“More than 100 precincts reported results that were internally inconsistent, that were missing data or that were not possible under the complex rules of the Iowa caucuses,” according to the analysis posted by our Upshot colleagues today.
Mr. Price has offered an apology and promised a full independent investigation. But he has given no real explanation for what went wrong.
Candidates are getting fed up with the uncertainty.
“That screw-up has been extremely unfair to the people of Iowa, it has been unfair to the candidates, all of the candidates, and all of their supporters,” Mr. Sanders said at a news conference today.
He’s right: The delay had a real impact on the dynamics of the race. The importance of Iowa stems from the momentum it can lend a candidate. Both Pete Buttigieg and Mr. Sanders, the two top finishers, lost some of theirs in the morass of mismanagement.
But the fallout will last far past 2020. Already, officials in Illinois, Michigan and other states have barely suppressed their glee at the idea of jumping to the front of the primary calendar. How Iowa Democrats handle the next steps will affect their already-diminishing chances of keeping their first-in-the-nation voting status.
Even if the caucuses go the way of the dodo, problems with technology and elections are only likely to multiply.
Election watchers see the caucus meltdown as a giant warning sign about the dangers to come as new technologies complicate voting, making it easier for bad actors to tamper with the most basic building blocks of our democracy.
Without a full accounting for what went wrong, a process that includes taking responsibility, it’s hard to identify those weaknesses — never mind figuring out how to avoid them in the future.
So, Iowa, I’ll be waiting by the phone for your explanations. Probably on hold.
What would a ‘recanvass’ look like?
What, The New York Times’s banner headline — “SPLIT SENATE CLEARS TRUMP ON EACH COUNT IN FINALE OF A BITTER IMPEACHMENT BATTLE” — wasn’t catchy enough?
