Opinion|Russia Wants to Meddle in Our Election. We’re Helping.
Russia Wants to Meddle in Our Election. We’re Helping.
Last week is proof.
For all the talk since 2016 of foreign election interference and Russian “meddling,” it seems few people really understand the information war and how not to play into the hands of our enemies. Last week is proof.
Last week, The Times and others reported that intelligence officials warned House lawmakers that Russia was trying to get President Trump re-elected. On Friday we learned the interference was bipartisan: The Washington Post first reported that Senator Bernie Sanders was briefed by U.S. officials that Russia was “attempting to help” his campaign as well.
Both reports were understandably alarming and dominated headlines. And yet they offered very little information about the scope of the interference. Here’s all we know, days later: Donald Trump berated the outgoing acting director of national intelligence, Joseph Maguire, for holding the briefing. A Times story said that “current and former officials speculated that the briefing might have played a role” in Mr. Maguire’s recent replacement as director. We also know that Senator Sanders condemned any Russian meddling while also using the news to take pressure off his online supporters (a subject that came up in last week’s debate). “Some of the ugly stuff on the Internet attributed to our campaign may well not be coming from real supporters,” he said.
But there’s a lot more we don’t know about this Russian interference, including: What exactly do these intelligence officials mean by “interference”? Is it an uptick in the garden-variety attempts to sow discord via fake social media accounts or large, hyperpartisan Facebook groups or pages? Or is it a deeper, more sophisticated attempt at infiltrating electronic elections systems? Both? Did officials feel compelled to brief lawmakers because they noticed an anomaly in the volume of inauthentic accounts or posts? Or because of tactics they’d never seen before? We don’t know, and officials can’t even seem to agree on the scope of the meddling.
Of course ignorance hasn’t prevented the scant news from being weaponized by interested parties. On Friday Hillary Clinton reacted to the news on Twitter by suggesting that Mr. Trump is “Putin’s Puppet” and “taking Russian help for himself.” Over 23,000 people amplified the tweet.
Over the weekend, the news of potential Russian assistance for the Sanders campaign prompted its own breathless speculation. The Bloomberg campaign used the news to attack Mr. Sanders’s brand of socialism as appealing to Russians.
These claims aren’t just irresponsible, particularly coming from high-profile politicians and media figures. They also play directly into the hands of adversaries already seeking to divide.
Foreign election meddling — vague a term as it is — is a continuing process. It has ebbed and flowed since 2016, but it has never stopped. Alarm over new reports ought to be regarded proportionally. “This should not be a surprise to anyone,” Clint Watts, a research fellow at the Foreign Policy Research Institute, tweeted after the Sanders news broke.
As Wired’s Brian Barrett wrote last week, it appears “no one has learned anything since 2016.” Yes, fake news, disinformation and “meddling” are again top of mind in politics, but few seem to understand the complicated dynamics of propaganda and how to engage in the information war without becoming unwitting participants themselves. The first mistake many make is to assume that foreign interference is wholly separate from domestic propaganda and partisan news.
Renée DiResta, who studies networked propaganda as the technical research manager at the Stanford Internet Observatory, has tracked foreign efforts to manipulate voters online. Recently she cautioned in a long Twitter thread about 2016 election interference that “most material was drawn directly from real pain points, then repeatedly reinforced. And that is why when we look at foreign influence operations, we do have to recognize that the overwhelming majority of the narratives do not come from outside — they are just exacerbated by outsiders who intentionally build communities to reinforce insecurity and distrust,” she wrote.
A great deal of the Russian troll farm content in 2016, especially the content directed at black voters, wasn’t even directly related to an election candidate. Instead, foreign actors created social justice Facebook groups like “Black Matters US,” “Blacktivist” and “Don’t Shoot Us” to try to amplify existing tensions.
The author Peter Pomerantsev offered an updated explanation last year, writing that Russian propaganda seeks to seed “doubt and confusion, evoking a world so full of endlessly intricate conspiracies that you, the little guy, had no chance to work out or change.” Foreign interference, then — to the extent that we can quantify it — is less a battering ram than it is a chisel meticulously aimed at pre-existing cracks in a weakened facade.
The effect of such interference is, in large part, determined by our response to it. Unfortunately, many of the systems we rely on (intelligence leaks, amplification via social platforms and cable news, electoral politics) seem out of step with the current moment. When news leaks from intelligence sources, the press arguably has an obligation to report such things, even if the motivation of the leaks is unclear or political in nature. But news reports without many details leave an information vacuum. And in our platform-powered misinformation universe, that vacuum is naturally filled by media incentivized to amplify the controversy, jaded party leaders attempting to score political points and bad-faith trolls. It helps deepen divisions and sows chaos.
I can’t claim to have a lot of easy answers, especially on an internet that incentivizes engagement and rewards controversy. Asking the press or politicians to ignore such news is arguably wrong and certainly unrealistic. But we can ask that they not provide ideal conditions for division and misinformation to grow.
That might mean expecting leaders of the intelligence community to find ways to publicly disclose and declassify information on election interference so that citizens have a realistic understanding of the threats facing their democracy. It might mean developing a more precise vocabulary that moves away from vague, ominous-sounding terms like “meddling” and “interference” toward specific terminology (some online propaganda accounts are created to build audience and content, and others are purely about dissemination). For the press, it might mean listing all the information we don’t know up front and urging caution when reporting on partial leaks.
If we don’t adapt to this information war, our panic over election meddling could become self-fulfilling. 
That, more than electing any one leader, is the true goal of Russian interference.