WASHINGTON — The Trump administration announced on Thursday that it would begin talks for a free-trade deal with Kenya, a step partly designed to counter China’s influence in Africa.
But the Trump administration and other officials in Washington see the move partly in geopolitical terms, believing it could provide a model for other trade deals with African countries and be a step toward countering China’s growing influence on the continent.
Robert Lighthizer, the United States trade representative, said in a statement that Kenya was “an important strategic partner of the United States, and there is enormous potential for us to deepen our economic and commercial ties.” The administration believes that an agreement with Kenya “will receive broad bipartisan support in Congress,” he added.
The Trump administration had discussed for more than two years which African country to select for trade talks — an effort explicitly aimed at countering China.
Mr. Eisner said the trade deal could benefit American agricultural producers who would sell into Kenya; textile manufacturers looking to invest in the country; and companies, like John Deere and Caterpillar, that would sell and service equipment. But if the deal is a comprehensive, high-standard trade agreement, it probably won’t be completed this year, he said.
An agreement that addresses the bulk of trade between the countries would require congressional approval. Whether such a deal could pass Congress remains to be seen. For example, Democrats could be concerned about Kenya’s low wages and labor standards.
Nations across Africa are pursuing a large-scale effort to break down trade barriers and integrate their economies. In May, the African Union initiated the African Continental Free Trade Area, a deal aimed at breaking down trade barriers and minimizing trade disputes.
Also, preferential trading terms that the United States has offered certain sub-Saharan African countries are set to expire in the coming years. The African Growth and Opportunity Act, which allows those countries to send goods to the United States duty free, is scheduled to expire in 2025, and it’s unclear whether Congress will renew it. Over 70 percent of Kenya’s exports to the United States enter under those terms, according to the United States trade representative’s office.