Claude McKay presciently grappled with the destinies of those he called the “outcasts and outlaws of civilizations.”Credit...James L. Allen/Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York Public Library.
In January 1928, Claude McKay mailed an audacious letter to the director of the Compagnie Fabre, one of the oldest shipping lines in France. He asked the director to intervene in the case of Nelson Simeon Dede, a Nigerian whom McKay had gotten to know while living among a community of black sailors, dockers and drifters in Marseille, the vibrant Mediterranean port city.
Identifying himself as a novelist published by Harper & Brothers in New York, McKay informed Fabre’s director that he intended to center his next book on the “vagabond and romantic means of existence” of the “Negroes from all over the world” whom he had met in Marseille. He wanted to include Dede, McKay wrote, but he was no “opportunist propagandist” and was hoping to write a “happy story.” Yet he would only be able to do so if Dede were “speedily and unconditionally released” and repatriated to Africa.
The ruse was apparently successful: Later that month, Dede was let out of jail. And when McKay did go on to write a fictionalized version of the affair, the fascinating ROMANCE IN MARSEILLE (Penguin Classics, paper, $16), edited by Gary Edward Holcomb and William J. Maxwell, he included a scene in which a French Caribbean Communist labor organizer named Etienne St. Dominique similarly pressures a shipping company manager to release a jailed stowaway — here called Lafala — by displaying a magazine article he has written about the black population in Marseille. “Now don’t go away and write anything bad about the company,” the manager says pleadingly. “I couldn’t now,” St. Dominique replies, smiling.
Unpublished during McKay’s lifetime, “Romance in Marseille” is the second novel by the author to appear recently, following the 2017 publication of “Amiable With Big Teeth,” a book written in 1941 that remained completely unknown until the scholar Jean-Christophe Cloutier stumbled upon the typescript in an archive a decade ago. Together, the books signal a remarkable revival for a writer who, when he died in 1948, had seen all the work he published during his lifetime, including four poetry volumes, three novels, an autobiography and a major study of black life in Harlem, fall out of print.
McKay has long been celebrated as one of the most distinguished voices of the Harlem Renaissance — his 1922 poetry collection “Harlem Shadows” is often cited as one of the books that inaugurated the movement — but much of his legacy is still underappreciated. Part of the challenge is the sheer breadth of his activity, as a poet, political activist and social critic as well as a novelist.
From today’s vantage point, McKay looks all the more like the harbinger of a global era. “Amiable With Big Teeth,” which is set in 1935-36 amid efforts by the Harlem intelligentsia to raise money in support of Ethiopia after it had been invaded by Mussolini’s Italy, is an unsparing satire of the shenanigans of self-appointed backdoor diplomats and manipulators of public opinion — a historical novel with newfound contemporary resonance. “Romance in Marseille,” like his sprawling 1929 classic “Banjo,” also set in the south of France, shows McKay presciently grappling with the destinies of those he calls the “outcasts and outlaws of civilizations” — migrants in thriving port cities central to the flow of global commerce — and with the violent upheavals and desperate striving that deposited them there.
McKay’s Marseille novels preserve a part of that city that no longer exists. In February 1943, fearing that Resistance cells would take advantage of the cramped and labyrinthine streets of the popular neighborhood known as le Panier (the Breadbasket), the occupying Nazi authorities expelled 20,000 residents — sending hundreds of Jews and foreigners to concentration camps — and dynamited more than 34 acres along the Quai du Port. The photos of the destruction are staggering images of a gaping wound: an entire flank of the harbor reduced to rubble.
Back in 1929, McKay told a journalist that it would take readers another 30 or 40 years to understand his fiction “in its true light.” His hubris should be taken with a grain of salt, but perhaps he underestimated what Cloutier has called the belated timeliness of his art. It seems fitting that, nearly a century later, McKay’s name takes its place as part of the cityscape, as a landmark nailed quietly above the hustle and bustle at the water’s edge.