Corrections that appeared in print on Thursday, Feb. 27, 2020.
Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about President Trump’s demand that two Supreme Court justices recuse themselves from cases that involve him described incorrectly a judge whom Mr. Trump called “an Obama judge.” He is a federal judge, not a Supreme Court justice.
An article on Tuesday about a group working to influence the Trump administration on personnel decisions referred incorrectly to an individual contacted for comment. The person was a former employee of the Heritage Foundation, not a current employee.
An article on Wednesday about a surveillance system used by the National Security Agency misidentified which 2016 Ohio machete attack investigation was cited in the report as having made use of the Freedom Act phone logs system. It referred to a February 2016 attack at a restaurant, not a November 2016 attack at Ohio State University.
An article on Wednesday about the conditions Harvey Weinstein could face in prison misstated which medical facility at Rikers Island has private cells with features like showers. It is the West Facility, not the North Infirmary Command.
A headline with the Wheels column on Friday, about road trips in foreign countries, misstated the age of a vehicle driven from London to Singapore. The 1954 Land Rover would have been about 62 years old, not 48, during the 2015-2016 trip. A picture caption with the article misstated the given name of the adventurer who took the trip. He is Ray Hyland, not Roy.
Because of an editing error, an obituary on Friday about the artist Jack Youngerman misstated the given name of the director of the film “Last Year in Marienbad,” whose cast included Mr. Youngerman’s ex-wife, Delphine Seyrig. He was Alain Resnais, not Louis.
An obituary on Monday about the restaurateur and lifestyle entrepreneur B. Smith misstated the surname of her first husband, who died in 2018. He was Don Anderson, not Henderson.
An obituary on Tuesday about the Mafia underboss John Franzese misstated the name of one of his surviving daughters. She is Maryanne Shinn, not Marianne Chin.
An obituary on Sunday about the Chilean lawyer José Zalaquett, who investigated human rights abuses during Augusto Pinochet’s regime, referred incorrectly to Chile’s return to democracy. It occurred in 1990, when Patricio Aylwin took office as president, not in 1981. Pinochet had established a constitutional framework that allowed for democracy in 1981, but he continued his autocratic rule throughout the ’80s.
To contact the newsroom regarding correction requests, complaints or other comments about our coverage, please email |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| or call 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397).
Comments on editorials may be emailed to |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| or faxed to |||PHONE_NUMBER||| .
For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or email customercare@nytimes.com.