SIGAR’s 46th quarterly report sketched how the United States is propping up a corrupt and weak pauper state.
If you are like most of us, you can be forgiven for missing news during President Trump’s impeachment trial that you might otherwise have caught. The news feeds filled with political news, making it feel as if coverage of other issues was bumped.
The number of attacks, detailed in the quarterly report from the Special Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction, a government watchdog formed in 2008, highlights once more the disparity between talking points on suppressing the Taliban and the reality on the ground: Despite a concerted bombing campaign and American and Afghan offensive ground operations, Taliban fighters are still able to attack at levels similar to those a decade ago.
Honest war news is often fundamentally and necessarily dark. And the Afghan war reliably reminds those outsiders still following it of the value of skepticism when listening to a war organizer’s accounts of military campaigns. SIGAR’s 46th quarterly report — a tally that itself underlines the advanced age of the Pentagon’s failed Afghan efforts — sketched how the United States is propping up a corrupt and weak pauper state with military support and cash. The situation, by the numbers, remains beyond precarious.
With these kinds of inflows, it’s no surprise that nearly 70 percent of Afghan respondents on a recent survey said that corruption was a problem in their daily life.
The Taliban endures, Afghan security forces struggle to operate independently, civilian hunger is widespread and persistent, reported cases of polio are on the rise. If there is a clear strategy to stabilize Afghanistan and fulfill anything like the many ambitions for it that the United States and the Pentagon have expressed for almost 20 years, the report underlined, again, how far off satisfying results still seem.
SIGAR’s report, much of which focused on Afghan corruption and the United States’ role in it, did not take note of one item in the news that might have offered help in framing the high-level practices of many of the war’s leaders. Gen. Joseph Dunford, who retired after serving as commander of all American and NATO forces in Afghanistan and then chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, was appointed to the board of Lockheed Martin, the Pentagon’s largest arms supplier. Dunford, who enjoyed friendly relations with many of the journalists who covered him, will assume his new role next week, according to this Reuters report.
Stagnation and suffering on the ground. Opportunity at the top. Maybe the 47th report from the inspector general, along with the careers of those who led the wars that the Americans and Afghans still fight, will receive the wider coverage they deserve. They look very different from what the Pentagon has often described.
That is the number of years the Saudi-enforced air-and-sea blockade of northern Yemen lasted before Monday, when a United Nations mercy flight to Jordan was permitted to leave the country. Onboard were seven Yemenis suffering from an array of life-threatening conditions, and an additional 23 people, most of them women and children, are expected to depart the country later in the week on flights to Jordan and Egypt. For five years the airport in Sana, the largest city in Yemen, was closed to civilian air traffic as part of the Saudi-enforced blockade, making it impossible for citizens of the war-torn country to receive health care its own government is ill equipped to provide. This week’s airlift came after 18 months of negotiations with Saudi Arabia, whose sweeping restrictions on the entry of aid and essential goods into the country has resulted in widespread starvation and a humanitarian crisis. Read the full Times report here.
Here are four articles from The Times you might have missed.
