We checked misleading statements that President Trump made about his trial, his political enemies and his own record.
President Trump celebrated his acquittal by the Senate in meandering remarks made on Thursday, when he recited a familiar litany of falsehoods and misleading assertions about the impeachment trial against him, his political enemies and his own record. Here’s a fact check.
This is exaggerated. For months, Mr. Trump has decried a re-enactment of his July 25 phone call with President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine, read aloud by Representative Adam B. Schiff, Democrat of California and the chairman of the House Intelligence Committee.
At a hearing in September, Mr. Schiff said he was conferring “the essence” of the conversation and later clarified that his summary of the call “was meant to be at least part in parody.” But he spoke in first person, leaving the impression that he was quoting Mr. Trump.
This is exaggerated. Mr. Trump was referring inaccurately to testimony from Lt. Col. Alexander S. Vindman, the top Ukraine expert on the National Security Council who heard Mr. Trump’s call with Mr. Zelensky. Colonel Vindman said that the reconstructed transcript included a few omissions, and that he had tried to make some changes. Some edits were successful, he said, but two “substantive” corrections were not made.
But Mr. Zelensky explicitly said Burisma, the Ukrainian gas company where Mr. Biden’s son worked, and not “the company,” according to Colonel Vindman.
This is misleading. Mr. Trump was talking about international aid to Ukraine. Those European countries are, in fact, contributing to Ukraine’s efforts to counteract Russian aggression. They provide more development and humanitarian aid to Ukraine than the United States does, though the United States is the largest provider of military assistance.
European countries have contributed $1.6 billion in development assistance from 2014 to 2017, compared with $807 million from the United States, according to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
This is exaggerated. Two Republicans, Representatives Dan Bishop and Greg Murphy, won their special House elections in September. Contrary to Mr. Trump’s claim that his party pulled off upset victories, both districts were conservative strongholds.
Republicans have held Mr. Bishop’s district, North Carolina’s Ninth, since the 1960s. Mr. Murphy won his seat after the February 2019 death of Walter B. Jones Jr., a Republican who had represented the Third District since 1995. Mr. Trump carried both congressional districts by wide margins of 12 percent and 24 percent.
Since New Mexico became a state in 1912, it voted for 15 Democratic presidential candidates and 12 Republican candidates, most recently George W. Bush in 2004. According to the University of Virginia’s Center for Politics, the state currently leans Democratic for the 2020 presidential election.
False. Mr. Trump was addressing Matt Schlapp, the chairman of the American Conservative Union, which hosts the annual Conservative Political Action Conference. But he had never won the straw poll at CPAC before he became president.
Ron Paul, the libertarian and former Texas congressman, won in 2011, and Mr. Trump, a write-in candidate who received about 1 percent of the votes, did not crack the top 15. Senator Mitt Romney of Utah won in 2012; Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky in 2013, 2014 (Mr. Trump tied for 14th place) and 2015 (Mr. Trump came in eighth place); and Senator Ted Cruz of Texas in 2016 (Mr. Trump came in third).
CPAC retired the poll for 2017 and 2018, but Mr. Trump did come in first place in 2019 with 82 percent of the votes, with Mr. Romney trailing in second at 6 percent.
This is misleading. The Consumer Price Index for prescription drugs has declined under Mr. Trump, most recently in September. But that measure does not include all prescription drugs. Nor was it the “first time in 51 years” that the index had declined — it did so as well in December 2013, under the Obama administration. And it has risen since September.
Other analyses show that drug prices have continued to rise, albeit at a slower rate than in the past. GoodRx, a website that tracks costs, has found that 639 drugs have so far increased by an average of 6 percent. That’s in line with other surveys from 3 Axis Advisors, a consultancy firm that estimated an average rise of 5.3 percent this year, and Rx Savings Solutions, a company that advises employers on how to reduce drug costs, which found an average 6.9 percent increase on more than 2,500 drugs.