In a wide-ranging career, he appeared onstage, on TV and in films and was the voice of Mark Twain for a Ken Burns film and of an “Outer Limits” reboot.
Kevin Conway, who brought intensity to roles large and small on the screen and the stage, including memorable turns in the 1970s in the plays “When You Comin’ Back, Red Ryder?” and “The Elephant Man,” died on Wednesday in Manhattan. He was 77.
Mr. Conway got a late start on his acting career, but by 1969 he was making his Broadway debut in Arthur Kopit’s “Indians.” His first significant film role was in “Slaughterhouse-Five,” George Roy Hill’s adaptation of Kurt Vonnegut’s novel, in 1972.
Early on, he often played explosive characters and tough guys. In 1978 he worked opposite Sylvester Stallone in both “F.I.S.T.,” a tale of organized labor and organized crime, and “Paradise Alley,” in which he played a hoodlum in the mean streets of 1940s New York. Mr. Stallone, he said, had suggested that he get a tattoo of an eagle on his forehead to make the character more memorable.
Mr. Conway was also seen on TV in numerous series and mini-series. In 2007 alone he appeared in the short-lived NBC series “The Black Donnellys,” about Irish brothers caught up in organized crime in New York, and the mini-series “The Bronx Is Burning,” about the 1970s Yankees, in which he portrayed the team executive Gabe Paul.
After graduating from Bishop Loughlin High School in Brooklyn in 1959, he spent time in the Navy and then took a job at IBM, starting in the mailroom and working his way up to sales. On a whim he enrolled in nighttime acting classes. Eventually, he said, he asked IBM to fire him so that he could collect unemployment while pursuing an acting career.
In the early 1970s he was in a long-running Off Broadway revival of “One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest,” Dale Wasserman’s adaptation of Ken Kesey’s novel about an asylum, playing the wildly disruptive McMurphy, the role played by Kirk Douglas in 1963 on Broadway and by Jack Nicholson in the 1975 film.
In 1973 he had another Off Broadway success in Mark Medoff’s “When You Comin’ Back, Red Ryder?,” playing an amped-up man with a gun who disrupts a diner.
Relatively early in his career, though, Mr. Conway realized that he wasn’t destined to be a marquee star. “I don’t envision posters of me hung on the walls of bedrooms of young girls,” he told The Boston Globe in 1978.
In a 1995 attempt to adapt the 1954 film “On the Waterfront” into a stage play, he was the racketeering boss Johnny Friendly, the role played by Lee J. Cobb in the movie. The Broadway production closed quickly, but Mr. Conway drew praise. “Easily the most riveting contribution is Mr. Conway’s as the murderous union boss,” Vincent Canby wrote in an otherwise unenthusiastic review in The Times.
Mr. Conway also directed plays, including several productions of Jerry Sterner’s “Other People’s Money,” in which he starred when it played Off Broadway in 1989.
Mr. Conway’s marriage to Mila Burnette ended in divorce. Ms. Newman said that in addition to her, Mr. Conway, an animal advocate, would have listed his survivors as his three beloved pets: a cat, Chico, and two dogs, Cotton and Dorothy.
Decades earlier, when appearing in “The Elephant Man,” he would sometimes think of another pet dog, Jingles, when conjuring up the tenderness his character was feeling toward Merrick, the Elephant Man.
