Robert Conrad, a television tough guy best known for his lead role in the mid-1960s series “The Wild Wild West,” died on Saturday at his home in Malibu, Calif. He was 84.
The cause was heart failure, Jeff Ballard, a family spokesman, said.
Mr. Conrad’s fearlessness and good looks served him well in “Wild Wild West” and many other shows, though he found the most satisfaction in some later, meatier roles, like the fur trader he played in the mini-series “Centennial” in the late 1970s.
He was also well served early on by his ability — at least by the not very rigorous standards of the late 1950s — to affect an ethnically ambiguous character. In one of his earliest roles, he had a bit part as an Indian.
In 1959, he landed the role of Tom Lopaka, a mixed-race private detective (“half white, half bronze,” as he put it), on “Hawaiian Eye,” a crime series that ran for four seasons on ABC. It also starred, among others, Connie Stevens, and both she and Mr. Conrad, a decent vocalist who had released several records, would sometimes sing in musical interludes built into the show.
Mr. Conrad played Jim West, who was dispatched on various secret missions on behalf of the government of President Ulysses S. Grant. West had an arsenal of quirky gadgets — exploding billiard balls, a pistol on a track hidden up his sleeve — and a partner (played by Ross Martin) who was adept at outlandish disguises.
The fights, with Mr. Conrad often doing his own stunts, got a lot of attention. So did those tight clothes, especially the distinctive trousers.
The dark-colored pants split so often, he said, that he took to wearing dark-colored underwear rather than white.
If the pants had a short shelf life, it was because the show’s rough-and-tumble scenes put them to the test repeatedly.
But certainly Mr. Conrad was frequently the one doing the punching, rolling and leaping. Mr. Conrad said the scripts would often say simply, “He fights,” and he and the stunt coordinator, Whitey Hughes, would come up with something. Once, near the end of Season 3, the result was almost catastrophic.
Mr. Conrad was born Conrad Robert Falk on March 1, 1935, on the South Side of Chicago to teenage parents. His father, Leonard Falk, later was superintendent at a New Jersey plant that made chocolate flavoring. His mother, Jacqueline Hartman, later became a publicist under the name Jacqueline Hubbard.
Mr. Conrad began his show-business career as a singer, performing with a trio in Chicago hotels when he was in his early 20s. A friend, the actor Nick Adams, urged Mr. Conrad to come to Hollywood and got him a bit part in a movie he was cast in, “Juvenile Jungle.” Mr. Adams eventually dropped out of that film, but Mr. Conrad remained, making his film debut.
He began getting small roles in shows like “Bat Masterson,” “Maverick” and “Sea Hunt.” Then came “Hawaiian Eye,” with the character he played there, Tom Lopaka, also turning up in several episodes of another ABC crime series, “77 Sunset Strip.” Mr. Conrad was also one of the young stars of “Palm Springs Weekend,” a fun-in-the-sun movie that came out in 1963.
The show made its debut in September 1965 and ran for four seasons and more than 100 episodes. It drew decent ratings, but a wave of concern about violence on television helped push it off the air in 1969. (One version of the show’s animated opening montage showed Mr. Conrad’s character kissing a woman, then slugging her.) He had no regrets, since the on-set injury was still fresh in his mind.
“I was afraid someone was going to get carted out of there on a stretcher,” he said.
If Mr. Conrad acknowledged the thinness of his “Wild Wild West” role, he was more proud of two later television efforts. One was “Black Sheep Squadron” (also titled “Baa Baa Black Sheep”), an NBC series that ran from 1976 to 1978 in which he played the real-life World War II combat pilot known as Pappy Boyington. The other was “Centennial,” a 1978 mini-series based on James A. Michener’s historical novel.
Mr. Conrad also starred or appeared in numerous other television shows, including “The D.A.,” “A Man Called Sloane” and “High Mountain Rangers.” He reprised his best-known role in two television movies, “The Wild Wild West Revisited” in 1979 and “More Wild Wild West” in 1980.
In 2003 Mr. Conrad was charged with driving drunk after his car crashed into another vehicle, seriously injuring the other driver and himself. Mr. Conrad, who was left with some right arm and hand paralysis, was fined and sentenced to six months of house arrest.
He married Joan Kenlay in 1952; the marriage ended in divorce in 1977. Soon afterward, he married LaVelda Fann, who was Miss National Teenager 1977 when he met her at the pageant at which she was passing on her crown. (He was the M.C.) They divorced in 2010. His survivors include five children from his first marriage, Joan, Shane, Christian, Christy and Nancy; three children from his second marriage, Kaja, Camille and Chelsea; and 18 grandchildren.
Mr. Conrad took delight in the fact that, thanks to reruns and retrospectives, “The Wild Wild West” attained a certain cult status with fans who weren’t yet born when it was originally on TV.
Michel Levenson contributed reporting.