Health officials are focusing on faster diagnoses of the coronavirus. A Chinese doctor who warned of the outbreak has died.
Death toll in China surpasses 600.
Health officials focus on faster diagnoses.
Wuhan is told to round up infected residents for mass quarantine camps.
Chinese doctor who warned of outbreak has died.
Refunds for U.S.-China air travel increase 500 percent.
This live briefing has ended. Read the latest developments in the coronavirus outbreak here.
The death toll and the number of infections continued to climb in China, according to official data released early Friday.
Nationwide, more than 70 new deaths and 3,100 new cases emerged in the previous 24 hours, the national health authorities said Friday morning.
So far, the vast majority of deaths have been in Hubei, though deaths have also been reported in the Philippines, Hong Kong and other Chinese provinces. There are also more than 200 cases of infection outside China.
Many doctors believe that deaths and infections in China are undercounted because hospitals and laboratories are under severe strain to test for the virus. Local officials in Hubei Province, the center of the outbreak, have called on health care workers to speed up the process.
The W.H.O. said it had activated an international “network of specialized referral laboratories” to support individual countries’ labs in confirming new cases. It also said it would ship 250,000 test kits to 159 laboratories across the world, to help speed up diagnoses.
In the United States, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said on Thursday that it would distribute a new test to diagnose coronavirus infection to state and international laboratories.
Until now, the C.D.C. has performed all of the diagnostic testing being done in the United States and assisted with diagnoses of patients abroad. Doctors had to send patient samples to an agency laboratory and wait for a response, and the process could take days.
The distribution of the new test kit is expected to greatly speed efforts to diagnose patients. It will be sent to 200 labs in the United States and about 200 labs internationally.
Each test kit can process 700 to 800 patient specimens. Results are available in about four hours.
A senior Chinese official has ordered the authorities in the city of Wuhan to immediately round up all residents who have been infected with the coronavirus and place them in isolation, quarantine or designated hospitals.
Sun Chunlan, a vice premier tasked with leading the central government’s response to the outbreak that is centered in Wuhan, said city investigators should go to each home to check the temperatures of every resident and interview infected patients’ close contacts.
The city’s authorities have raced to meet these instructions by setting up makeshift mass quarantine shelters this week. The shelters are meant for coronavirus patients with milder symptoms, the government has said. But concerns are growing about whether the centers, which will house thousands of people in large spaces, will be able to provide even basic care to patients and protect against the risk of further infection.
The quarantine comes amid a lockdown of the city and much of the surrounding province of Hubei that has exacerbated a shortage of medical supplies, testing kits and hospital beds.
The lockdown — encircling roughly 50 million people — is unprecedented in scale and experts have questioned its ethics.
The Chinese government says the quarantine has prevented a broader outbreak, but Wuhan and its home province, Hubei, have borne the brunt of the epidemic as the sudden shutdown of transportation links into and around the area slowed the shipping of vital medical supplies.
The fatality rate in Wuhan is 4.1 percent and 2.8 percent in Hubei, compared to 0.17 percent elsewhere in mainland China.
A doctor who was among the first to warn about the coronavirus outbreak, only to be silenced by the police, died on Friday after himself becoming infected with the virus, the hospital treating him reported.
The Wuhan City Central Hospital said at 3:48 a.m. Friday that the doctor, Li Wenliang, had just died. “We deeply regret and mourn this,” it said on the Chinese social media site Weibo.
Just hours earlier, the hospital had said it was still fighting to save Dr. Li, 34.
Dr. Li’s death set off an outpouring of grief and anger on social media, with commenters on Weibo, a Twitter-like website, demanding an apology from the authorities to Dr. Li and his family. “I want freedom of speech” also emerged as one of the top trending topics on the site, until government censors stopped the messages.
The police and others questioned Dr. Li in early January after he warned a circle of medical school classmates on Dec. 30 about a viral outbreak that he said appeared similar to SARS. The police compelled him to sign a statement denouncing his warning as an unfounded and illegal rumor.
Demand for flights to mainland China from the United States took a nosedive in late January as the severity of the outbreak became clear, according to data from the Airlines Reporting Corporation, an industry-owned transaction clearinghouse.
Sales, which were only somewhat lower early in the month, were down 59 percent in the fourth week of January compared with that period the year before, according to the data, which is based on 1.8 million tickets sold in January 2019 and 2020.
Ticket refunds skyrocketed by 534 percent that week, year over year.
Demand for flights to Asia showed a smaller decline of 18 percent in the fourth week of January, with the number of refunds up 215 percent. Airlines around the world have cited such declining demand in recent weeks as they have severely cut service to mainland China, with the cancellations spreading to Hong Kong in recent days.
Air China, one of the most active nonstop carriers between the United States and China, cited that drop in demand this week in a request for federal approval to sharply reduce service. In an emergency request filed with the Transportation Department on Sunday, the airline said it wanted to replace its current American flights with just two routes, one serving each coast.
One route would connect Beijing with Los Angeles and San Francisco. The other would connect Beijing with Kennedy International Airport in New York and Dulles International Airport near Washington. The plan omits existing service to Newark, Chicago and Houston.
In 2018, Air China carried more passengers than any other airline on nonstop flights between the United States and China. Of the 8.5 million people who flew on such flights that year, about 19 percent flew on Air China. United Airlines was No. 2 with 17 percent.
Wynn Resorts, Estee Lauder and Nintendo join list of companies hit by coronavirus.
As the coronavirus spreads through China and the government tries to respond, the world is acknowledging just how much it has come to count on its No. 2 economy.
The American casino operator Wynn Resorts is losing between $2.4 million and $2.6 million every day that its casino in Macau, the semiautonomous Chinese territory, remains closed because of the coronavirus, the company’s chief executive, Matt Maddox, said Thursday.
This week, officials in Macau asked its 41 casinos to close for half a month, as they struggled to contain the coronavirus outbreak afflicting China and the region.
Three-quarters of Wynn’s revenue comes from Macau.
Estee Lauder, the luxury cosmetics company, warned that the outbreak would hit its financial results “in the near term,” predicting that sales in its third quarter of 2020 would be the most affected. It pegged this to the impact on air travel and tourism to key global shopping areas.
The American luxury brand Tapestry, which owns Coach, Kate Spade and Stuart Weitzman, said the outbreak was “significantly impacting” its business, with the majority of its Chinese stores closed.
Nintendo, the Japanese maker of video games and gaming devices, said Thursday that shipments of its Nintendo Switch game console to customers in Japan would be delayed.
And Yum Brands, which operates KFC and Pizza Hut franchises in China, had said earlier this week that nearly one-third of its restaurants had been closed because of the outbreak.
But ArcelorMittal, the world’s biggest steel maker, had a more positive outlook, saying it expected the virus to have “a short-term negative demand impact in China and to a lesser degree elsewhere,” but that demand would recover in the rest of the year.
The number of Americans quarantined on military bases continues to rise.
Two more flights evacuating Americans from Wuhan, China, the center of the coronavirus outbreak, are scheduled to land in the United States this week. Passengers will be quarantined at hotel facilities on Lackland Air Force Base in San Antonio and Eppley Airfield in Omaha, Neb., government officials said.
Their arrival will bring the total number of evacuation flights to five. The first carried 195 Americans out of Wuhan last week; they are quarantined on a military base in Riverside, Calif. Two more flights landed in the United States early on Wednesday morning, and the 348 passengers, mostly American citizens, will be held at Travis Air Force Base in Fairfield, Calif., and at Marine Corps Air Station Miramar in San Diego.
All of the passengers have been ordered to remain in quarantine for 14 days from the time they left Wuhan. Two weeks is believed to be the maximum time it takes a person to become ill after being exposed to the coronavirus. Read more about what life has been like for them in quarantine.
Virus’s spread raises fears about Tokyo Olympics.
As the coronavirus continues to spread, the clock is ticking toward the start of the 2020 Summer Olympics in Tokyo, raising concerns that the outbreak could disrupt the Games.
The opening ceremony is scheduled to be held in less than six months, on July 24, and Japanese officials sought on Thursday to allay fears that the dangerous virus would have any effect on the Games, athletes and fans.
“I’d like to make it clear that there have been no talks or plans being considered between organizers and the International Olympic Committee since the World Health Organization declared an emergency,” Prime Minister Shinzo Abe told Parliament.
Still, the threat remains. Only a few dozen cases have been confirmed in Japan, but the presence of a cruise ship off Yokohama with more than 2,000 quarantined passengers offered an all-too-vivid symbol of the disruptive potential of the virus.
Toshiro Muto, the chief executive of the Tokyo Olympic organizing committee, said it was important not to “unnecessarily stir up a feeling of crisis,” the Japanese public broadcaster NHK reported, but he allowed for a different scenario.
W.H.O. will host a meeting of scientists.
To help stem the spread of the new coronavirus, the World Health Organization will convene a scientific meeting in Geneva on Feb. 11-12 to focus on speeding the development of treatments, diagnostic tests and vaccines.
At a news briefing on Thursday, W.H.O. officials said scientists still do not know exactly how the virus is transmitted and what the spectrum of severity is — in other words, how many people develop severe symptoms that can be fatal, and how many have mild cases.
W.H.O. reported about 3,700 new cases on Wednesday, a slight dip from the figure reported on Tuesday. Despite the decline, “it’s right now too early to make predictions” about the course of the epidemic, said Dr. Michael Ryan, executive director of W.H.O.’s Health Emergencies Program.
“Nearly 3,700 new cases of coronavirus in a single day is nothing to celebrate,” he added.
A third coronavirus patient has been confirmed in Italy, according to an official with the Italian health ministry.
The patient was one of 56 Italian evacuees from Wuhan, who arrived in Rome on Monday and were put in a military site in Rome.
Two other confirmed coronavirus patients in Italy, who are Chinese citizens from Wuhan, remain in critical condition at a hospital in Rome, where they are being treated with an experimental combination of antiviral drugs.
One drug, ritonavir, is often used with other medications to treat H.I.V. and has shown “antiviral activity on coronaviruses,” according to the hospital. The other drug, remdesivir, was developed as a treatment for Ebola but has not yet been approved for use against any disease. There is some evidence that it could work against the new coronavirus, and Gilead, the company that owns the remdesivir patent, has donated doses to China.
With no proven cure in sight, the race is on to find an effective treatment for the new coronavirus. In China, scientists have reported preliminary success in treating coronavirus patients with a combination of Arbidol, an antiviral drug used for treating influenza in China and Russia, and Darunavir, an anti-H.I.V. drug. But the researchers did not say how many patients they had treated with the combination therapy, and their findings have not been reviewed by outside experts.
The Chinese authorities have also turned to other types of treatments. In a treatment plan released last week, the National Health Commission of China listed traditional Chinese remedies as well as antiviral drugs.
61 now stricken with coronavirus on cruise ship off Japan.
Things were looking up on Thursday for the more than 2,000 passengers quarantined on a cruise ship in Yokohama, Japan: Meals were coming on a more regular schedule. The internet was upgraded to a wider bandwidth. There was even official approval to breathe some fresh air.
Still, on the second day of a planned two-week quarantine, there was persistent concern about the spreading coronavirus and dread about long days ahead stuck inside the cabins of the ship, the Diamond Princess.
As Japanese health officials continued to screen 273 passengers who were potentially exposed to the virus, they said that 20 of the 102 tested so far had been found to be positive.
The first 10 cases were announced on Wednesday, and the others on Thursday. The new cases involved four Japanese passengers, two Americans, two Canadians, one New Zealander and one Taiwanese. They were removed from the ship on Thursday and taken to medical facilities.
On Friday morning, however, the numbers had taken a turn for the worse. Japan’s Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare announced that the number of infected passengers aboard the boat had risen to 61.
The 41 new cases were to be taken off the ship for medical treatment. Of the 41 new cases, 21 were Japanese, the ministry said.
Some posted a letter that had been delivered to their rooms saying that the ship was negotiating with Japanese quarantine officials to allow small groups with face masks to breathe air on open decks.
China warns Taiwan not to use the outbreak as an excuse for independence.
China’s government on Thursday accused Taiwan’s governing party of exploiting the coronavirus outbreak to push for Taiwan’s independence, referring to its effort to participate in World Health Organization discussions over the outbreak.
Taiwan, which is self-governed but which China claims is part of its territory, has repeatedly lobbied to be included in panels held by the W.H.O., the United Nation’s health agency. The W.H.O. cannot share information about the virus independently with Taiwan, because the United Nations considers it part of China.
The exclusion of Taiwanese medical experts from international public health meetings during the SARS epidemic of 2002-3 had hampered prevention efforts, said Su Ih-jen, the former director general of the Taiwan Centers for Disease Control.
“The two sides of the Taiwan Strait must extend olive branches at this time, put aside political considerations and work together to fight the epidemic,” he wrote that in an opinion piece for The Times.
The Taiwanese government has been taking tough measures to prevent the virus from infiltrating its borders. Health officials on Thursday banned all international cruise ships from its ports after a 60-year-old Taiwanese woman contracted the virus on a cruise ship now quarantined in Yokohoma, Japan.
Reporting was contributed by Elaine Yu, Daniel Victor, Sui-Lee Wee, Raymond Zhong, Tiffany May, Carlos Tejada, Isabella Kwai, Amy Qin, Elsie Chen, Chris Buckley, Michael Wolgelenter, Motoko Rich, Elisabetta Povoledo, Miriam Jordan, Julie Bosman, Zolan Kanno-Youngs, Katie Robertson, Cliff Krauss, Roni Caryn Rabin, Niraj Chokshi, Vivian Wang and Campbell Robertson.