With the president on the verge of acquittal in the Senate, Speaker Nancy Pelosi made the case that Democrats had won by losing. “He has been impeached forever,” she said in an interview.
WASHINGTON — Speaker Nancy Pelosi always knew impeachment would end this way: with the acquittal of President Trump.
Now that it is all but over — and Mr. Trump is about to march onto her home turf, the Capitol, for his inevitable victory lap at his State of the Union address on Tuesday night — Ms. Pelosi must reckon with what she has wrought. Her Republican detractors say she put moderate Democrats in political peril and weakened the House inquiry by failing to wage a prolonged legal fight to obtain critical testimony that the president was blocking.
And Republicans gloat that the failed attempt at removing Mr. Trump has only made him more politically powerful, energizing voters to rally behind a president who survived the ultimate effort to take him down.
But Democrats argue that Ms. Pelosi won by losing, setting the stage for an election that is not only about the kitchen table issues that carried them to the majority in 2018, but also about exposing the president as unfit for office — and Republicans as complicit in his misbehavior. In an interview Monday, Ms. Pelosi said Democrats had forced Republicans to do what Mr. Trump never has: Admit that he was wrong to pressure Ukraine to investigate his political rivals.
Impeachment has been a tricky enterprise for both parties on both sides of the Capitol. In the Senate, where Democrats are in the minority, Mr. Trump’s impeachment trial — which is expected to conclude with his acquittal on Wednesday — forced vulnerable Republicans in swing states to align themselves with a president who brooks no dissent. They bristled at being painted as beholden to Mr. Trump, reacting angrily when the lead House impeachment manager referred to a news report that said Republican senators had been told their heads would be “on a pike” if they voted against him.
But in the House, impeachment was widely viewed as a gamble for moderates who represent districts where Mr. Trump is popular. While Ms. Pelosi gets generally good marks from her rank and file, some centrist members now grumble privately that she made some tactical missteps.
Her refusal to send the articles of impeachment to the Senate for several weeks after the House adopted them, which forced a delay in the Senate trial, generated blowback in swing districts, said Democratic lawmakers who insisted on anonymity to speak candidly. They cringed when Ms. Pelosi made a spectacle out of the eventual signing of the articles in January, when she distributed commemorative pens to colleagues. Critics said it undermined her own oft-stated message that this was a “somber” and “prayerful moment” for the country.
Other Democrats have questioned the decision to impeach Mr. Trump without exhausting the House’s legal remedies to compel the testimony of key White House witnesses. Those fights could have taken months, potentially pushing a vote to charge him up against the presidential election, or even beyond.
But most Democrats defend Ms. Pelosi. With the economy booming and unemployment low, Mr. Trump should be coasting to victory in 2020, they say. Instead, Republicans like Senators Marco Rubio and Lamar Alexander now say Mr. Trump violated the bounds of appropriate presidential behavior. Senator Lisa Murkowski, Republican of Alaska, on Monday called Mr. Trump’s behavior “shameful and wrong,” and said he had degraded the office.
And at the end of the day, Mr. Trump will still go down as only the third president in American history to be impeached. It is an “ugly distinction,” in the words of Brian Fallon, the executive director of Demand Justice, a progressive advocacy group.
It is no secret in Washington that Ms. Pelosi was never eager to impeach the president. She resisted it for months — even after Robert S. Mueller III, the special counsel investigating Russian interference in the 2016 election, outlined 10 possible instances of obstruction of justice by the president. She said it would be too divisive and that it ought to be bipartisan, comments that Republicans throw back at her today.
Ms. Pelosi has answered the question before. She argues, as she did on Monday, that in trying to use Ukraine to gain an advantage in the 2020 election, “the president gave us no choice but to protect and defend our Constitution and oath of office we take.” While some say that Mr. Trump’s acquittal will only embolden him, both Ms. Pelosi and Representative Adam B. Schiff, the lead House impeachment manager, insisted the inquiry and trial had, at the very least, increased scrutiny of a president who ordinarily feels no constraints.
“To those who would say that the president will now feel unbound, he already felt unbound,” Mr. Schiff said.
But Carlos Curbelo, a former Republican congressman from Florida who lost re-election in 2018, said that in pursuing impeachment, Ms. Pelosi may have created an opportunity for Democratic presidential candidates to follow the playbook of George W. Bush, who campaigned in 2000 on restoring dignity to the White House after the impeachment of President Bill Clinton.
