Ms. Stapinski is a journalist and author.
If I had to count, I’d say my father spoke 20 paragraphs to me in his lifetime. Communication was not his strong suit. When I was 22, he died at the age of 59, which once seemed old. But now that I’m 54, I realize he died young, with so much left unsaid.
When he had a few drinks in him, he talked a little more and could be funny. But most of the time, Daddy kept his “trap shut” — one of his few expressions, usually aimed at my mother.
Gregarious and fun, she’s the one who always filled in the blanks that Daddy left. Now 88, she loved to dance and write when she was a teenager — qualities I was sure attracted my taciturn dad.
We knew Daddy loved us, but not by his words: He worked in a frozen food warehouse in Jersey City, N.J., at a job he probably hated (though he never talked about it) to feed his family with his working man’s paycheck — and with the lobster and steaks that would “fall off the back” of the delivery trucks.
Whenever I climbed into bed with my parents, he scratched my back. If I got a good report card, he’d peel a $20 bill off the roll he kept in his warehouse uniform pocket. The only time I saw his handwriting was when he signed those report cards.
Because we never had an adult conversation, I wondered, as I grew older, what made him tick. He was the youngest boy in a family of nine and was nicknamed Babe, which was stitched in yellow script on the bright blue bowling shirts I inherited from him. He didn’t read books but devoured three newspapers a day, though he never spoke of current events.
Then I discovered the valentines.
One recent afternoon my mother casually mentioned letters he’d written her when he was in the Marine Corps before they were married.
Love letters? She pulled a pillow case from her hope chest; inside was a tattered red cardboard box filled with 15 letters, three valentines and a crushed Whitman’s Sampler whose chocolates she’d polished off over 70 years ago.
They were the first valentines she’d ever received.
I took the yellowed letters and cards home and read through them carefully, as if attempting to crack the code to a long-ago encrypted military transmission. I was shocked by the verbose and expressive teenager I found.
Right in front of me was my parents’ courtship in black, white, red and pink. I ran my fingers over the satin hearts and luxuriated in my father’s long sentences and lovely handwriting, which I recognized from those signed report cards. But mostly I marveled at the dynamics of their relationship. This narrative contradicted everything I thought I knew.
The first letter, dated Feb. 8, 1947, is a one-page note typed on onionskin. Daddy complains about the bitter below-zero days outside his barracks in Scotia, N.Y. “I haven’t got anything to say except that I love you,” he writes.
I’m not sure what my mother was saying in response, since he didn’t save her letters. But when I asked, she said she loved him, but loved her freedom more. She was only 16 and wasn’t ready to commit. He was a bit older, but a baby himself at 19.
Three days before Christmas his tone has changed. My mother, a raven-haired Italian beauty before raven-haired Italian beauties were the rage, has given him a photo of herself.
Some sort of fight followed, because by February, he’s asking her forgiveness. It’s snowing, a whole year has passed since that first letter, and he tells her about an old church burning down near Schenectady. “The fire was so great you could see it from miles away.” It’s the perfect metaphor for what’s happening to their courtship and he plays it for all it’s worth.
It’s the “why?” that really killed me. My father, so strong and silent all the time, was this sensitive, insecure soul inside his Marine blues and later, that warehouse uniform. Now that I knew him better, I missed and grieved for him even more.  And cry with. I dried my eyes and read on.

One final letter talks about how he’s coming home and how she needs to “get the tube ready.” I hesitated to ask what that meant, but it was all very innocent. He meant the lipstick tube, because they’re going to kiss so much. The letter is intricately folded into a tight rectangle and I can just picture my young father taking the time to fold it and fold it again and again, placing it in a small envelope and sending it off to the love of his life.
Written on the front are the words “I still love you” in all caps.
I still love you, too, I want to write back.
