Bernie Sanders is the front-runner, and Joe Biden is in serious trouble. Here’s what happened in the first primary of the 2020 race.
“This victory here is the beginning of the end for Donald Trump,” Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont told supporters celebrating in New Hampshire.
Let me take this opportunity to thank the people of New Hampshire for a great victory tonight. [cheering] This victory here is the beginning of the end for Donald Trump. We’re going to Nevada, we’re going to South Carolina and we’re going to win those states as well. [cheering] No matter who wins — and we certainly hope it’s going to be us — we are going to unite together, we are going to unite together and defeat the most dangerous president in the modern history of this country.
MANCHESTER, N.H. — Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont won New Hampshire’s Democratic presidential primary Tuesday night, consolidating support on the left in his second strong showing in as many weeks.
Mr. Sanders fended off two moderate rivals, former Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind., and Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota. Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts and former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. finished behind them.
Only a small fraction of the total available delegates have been awarded in the Democratic primary so far. So what do Tuesday night’s results mean for the race going forward? Read on.
Mr. Sanders won the most votes in Iowa, even if he narrowly lost the delegate battle. He won the New Hampshire primary. His support among people of color has grown in polls, while his chief competitor for those voters, Mr. Biden, has been fading in the overall contest. He has climbed to the lead in some national polls. And he is raising more money — and has more money — than any of his rivals who are not billionaires.
Mr. Buttigieg, the former mayor of South Bend, Ind., finished in the top two in both Iowa and New Hampshire. Ms. Klobuchar surprised with a third-place showing in New Hampshire. But neither of those candidates have demonstrated any appeal to black and Latino voters so far. And a candidate who has, Mr. Biden, stumbled to a fourth-place finish in Iowa and was in fifth place in New Hampshire.
After her relatively strong third-place showing in the Iowa caucuses, Ms. Warren’s campaign came to New Hampshire and made minimal adjustments, hoping the same message of unity she closed with in Iowa would lift her as rivals began taking more overt shots at one another. It didn’t.
