Mr. Biswas is a critic.
Twenty years ago, on Feb. 4, 2000, a shock wave reverberated from the heart of Europe: The far-right Freedom Party of Austria, founded in 1956 by National Socialist activists, entered government. Led by Jörg Haider, a provocateur who had made a name for himself rallying against the “Überfremdung” (“over-foreignization”) of his country and notorious for praising the Waffen SS and Hitler’s labor policies, the party’s October 1999 election campaign achieved the best result for any far-right party in a European democracy since World War II, taking 27 percent of the vote.
But in 2017, when Mr. Haider’s Freedom Party successor, Heinz-Christian Strache, scored a similar general election result and the party was once again invited into a ruling alliance, there was little attempt to ostracize the country. President Emmanuel Macron of France and Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany moved quickly to welcome the new Austrian government, led by the 31-year-old conservative Sebastian Kurz, who sought success by adopting much of the Freedom Party’s anti-migrant stance. The youngest leader in the expanded European Union’s 28 nations, Mr. Kurz had called for Muslim-run kindergartens to be shut down and refugees relocated to outside Europe’s borders.
The Freedom Party was gifted the foreign, interior and defense departments, and Mr. Strache — who denigrated Islam as “fascistic” and as a young man had been arrested at a torch-lit neo-Nazi procession in Germany — took control of the office of vice chancellor. The coalition agreement was fittingly announced at Kahlenberg, the site of the Battle of Vienna, which resulted in the defeat of the Ottoman Empire in 1683. Crowds gathering in the Austrian capital to oppose the new government were a fraction of those who came out nearly two decades earlier, when protests were so severe that the new cabinet could only enter and exit the inauguration ceremony through hidden underground passageways.
So it proved. Ms. Le Pen’s far-right party successfully displaced the traditional conservatives (and dwarfed the incumbent Socialists) to make the presidential runoff in 2017. Though ultimately defeated by Mr. Macron, she still attracted over 10 million votes. Her rebranded National Rally party now finds itself neck-and-neck with Mr. Macron’s En Marche in the polls, cautiously optimistic of victory in 2022.
Mr. Haider died in a 2008 car accident in Carinthia, the province where he had been governor for nearly a decade. In 2019, Mr. Strache, embroiled in a corruption scandal, was forced to step down as Austrian vice chancellor and was subsequently expelled from the Freedom Party. Yet their messages — politically anti-establishment, culturally anti-immigrant and anti-Islam — remain popular, permeating through Europe.
K. Biswas (@BizK1) is a writer whose work has appeared in The New Statesman, The Nation and The Times Literary Supplement.