A giant federal agency in turmoil faces more of it after a senior official is ousted.
WASHINGTON — In a sign of continuing turmoil at the Department of Veterans Affairs, a deputy secretary in charge of key initiatives was dismissed on Monday, just as the agency rolls out complex changes to its health care system and a plan to address veterans suicide.
Officials at the department declined to provide further details, but the abruptness of Mr. Byrne’s forced departure and Mr. Wilkie’s terse language suggested a major problem.
Mr. Byrne, who was confirmed by the Senate just five months ago, was closely involved in the agency’s Office of Accountability and Whistle-Blower Protection. The office was set up by the Trump administration in 2017 to root out malfeasance and has become a target of accusations that it retaliated against the very people it was meant to protect.
As the second-most senior person at the Department of Veterans Affairs, one of the government’s largest and most historically troubled agencies, Mr. Byrne had broad authority over a number of sensitive issues and important initiatives as the department moves to direct thousands of veterans to health care providers outside the agency’s legacy network.
The agency’s $18 billion attempt to modernize its health care records has been troubled with its communications with the Defense Department system, and with maintaining enough staff for an ambitious debut deadline next month. As the agency moves to get more health care for veterans in their community under the new plan, it has struggled to increase its network of doctors to meet the popular demand.
An initial task force plan to combat veterans suicide — a key policy initiative — has not been met with satisfaction at the White House, three people familiar with the plan said, in part because it is viewed as focusing too narrowly on reducing firearms, which are a leading method of suicide. Mr. Byrne alluded to the emphasis on veterans suicide as a Trump administration priority at his confirmation hearings.
Last fall, a senior policy adviser on female veterans issues for the House said she was assaulted at the V.A. Medical Center in Washington, a complaint that was sent to the inspector general, in part at the behest of Representative Mark Takano, Democrat of California and chairman of the Veterans Affairs Committee.
That, in turn, drew its own rebuke from the inspector general, Michael J. Missal, who wrote to Mr. Wilkie saying that characterizing the allegation as unsubstantiated was incorrect. “Reaching a decision to close the investigation with no criminal charges does not mean that the underlying allegation is unsubstantiated,” the inspector general wrote.
Christina Mandreucci, a spokeswoman for the department, said the dismissal of Mr. Byrne “has nothing to do with the allegations” brought by Ms. Goldstein.
Veterans are an important segment of President Trump’s base, and he has made their health care and other programs a centerpiece of his campaign.
But the Department of Veterans Affairs has persistently been under fire, and has had four secretaries over the last five years. Mr. Byrne, who once served as the department’s general counsel, was a Marine infantry officer and a former international narcotics prosecutor who also worked in several government agencies before taking the job with Mr. Wilkie.
Mr. Trump approved of his dismissal, someone with knowledge of the termination said.
“Despite speaking with Secretary Wilkie this morning about changes to V.A.’s staff structure, I have many questions about what Deputy Secretary Byrne’s firing means for our veterans and V.A. as a whole,” Mr. Takano said in a statement.
