From Goldman Sachs to Amazon to the Democratic contenders, older rich men are going wild online.
Twitter was founded in 2006. Fourteen years later, and perhaps thanks to the influential example of President Trump, the masters of the universe have apparently learned to post to it.
This week alone, a plethora of influential politicians and business leaders have at least attempted to use the social media platform with the same air of casual authenticity coupled with severity that characterizes many of Mr. Trump’s tweets.
On Thursday, Mike Bloomberg responded to a taunting tweet from Mr. Trump — pitting him against his rival for the Democratic candidacy, Senator Bernie Sanders — by telling Mr. Trump that their mutual connections had nothing but contempt for him.
Mr. Bloomberg is, among other things, competing with Mr. Trump on his own terms on social media — and has spent no shortage of money in doing so. But he was not alone last week in bluntly expressing himself on social media.
Lloyd Blankfein, the senior chairman of Goldman Sachs who is 65 and very, very rich, tweeted late on Tuesday about the possibility of Senator Sanders becoming the Democratic nominee for president.
“If Dems go on to nominate Sanders, the Russians will have to reconsider who to work for to best screw up the US. Sanders is just as polarizing as Trump AND he’ll ruin our economy and doesn’t care about our military. If I’m Russian, I go with Sanders this time around,” Mr. Blankfein tweeted.
Mr. Blankfein’s tweet came only a day after a series of tweets from Jay Carney, the former White House Press Secretary and senior vice president for global corporate affairs at Amazon. Mr. Carney lashed out at critics of an op-ed he wrote in The New York Times (also about Mr. Sanders), criticizing their word choice and suggesting that one might be a bot.
Mr. Carney’s sudden spate of unusual and aggressive tweets makes sense in the context of a less private Amazon ecosystem. His boss, Jeff Bezos, recently set Twitter alight with his own post, the point of which appeared to be that Mr. Bezos had met Lizzo at the Super Bowl.
Historically, Goldman Sachs and Amazon are known for extremely careful and policed corporate messaging. But in 2020, the example of the tweeter-in-chief (and, clearly, the specter of Senator Sanders competing in the general election) seems to have loosened their Twitter fingers.
This week’s tweets are meant to influence voters, and Mr. Trump has modeled a singular method of influence in that regard. Rebecca Katz, who has worked as a communications adviser to Mayor Bill de Blasio and Cynthia Nixon, attributed this week’s tweets to the increasingly blurry lines between politics, business, media and celebrity.
Jack Grieve, a fellow at the University of Birmingham and one of the authors of a paper about linguistic variation on Mr. Trump’s Twitter account, said in an interview that the style of the president’s posts was not arbitrary.
That informality was characterized by short sentences, an abundance of pronouns, contractions, questions and direct interactions with other users on the site, Mr. Grieve said.
