The decision dealt a blow to Joe Biden, who had hoped his longstanding ties to organized labor would win him the union’s coveted support.
A powerful union in Nevada declined to endorse a candidate in the Democratic primary, dealing a blow to former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., who had hoped his longstanding ties to organized labor and opposition to “Medicare for all” would win him its support and a much-needed boost in the state’s upcoming caucuses.
Those goals are threefold, she said: One job should be enough to make a living, health care should be preserved, and the immigration system should be reformed. In the general election, she added, the union’s foremost goal will be defeating President Trump.
The union has been a vocal opponent of Medicare for all, arguing that while health care should be a right, workers must be able to choose where and how to get their insurance. The union has its own health plan and does not want it to be eliminated in favor of a single-payer system.
The union, which represents tens of thousands of workers in Las Vegas and Reno, has sat out primaries before: It did not take sides in 2016, when Hillary Clinton defeated Mr. Sanders in Nevada. But there is a reason its endorsement has been one of the most coveted in the Democratic primary: In 2008, it got behind Barack Obama and played a pivotal role in helping him claim the Nevada caucuses.
The union’s admiration for Mr. Biden is clear: While Ms. Argüello-Kline said on Thursday that the group respected “every single political candidate” in the Democratic race, Mr. Biden was the only one she mentioned by name.
But Mr. Biden’s lackluster performances in Iowa and New Hampshire, and the broader uncertainty hanging over the race, made it difficult for the union to endorse someone who could be out of the primary next month.
Rank-and-file members also favored a variety of candidates, and members of the union’s leadership are fond of much of the field, so they did not want to alienate their workers or a potential nominee, according to Democrats familiar with their thinking.
But the union’s decision to remain officially neutral will be a boon to Mr. Sanders. In the first two nominating contests, he benefited from divisions among more moderate Democrats and the decision of many individuals and institutions, including labor, to split their support or stay out of the fray.
The candidates will still devote considerable time to wooing culinary workers, and some are sure to visit them in the Las Vegas casinos where many are employed. The major candidates have all addressed the workers at forums, and many also courted the union’s local and national leaders.
