The state will also pay $100,000 to Kenneth Caban Gonzalez, who was wrongfully arrested on charges that he provided false documents with his driver’s license application.
The state of Georgia on Monday agreed to remove an extra layer of requirements for Puerto Ricans to transfer their driver’s licenses to the state as part of a settlement in a federal class-action discrimination lawsuit.
The Georgia Department of Driver Services said it had eliminated the knowledge and road test component of the application process for those who moved to the state from five United States territories.
People from Puerto Rico, Guam, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa and the Northern Mariana Islands will now be treated the same as license holders from other states who become Georgia residents, the state said.
The change came after a Hinesville, Ga., man, who was born in Puerto Rico sued the driver services commissioner and a licensing inspector in United States District Court in Atlanta last July for discrimination.
The man, Kenneth Caban Gonzalez, 23, was wrongfully arrested and accused of providing false documentation with his transfer application, which was held up for more than two years, the lawsuit said. The charges were later dropped.
Kira Romero-Craft, a lawyer for Mr. Caban Gonzalez, said that the discrimination against Puerto Rican applicants by Georgia’s licensing agency was systemic.
“They were treating them as if they had a foreign driver’s license,” Ms. Romero-Craft, a managing lawyer for the immigrants rights group LatinoJustice PRLDEF, said on Monday.
Some Puerto Rican Georgia residents were even forced to answer geographic and cultural questions to prove they came from the island, Ms. Romero-Craft said.
The state licensing agency kept Mr. Caban Gonzalez’s birth certificate, Social Security card and Puerto Rico driver’s license that he had submitted with his application, the lawsuit said. Ms. Romero-Craft said that hampered Mr. Caban Gonzalez’s ability to drive for his job as a construction worker.
“They took all of his identity documents,” she said.
On Monday, when licensing offices are usually closed in Georgia, the state took the rare step of opening its Conyers, Ga., branch — which is four hours from Mr. Caban Gonzalez’s home — so that he could obtain a temporary driver’s license. That ended a more than two-year ordeal since he first applied to transfer his license in October 2017.
Mr. Moore was named as a defendant in the lawsuit, which LatinoJustice PRLDEF filed jointly with the Southern Center for Human Rights, another advocacy group.
“We appreciate D.D.S.’s efforts to end discriminatory policies that treated Puerto Rican applicants like second-class citizens,” Atteeyah Hollie, a senior staff lawyer for the center, said in a statement on Monday.
Mr. Caban Gonzalez, the lead plaintiff in the class-action suit, will receive a $100,000 payment as part of the settlement, according to the advocacy groups that represented him. Some of the payment will go to lawyer’s fees and court costs.
