I met the man who became my husband at a book party in a downtown loft in late spring. In retrospect, meeting that way was auspicious, an indication of a shared passion, if not for the particular book being feted that evening — one about the dawning gig economy that has long since been surpassed by bleaker fare — than for books in general. But at the time, I wanted nothing to do with him.
“Not now,” I replied, batting the hand away with (I must insist on this) uncharacteristic curtness. I was tired. I was wary. I had recently been dumped by a man to whom I had devoted considerable attention, and I wasn’t ready for a new entanglement, let alone conversation, with a stranger.
The encounter would have ended there had Mark not demonstrated unusual and, given the circumstances, inexplicable persistence. He obtained my email address from a mutual friend and energetically deployed it. Eventually I found myself having lunch with him, and of course we talked about books — terrain we’d already established as common ground. We exchanged the names of our favorite novels and joked about the fact that he had not read mine, nor I his.
When that card was followed by an invitation to brunch, I didn’t hesitate to say yes. There were more meals after that, along with, at crucial intervals, handwritten cards featuring lines from my favorite novel.
“For me you’ll always be the most important woman in the world,” Mark, via James, wrote.
Did it matter that these words were James’s, not Mark’s? Or that James had put them in the mouth of the duplicitous Gilbert Osmond (to whom the trusting Isabel Archer is soon bound in unhappy marriage)? Not to me.
Nor did it strike me that there was anything unusual about courtship mediated by a literary classic. Like every other student of high school French, I’d read “Cyrano de Bergerac,” the madcap ode to true love as literary ventriloquism. When Roxane swoons over Cyrano’s love letters — “Methinks it were impossible that there could breathe a man on this earth skilled to say as sweetly as he all the pretty nothings that mean so much, that mean all!” — believing them to be by the dimwitted but handsome Christian, wasn’t she merely enacting an exaggerated version of the essential romantic fallacy? Wasn’t love always a case of mistaken identity, of plagiarism and misattribution? Of shopworn phrases prettily repackaged and offered as revelation? Romantic love may top the list of linguistically overdetermined human experiences, and yet the beauty of it is that it always feels brand-new.
At the same time, Madeleine is writing an honors thesis under the tutelage of a professor who believes the novel reached its apogee in the 19th century, in the “marriage plot” fiction of Austen, Eliot and James, and has been in decline ever since, thanks to no-fault divorce, women’s lib and prenups — all symptoms of marriage’s demise as a meaningful institution.
Thus, as Madeleine embarks on a relationship with Leonard, she is on very shaky phenomenological ground. The narrative scripts and plotlines that have governed romance for centuries are under attack, and with nothing in the wings to replace them, a sense of impending crisis prevails. “The thing about desire is that there is no there there,” the semiotics professor solemnly opines.
As Madeleine and Leonard’s relationship develops, gathering substance and complication along with an erotic charge, Madeleine’s thoughts inevitably turn to the 19th-century fiction she knows so well: “There were all kinds of outmoded, novelistic words to describe how she was feeling, words like aflutter.” She’s smart enough not to say any of them aloud.
The crisis is in full throes.
The question Eugenides set for himself with “The Marriage Plot” was not just academic — can the novel survive the death of the marriage plot? — but existential: Can love survive the death of the novel?
Of course, “The Marriage Plot” unfolds in a world without smartphones or social media. As did my relationship with Mark. (Did I mention that he, too, had been a semiotics major at Brown?) With the advent of dating apps and DMs, the narrative conventions surrounding romance have necessarily shifted. Why copy passages from novels when you can text your date directly and, by selecting from a pre-existing menu of affect-specific emojis, let her know just how you felt about the evening while being spared the awkwardness of doing so to her face, in your own words?
The point is this: When it comes to romance, no words have ever been, or will be, your own. Even in our post-marriage-plot age of instant and endless communication, romance is still scripted. It remains an exercise in ventriloquism, only the textual references have become deeply suspect.
Consider Sally Rooney’s 2017 “Conversations With Friends,” widely heralded as the first great novel of millennial life. It’s a love story set in a thoroughly disillusioned world, one in which the lessons of French theory have been fully absorbed and relationships exist in a state of perpetual flux.
The four central characters mingle and separate, migrating from sexual partnerships to platonic friendships, from marital unions to adulterous affairs and back again, just as their interactions morph from face-to-face talk over dinner and in bed to virtual exchanges over cellphones and email. Love, when it comes up, is dismissed as fantasy, self-delusion, a capitalist plot leading to the procreation of ever more workers and consumers.
My own marriage plot nearly didn’t end in marriage. By the time Mark and I became engaged, he had read “The Portrait of a Lady” in its entirety, underlining as he went, but I had stalled halfway through “Vineland.” He made it a condition of our marrying that I finish the book before our ceremony. When the day arrived, I still had a chapter to go. I read the last page in my wedding dress that morning.