A restored midcentury house in South Pasadena, a 1925 home in Asheville and a waterfront condominium in a converted 1832 warehouse in Boston.
James Allen Walter, a California architect, designed this house for Geoffrey and Doreen Siodmak, a couple who moved in when South Pasadena was “just goats grazing and some avocado trees growing,” as Ms. Siodmak later described it to a historian. The home is being sold by its second owners, following a respectful renovation that involved new insulation, plumbing and electrical systems, windows and doors, and an updated kitchen and bathrooms.
The home is at the end of a cul-de-sac, about 10 miles northeast of downtown Los Angeles.
Indoors: Orange double doors open to a forecourt, and glass-panel doors take you into the house. The U-shaped building’s two long wings are on either side of a large outdoor deck. The wings have vaulted ceilings with dark beams; newly laid cork floors; and glass walls facing the deck.
One wing is a single open space that contains the living and dining areas and the kitchen. The original owners requested a partition to shield the messiness of food preparation in the kitchen, but the wall was removed during the renovation and the layout restored as the architect originally wished. A 12-foot-long soapstone island now acts as a divider. The living area includes a fireplace.
The other wing contains the bedrooms, including a generously proportioned master suite that includes a bathroom with twin sinks and mirrors, a walk-in shower and a new skylight. The guest bathroom has a combined tub and shower.
Outdoor space: The grounds, visible from every room, are planted with oaks, pines, an avocado tree and an orange tree. Parking is in an attached two-car garage. A parking pad at the side of the house could be used for outdoor dining.
This home is in Grove Park, a neighborhood two miles north of downtown Asheville that is identified with a historic resort where presidents have stayed. The golf course is just across the road. Grovewood Village, a cultural complex on the site of an old weaving studio, with artist workshops, museums, craft galleries and a restaurant, is less than a mile northeast.
Designed by William J. East, the home was in poor condition when the current owners bought it eight and a half years ago. They restored it from 2012 to 2018, replacing all 90-plus windows, relining chimneys, updating all of the mechanical systems and refinishing the original floors, some of which now have radiant heat.
Indoors: An entrance hall with hardwood floors and crown molding leads into a living room whose stone fireplace is flanked by decorative wood paneling with neo-Classical details below illuminated arched wall niches. Beyond is a sunroom that extends the length of the house and has stone tile floors, a fireplace surrounded by brick and a view of the Omni Grove Park Inn and Blue Ridge Mountains.
To the left of the entrance is a recently wallpapered formal dining room. It connects to a study and a newly renovated kitchen that runs the length of the house, on the other side of the staircase. The kitchen area — which includes a sitting area with a bar and desk, a main work space and a breakfast room with mountain views — has traditional wood cabinetry and walls faced in limestone tile.
The front staircase is next to a new powder room with cherry-blossom-patterned paper. It rises to a landing with double glass doors opening to a large fenced terrace on top of the rear porch.
The master has hardwood floors, mountain views and an en suite bathroom with painted-brick and marble-tile walls, a stand-alone soaking tub and a walk-in shower. Three additional guest rooms have use of a hall bath with a marble walk-in shower. Another three bedrooms and a bathroom with subway-tile walls and a walk-in shower are on the third floor.
The walkout basement has the look of a speakeasy, with a recently restored vintage bar and a London telephone booth embedded in a wall, allowing passage through its two open sides. The bathroom has rusticated stone walls.
Outdoor space: The home is on a double lot, with a large front lawn and outdoor fireplace. The covered rear porch steps down to grass and a circular paved driveway. Parking is in a two-car garage on the basement level, and in a carport on the side.
This penthouse apartment is one of 94 units in Commercial Wharf East, a five-story residential complex that was converted into condos in 1978.
The floor-through unit has exposures on the north and south sides, with views of Boston Harbor and the financial district. More than 100 restaurants surround the wharf, including Joe’s American Bar & Grill next door. The Italian cafes of the North End are a six-minute walk northwest, and the shops of the Faneuil Hall Marketplace are about the same distance southwest. Train, bus and water taxi service is in the immediate area, and Boston Logan International Airport is less than 15 minutes away by car. The building is in a FEMA flood zone.
Indoors: At some point, a curving staircase was installed to create a partial upper level with a master suite. Below is a combined living-and-dining room with hardwood floors and a soaring ceiling. Two sets of sliding-glass doors open to a private deck. A long, rectangular niche in a wall next to the staircase could hold plants, decorative objects or an electric fireplace.
The open kitchen is under the loft and has white cabinets with granite countertops (including a curving section that doubles as a breakfast bar), twin sinks and Sub-Zero and Wolf appliances (including a full-size wine refrigerator).
The kitchen narrows into a breakfast area looking out to the back terrace. Next to it is a guest bathroom with floor-to-ceiling glass-tile walls and a deep marble-topped tub.
The guest bedroom continues the theme of white-painted-brick and hardwood, and has direct access to the back terrace. The upstairs master, which overlooks the main level, includes a skylight as well as a row of windows with harbor views. The master bathroom has marble finishes and a large walk-in shower.
Outdoor space: The building is across the road from Christopher Columbus Waterfront Park, which includes a playground and the Rose Kennedy Rose Garden. Parking spaces just outside the entrance can each be rented for $300 a month. Guests of the holders of those spaces can park for free after 5 p.m. on weekdays and all day on weekends.
