President Trump had a busy morning on Twitter and the radio, in a tirade that rivaled his most grievance-filled moments since becoming president.
WASHINGTON — President Trump made a number of staff moves on Thursday to ensure he will be surrounded by a cadre of loyalists at the White House even as he raged against an ever-growing cast of perceived enemies that included his former chief of staff, an impeachment witness, a juror he accused of bias and a Democratic rival.
The White House announced the return of Hope Hicks, the president’s former communications director and one of his closest advisers. The move consolidated the position of Jared Kushner, the president’s son-in-law and adviser, and signaled the waning influence of Mick Mulvaney, the acting White House chief of staff.
Ms. Hicks will serve as a counselor to the president, reporting to Mr. Kushner. Her return to the president’s side after his acquittal in the impeachment inquiry is an indication that Mr. Trump is seeking to reassemble as best he can the small, intensely devoted team of family members and friends who helped guide him to an improbable victory in 2016.
Johnny McEntee, the “body man” who trailed Mr. Trump as a candidate and in the White House, will be elevated to oversee the Presidential Personnel Office, according to four people briefed on the move. Mr. McEntee, who was forced from his job in 2018 over gambling debts that threatened his security clearance, recently returned to his old role as a personal aide to Mr. Trump.
Earlier Thursday, Mr. Trump engaged in an hourslong series of rants on Twitter and in a radio interview, hurling insults and unproved accusations in a tirade that rivaled his most grievance-filled moments since becoming president.
In rapid-fire fashion, Mr. Trump alleged bias from a juror in the trial of Mr. Stone, his longtime friend, and belittled John F. Kelly, his former chief of staff, as an ineffective aide who “misses the action & just can’t keep his mouth shut.” In a speech on Wednesday, Mr. Kelly had defended Lt. Col. Alexander S. Vindman, the decorated national security official who testified in the impeachment inquiry and was removed from his job last week.
The president said Colonel Vindman’s exit from the White House — he was escorted out by security officers — was applauded by “the whole building.” Moments later, Mr. Trump mocked the physical stature of Michael R. Bloomberg, a Democratic candidate for president and the former mayor of New York.
“Mini Mike is a 5’4” mass of dead energy who does not want to be on the debate stage with these professional politicians,” Mr. Trump said, sneering at the idea that Mr. Bloomberg might stand on a box during a debate. “No boxes please.” Mr. Bloomberg is actually 5-foot-7.
Mr. Bloomberg, a billionaire who has already spent more than $350 million in his bid for the Democratic nomination, wasted no time returning fire at the man he hopes to face in November’s election.
In his speech at Drew University in New Jersey, first reported by The Atlantic, Mr. Kelly said that Colonel Vindman was right to raise questions about a telephone call with the president of Ukraine in which Mr. Trump pressed for investigations into his political rivals.
The remarks drew a swift response from the president, who tweeted on Thursday morning that Mr. Kelly, who served as the chief of staff for 17 months before resigning early last year, was “way over his head” in the job. He also suggested that Mr. Kelly’s public comments violated a “military and legal obligation” to remain silent.
In the radio interview with Geraldo Rivera, Mr. Trump also renewed his attacks on Colonel Vindman, describing him as “very insubordinate” and claiming that Colonel Vindman’s colleagues applauded his departure last Friday.
“Vindman was the guy that, when we took him out of the building, the whole building applauded,” Mr. Trump said. A senior National Security Council official said later that Mr. Trump’s description was accurate, but did not say he had firsthand knowledge of it.
The changes at the White House will bring familiar faces back to the West Wing. Always obsessed with the threat of leaks, Mr. Trump has become more concerned about loyalty since a whistle-blower came forward last year to express concerns about the Ukraine call.
Ms. Hicks, 31, worked on Mr. Trump’s 2016 campaign from its inception and followed him to the White House, eventually becoming communications director. Her return will come as his re-election campaign intensifies and as his advisers say the superstitious president has talked about recreating some aspects of that first race.
Ms. Hicks’s title when she left belied her influence with Mr. Trump, who felt more personal comfort with her than with almost any other adviser. A senior administration official said that Ms. Hicks would work on projects that Mr. Kushner oversees, including the re-election campaign. She will not rejoin the communications office.
Ms. Hicks’s time with Mr. Trump began when she was working as an aide for his elder daughter, Ivanka Trump, on her fashion brand. He hired her for his skeleton staff when he began his campaign for president in 2015, and because the campaign was so small, Ms. Hicks was constantly at Mr. Trump’s side.
Since last fall, Ms. Hicks had been working as the chief communications officer at Fox.
Eileen Sullivan and Michael Crowley contributed reporting.