Danny’s days are already difficult. Born in Sri Lanka — there, he was Dhananjaya, not Danny — he came to Australia to study before being denied refugee status. He’s an illegal, which to him makes it sound as if he’s legal but sick.
Danny does feel a bit ill, every day. He’s short and brown in a country that’s tall and white. He’s not bad looking, but his teeth are cracked. He has golden highlights in his hair. Is there not a place for him here?
I like to read Adiga’s novels almost as much as the poet James Dickey liked to drink. He has more to say than most novelists, and about 50 more ways to say it. Born in India, Adiga was educated at Columbia and Oxford. He won the Booker Prize for his novel “The White Tiger” (2008).
Another illegal immigrant, a lovable and wily young man known as Abe, spies a policeman and recognizes “the look in his eyes: the look of a people losing their grip on a continent.” Adiga is valuable because he attends to how people think, rather than how they should think.
No one in his novels is simple to understand. Adiga may not agree with everything that gets said or thought, but there is no gauze on his mental windshield. Nice people are often skewered, as if on kabobs. 
There are practices to avoid: “White people did not like the sound of knuckles being cracked.” He hopes to understand the thing that, at times, baffles him the most: Australian irony.
This novel has a simmering plot: One of Danny’s former housecleaning clients is murdered. Danny thinks he knows who did it. The suspect knows Danny is in the country illegally. They have kompromat on one another. Perhaps they will each turn the other in, in a kind of mutually assured destruction pact.
Adiga’s plot clicks the novel forward along its tracks, but it’s packed with small implausibilities. You come to this novel for other reasons, notably for its author’s authority, wit and feeling on the subject of immigrants’ lives.
“You’ve gone in the glass-bottomed boat to see all the corals, right? And what do you see? There’s that filthy stingray, hiding squat on the ocean floor, and kicks up mud and it goes fleeing under the glass-bottomed boat with its forked tail, just the most frightened vermin you ever saw. I’m never going to live like that.” A pungent expletive trots along behind these sentences.
For Prakash and his lover, ruinous gambling is part of their wellness routine. They compare themselves to Oscar and Lucinda, the title characters and gambling obsessives in Peter Carey’s 1988 novel.
Adiga’s observations about gamblers are perfect: “It was an odd vocation, this gambling, very technical, full of numbers, pencils and calculations, done by the kind of brawny men who did not seem to be otherwise into thoughtfulness or calculation.” Everyone in this novel seems to be cashing in a shrinking pile of chips.
I read this novel on a long flight. Its opening pages are a reverie about Danny’s life back in Sri Lanka, and there are mermaids and singing fish and a “magic island.” Oh God, I thought, Adiga has become Salman Rushdie — how do I pop the emergency exit? He hasn’t become Rushdie. Keep reading.