Programs featuring the work of Charlie Parker and John Coltrane bookend more than two dozen different two-night engagements.
Jazz at Lincoln Center’s 33rd season will include appearances from a wide array of internationally renowned vocalists, tributes to the legends of jazz and premieres of new suites by members of its resident orchestra.
The season will kick off Sept. 25-26, with a program featuring new arrangements of classic Charlie Parker tunes for the Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra, and will end with a similar program featuring the music of John Coltrane (June 11-12). In both cases, younger saxophonists will be featured guests.
In between, the season will comprise more than two dozen different two-night engagements at Jazz at Lincoln Center’s main stages, the Appel Room and the Rose Theater.
On Oct. 2-3, a quartet featuring Joshua Redman, Brad Mehldau, Christian McBride and Brian Blade will revisit “MoodSwing,” an album that these four jazz luminaries released in 1994 (as the Joshua Redman Quartet).
The “Duke Sings” concerts on Nov. 13-14 will bring together four rising vocalists — including the 2019 Sarah Vaughan International Jazz Vocal Competition winner Samara Joy McLendon and the Thelonious Monk International Jazz Competition finalist Vuyo Sotashe — for a program of Duke Ellington’s compositions for voice, accompanied by a band directed by the saxophonist Ruben Fox and the pianist Christopher Pattishall.
The Cuban vocalist Omara Portuondo (of the Buena Vista Social Club) will headline on Nov. 6-7. The Brazilian pianist and vocalist Eliane Elias will play the music of Antonio Carlos Jobim on May 14-15. And in a nod to the experimental edge of jazz’s global reach, on Oct. 23-24, the percussionist Cyro Baptista will celebrate his 70th birthday in performances to include John Zorn as a special guest.
The trumpeter Terence Blanchard will be honored with a career retrospective, titled “A Life in Music” (March 12-13), including appearances by his acoustic-electric band E-Collective and by the vocalist Cassandra Wilson.
The drummer Matt Wilson and the pianist Helen Sung will collaborate on a double-feature titled “Jazz Meets Poetry” on April 31-May 1, with each bandleader presenting a poetry-driven project.
A number of presentations will have social-justice bents this year, including “Freedom, Justice and Hope” (April 2-3), a collaboration between the Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra and the lawyer-activist Bryan Stevenson; and “Freedom Con Clave” (June 4-5), a premiere of new works by Carlos Henriquez, the orchestra’s bassist (he will perform here with a smaller group).