Many grandparents — mostly mothers and mothers-in-law — are present for the birth of a grandchild.
When my granddaughter was born, my own role was very clear: Keep a packed bag handy. Head for Brooklyn as soon as my daughter, Emma, called to say she was on the way to the hospital with her husband. Move into their apartment for the duration to walk and feed Pearl, their sweet ancient Labrador. Wait by the phone.
Being assigned to canine care was perfectly fine; I was glad to be useful. It never occurred to me that I could actually be in the delivery room when this baby arrived, and it didn’t occur to my daughter to invite me, or anyone else.
Emma wanted a quiet, private birth with her partner and their nurse-midwife. Her own birth 30-some years earlier had been much the same.
But I’m learning that many grandparents — mostly mothers and mothers-in-law, but some fathers and fathers-in-law as well — are indeed present for the big event.
And she has been, for the births of all five of her grandchildren, most recently of twin boys. She has clasped her two daughters’ hands, fetched water for them, held their legs when it was time to push. She served, with permission, as the chief photographer and videographer. “It’s become a family event,” said her daughter Caitlin Schut, 31, the twins’ mother.
Thus, Deana Hendrickson, 61, was with her daughter, son-in-law, his mother and an aunt in Los Angeles in November when little Joseph was born. “A wonderful experience that I never want to repeat,” said Ms. Hendrickson, who found it difficult to see her daughter experience pain.
Nonetheless, if her daughter has another child and wants her to be present, “I’ll be there again,” she said.
Not many generations back, most births were like this, family affairs. As recently as 1940, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reports, 44 percent of American births took place outside of hospitals, generally at home. But childbirth swiftly became a medicalized phenomenon; by 1969, only 1 percent of births took place outside of hospitals.
Women and their advocates have fought for years to have partners or other support people in hospital delivery rooms, to avoid unnecessary procedures and to gain more control over childbirth.
Now, though there’s no data on how commonly this happens, it’s noncontroversial to have grandparents — or aunts, sisters and friends — present, said Dr. Samuel Bauer, chief of women’s and children’s clinical care at Beaumont Health in Michigan.
“We tend to let everybody in,” he said. (About 18,000 babies are born in Beaumont Health hospitals annually.) Support during labor, he pointed out, has been shown to reduce anxiety and pain.
There’s a key question: Whom might a laboring mother choose to include, and might exclusions cause hurt feelings and jeopardize family ties?
“If I invited my mother, did I have to invite my mother-in-law?” Ms. Schut wondered. “I realized no, this is really my decision. I can set boundaries.” Her mother agreed to accept any verdict, which eased the pressure.
Personally, I think accepting any verdict about who attends the birth sets a good precedent for grandparenting in general. Get used to it: We are not in charge, and we don’t get to make demands.
If you’re included, support the mother’s choices. If she wants to labor unmedicated, fine. If she wants an epidural, ditto. If she wants to give birth in a tub, O.K. If she decides that the room is getting too crowded, leave.
It’s not about you. The labor room is not the place to recount your own delivery or to joke that ha-ha, despite the mother’s saying that she will never do this again, she will. “This may not be the time to talk about that, or to talk at all,” Dr. Zielinski said.
 She needed to have labor induced, on a summer day when every pregnant woman in Brooklyn seemed to have headed for the maternity floor at about the same moment.
So Emma and her husband, Jay, bounced in and out of the hospital, waiting for a bed, getting sent home, being called back. Still no bed. Around 4 a.m., Emma told Jay to go home and get some sleep.
I awoke a little later in their guest room — shortly to become the baby’s room — and thought of my girl alone in the hospital. I texted: Would you like some company until Jay returns? She answered, Yes, please.
For a few hours, we chatted and read and did the Times crossword puzzle and snacked. (You can eat during early labor these days, I learned.) We walked slowly up and down the halls to stimulate contractions.
It was a final mother-daughter moment before we became mother-daughter-granddaughter. I hope I was of some comfort.
Then her husband arrived, and I went home to walk Pearl and wait for news.