So many people came together to save this one girl’s life, and her chance to grow, to find happiness, to find love.
Dr. Wellons is a pediatric neurosurgeon.
On a blustery, rainy Saturday nearly two decades ago, in my first year of practice, I went to my office after rounds, put my feet up on my desk, took a sip of lukewarm coffee and leaned back in my chair to relax after a busy morning. Within seconds, I felt the pager clipped to my belt vibrate. I set my mug down on the desk and called the number back. An emergency room doctor from another hospital immediately picked up and identified himself.
The pupil typically dilates on the side of the brain with the increased pressure, in this case the right side, as the brain is forced down and away from the blood clot. The nerve responsible for pupillary function basically goes haywire and starts to enlarge in response. The term posturing describes a movement pattern that comes from damage being done to the part of the brain that deals with movement. Both are outward signs of high brain pressure. Put bluntly, this girl was sick, getting sicker quickly, and the window to save her was closing.
“Why don’t you already have her in the air?” I asked, slightly annoyed. My hospital was in Birmingham, Ala.; theirs was in Auburn, some 100 miles away. A medical helicopter could have her here in just over 30 minutes, well within the window to save her.
“Weather’s too bad between Auburn and Birmingham to fly in. She’s 90 minutes from you by ground, at least,” he said, clearly knowing what that meant — an hour and a half in an ambulance, plus the two hours since her accident, is a long time to have high intracranial pressure and expect to survive.
Even now, when I’m faced with a situation without an obvious solution, my mind goes to my father and the calmness I felt in the years I spent flying next to him as a child. During his more than four decades of service in the Air National Guard, he piloted all types of planes in all types of situations and weather. Early on, he taught me to review the flight checklist before every takeoff and landing. Once aloft, we would practice emergencies in the air. As we would gain altitude, and I would be focused on keeping the plane level on the horizon or interpreting the navigation system, he would quietly feather the propellers the tiniest amount, or trim the flaps just so. Then as we gently lost airspeed and the altimeter would slowly begin to wind down under his watchful eye, he would have me “work the problem” until I had it figured out. Flying and problem-solving for him went hand in hand and were as much a part of him as breathing.
As the brief memory faded, I found myself staring at the worn photo of him that sat on my office desk. He is standing next to an F-4 Phantom, helmet under his arm, grinning widely in his olive drab National Guard flight suit.
“Are those Blackhawk helicopters still stationed at that base near you?” I asked the emergency room doctor.
My office overlooked the street in front of the hospital. After half an hour, I looked down to see the surface of coffee in my mug rippling like in the scene in “Jurassic Park” where the approaching T. rex’s footsteps are detected in puddles of water. Within seconds, there were rhythmic pulsations all around, then a strong thump-thump-thump-thump as the air beat against my window. Outside in the midst of the downpour, trash cans tumbled down the street and pickup trucks were forced down on their shocks. I gazed up to see an Army Blackhawk helicopter, giant in comparison to our standard medical helicopters, hovering steadily over the children’s hospital helipad, rain and fog swirling in all directions. Every part of the office thumped, the heartbeat in my own chest now overpowered.
Events moved quickly after the girl’s arrival. In the pediatric trauma bay, two of the soldiers who brought her through the storm, still in their wet flight gear, worked alongside our nurses. As I came to the bedside, one of the nurses greeted me by name and the younger of the two soldiers for some inexplicable reason immediately snapped to attention.
A vision of my father in his flight suit flashed in my head.
As we packaged the child up and headed off to the elevator up to the operating room I turned back to them. There they stood amid the residual chaos of the trauma room, torn paper packaging and discarded blue gowns strewn about. They watched us roll into the elevator. I locked eyes with the closest soldier. He gave the briefest of nods just before the doors closed. Then he and the chaos of the trauma bay were gone.
The operating room team was ready for the girl, the sterile instruments laid out on the back tables, blue drapes applied after a quick clipping of her hair and lightning-fast wash of her head with sterilizing prep solution. Knife. Retractor. Drill. Scissors to open the dura, the thin leathery covering of the brain, bulging and tight from the underlying blood. Once the brain is exposed it does the work for us, extruding most of the coagulated clot in a matter of seconds. We clean out what is left at the edges and I see the offending vein, torn away from the brain during the accident. We coagulate it and begin to make our way out, step by step, gently repairing all that we had to take apart to get there.
After surgery, she immediately began to stabilize, waking up and even flickering her eyes open, but her recovery took time and her journey was not without cost. She was left with a noticeable weakness on the left side and the slightest slur to her speech, but she was alive. With each follow-up appointment, some hurdle had been overcome. Over time, I would receive updates from her family. She would come to enter and then win a local beauty and talent pageant; be voted Most School Spirit; cheer alongside friends dressed up as the school mascot; and then, one remarkable May day, graduate from high school. Four years later, she would finish college and head to graduate school for a career in social work. All of this chronicled first in clinic visits, then, as the medical reasons to see me faded, in holiday cards and the occasional letter.
A decade and a half after her injury I received one such letter. No longer the hand-drawn cards of childhood or newspaper clippings from her proud parents, this was a handwritten note on elegant stationery inviting me to her wedding. Her wedding.  The nurses methodically connecting her to the monitors, line by line, tube by tube. Me urging her to squeeze my hand, for a sign, any sign, that she was better. Now, years later, I was reading how thankful she was to have been given this chance. Grateful for those soldiers in that helicopter, the two hospital teams, and for me. She promised to always have us in mind as she began her new married life and hopefully one day raise her own family.
As I read the letter sitting in a different office in a different city, thinking back over those events, I found myself realizing how deeply grateful I was to her, for her evolving story over the years — all the cards, each barrier broken, every milestone — and for what that experience taught me. So many other critically ill children in the subsequent years benefited from this early experience, when I was learning how hard to push, where to draw the line and how much to expect of others.
My father’s lessons in the air, that industrious emergency room doctor, those brave soldiers soaked to the bone standing there as we rolled away — so many people and events came together for this one child to grow into her life, to find happiness, to find love. All of us need a living, breathing reminder to just keep pushing on. There may be a life there to be beautifully and fully lived, a person who just needs someone, anyone, to work the problem, to make the hard call, and to fly in a storm.
Jay Wellons, M.D., is a professor and chief of pediatric neurosurgery at Vanderbilt.