Joe Deeney’s puzzle is both brilliant and cruel and I love it.
Not only is there a trick to this puzzle by Joe Deeney, but there is also more than one way to plunder it. Both will be counted as correct in all online formats except for Across Lite.
I say this not as a spoiler, but as a way to help solvers avoid the frustration that comes from entering an answer one way and hearing the commenters talk about entering it another way. Or from not even understanding what is going on. That is also a perfectly acceptable possibility, but I will explain the theme below, so hang in there. Trust me, you will like this, because it’s good to have to fight with a puzzle once in a while.
I also wouldn’t blame you one bit if you read the clues to yourself in pirate talk. Arrgh.
The best advice I can give you is to keep track of the “8’s.” The surrounding clues are not that bad, although there is a considerable amount of general knowledge required. Work those crossings.
15A. After she finished writing the Harry Potter series, J.K. Rowling chose to write a series of crime novels under the ALIAS Robert Galbraith, so the books could be judged on their own merit.
44A. I guffawed. “Nation’s borders?” are not the actual borders of a country, but the borders of the word “nation.” The answer is ENS.
45A. TIL who ADRIAN Dantley is, and based on his bio, I’m glad I did.
65A. A KEPI is a round topped hat that usually slopes forward, with a long bill as a visor. The one that Charles de Gaulle wore looked like this.
4D. I might not know off the top of my head “Where the Ko’olau Range is located,” but I got the first two of the four letters from the crossings. Once you have OA_ _ and the clue pretty much screams “Hawaii!,” the answer has to be OAHU.
32D. “Pockets of the Middle East?” sounds like it might be hinting at certain sections of the area, but it’s just referring to bread. The answer is PITAS.
The answer to your question is yes, this is a rebus, but it might not be the kind of rebus you are used to. Solvers who have been wrassling with midweek puzzles for a while are used to squeezing more than one letter in a square (and, if you are curious, that link also describes how to do this on your devices). Technically speaking, you can do that in this puzzle, but it might make things harder to keep track of. I’ll get to that in a bit.
Rebuses can also be numbers or symbols, and Mr. Deeney has set a trap for us — sorry, I meant “made a brilliant puzzle for us” — by substituting the ATE sound for the number “8” in — wait for it — eight places. That’s the first part of the theme.
The second part of the theme is that, wherever there is an “8” in a Down answer, you are to read it as the OO sound, because the number “8” is made up of two O’s.
For those of you who can’t spot rebuses in puzzles, take heart: After writing this column for nine years, I am only sort of getting better at it, but I’m proud of my progress. I realized that something was up with Mr. Deeney’s puzzle when 10 minutes had elapsed and I still hadn’t written much in the grid. When I got to 61A, however, the “Aha!” light bulb went off in my head and I realized that the answer to “At dinner and then the cinema, say” was not ON A DATE (there’s no room), but ON A D8. Then I filled in the crossing Down entry, FOOLS for “Tricks,” and that’s when my eye started to twitch.
I fell into the “squeeze more than one letter into a square” trap. As soon as I realized what the rebus was, I filled in those squares with OO instead of an “8.” But the puzzle hadn’t marked me wrong.
Fortunately for solvers like me, both OO and 8 are allowed in this puzzle. I think it’s easier to read if you use the “8,” but you do you, secure in the knowledge that either one counts.
I had the idea for this revealer while driving home from work in Nov. 2018. It’s not the best place to get ideas, as they can’t be written down immediately, but thankfully I was able to hold on to this one. I built the puzzle on and off through November and December. Submitted it in Jan. 2019, accepted in May.
To make the puzzle, I created a word list that replaced all instances of “ATE” and “OO” with 8. I placed the revealer and H8RSGONNAH8 in the grid as if I were building a themeless and tried to build the puzzle from there. There was a bit of a challenge to evenly distribute eight 8’s in the grid while ensuring the horizontal 8’s were all replacing ATE and pronounced like 8 while ensuring the vertical eights were all replacing OO. Because I didn’t have a set of theme answers in mind, this provided some freedom to try to make the fill as interesting and clean as possible.
Overall, I’m happy with the result. KEPI and OLEG aren’t great entries, but they don’t make me go YIPE either. This is my first Thursday puzzle in The Times and probably the trickiest themed puzzle I’ve had published anywhere to date. I’m curious to read what everyone’s thoughts are on it.
