I barely knew this child, and narrating the world for her felt impossible.
I’m on vacation this week, so I asked Kaitlyn Greenidge, an NYT Parenting contributor and the author of “We Love You, Charlie Freeman,” to take the reins. In this newsletter, Kaitlyn describes how she struggled early on to narrate the world for her newborn daughter.
When I was in high school, my mother worked for a time at a program for teenage mothers. Sometimes, she would tell us stories of the young women she worked with — young women who loved their children but were still, in many ways, children themselves. I remember her talking about one girl in particular. My mother wanted the girl to speak to her baby, because it would help build her child’s language skills. But the girl refused. “I’m not going to talk to my baby until my baby talks to me,” she said.
At the time, hearing this story, I thought it was funny but I didn’t really understand it. Since having a baby, though, there are so many days when I get that girl’s reasoning. I was home with my daughter for her first five months. At month three, my husband went back to work. My daughter was not in the babbling stage yet. Suddenly, the days grew much longer and very, very quiet.
I would find ways to liven up the noiseless apartment — old “Desus and Mero” clips and Ask Wendy segments from “The Wendy Williams Show.” God bless YouTube and its endless streaming capabilities. I even overcame my intense anxiety around our current political landscape to play NPR for hours, because I would rather listen to preternaturally calm voices describe natural disasters than sit in silence with this baby.
“OK, so I’m getting your bottle …” I would start, and then falter, self-conscious. Everyone said the awkwardness of motherhood came from the physical intimacy — the bodily fluids shared, the body parts glimpsed. But this was so much harder for me. I am a naturally silent person. I hate revealing anything about myself to anyone, even close friends. And although my daughter was my child, I’d only technically known her for a few months. It seemed impossible to carry on a one-sided conversation with her, even about something as superficial as our day.
But I forced myself to keep trying. A recurring theme about parenting, for me, has been constantly rethinking what I want my daughter to learn, who I want to encourage her to be. I want my daughter to feel freer with expressing herself than I ever have.
The turning point came when I began taking her to day care. Our day care is a little less than a mile from our house, and I walk her there most mornings, carrying her in a baby sling. While I walk, I describe everything we pass. I count the number of brown doors versus white doors we see on the buildings; I speculate about the one brownstone with a pile of junk in front of it; I point out the Bajan flag in front of another every time we pass. “We’re Bajan, too,” I whisper in her ear. I show her the apartment I lived in five years ago and tell her about what I used to buy at my old bodega. The ease that comes from describing our neighborhood helped me talk to her at home, too.
“Who are you telling this to?” my partner says, confused.
“We have to talk to her all the time. All. The. Time,” I say, as if it were obvious.
In the last month or so, when I talk, she looks at me intently. She is looking at my mouth, at my tongue moving, and she tries to move hers in the same way. She furrows her brow and concentrates, as if she is memorizing what a voice can do. In the mornings, if she’s fussing, I can calm her now by describing what we will be doing for the day. And when I sing to her, she opens her mouth wide and wails along, beautifully out of tune, trying very hard to harmonize.
It is a brand-new form of conversation.
P.S. Follow us on Instagram @NYTParenting. Join us on Facebook. Find us on Twitter for the latest updates. Read last week’s newsletter about the one thing that will get men to take more paternity leave.
Want More on the Newborn Days?
Kaitlyn wrote a beautiful essay for us about going to a conference with a 6-week-old baby, and how it made her think about the kind of mother she wanted to be.
Check out our Newborn page, which answers pressing questions like: Why is my baby so hairy? It offers guides on sleep training and postpartum changes you should know about, too.
Do new moms dream differently after giving birth? Leigh Ann Henion looks at the science and explores potential changes to your postpartum dreamscape.
Being a supportive partner in the early days is key. We have a guide about how to make parenting a team effort.
