In the enormous seaside mansion of an old-money family in Maine, 32 wives of 32 Republican governors are gathered for tea and hors d’oeuvres and what they believe will be a polite lecture from a local historian. What they get instead is neither polite nor a lecture. 
The monkeys have name tags identifying them as “Elected Official” or “Revolving Door Adviser” or “Big Corporate Titan Controlled Media” or various other characters symbolic of modern political life. The monkeys poke and shove and kick one another. They scream and flip one another off. The wives are briefly entertained by all of this until the U.S.-Foreign-Policy monkey whips out a toy rocket launcher and fires it at the Poor-of-the-World monkeys and then kicks the Crawling-Refugee monkey and murders the Resister-of-Oligo-Oppression monkeys and takes everyone’s bananas.
Which is when the wives get good and truly flummoxed.
It’s a scene that occurs early in Carolyn Chute’s new novel, “The Recipe for Revolution,” and a scene that presents a difficult question for the Republican wives who witness it and the journalists who write about it: Exactly what the hell is happening?
The answer becomes ever more malleable as the story radiates through media: The newspaper says the children ranted at the wives; the television says they terrorized the wives; the radio says they threatened the wives. The local historian turns out to be one Gordon St. Onge, leader of an off-the-grid community known as the Settlement. Gordon is maybe a prophet, or a militia separatist or a polygamous child abuser. The Settlement he leads is an eco-cooperative, or a cult or a compound. The masked children all live there, or maybe they are kept there, or maybe they are brainwashed there.
It’s a theme Chute returns to repeatedly, the basic problem of just describing something accurately, of giving form to reality. The events of the novel take place circa-Y2K, but Chute’s concerns seem very 2020: how reality is named, created, fragmented, trolled, distorted.
I’m quoting her a lot because when she’s writing about this — about capitalism’s exploitative structures, the “hot gut of the oligo-spider’s intransmutably web-wrapped global edifice” — the writing is often wicked gorgeous. And it’s been her career-long passion, this ongoing searing critique of profit’s “god-sized system.” And describing this critique is, I think, quite a bit more useful than describing her plot, which readers may struggle to locate. This is a book that doesn’t want you to worry too much about, like, story.
In place of a traditional plot, Chute allows characters to slowly emerge, exert a kind of magnetic pull and then recede. It feels like the literary equivalent of a big choir with occasional soloist. The first is Bruce Hummer, the chief executive of a multinational corporation called Duotron Lindsey International. He is Chute’s avatar for low-road capitalism — when we meet him, he’s laying off 55,000 workers, to the cheers of shareholders — and his need for growth growth growth turns out to be body- and soul-ravaging in shocking ways.
Next is Gordon, founder of the Settlement, an anticapitalist whose meeting with Bruce the billionaire is one of the book’s magical moments, a thesis smashing into its antithesis. But Gordon isn’t exactly the epitome of moderation and restraint: He has 19 wives, and pursues a few more during the course of the book. Turns out, Gordon’s relationship to women mirrors Bruce’s relationship to money — growth growth growth — to equally disastrous ends.
And there’s Bree, the 15-year-old activist who wants to spread the Settlement’s message far and wide. Whereas Gordon prefers to keep things small and private, Bree seeks to build a mass movement — another thesis meeting its antithesis. But Bree’s relationship to fame — growth growth growth — also brings disaster.
So there’s a moral in here regarding the delusion of endless growth. And, O.K., sure, maybe it’s ironic that a 2,600-page four-novel cycle seems to have, at its heart, an argument against bigness. But maybe it would be more accurate to say it’s an argument against scale — specifically, the enormous global capitalist scale that tends to flatten things that are complicated and idiosyncratic and human.
Many of the reporters and reviewers who’ve covered Chute over her career have focused — almost fetishistically — on her ruralness. A headline in this very newspaper named her a “backwoods writer.” The Washington Post described her rustic settings as “ramshackle.” A Los Angeles Times review focused on her depiction of “grinding poverty.” The Chicago Tribune called attention to her incestuous characters. And just about every journalist who profiles her cannot help mentioning that her husband is illiterate.
Which is also the problem the Republican wives face: They cannot understand those children, have no common language, no shared references. They can’t meaningfully apprehend past the boundary of money’s bubble.
Just like those costumed children, the poor are masked, she seems to be saying. They are hidden by stale language, misleading histories, willful blindness. And Carolyn Chute’s epic project is to make all of us, finally, see.