Kids are expensive. Here’s how we’re managing.
 A middle-income American family will spend an average of $12,980 annually per child, according to the most recently collected data. Among parents paying for child care for the under-6 crowd, expenses may be significantly higher. The average cost of full-time, center-based care for an infant varies by state, but it can be more than $15,000 a year.
Two articles focus on individuals in the “sandwich generation” — parents of young children who are also caring for older relatives. We partnered with YouGov, an international polling and market research company, to do an informal survey on the financial and emotional stresses of this kind of dual caretaking, and spoke to several parents about their experiences. The results are sobering: 18 percent of millennials surveyed have delayed their plans to have children or decided to have fewer children in anticipation of their caretaking role for aging family members.
Many sandwich-generation caretakers — like Laura Zigman, a novelist and the author of “Separation Anxiety,” who wrote an essay for us — are not prepared for the career setbacks they might experience because of their many responsibilities. When Laura’s mother was found to have pancreatic cancer, “It didn’t occur to me then how caretaking would affect me financially — my ability to earn, to generate work, to preserve our savings and retirement — for years to come.,” she wrote.
We also have Christina Caron, a staff reporter for NYT Parenting, exploring the costs of a NICU stay, and how insurance is not covering everything many premature babies need. Finally, we have a piece about the price of adoption, by David Dodge.
Look out for more coverage of financial myths and truths, how activities for kids got so expensive, the cost of helicopter parenting and how parents are raising money in unconventional ways, in the coming days. One big issue for parents is the way money affects a relationship after you have kids. So we want to hear from you: If you’re married or co-parenting, how do you work through financial issues together? Drop us a line here.
Want More on Money?
In 2019, Katherine Zoepf wrote about how she rented out one of her bedrooms to make ends meet as a single mom, and how financial struggles are so difficult for parents to talk about. Our wonderful readers also shared some of their stories of financial strain.
Have a new baby and need to reset your family budget? Taylor Tepper has some tips for you. Taylor also wrote a great piece about how to prepare for tax season when you have kids.
When you have little ones, it’s terrifying to start thinking about saving for college, because it feels as if it will cost $9 trillion by 2035. Tara Siegel Bernard has a thorough guide that will help you every step of the way.
