Credit...Andrew Purcell for The New York Times. Food Stylist: Barrett Washburne.
What I’m really excited about today: our cool new collection of recipes devoted to the pleasures of the single-vessel meal in all its sheet-pan, skillet, big-pot glory. I hope you’ll check that feature out right now and luxuriate in the print edition we’re sending out to home-delivery subscribers tomorrow. (It’ll be on newsstands on Sunday.) It’s really good and fun, requires less pot-washing and, if it leads you to want to experiment, great: Take a look at Melissa Clark’s invaluable guide, “How to Make a Sheet-Pan Dinner,” before you head to the store.
Or maybe chicken enchiladas? Cauliflower adobo? Barbecued shrimp? I could imagine a big bowl of creamy white beans with herb oil hitting the table this weekend, and everyone around it cheering.
Will you bake this weekend? I’d like to. Maybe vegan brownies with tahini and halvah? Or an olive oil cake? Giant crinkled chocolate chip cookies? It’s been a while since I’ve cooked Christina Tosi’s crockpot cake.
There are thousands and thousands more recipes you could cook this weekend on NYT Cooking. Yes, you need a subscription to get to them, just as you need a subscription to watch the second season of “Shrill” on Hulu. Worth it!
Please visit us on Instagram, Twitter and Facebook, as well. I like our off-platform work. And definitely come see us on YouTube, where our Alison Roman is cooking her new recipe for wine-braised chicken with artichoke hearts.
If anything goes wrong along the way, either with your cooking or NYT Cooking itself, please write for help |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Someone will get back to you. Or you can write to me directly |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| I read every message and try to get back to as many people as I can.
Two great restaurant reviews for you: the first of Tavern by WS here in New York City, by Pete Wells; and the second of Nari in San Francisco, by Tejal Rao.
It has nothing to do with pork bellies or lager, but this Nori Onishi profile of the French pedophile Gabriel Matzneff, now hiding out on the Italian Riviera, is really strong, and beautifully written.
Finally, here’s Etta James with “W-O-M-A-N,” live at the Montreux Jazz Festival, 1975. It’s long and it’s loud and I hope your weekend’s the same. I’ll see you on Sunday.