Edward Einhorn’s playful play takes on a lot: his scientist grandfather, his aging mother and his own doubts about putting their lives onstage.
Alexander Wiener is a figure right out of a med school textbook: The award-winning physician helped discover the Rh factor in blood and advanced the fields of forensic medicine and serology. A flesh-and-blood rock star of flesh and blood, if you will. So how would one reckon with living in the shadow of such a legacy?
That’s the question the playwright Edward Einhorn asks in “Doctors Jane and Alexander,” a Untitled Theater Company #61 production at Here Arts Center. The result is a hodgepodge of sincere, real-life testimony and calculated schmaltz that gets its head so wrapped up in thinking that it leaves some heart behind.
It’s 2005, and Einhorn (Max Wolkowitz) is visiting his mother Jane (Alyssa Simon), who has recently suffered a stroke, to interview her about her father, the famous Dr. Wiener (Len Rella). The play — the one he’s writing, the one we’re seeing — uses found text from those interviews, as well as conversations with other family members and academics. But Einhorn gets caught up in his mother’s story instead — her work in psychology, her art, her mental and physical decline.
The path there is a sportive mash-up of fact and fiction. Einhorn’s Wiener is apt to leap out from a story about him, taken from a comic strip, or to heroically narrate scenes of his life. Rella, all wide eyes and popped eyebrows, is the man as hyperbole, comically outsized. Alyssa Simon relies a bit too much on the quiver and quake of her vocal delivery, but nails Jane Einhorn’s dry humor. Wolkowitz, at home with the text, is a believable ventriloquist of the self-doubting playwright.
This conceit also showed up this season in the revival of Tony Kushner’s “A Bright Room Called Day.” Both summon characters to exorcise the artist’s misgivings, as if writerly fears can be wished away by inserting them into the script itself.
Yet Einhorn remains a distant invention, a documentarian-artist through whom we encounter facts but who allows us no access to his own emotional back story: any hints of his early relationship with his mother, any depths to his fascination with his grandfather.
As the show’s director as well, he serves up moments of postmodern fun, but sometimes falls prey to making scenes so cute they are obnoxious (a top-hat-and-lab-coat song-and-dance number, for example). Mike Mroch’s set design, with walls made of disconnected vertical panels, emphasizes the show’s fragmentary approach.
“Doctors” is beholden to its premise, the story of Einhorn’s famous grandfather, even as it playfully cartwheels beyond to reveal its real intent. Yet it doesn’t commit fully to either Doctor Jane or Doctor Alexander but rather to the idea of writing about them. Here the writer, not the doctor, is in.
Through Feb. 15 at Here, Manhattan; |||PHONE_NUMBER||| , here.org. Running time: 1 hour 20 minutes.