Jean-Luc takes a detour to see some old friends, and comes across an unexpected one.
I didn’t expect another episode of setup this week, but Jeri Ryan’s first appearance as Seven Of Nine at the end made the payoff worth it. Still, this was the first episode of the season that felt a bit extemporaneous, after the tight storytelling of the first three installments.
Picard decides to take the expedition to find Bruce Maddox on a detour to the planet Vashti, a Romulan relocation site, where a group of what appears to be sword-wielding Romulan nuns called the Qowat Milat reside. An early flashback shows that Picard was a god of sorts here when he was leading the effort to rescue Romulans from the supernova.
From the Department of Coincidences: The group Picard is fighting is the Tal Shiar sect, Zhat Vash, and the planet the Romulan warriors are on is Vashti. I’m wondering if this will come into play later.
Over on the Borg cube, Narek and Soji are still doing their thing. The scene where they both slide down a hallway as a “Borg ritual” was something else. Again, I’m not sure where this is going, but Narek awkwardly interrogating Soji, post romantic-slide, should be the first example in the “what not to do” chapter of the Spy Handbook.
What are we doing here guys? If you want to know why Soji wasn’t listed on a previous passenger manifest, at least put a ring on it first! Eventually, Rizzo shows up to seductively stroke her brother and then choke him. None of that is a typo, and I’m not entirely clear how she was able to do any of this, given that she is supposed to be a projection.
 But I did find the scenes on Vashti fairly compelling, because I appreciate exploring new terrain and Patrick Stewart fencing with a child makes for an enjoyable visual. This episode, directed by the upcoming cast member Jonathan Frakes, just felt a little distracting to me. However, seeing Seven at the end was joyous.
My assumption is that next week, we head to Freecloud with our favorite former Borg drone and we’ll learn what she has been up to.