Weather: Rainy and windy, with a high in the mid-50s.
In New York’s cutthroat rental market, the broker is king. These middlemen grant prospective renters access to listings, viewing appointments and leases in exchange for a fee.
But on Tuesday, state regulators announced an unexpected change that could spark a seismic shift in the market: no more broker fees for renters.
I spoke to my colleague Luis Ferré-Sadurní, who covers New York State politics in Albany and previously wrote about housing, about the new rules.
What exactly are broker fees, and how are the rules around them changing?
Before tenants are handed the keys to a rental, they’re often asked to pay a nonrefundable fee to a broker, usually 8 to 15 percent of one year’s rent. 
In a memo clarifying tenant protection laws from June, they said brokers acting on behalf of landlords would no longer be allowed to collect fees from new tenants.
What does this mean for renters in New York City?
It’s one less steep financial barrier to securing housing in a city where rents are soaring and affordable apartments are scarce. It’s worth noting that application fees for apartments were capped at $20 and security deposits at one month’s rent under last year’s new rent laws, too.
What about for brokers and landlords?
Brokers are still allowed to collect their fees, but only from the landlord unless the tenant hired the broker to help find an apartment. Industry experts say that will cause landlords of market-rate apartments to pass on the cost of the broker fees to tenants by raising the rent. Landlords of rent-stabilized units would not be able to raise rents to offset the expense.
Tenants could end up paying more over time if the increase remains baked into the rent down the road. The real estate industry has warned that this change could lead brokers to lose income and, potentially, their jobs.
Yesterday, state regulators said the changes were not retroactive, meaning that renters who paid a broker fee after the passage of the June 2019 rent laws were not entitled to a refund.
Some brokers said they planned to continue business as usual, arguing that they were left out of the process and that the state’s new guidance was not an enforceable mandate.
The real estate lobby, which encouraged its members to follow the new rules, said it could challenge the changes in court.
“It’s basically our bible,” Officer Ramses Cruz said.
The books are so sacred that officers must safeguard them even after retirement, because they could be used as evidence in future trials.
But by Feb. 17, they will be replaced by an iPhone app.
Department officials said the transition would help eliminate possible problems, such as faked entries and having to sort through indecipherable handwriting.
Patrick J. Lynch, president of the Police Benevolent Association, the police union, said the app would increase “bureaucratic burdens” and “workplace surveillance” within the force.
It’s Friday — try something new.
A friend of mine was visiting from Oklahoma. She had been to New York many times and had seen the major attractions, so I decided to take her to Coney Island.
We went on the Wonder Wheel, got a hot dog at Nathan’s and made our way over to the Brooklyn Cyclones’ baseball field to watch a game.
While we were in the stands, a peanut vendor passed by.
I stopped her and said she should yell, “Yo, peanuts,” as loud as she could.
The vendor turned around immediately.
“How many?” he said.
