Friday: The news can be rough. Enjoy some tiny California love stories.
A little while ago, we asked you to send us your tiny California love stories — your meet-cutes, your reunions, your heartbreaks, all told in 100 words or fewer.
We got responses from readers young and older from around the state. And as it’s Valentine’s Day, we thought today would be the perfect day to share some of our favorites.
I’m alone. She’s stuck in LAX traffic. I get in her car, see her face for the first time — an aunt I’ve never met, who I barely knew existed until my parents passed away. She calls her husband and uses my pronouns. I visit again. I move to Los Angeles. She makes me dinner. She loves me at Christmas. I love her at Thanksgiving. We grow together, and she loves me for me, and I love her for her dog. Together we get to build our family.
When my beloved husband of 41 years died of a heart attack in 2018, he took the life I had. He also opened the door for a new life — and the gift to reconnect after 60 years with a childhood crush. First through tentative texts and cautious phone conversations (Where are you? Who are you?), then a first date hiking in Marin, to romantic weekends back to Carmel where we grew up among the cypress and pines, strolling along that incredible white-sand beach, our love blossomed. Now we have to buy a House Divided Stanford/Cal flag for Big Game!
I thought he was homeless when I met him, which wouldn’t have been unusual in the coastal town where we lived. He’d show up disheveled at gatherings we frequented, sometimes smelling like he needed a shower. Our first date was Thai, our second at Bart’s Books, an outdoor bookstore in beautiful Ojai. Turns out, he lived in an Airstream in the hills of Ventura County. A little over two years later, expecting our second, we eloped in Las Vegas. We live in 700 square feet now, and we can walk to the beach. He is my perfect California mountain man.
After we moved from Hong Kong, his home, to San Francisco, my home, Daniel drifts uneasily. The buildings aren’t tall enough; the Muni isn’t fast enough; the Chinese food isn’t Chinese enough. “There’s better char siu here than in any other Western city,” I object, as he blanches at my restaurant suggestions. Acceptance builds slowly: first at a hole-in-the-wall in Chinatown, followed by a space-warp into Kowloon at a Cantonese cafe in Sunset. “This place is really authentic,” he beams over satay beef macaroni soup and French toast. Even the rain outside feels like an authentic Pearl River Delta deluge.
Andrew and I met at a Disneyland Annual Passholders’ Meet-up, outside the Jungle Cruise. Neither of us were looking to date anyone, just to make friends. We were lined up by chance to sit side-by-side on Space Mountain that day. Our lives have been exciting ever since. We’ve weathered excellent days and health hardships over our many years together now, and we love each other more than ever. Although we don’t have Disneyland Annual Passes anymore, Disneyland will always hold a special place in our hearts, because it brought two unlikely strangers together, first as friends, then into love.
I met Jea as a freshman at Stanford. I thought she was cute, but lacked the moxie to ask her out. Then she started dating some other guy. A decade later, we were doctors-in-training at U.C. Davis. I was at the clinic when I randomly bumped into her. She was there as a patient, nervous that she might have thyroid cancer. We made awkward small talk before the nurse ushered her away. My moxie consisted of messaging her on Facebook. Fortunately, she returned my message. Even more fortunately, the thyroid ultrasound was negative. We’ve been married for four years.
In a clinic at U.C. Davis in Sacramento, I thought I would be diagnosed with thyroid cancer. He was there signing paperwork for his patient. He immediately recognized me, saying, “Remember me from Stanford?” I couldn’t recall what classes we might have taken together 10 years earlier. I don’t remember my response — perhaps just an icy stare? Turns out, I did not have cancer. Before I could write an email apologizing for my curtness, a message on Facebook asked me to dinner. Two years later, we were married at Stanford, and we’re forever grateful to Mark Zuckerberg.
And a programming note: We’ll be off for Presidents’ Day on Monday. We hope you have a great weekend.
