Opinion|Is Bloomberg the Democrats’ Best Hope?
Is Bloomberg the Democrats’ Best Hope?
Readers offer conflicting answers and address the controversy over his stop-and-frisk policy.
I am a Trump supporter, but the only Democrat I would vote for is Michael Bloomberg. The reasons for this are given quite nicely by Mr. Friedman. From my point of view Mr. Bloomberg is right on the social issues that Mr. Friedman cites, and most knowledgeable on business issues, budgets and how to run a major big organization like our government.
So if the Democrats want a chance this year, nominate Michael Bloomberg and get at least this one Republican vote and many, many more.
I disagree with Thomas L. Friedman’s argument that Michael Bloomberg would be the strongest candidate against President Trump. First of all, “Billionaire Mike” is anathema to far too many of Bernie Sanders’s supporters. While I agree that Senator Sanders would be a weak opponent for Mr. Trump, not alienating his dedicated adherents is an absolute prerequisite for a Democratic victory.
Mr. Bloomberg’s sudden reversal on strongly championing “stop and frisk” while mayor of New York will surely not be persuasive to many in communities of color.
Finally, I don’t see why Mr. Bloomberg would possess a special appeal for voters in the crucial Midwestern battleground states that decided the election in 2016. Indeed, Amy Klobuchar would appear to possess far more plausible credentials as the candidate with the best chance to vanquish Mr. Trump.
I see, with some dismay, that Michael Bloomberg’s ill-advised stop-and-frisk policy is being dredged up again as he begins to climb in the polls. I hope this issue will not overshadow all the excellent policies he has espoused throughout his public career. I absolutely believe that he is the only candidate who stands a chance to beat President Trump.
He can outspend him, he would be a strong manager of the economy, he has a moderate but forward-looking health plan and he is on top of the climate change issue. If Democrats truly mean it when they say they will vote for anyone, Mickey Mouse, anyone who can beat Mr. Trump, then they better hop on the Bloomberg bandwagon because he’s the only game in town.
The writer is a former publisher of Foreign Affairs magazine.
The narrative among New Hampshire voters in the weeks before their primary was, “My priority is to vote for the person who can beat Donald Trump, but I am not sure who that person is.” I believe that it is now obvious: a Mike Bloomberg-Amy Klobuchar ticket.
Mr. Bloomberg — the moderate, pragmatic, results-oriented individual who actually built a successful business himself, but is aging and lacks experience with Congress. And Ms. Klobuchar — the self-made woman who has worked across the aisle to produce measurable results in Congress for 13 years.
Bloomberg-Klobuchar is as good as it is going to get.
