Books|Dan Brown … Children’s Book Author?
Dan Brown … Children’s Book Author?
For his latest project, the writer best known for “The Da Vinci Code” is turning his attention to a younger audience.
Dan Brown’s “Wild Symphony” is set for release in September.
Brown says the story and music were inspired by classical works like “Peter and the Wolf” and “The Carnival of the Animals.” He is also simultaneously releasing an album of the music that he composed, performed by the Zagreb Festival Orchestra in Croatia.
Brown was closely involved in the process, from choosing the illustrator, Susan Batori, to overseeing the development of the app, said Mallory Loehr, the senior vice president and publisher of the Random House Books for Young Readers Group. He traveled to Croatia to work with the Zagreb orchestra on the recording.
Music has long been a favorite mode of expression for Brown. As a child, he played piano to entertain himself (his parents wouldn’t allow a TV in the house). After college, he tried to make it as a musician. He founded his own record company, called Dalliance. He later moved to Los Angeles to become a singer-songwriter and pianist, and joined the National Academy of Songwriters. He still plays the piano nearly every day.
Brown wasn’t planning to make a splashy public return to his musical roots. The project came about in 2018, when his friend Bob Lord, the chief executive of PARMA Recordings, rediscovered his long-lost children’s album and asked Brown if he had thought about having the music performed by an orchestra. Brown gave a recording of “Musica Animalia” and the text to his literary agent, and proposed the dual book and album. To make the story cohere, Brown wrote more poems and musical pieces and added the mouse character to guide the reader and give the story an arc.
The orchestral music was recorded by PARMA Recordings, and is being distributed by the classical-music publisher Boosey & Hawkes.
“Wild Symphony” will be Brown’s biggest musical release to date: Rodale is printing 150,000 copies of the book, and rights have sold in 27 countries.
