Politics|Elizabeth Warren Is Running Her Race. The Real One May Be Passing Her By.
Elizabeth Warren Is Running Her Race. The Real One May Be Passing Her By.
The candidate keeps talking about winning “unwinnable fights.” But the New Hampshire primary was not supposed to be in that category.
CONCORD, N.H. — Two days before a once-mission-critical primary in a state she neighbors, Senator Elizabeth Warren — typically exceptional at holding a room — had not finished speaking when something unusual happened: Dozens of voters began filtering out of the middle school gym she had reserved.
Campaign staff strained to enlist prospective volunteers on their way to their cars. “Someone, anyone,” one organizer called out as departing guests stepped around him.
And when Ms. Warren wound toward her big finish, the go-out-and-get-’em kicker in these urgent final hours, her mind wandered accidentally to home.
“It’s up to you, Massachusetts, to decide what to do,” Ms. Warren instructed.
Supporters looked back at her, murmuring. She realized why. “And to the people of New Hampshire!” she amended.
On the eve of a contest she had hoped to win (and probably will not, according to polls) — one week removed from a caucus she had hoped to win (and certainly did not, according to Iowans) — Ms. Warren has arrived, almost imperceptibly, at a precarious stage.
In a primary adjoining her own state, it is Senator Bernie Sanders, another New Englander, and Pete Buttigieg, the former mayor of South Bend, Ind., who are leading in polls. Hoping to turn New Hampshire into a two-person race, the pair have been slinging fresh insults: Mr. Buttigieg suggested on Monday that nominating Mr. Sanders would “risk alienating Americans at this critical moment.” Mr. Sanders, contrasting his online fund-raising army to Mr. Buttigieg’s cadre of high-dollar donors, said he would not “go to rich people’s homes and get advice from millionaires and billionaires.” And after a chaotic virtual tie in Iowa, both campaigns on Monday requested a recanvass of certain caucus precincts.
Former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., another fallen front-runner, looked past New Hampshire in a phone call on Monday to supporters in South Carolina, where his popularity with black voters is expected to make the state more hospitable to him than the first two. “Keep the faith,” he said at a field office in Salem, N.H.
Senator Amy Klobuchar has edged up in polls after appraising Mr. Buttigieg as a “cool newcomer” seeking a mega-promotion and insisting a “socialist” like Mr. Sanders should not lead the ticket. “We’re surging,” she told reporters, before citing a Boston Globe-affiliated survey by name.
But Ms. Warren, who has largely avoided engaging her opponents, is making perhaps the riskiest bet available: changing very little, largely declining to alter a 2020 primary approach often premised on self-branding as a “fighter” in a policy context but less often in a political one.
She can appear at times to be campaigning in a time capsule delivered from last year, running the race on her terms, largely independent of the changing circumstances. Her riff on a wealth tax for the ultrarich still lands (“Just two cents!” her crowds chant, cheering the policy’s tagline). Her supporters still hold signs aloft with purpose (“Win with Warren!”).
But what if it is not enough?
Many Warren admirers remain almost preternaturally calm about her electoral position, deciding after a year of semi-permanent meta-punditry from voters that this is not the time to overreact to disappointing news.
They cite what they see as a double standard in her treatment as a female candidate, observing that male candidates are less often held to account over squishy policy details or minor missteps, while also choosing to believe in Ms. Warren’s gentle reminders that “women are outperforming men” in some recent competitive elections.
“She’s hanging in there,” said Lisa Nicholson, 60, from Hopkinton, N.H., waiting for Ms. Warren on Sunday afternoon.
Andrea Olmstead, 71, a Bostonian who traveled to see Ms. Warren in Manchester, was one of many women to invoke the sting of Hillary Clinton’s defeat in 2016, suggesting that Ms. Warren’s campaign had been a kind of balm for hope-seeking women in the Trump age.
Ms. Olmstead was disinclined to consider the possibility of another letdown.
There are. But at a most inconvenient moment, Ms. Warren finds herself a candidate in-between, neither surging nor necessarily free-falling, struggling to channel the zeal that long powered her last year but also careful not to project any outward alarm to her slice of an often skittish Democratic electorate.
Allies are imagining a win-without-winning-yet path to the nomination, arguing that placing first in any state this month is not essential in a field so unsettled that merely surviving into March could suffice for now. It is a theory floated every four years by faltering campaigns in recent presidential cycles, generally without success. But their case: There is no front-runner with an overpowering coalition and Michael R. Bloomberg, the billionaire former New York mayor, will provide a useful foil for Ms. Warren’s familiar crusade against big money once he begins competing in states next month.
Ms. Warren’s rallies can often approximate the sheen of a winner’s: the nods from voters as she speaks about her Oklahoma youth; men in flannel shirts whoot-whooting for the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau; a boy with a blue crayon, coloring in the bubble letters on a sheet of paper reading “Dream Big, Fight Hard,” turning to clap when the adults clapped.
There are still superfans, like Don Lansing, 32, of Lebanon, N.H., who waited for a photograph with Ms. Warren on Sunday evening in a shirt depicting no fewer than five pictures of himself with the candidate.
“She reminds me of every best teacher I ever had,” he said.
In high-stakes settings, Ms. Warren has made no major mistakes, turning in another solid if unmemorable debate performance last week while competitors claimed more attention and speaking time. In a signal of her peers’ view of her chances, Ms. Warren barely faced any criticism onstage.
Lately, Ms. Warren has taken to calling herself the unity candidate — a complicated messaging task for a senator whose political identity has registered more often for her unswerving progressive passions.
She has alluded to the “unwinnable fights” she has won in her life — transcending a working-class upbringing to excel in academia, flipping a Senate seat — as evidence of her viability as a general election option against President Trump.
If she can attract the small-dollar fund-raising totals required to sustain a national bid, Ms. Warren’s team believes she can compete effectively in a primary of attrition. According to a memo from her campaign manager last month, Ms. Warren had more than 1,000 staff members on the ground in more than 30 states.
But after a year in which Ms. Warren so often set the pace of the primary, sending policy plans into orbit and selling puckish apparel like a “Billionaire Tears” coffee mug, some veterans of losing campaigns wonder if her best 2020 moments have passed.
Knocking on doors in Manchester on Saturday with her husband, Bruce Mann, and her golden retriever, Bailey, who sniffed a local news microphone as he walked, the senator received a mixed reception.
“You’re on my short list,” a jogger told her, stopping briefly to chat.
Up the street, a Sanders canvasser walked by a home with signs out front for Ms. Klobuchar and Mr. Buttigieg.
