Of a record 2,300 entries, we selected nine winners, eight runners-up and 18 honorable mentions. Read the winning essays here.
A Garfield-inspired restaurant. Doc Martens. New York’s Penn Station. A Lizzo concert.
These are just a few of the pieces of art and culture students chose to write about for our Fifth Annual Student Review Contest, in which we invited them to review anything they wanted as long as it fit into one of the categories of creative work reviewed by The Times.
This year, we divided this popular contest into two categories — one for high school and one for middle school. More than 2,300 young people entered our high school category, which was open for students ages 13-19. They wrote about everything from local restaurants and art exhibits to comedy shows and hidden architectural gems.
Of the many excellent entries we received, our judges selected nine winners, eight runners-up and 18 honorable mentions. You’ll find the nine winning essays, published in full, below. Scroll to the bottom of this post to see the names of all the finalists.
One thing we noticed about this year’s entries? Students seem to have mastered the art of the pan. While we often get many complimentary reviews, in this batch of winners you’ll find just as many glowing reviews as you will critical ones. And, as you’ll see, both are a joy to read.
Whether positive or negative, we think any of these student essays would make great mentor texts. If you decide to use any of them in your class, write to us at LNFeedback@nytimes to tell us how it goes.
Congratulations to all our finalists and thank you to everyone who participated!
To see what other contests we’re running this school year, please visit our 2019-20 contest calendar.
There is no single term that can adequately define music sensation Lizzo, but “bop” star, band-geek-turned-pop-icon, classical flutist, self-love trailblazer, and inclusivity advocate are all apt descriptors. At her Washington, D.C., concert, she took the audience to church, and center stage, from a gold pulpit lit up with her name, Lizzo preached a message of joy, self-love, and celebration. Every ounce of her performance shone with positivity. Even before she appeared, the bright podium and large flats made to look like stained glass windows gave the audience a taste of the revelry ahead.
Then, clad in a silver leotard, she appeared at the pulpit and belted out the first song of her set: “Worship,” an anthem of confidence and self-love. Coupling the song with a nod to Aretha Franklin’s “Respect,” Lizzo made it clear from the start that she would tolerate no negativity in her presence.
Her powerhouse pipes were on full display with the title track of her album, “Cuz I Love You.” She held nothing back, and her voice was just as powerful, if not more so than on her studio tracks, and while she belted perfect high notes, she danced. And it wasn’t merely a little toe tapping along to the beat; she danced. Accompanied by her crew, The Big Girls, they rocked the stage, jumping, clapping, and twerking in perfect unison. None of the women onstage that night, including Lizzo herself, were society’s picture of a dancer or performer. They were full-figured, wearing high-cut metallic leotards, with close-cropped hair or swinging dreadlocks, and almost all of them were black. 
Garfield — a beloved childhood character; Garfield Eats — an abomination. “Garfield Eats” is a Garfield-themed restaurant obsessed with perfecting their marketing strategy, and clearly nothing else. With a haunting slogan like, “Love me, feed me, don’t leave me,” I often wonder how they managed to find a phrase so efficient at turning away customers before they even walk through the doors.
The awkward, cringe-inducing titles don’t end there, though. “The Garfachino,” one of their main menu items, is watery and bright orange, and looks about as artificial as spray cheese. The flavor was so boring and bland, it almost made me wish it was spray cheese. Their meals are arguably worse, titled “KIDult” meals for the millennials who have yet to accept that they are not quirky teenagers.
These meals include the “Garnivore” pizza and the famous lasagna. The “Garnivore” pizzas are shaped like faceless Garfield heads that would give any child nightmares. The crust seems two inches thick and was so dry, I felt like I was taking a bite of a cracker with a little sauce sparingly thrown on top. The pizza sauce is also neon orange, despite one of Garfield Eats’ many marketing strategies being proudly boasting the restaurant’s “healthy” and “all natural” ingredients.
And of course, the famous lasagna that Garfield is known for; Garfield Eat’s lasagna tastes exactly how you would expect fast food lasagna to taste: disgraceful. It tastes obviously nuked in a novelty box that is clearly the only attraction to the restaurant in the first place. The flimsy cardboard box features one comic strip to keep you entertained throughout your entire meal. You may think one comic strip isn’t enough to last you the whole time, but it only takes ten seconds to realize the food is not worth eating.
It is clear that this restaurant cares more about public image than the quality of their food when you visit their Google review page in which almost every negative comment that makes a valid complaint is flagged for spam.
As for customer service, it’s bad. The average flagged review mentions how most often the “fast food” comes upward of twenty minutes after ordering despite the restaurant being marketed as a “quick mobile restaurant.” It is shocking how long it takes the employees to microwave a box of subpar lasagna, and sometimes, they can’t even do that. A large amount of the poor reviews mention that their lasagna came undercooked and even frozen in some areas.
So, unless you’re a child who desperately wants a novelty box stained with grease and marinara sauce, I would suggest you keep your association with Garfield strictly by comic strip.
Two words. DOCTOR. MARTENS, or as I like to call them, my around the world boots. My moon boots, my emo boots, my girlie boots, my goth boots, my shiny glass slippers in the shape of boots. My oh dang look in the mirror, you’re looking mighty fine boots. My ‘can I take a picture of your boots’ boots. My casual boots, my prom-night boots, my run to the mailbox boots. America I am telling you, these suckers are my BOOTS. The sleek black leather is smoother than the butter my grandma hand-churned in the middle of Alabama heat of 1942. The intricate yellow stitching all along the seams is more iridescent than a disco club in 1973 with bell bottoms and cigarette smoke and Elton John serenading the microphone. The squeaky clean rubber soles. the Armageddon-fighting, indestructible laces. The notorious shine of the black leather. But none of this is even comes close to the very best part of Doctor Marten Boots: these babies have SOUL. The second my feet glide into those chunky shoes, I feel myself transform like Cinderella from a dusty maid-rat to an unstoppable, ever-so captivating goddess. From black lipstick to flowery dresses to sleek suits, no outfit is complete without the flash of a stylish and daring shoe like Doc Martens. These high tops have marched across the globe; From Western Europe to downtown Atlanta, my Doc Martens have dominated every inch of rubble they have crossed. Carrying me across airports and grocery stores and museums, these boots are the one missing piece of every human’s existence. Everlasting, imperishable, dominating, beguiling. If I mercilessly trekked the sands of Israel and the mountains of Asia to find a genie in a bottle, I would use all three of my wishes on these heaven-sent boots. Wearing Doc Martens is the feeling of Elvis Presley’s knees rocking and hips swinging as the King of pop performs ‘Jailhouse Rock’ for a raging crowd. It is the experience of marching alongside Martin Luther King and fighting for all love and equality on the urban streets of Georgia. It is the intense warmth in your heart when you slow dance in a pavilion under the warm August moonlight. If there is one thing that America needs to unite itself under one heart, tried and true, a pair of high top Doctor Marten boots is always the answer.
Picture it — a gritty, violent horror opera to the tune of lilting violins, wherein men can metamorphosize into anything from the feed for a mushroom farm, to the dining fare for an unknowing high society. This is the grisly world of NBC’s “Hannibal,” tragically canceled in the wake of its third season. Watching it feels as though you’re plunging into a blood soaked gore fest, conducted with perhaps a more tender hand than other such carnage filled media, like “Saw” and “Hostel.” But, beneath the wild, fantastical murders and indulgent displays of opulence hides a complete mastery of subtext, which expertly navigates the various nuances of mental illness, gentle homoeroticism, and at times, comedy.
“Hannibal” follows the tragic tale of intelligent empath Will Graham, who, while working for the F.B.I., unfortunately falls into the favor of extravagant serial killer, Hannibal Lecter. The show is not only made by the phenomenal writing, but also by the extraordinary characterization as portrayed by Hugh Dancy and Mads Mikkelsen. As they further tumble into each other’s clutches, they play psychological games with one another, such as manipulating each other’s lovers, framing each other for murder, and inevitably falling in love, all in a way that appears entirely logical and conducive to their story. The nonsensical becomes reality, the macabre whimsical.
Viewers must thoroughly suspend disbelief to truly revel in the show’s genius — a cannibal named Hannibal making puns about eating people with the Director of Behavioral Psychology at the F.B.I.? Commonplace. A totem pole composed of numerous human remains? A regular Tuesday evening for Hannibal and Co. To quote Mikkelsen, “[Hannibal] finds the beauty of life right on the threshold of death.” The show serves as an exploration of the darkest facets of human nature, examined with a lens of normalcy, and almost reverence. Morbidity serves as an expression of love, or otherwise emotion for the characters, often composed with excruciating care, creating a chillingly addictive experience.
As humorous and witty as, “Hannibal” can be, it predominantly functions as a heart-rending examination of psychology, love, ethics, and humanity at large. Finding basis in Carl Jung’s dream theory and the unconscious desires of man, one’s understanding of themselves and others will be thoroughly enriched by the show, although through somewhat odd means. The concept of empathy is explored in the most painful of ways, and discussions of shattered teacups and time reversal will leave viewers dewy eyed, with a solemn reminder of the fragility of human relationships.
For those with strong stomachs, and who can handle some graphic imagery, “Hannibal” is an extraordinarily worthwhile endeavor to pursue. It is consistently shocking and ever beautiful, forever shifting my aesthetic tastes toward melodramatic opera and gourmet cooking.
Arriving today in New York’s Pennsylvania Station — as any commuter, tourist, or local may attest — is a degraded business. Previously, it was an awe-inspiring affair. Consider old Penn Station, a Beaux-Arts masterpiece of imposing grandeur and soaring arches that once straddled an entire block. A technological marvel, it welcomed weary travelers into midtown Manhattan until its merciless 1963 razing. But modern Penn Station — unlike its illustrious, state-of-the-art predecessor — is sorely unequipped to handle its 21st-century demands. In fact, a (brief) visit confirms that Penn Station 2.0 — a subterranean hellhole — lacks absolute coherence.
Notoriously difficult to navigate, Penn Station’s absurd layout only compounds its woes. Though the transit hub is purportedly composed of an upper and lower level, this — one soon discovers — is extremely misleading. In reality, the “two” levels are further divided by numerous split-levels, ramps, and stairs — all impeding efficient human flow. Consequently, Penn Station is perpetually crowded. Oh, and have I mentioned the baffling signs? “Downstairs,” I observe a man holding a map and scratching his head, clearly confused. People here look lost — because they are.
The scarcity of unity extends to the train concourses, which function as individual microcosms — each complete with eccentric fonts. Amtrak’s hall has high ceilings, but its waiting area is cramped as if passengers were the last priority. New Jersey Transit’s concourse, despite a garish color scheme, is the only tolerable space — in rush hour’s absence. And the Long Island Rail Road’s cross-station artery — clogged with a mishmash of stores and eateries — is suffering the architectural equivalent of a heart attack. If train services were amalgamated in old Penn Station’s fashion, this state of disarray would’ve been instantly eliminated.
Penn Station’s obstructive configuration isn’t just frustrating for riders — it actually endangers their lives. Particularly disconcerting is the dearth of escape routes, which constitutes a major security hazard. Antecedent incidents underscore the perilous ramifications; a literal 2017 stampede injured 16 people.  After 15 minutes wandering its dim tunnels devoid of sunlight, I felt aggravated and stressed. Now, imagine doing this daily — for years. Exasperated commuters shove each other, scrambling for the subway home. Tourists dragging luggage gape at the chaos. Locals flee. Nobody wants to be here. Somewhere above the din, mournful strains of music wail.
For those interested in experiencing Penn Station’s horrors firsthand, admission is free. Entrances are located on 34th Street and 7th/8th Avenues — I utilize the 7th Avenue exit. Back outside, I glance at the squeaky escalators belching masses onto the unforgiving concrete curb. They emerge — and scamper away. As Vincent Scully, the late art critic, famously noted, “One entered the city like a god … One scuttles in now like a rat.” That blustery Friday afternoon, it wasn’t too hard to see Mr. Scully’s point.
I’ve recently been pondering the extent of my anger, or better, lack thereof. Women are taught that anger is the only emotion we should not feel if we are to be good mothers, good wives, good mild homemakers while, often, anger is seen as a purely male emotion. A woman should be strong enough to be sexy but not so strong that she overpowers the men in her life. Girls should simultaneously ooze sexuality but keep it in check lest a boy takes notice and is distracted by a shoulder. Justine Kurland’s photography combats the modern female ideal and collects utopian fragments from a matriarchal Garden of Eden. Her photographs were exhibited by Mitchell-Innes and Nash in early 2018 but now can be found within her many books or by simply searching her name. Kurland’s images only reawaken my childhood fascination with running away to the woods behind my house and finding silence in the snow. Through these photos, I am realizing the autonomy in adventure and a cure for involuntary numbness.
Justine Kurland’s photo series “Girl Pictures” reveals a world of ‘runaway girls’ in all the places they are not supposed to be. In a culture that frequents the image of a teenage boy with a cigarette between his lips and an alluring dark side, to see a young woman fixed into the same romantic frame is refreshing. In “Kung Fu Fighters,” two girls play fight in an unkept field, a bridge and building to their backs, while the third girl sits atop a graffitied boulder and blows a bubble with her chewing gum. Kurland’s photos are overwhelmingly androgynous in their unapologetic femininity; her girls are casually dressed (or undressed) in ’90s jeans and tank tops accompanied by militant personas. These heroines reconstruct the famed “Lord of the Flies” narrative through their coven of violence. In “Boy Torture: Double Headed Monster,” a girl straddles an inanimate teenage boy, her spit looming over his face while two girls hover in the background: one with hair hanging forwards, and a younger girl perched in a nearby tree. A commentary on the seemingly innate ferocity of young men, Kurland designs these clandestine moments to the paradoxical and raw backdrops of American desolation. The intimacy with nature portrayed in “Armadillo Burial” as a girl holds the tail of an armadillo while her accomplices dig and look on with quiet courtesy of a proper burial forges a peculiarly solemn moment that calls to the undiscovered wild within us. Within seemingly candid shots, these young women are allowed to exist within the covert intensity of childhood that endures beyond society’s implicit chains.
Dave Chappelle doesn’t care what you think; the opening to Sticks and Stones makes that much clear. Perhaps this confidence is warranted, considering Chappelle simply does the same thing privileged groups have always done, to great success: punch down.
Faced with a new social climate, Chappelle covers everything from the #MeToo movement to transgender people. It’s too bad his new outlook is but a rehashing of close-minded ideas long thought overcome, whether it’s proudly claiming the language of misogynists for himself (“You could … shut the f*ck up!” he tells women fighting for equality — I’m sure no woman has ever heard that one before), or favoring a celebrity’s status over the crimes they’ve committed (“Even if he did do it … so what?”).
Chappelle’s comedy hinges on shock factor, wrapped slyly around the shoulders of his Everyman persona. His most powerful weapon is his mansplaining voice, which manages to convince you that whatever wild claim he just presented is actually common sense, before the moment passes and you remind yourself that his entire argument is built upon fallacy. “What if I was Chinese, but born in this n***** body?” he reasons, and he’s right in the wrong way, taking a potentially fascinating commentary on the societal boundaries of race and gender and instead assigning outdated stereotypes as intrinsic racial qualities.
Chappelle admits his mistakes but refuses to apologize, determined to paint himself as the victim of marginalized groups: “No matter what you do in your artistic expression,” he moans, “you are never, ever allowed to upset … the alphabet people.” He skirts the mention of the L.G.B.T.Q. community’s struggles, instead emphasizing his lazy caricatures of L.G.B.T.Q. people and mocking petty infighting in the community, undermining the gravity of the homophobia and transphobia they face from straight people.
Of all his bits, his comments on active shooter drills are some of the only ones that hit home. We get a brief flash of the classic Chappelle as he points out the absurdity of children with firearms and the rage of school shooters that stems from a place of privilege, even suggesting that the only thing that can overcome the government’s love of guns is their fear of African-Americans.
Chappelle has long been praised for these sorts of refreshing and straightforward takes on racial dynamics, but in an effort to maintain his brand, it seems he’s regressed to finding new, even more offensive ways to present antiquated ideas. Once you’ve seen someone fall a thousand times, it’s just not funny anymore. 
A word of warning: The BBC’s “Great British Baking Show” is not mean and dispiriting television. If you enjoy the petty and often cruel conflict most reality programs include, this won’t be your cup of tea.
Set among vast greenery, the “Baking Show’s” prestigious venue makes for a quiet viewing escape. Have a crippling fear of climate change? A math exam on Monday? Your granddaughter hasn’t texted you back? The crisp, white competitor’s tent can tackle those worrisome distractions. Here, where the best amateur bakers in Britain compete, even President Trump seems eons away.
The program isn’t, however, only about baking prowess. Humorous at its core, judges Prue Leith and Paul Hollywood assume traditional good cop bad cop personas, and the witty, eccentric hosts Noel Fielding and Sandi Toksvig fool around on set.
And this is precisely the point. It doesn’t matter. The eliminated contestants return at the end of the season to cheer on the finalists, and in the closing credits are pictures of participants baking and visiting each other after filming. The show has a “life goes on” attitude that is absent from our often anxious, everyday discourse. A stark contrast to the harsh media we are so constantly exposed to, “The Great British Baking Show” stands apart in its genre, rooted in good-natured humor and celebration of its contestants and their work.
Few Democratic politicians in recent memory have spiraled so swiftly and so irrevocably from political stardom to scandal-ridden infamy as former Senator Al Franken. Since eight women leveled allegations of non-consensual kissing or groping against Franken, his abrupt resignation in December 2017 still occasionally haunts Democrats.
Franken’s 2017 memoir, “Al Franken: Giant of the Senate,” is a relic from the former senator’s glory days. I turned to Franken’s memoir to see if his account of events during his Senate career exposes any of the attitudes or actions that compromised him. What I found was simultaneous evidence of Franken’s current caricature, a remorseless, perverted product of Hollywood‘s hypermasculine underbelly, and the virtues that once endeared him to progressives: down-to-earth humor and artless candor.
At the beginning of his narrative, Franken describes S.N.L.-related controversies resurfacing during his campaign for Senate. Yet rather than confronting his comedic blunders with humility, he labors to explain away a rape joke he pitched about journalist Lesley Stahl. Somehow, Franken thrived in a liberal paradigm defined by crusades against rape culture, but he still defends (in print!) his own vulgarities by identifying himself with television’s “good ol’ boys” club. Franken’s sleazy justification for verbal misconduct — “I was a comedian” — suggests his liberal celebrity was all along a contrived myth, disguising latent toxic masculinity.
As clearly as Franken frames himself as a sorry-not-sorry misogynist, Franken’s later account of his time in Congress reminds readers of the heart and humor he brought to the Senate, a chamber notoriously bereft of either. Franken makes long-winded policy battles surrounding Obamacare and Native American rights genuinely entertaining, augmenting technical explanations with stirring anecdotes.
Not all of Franken’s comedy attacks liberal values, either. Many of his jokes, including ribbing against Ted Cruz and calling Antonin Scalia’s dissension against gay marriage “very gay,” inject casual satire into Franken’s tour of his Senate tenure. By dispensing with the cloying, 10,000-foot-high patriotism that typically bloats political memoirs, Franken reveals his main objective: appearing relentlessly authentic, even if that means becoming dangerously risqué.
Given his current reputation, marred by allegations of sexual impropriety, even Franken’s most convincing appeals to the heart — or the funny bone — appear less legitimate. His tainted credibility is by no means redeemed with a few laugh-out-loud one-liners. Nevertheless, Franken’s gut-busting, earnest progressivism explains why some of his Democratic colleagues delivered tearful farewell speeches on the Senate floor for him. The potent jokes contained in Franken’s prose recall the unique role he occupied in the Democratic Party: a charming, recognizable, funny senator, who, unlike every other talented Democrat, wasn’t seeking the 2020 presidential nomination. With the vacuum of genuine hilarity Franken’s left in Congress, reading his memoir two years later is nostalgic and disheartening, if not very exonerating.
In alphabetical order by the writer’s last name.
“Speed Racer (2008)” by Nathaniel H.
Contest Judges: Amanda Christy Brown, Nicole Daniels, Shannon Doyne, Jeremy Engle, Ross Flatt, Michael Gonchar, John Otis and Natalie Proulx.