Amina Cain’s ‘Indelicacy’ is a cautionary tale and a call to arms.
For many book groups, it’s hard enough to figure out where and when to meet, whose turn it is to host and whether or not to add or subtract members, let alone what to read next. Group Text will address the main event: what to read — with a focus on the kinds of propulsive, thought-provoking books worthy of discussion. This month’s pick is “Indelicacy” by Amina Cain — a small but mighty tale of aspiration and marriage gone wrong.
An aspiring writer lands in the life she thinks she wants, one where she’s creating art instead of cleaning it. Eventually she has to consider what’s most important — time, inspiration or human connection? The answers are complicated.
I came to “Indelicacy” because the cover looked like a dress I’d buy. I stayed because it reminded me of “A Room of One’s Own” with a few wicked twists.
Once upon a time I was transfixed by an illustration of the Little Match Girl in my grandmother’s old copy of Hans Christian Andersen’s fairy tales. You could only see her from the back, an urchin in rags gazing through a window into a bright room where a family dined on roast goose. The image was haunting enough to make me a rubbernecker before I knew how to read.
If the Little Match Girl hadn’t frozen to death on the next page, she might have grown up to be the narrator of Amina Cain’s weird, quiet debut novel, “Indelicacy.” To be clear, I mean weird in the best way — as in eyebrow raising, tantalizing and unforgettable. This is a book that holds you at an arm’s length, not the other way around.
When we first get to know our mysterious narrator, she has a job cleaning an unnamed museum. (I pictured the Met, but you can imagine any place you like, which is the beauty of Cain’s lightly sketched world.) Like her Danish counterpart, she’s on the outside looking in — at art, at wealthy patrons, at the world at her fingertips, which is also impossibly far away.
Who wouldn’t want to have time to feel like a giant ear?
You’re a little bit jealous of this woman until you realize how miserable she is. She has exactly what she thought she wanted, but the next phase of her life unfolds hypnotically as “Indelicacy” morphs from a modern “Pygmalion” into a fable infused with an old-fashioned moral: Be careful what you wish for.
But don’t get the wrong idea; it’s not all doom and gloom. Cain’s story has its funny moments, as when the narrator gets drunk and waltzes with a pal; or when she tells two authors at a reading what she really thinks of them. (This part is also kind of mean.) You’ll notice how she seems happy only when she’s with her friends, Antoinette and Dana. Aside from the maid, they’re among the only people Cain names, and the only ones our narrator genuinely cares about.
“Indelicacy” makes you think about creativity, friendship and the nature of time. I will admit, I got a C in the one philosophy class I ever took, so if I felt compelled to mull over the questions at the heart of this small but mighty book, you will too.
Cain’s tale made me want to grab a highlighter, and it transported me to a different part of my life, one where I collected lines of verse — hi, Adrienne Rich! hi, Mary Oliver! — and stored them in the part of my brain now overtaken by passwords and the orthodontist’s phone number.
“Indelicacy” is not escapist reading, but it is fuel, pushing you to do the thing you love. For me, that was writing this review. Like a patient gym teacher coaching a lazy student, Cain whispered beautiful words into her megaphone, and I listened. You will, too.
How did you imagine the narrator’s life beyond what was on the page? Did you feel a connection to the narrator, and did it matter?
What does this book tell you about the nature of inspiration? Does it bloom where it’s planted or only flourish under certain conditions?
Why do you think Amina Cain was so parsimonious when it came to names? What do you make of the italicized sections?
Where did you picture the story taking place and why?
“Dept. of Speculation,” by Jenny Offill. Welcome to the story of an imperfect relationship told in the way actual love stories really unfold — in cryptic, sometimes beautiful and sometimes ugly pieces.
“Free Food for Millionaires,” by Min Jin Lee. Before there was “Pachinko,” there was “Free Food,” a novel about a young striver who makes money at an investment bank when she really wants to make hats. How long will she hold onto the brass ring she never wanted?
“Happenstance,” by Carol Shields. In most stories about marriages you only get one side of the story. Here, Shields shows both perspectives. Spoiler alert: They’re very different.
“The Yellow Wallpaper,” by Charlotte Perkins Gilman. In this iconic feminist short story, a woman deprived of creative pursuits slowly loses her mind while imprisoned in the summer house her husband rented in an effort to help her recover from the birth of their child.
To join the conversation about “Indelicacy,” you can comment below — or go to our Facebook page, @nytbooks, or our Instagram, @NYTBooks. You can also tweet your thoughts, questions and opinions to @nytimesbooks with the hashtag #nytgrouptext.