The fall 2020 shows have come to a close in New York. Here, our daily recaps and the most memorable moments from the runways, as captured by T’s photographers.
As usual, New York Fashion Week closed with a show from Marc Jacobs, who staged a nostalgic ode to the city itself. Inside the Park Avenue Armory, viewers sat at intimate wooden cafe tables as models (Miley Cyrus among them) walked not in a precise procession, but rather like pedestrians on a busy sidewalk — one shared with dozens of bra-clad dancers. Jacobs cited the choreographer Karole Armitage, who opened the event with a solo performance, as a source of inspiration for her ability to break with convention and reinterpret previous eras of the city’s history. Jacobs did the same with mod, ’60s-style coats and minidresses in neutrals and pastels. Some models sported shimmering opaque tights while others wore dainty ankle or knee socks with their pumps or Mary Janes. There were also a few nods to fictional city characters: a red Peter Pan-collared dress recalled orphan Annie; and Bella Hadid, in a black sequined gown, white gloves and plenty of jewels, embodied Audrey Hepburn as Holly Golightly.
Michael Kors’s show opened with an understated black-and-grey plaid cape coat paired with a matching overnight bag and tall black riding boots. It was the first of many cape-like pieces, and another overt equestrian reference came in the form of an elongated scarlet red dressage coat. These, it was clear, were polished clothes for a weekend in the country. For days (and nights) back in town, there were paisley silk numbers, midi-length pleated skirts and woolen pantsuits. Some of the more playful pieces included a gold lamé minidress and a white denim vest, its feathered lining bursting out on all sides. Whatever her presumed setting, though, the Kors woman looked comfortable — and, notably, warm. Even a shimmering sleeveless dress in gunmetal gray was worn with a chunky knit scarf.
This season, Mike Eckhaus and Zoe Latta worked with familiar silhouettes, to which they applied their own homespun eclecticism. That meant acid-washed jeans in shades of berry and sepia, patchwork-like knit sweaters and double-breasted coats worn with the sort of grommet-studded belts more commonly seen on motorcycle jackets. Two of these coats also appeared in a cropped length that gave them an appealing boxy shape, and even a simple fitted crew-neck T-shirt was made memorable by its mauve Lurex fabric. On their feet, the models wore secondhand shoes that came courtesy of the e-commerce site the RealReal, which, now that the show is over, will list them for sale. The designers wanted to show their support for sustainability in fashion, and the fact that no two pairs were alike also fit perfectly with the Eckhaus Latta’s offbeat spirit.
After an 18-month hiatus from the New York Fashion Week calendar, the sisters Laura and Kate Mulleavy of the Los Angeles-based label Rodarte staged a much-anticipated show at St. Bartholomew’s Church on Park Avenue. Inside the candlelit, 19th-century building, models with burgundy-stained lips emerged from clusters of overgrown flowers in looks that fluctuated between sweet and slightly sinister. The Mulleavys, who often cite their love of film as a source of inspiration, looked to Francis Ford Coppola’s 1992 adaptation of Bram Stoker’s “Dracula.” Primly cut polka-dot numbers and pouf-sleeved blouses gave way to elaborately detailed gothic evening looks in black, ghostly silvers and yes, blood red. Some glistened with beaded spider-web appliqués, and there was even a floor-length hooded cape. But then the mood turned again, as if the specter of death had been vanquished, and out came a queue of almost saccharine tropical-print gowns worn with crownlike buds and veils.
Laura Kim and Fernando Garcia, the design duo behind Oscar de la Renta, staged their show at the main branch of the New York Public Library, a classic city spot that, after hours, is often the site of parties and balls. Naturally, the collection included plenty of evening wear, including full-skirted dresses that were short in front and floor-length in back, and several more columnar options in swaths of velvet. Even the boldly colored daywear looks, one of which featured pink pants paired with a teal sweater, struck a festive note.
Known by stylish New Yorkers as the Proenza boys, Jack McCollough and Lazaro Hernandez honed their taste for sharp angles with asymmetrical body-sculpting dresses and pea coats worn off the shoulder. Exposed shoulders were a running theme throughout the collection, and also appeared with ribbed knit dresses that wrapped around the torso like bandages, as well as with leather mini dresses in black, nude and siren red. Just as eye-catching were tall boots in ruched leather and, as Proenza Schouler can always be counted on to create dynamism from head to toe, many of the models’ slicked-back hair.
At Carolina Herrera, creative director Wes Gordon presented an exuberant meditation on form and silhouette, showing exaggerated A-lines that, in some instances, took the form of sweeping, papal-style robes. Elsewhere, he created volume with asymmetric peplums and stacked tiers of jacquard. Adding to the collection’s joyous mood were shades of Yves Klein blue, cadmium red and carrot orange, which the designer counterbalanced with several black-and-white looks, including an off-the-shoulder dress worn with a polka-dot veil. Gordon, whose eye never strays far from the garden, combined these opposing color schemes in a floral print of canary yellow blooms, their brilliance magnified by a dark background.
From a tangle of wildflowers that brought to mind a secret garden, Jason Wu’s models emerged in a succession of feminine, diaphanous gowns that mimicked their lush surroundings. Wu looked to blooms — especially orchids — during the design process, as evidenced by the collection’s vibrant hues and delicate textures: Dresses in shades of ultramarine, deep violet and fuchsia featured irregular twists and ruching that resembled petals, while others were swathed in cascades of fluttering feathers. There were also several daywear options, including a satiny quilted silk skirt suit in garnet, but by and large, Wu’s collection was for women in need of something lovely.
Sander Lak, the designer behind Sies Marjan, staged his show on the 54th floor of a new building in Midtown Manhattan, from which guests took in spectacular 360-degree views. In contrast to the hyper-urban setting, the collection was largely influenced by a coming Guggenheim exhibition focused on the Dutch architect Rem Koolhaas’s study of shifting rural landscapes. Lak found his own sort of building blocks in extremely tactile materials, including sumptuous silks and wools. Many of these fabrics came by way of partnerships with English, Irish and Dutch artisans who still abide by an older, slower way of life, while others were hand-embellished or naturally dyed. Ever the colorist, Lak punctuated the collection with bursts of metallic gold, bright daffodil and tangerine; one of the most memorable pieces, the many pairs of chunky clogs notwithstanding, was a glossy yellow blanket cape.
Area’s Beckett Fogg and Piotrek Panszczyk channeled the draping work of the 20th-century French couturier Madame Grès, which they filtered through the lens of their own street-meets-glam aesthetic. The designers also used their own signature fabrication techniques (crocheting, soldering and weaving) to create contemporary, enveloping forms — including an elaborate top constructed from thickly braided strands of crystal — that resembled soft armor. Nods to haute couture also played out in puffy, oversized heart-shaped dresses and high-cut leotards with exaggerated shoulders. Added to the mix were two statement-making accessories that resulted from a collaboration with the newly formed clothing and accessories brand myreality: a crystal-covered chair-shaped earring and a matching chair bag charm. All proceeds from those pieces will benefit The Africa Center, a nonprofit cultural institution dedicated to increasing engagement with contemporary African art and culture, the New York headquarters of which served as the setting for Area’s show.
Tory Burch — who has held past shows at the Whitney Museum in New York and who last year looked to artwork produced at Black Mountain College, the bygone experimental college founded in North Carolina in the 1930s — honored the contemporary American artist Francesca DiMattio. Models shared the runway with several of DiMattio’s large-scale floral ceramic sculptures, weaving in and out of the abstract, anthropomorphic forms while wearing dresses, separates and even boots covered in florals. There were also subtler takes on DiMattio’s pieces (which often explore cross-cultural notions of beauty and womanhood) that incorporated ruffles, fringe and mixed patterns, projecting an air of bourgeois bohemianism: Here were women who go where they want and dress as they please.
On the eve of the Oscars, Brandon Maxwell closed out the day of shows with more than a few red carpet-worthy looks. He typically holds his presentations at iconic Manhattan venues such as the Russian Tea Room and the Monkey Bar; this season, the designer chose the Museum of Natural History, where a mixed-gender cast of models walked in a range of luxe materials such as dyed suede, creamy cashmeres and liquid-like satins. Alongside tuxedo-inspired options, including a strapless white pantsuit, there were elegant fit-and-flare evening dresses and long, swishy robe coats, as well as more casual daywear looks paired with slouchy beanies and tall leather boots. The crowd’s enthusiastic cheers made for an especially lively picture set against the dioramas in the background.
For his third season on the New York Fashion Week calendar, Christopher John Rogers expanded on his bold use of color with looks that ran the spectrum of the rainbow. Bright, citrusy hues were followed by chartreuse, fuchsia and at least nine different shades of purple. But the designer was also playing with form, and the cuts and silhouettes of the evening-focused collection — including those of two dresses (one in turquoise, the other a ruffled taffeta silk number in magenta plaid) with skirts nearly as wide as the runway — showcased the designer’s knack for tailoring and proportion. Throughout, voluminous elements like puff sleeves and strawberry-shaped pants were counterbalanced with ruching, cinching and waist-defining sashes. Just as dramatic was the set, with its theater-style curtain and chandelier hanging overhead.
This season, Ulla Johnson looked to the work of the pioneering 20th-century French architect and designer Charlotte Perriand, who believed good design made for a better life. That way of thinking was apparent in the show’s setting — a raw space in west SoHo outfitted with pillars painted to look like marble and a matching stone-like runway — and in the clothes themselves: As the Pamplona-based garage pop band Melenas provided a live soundtrack, models walked in an assortment of vibrantly colored looks that balanced fluttery elements with more structured ones. A drawstring pear yellow skirt was paired with a matching cropped wool jacket, for instance, and the ruffled tiers of various dresses called to mind the floors of a building. There were also nods to 1970s-era craft obsessions: thickly crocheted knits, leather pants and belts and a couple of dresses that looked more like American quilts.
Reporting by Laura Neilson.