State Democrats introduced an app to record results in 2020. What followed was an epic collapse of the rickety system they have relied on for decades.
DES MOINES — They are a mix of campaign veterans and political rookies, deeply committed to a complex Democratic process that defies most accepted tenets of representative elections.
And on Monday night in Iowa, all those years of experience came up against a smartphone app that volunteers either didn’t use or couldn’t log in to, and a help line that left them on hold for hours.
As part of a set of reforms following the 2016 election, the Iowa Democratic Party introduced an app intended to make reporting numbers on caucus night easier. But there was a problem with the much ballyhooed innovation: Most people didn’t use it.
According to more than a dozen Iowa Democratic Party officials, county chairmen and volunteers involved in running precincts, many precinct leaders ignored the party’s request that they download the app before caucus night or found the process of installing it too cumbersome.
John Grennan, 44, the Democratic chairman in Poweshiek County, said seven of the 10 people running precincts in his central Iowa county never downloaded the state party’s app to begin with, choosing instead to phone in results as they always had.
The phones didn’t work like they used to.
Democratic candidates tried to spin the chaotic situation at the Iowa caucuses, and campaigned in New Hampshire as they awaited the results.
So many people chose to call their results in or called for help with the app that the state party’s hotline crumbled under the volume. Some precinct leaders found themselves on hold for hours, with others disconnected after long waits.
If precinct leaders did manage to report results by phone, the party then instructed them to send in a photograph of their caucus’s handwritten results page. Sarah Truitt, co-chair of the Clarke County Democrats, said she was told to use the email address |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Sarah Banks, a 39-year-old career adviser at Grinnell College, served as a caucus secretary, deputized by her precinct leader to record and submit results. She said she logged in to test the state party’s app Monday afternoon with no problem. But when it came time to report the actual tallies on Monday night, her app failed.
Shortly before 1 a.m., Ms. Banks said she was finally able to log in and plug in her precinct’s totals.
Mr. Grennan, the Poweshiek County chairman, said state party officials hadn’t introduced the app to his volunteers until days before Monday’s caucus. Some precinct leaders in his county were unable to properly enter a security code to download and access the app, let alone submit results.
“A lot of people were like, ‘I’m getting a virus on my phone’ and just quit it,” he said.
Ms. Truitt said the process was confusing for those who tried. It involved inputting a series of forms and links and security codes. Only one person at a precinct could be authorized to submit results through the app.
indicate support for candidates.
worksheet with results.
reported one of two ways.
Many caucus chairs had difficulty downloading the app, did not try or had other problems.
Many caucus chairs called the hotline, overloading the phone lines. Unlike past years, there were three sets of numbers that were reported, instead of one.
Caucus chairs fill out a worksheet with results. The results could be reported one of two ways.
On caucus night, Mr. Grennan said the app repeatedly asked him to enter a security code, which he had written down in his caucus packet. After he’d logged in, the app kept kicking him off. And once he was able to enter his precinct’s results he never got a confirmation that they had been received.
There were scattered reports of the state party’s app functioning properly. Zach Wahls, a 28-year-old state senator from Coralville, ran a caucus in his hometown that he said went smoothly.
