In this lesson, students will explore how a public art installation led a town to look at itself closely. Then they will consider how they would best represent their own community.
The town of Newnan, Ga., decided to use art to help the community celebrate diversity and embrace change. But not everyone was ready for what they saw.
In this lesson, you will explore how an art installation forced a town to look at itself closely. In a Going Further activity, you will consider how you would best represent your own community with public art.
Imagine you have been asked to take a series of photographs to represent your community. What people, places and things might you photograph?
Take several minutes to brainstorm a list of possible images. Consider specific things like a local library, a favorite teacher, a neighborhood hangout as well as ways to express more abstract ideas or feelings like hope, unity, change and conflict.
Then reflect on your list: What story do your pictures tell about your town?
What is your initial reaction to the images? What did you notice about the choice of subjects?
What story do the images tell about the town of Newnan?
How do the images compare to the ones you brainstormed about your own community?
1. Why does Audra D. S. Burch, the writer, begin the article with the story of a neo-Nazi rally in 2018? What does the example illustrate about the changes in Newnan over the past two decades?
2. What was the reaction of people in Newnan to the 17 large-scale banner portraits? Why was the portrait of Aatika and Zahraw Shah controversial?
3. What was the purpose of the “Seeing Newnan” art installation, according to Robert Hancock, who helped commission the art project? How did Mary Beth Meehan, the photographer, understand the goals of the piece?
4. The author contrasts old and new Newnan. Give two examples of each that you find interesting or significant.
5. How did the Shah sisters react to the community’s response to their portrait? What have they learned from the experience?
6. What is your reaction to the reception of the portraits by the people of Newnan? How did their reaction compare to yours from the warm-up activity? What does the controversy say about the current state of American communities and how they deal with diversity and change?
In what ways do you think the project met its goals? Do you think the conversations prompted by the portraits are productive and healthy ones? What “uncomfortable” conversations do you think your own community needs to have? Explain why.
1) Analyze and respond to a portrait featured in the article.
What is the subject of this image? What is the setting?
What draws you to this image? How does it engage the viewer?
What feeling or feelings does it evoke? What ideas or themes does it suggest? What mood or tone does it set?
What story does it tell about the community of Newnan?
2) Design a public art work to represent your community.
Feel free to choose photographs, murals, sculpture or other forms of artistic expression.
Build on your brainstorm from the warm-up activity and consider what aspects of your community you would want to represent — people, places, ideas or feelings.
Consider the impact you would like to have on your community. Mr. Hancock said: “I just felt like we were living apart. We were in these little bubbles. I thought this project could pierce the bubbles.” Would you want to celebrate your community? Challenge it? What kind of conversations would you want to start?
Make a sketch (or sketches) of your public art work. Include an explanation of the piece, including the goals, the medium and materials you would use and where you would want it to be displayed. If time permits, present your sketch to your class.