Chris Malloy runs a small events business in New Hampshire. The week before the state’s primary election, he has handled almost every campaign event.
MILFORD, N.H. — The better Chris Malloy does his job, the less people will notice him. In fact, they might only know he had been there if things had gone terribly wrong.
Mr. Malloy runs a small events business in Rochester, N.H., near the seacoast. Most of the time, his business is busy producing corporate dinners in Nashua, weeknight fund-raisers in Manchester and the occasional wedding; the week before the New Hampshire primary was different.
Mr. Malloy’s business has all but cornered the market on producing political rallies here for Democratic presidential candidates. The eyes of the nation are on town halls and rallies predominantly produced by Mr. Malloy’s company, Malloy Events.
Anyone who followed the bungled Iowa caucuses would know that things in the early states could go south, and that when they did the consequences reverberated.
From a town-hall-style meeting for Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts last Tuesday morning in Keene to several election night parties scheduled for Tuesday night, Malloy Events will have built stages and audience risers, set up chairs and lights, wired microphones and speakers and assembled press filing areas for more than 60 presidential campaign events featuring Ms. Warren, Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota, Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont and the entrepreneur Andrew Yang (plus an election night party for the businessman Tom Steyer).
Malloy Events produced dozens of events throughout the past 12 months for those candidates plus former Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind., and former candidates Senator Cory Booker of New Jersey and Senator Kamala Harris of California.
Which is not to say this stretch is without challenges for Malloy Events. The company has roughly 15 full-time employees, Mr. Malloy said, but will have closer to 100 in the run-up to the primary, including temporary workers and daily union laborers.
For Mr. Malloy, 39, a longtime New Hampshire resident and devout “West Wing” fan, these several days in the spotlight are not primarily about the bottom line.
Last Tuesday, a team led by Mr. Malloy had just a few hours, following morning tennis, to turn a cavernous field house at Hampshire Hills Athletic Club in Milford into a site for Mr. Sanders’s first rally since the Iowa caucuses had concluded (so to speak) the night before.
Working off the campaign’s proposed layout, drapes were strategically hung. The campaign used its own podium; Mr. Malloy had two spares just in case.
This is Mr. Malloy’s second primary cycle producing a plethora of presidential events, after working for both Mr. Sanders’s and Hillary Clinton’s campaigns leading up to the 2016 primary. The company is nonpartisan, but Mr. Malloy is a former Democratic state representative and has connections in the party.
His experience creates a network effect in which the more events he does, the more he is trusted to have mastered the state and its venues. “If you consistently perform well, they will call you over and over again,” Mr. Landry said.
Mr. Malloy knows which halls already have adequate lighting and which he will need to supplement, and which fire marshals are sticklers for neat rows of chairs.
Shannon Jackson, the Sanders campaign’s state director, first hired Mr. Malloy to produce an opening for the previous Sanders campaign’s Portsmouth office in September 2015. The campaign expected 25 people, but 150 showed.
Amanda Kules, the Northeast regional advance lead for the Warren campaign, recalled an event at a Peterborough bowling alley where the campaign wanted a door where there was none. Malloy Events, which is subcontracted by a national company to do New Hampshire work for the Warren and Buttigieg campaigns, used a drape to build one.
“They know the janitorial staff, the fire marshal — every person we might need to put on an event successfully,” Ms. Kules said. She also said that she appreciated that the Malloy Events team that produces Warren events was led by women, including Mr. Malloy’s wife, Kate, a former wedding planner.
Though Mr. Malloy was elected to a lone term as state representative of his hometown, Pelham, in 2002, he was bitten by the political-events bug about a decade later.
The biggest test for Malloy Events came Saturday night, with the Democratic Party’s fund-raiser at the SNHU Arena in downtown Manchester featuring all the candidates and several thousand attendees.
Mr. Malloy parked himself by the catwalk leading to the stage and gave the thumbs-up to each candidate when the house music was ready to be cut and the M.C. was prepared to introduce him or her.
“All the candidates did well,” he said, referring to their speeches.
Mr. Malloy has been able to see an unusual amount of the candidates. He plans to vote on Tuesday. He declined to specify for whom.
