A career for our times.
Mr. Tait, a creative director and partner at Buck, a production company, tried to carry on that tradition as an adult in his Brooklyn home, complete with the loud rock. But he and his wife, Amy Won, were too busy to care for their houseplants. They never got around to repotting them. Fungus gnats colonized.
That someone was Lisa Muñoz. For $2,000, Ms. Muñoz will come fill your house with plants and make it look beautiful. You can spend more than $2,000, but you cannot spend less; that’s the minimum fee charged by her Brooklyn-based firm, Leaf and June.
If Ms. Muñoz, 38, sounds practiced at selling her services, it’s because her job title — interior plant designer — usually requires explanation. It’s an emerging career; she has been doing it for six years.
The fascination with houseplants has begun to spawn all manner of specialists.
After he began posting photos of his Baltimore home to Instagram three years ago, and talking about the 200 plants that fill the lush rooms, Hilton Carter became a bit of a celebrity. He published a book, “Wild at Home: How to Style and Care for Beautiful Plants,” and, he says, created a new occupation.
These days, Mr. Carter is too busy with his other plant gigs (he has a new book coming out this spring, “Wild Interiors,” with a promotional tour to follow) to do much styling, he said.
Maryah Greene, who runs the one-woman firm Greene Piece, bills herself as New York City’s “Plant Doctor & Stylist.” She is the fiddle-leaf-fig whisperer for the rest of us: She charges a flat hourly rate of between $125 and $175. Her clients are largely renters who want to introduce a little greenery into their lives but don’t know a pothos plant from a bird of paradise, much less how to not kill them.
“A lot of what I do I like to think of as confidence boosting,” said Ms. Greene, 24, who has plant styled for more than a year and has met with about 50 clients so far.
The confidence they crave requires counsel: Will a monstera be happy by the radiator? Can sunshine-loving cactuses thrive in a light-starved apartment? What’s the best pot to show off the pink and white leaves of hoya carnosa?
For one Brooklyn homeowner, Ms. Muñoz put a schefflera tree in the kids’ room, with rich, green foliage that droops like an umbrella. She paired it with a showstopper pot — a $1,500 ceramic planter from Bzippy & Co. For another Brooklynite whose kitchen is flooded with light, she built a six-foot fiberglass window planter and filled it with herbs and leafy greens.
Those two clients came to her through Elizabeth Roberts, an architect popular with the brownstone Brooklyn gentry who frequently brings in Ms. Muñoz for her projects. Ms. Roberts works with gardeners and landscape architects to design outdoor green spaces.
One wonders why a plant stylist is needed in the first place. The library is still free.
Yet in the age of the gig economy, where freelancers and consultants exist to fulfill every life need, and hiring out a task can be preferable to learning how to do it yourself, houseplant decisions are just another thing to outsource.
The plant stylists say most people’s ability to properly choose and care for houseplants is woeful, even as the reported desire to live among them is high.
A four-year degree in horticulture or botany isn’t necessary to style plants. Ms. Greene was earning her master’s in education and literacy and hanging around plant shops when she realized she could make money from her hobby.
In 2013, Ms. Muñoz earned her certificate in horticulture from the Brooklyn Botanic Garden and began working part-time at plant shops, including the Sill, to further educate herself. Her business was born in 2014.
A recent afternoon found Ms. Muñoz checking on one of her plant-care clients, an office in the Dumbo section of Brooklyn. A 10-foot-tall fiddle leaf fig had been placed too close to the radiator over the holiday break, with the shades shut to boot, and was shedding leaves in revolt. Ms. Muñoz gave the fiddle leaf a thorough watering and the office manager a gentle reminder that plants need sunlight.
When she isn’t doing plant triage, Ms. Muñoz is in her plant-filled studio near the Brooklyn Navy Yard, creating design proposals for clients, including one for the new mega art space in Chelsea opened by Pace Gallery. She also devotes a significant amount of time to seeking out ceramists to source pots from and researching interesting plants.
On a shelf above her desk was her latest find: peperomia polybotrya, or peperomia raindrop, a squat houseplant with waxy, raindrop-shaped leaves that “stopped me in my tracks,” Ms. Muñoz said, when she encountered it at a nursery.
Ms. Muñoz recently installed 115 potted plants in Buck’s large, light-filled offices overlooking the Brooklyn waterfront, at the behest of Mr. Tait and his partners. Soon after, she said, the company asked for a proposal to add more plants.
“I think people are really just wanting things that make them happy. And things that are alive …,” Ms. Muñoz said, trailing off.
