Book Review|In Hollywood, Stories About People of Color Are Still Rare. These Y.A. Fantasy Novels Pick Up the Slack.
In a 2018 essay for Time magazine, the actress Gabrielle Union lamented Hollywood’s lack of imagination when it comes to casting people of color. Why, she asked, is it so hard to make movies about black and brown people that tell “the same nonsensical and mundane stories as white women and men”? It’s now two years later, and the only actor of color nominated for an Oscar is Cynthia Erivo for her portrayal of Harriet Tubman.
So the heart rises when cracking open Echo Brown’s audaciously titled BLACK GIRL UNLIMITED (Christy Ottaviano/Holt, 291 pp., $17.99; ages 12 and up). And then deflates when on the first page the young protagonist, 6 years old and living in a cramped East Cleveland apartment, struggles to wake up her naked mother from their bathroom floor.  Oh, this wretched oft-told story.
But hang in there through that first scene of chaos. There is nothing played-out or reductive about this genre-bending debut, which is equal parts memoir and high fantasy. Brown has written a guidebook of survival and wonder.
Told through a series of magic-infused lessons on how to unlock one’s own quantum wizard — “a wizard with unresolved rage will keep unleashing terror” — the book reads like a training manual for a superhero.  Never once, in this swirl of drama and trauma, does our hero seem to exist at a remove. The reader doesn’t gawk at her tragedy and resilience.
Maya Angelou and Langston Hughes. The movie “Titanic” and the television series “Saved by the Bell.” White Jesus, grape Kool-Aid. Who can tell what holds a girl up through adolescence? Each of these plays a role in Echo’s rise, as do her Iranian best friend and the five other smart kids hoisting their heavy backpacks at her high school. Her devoted English teacher does too, and her dreamer baby brothers, whom she refuses to let languish on the corner.
The queer Latinx author Anna-Marie McLemore tells two stories in DARK AND DEEPEST RED (Feiwel & Friends, 306 pp., $17.99; ages 14 and up), straddling 16th-century Alsace — where a Romani girl and trans boy battle suspicion and prejudice — and the modern-day United States, where the Mexican daughter of celebrated shoemakers becomes entangled with a science-obsessed boy himself descended from Romani people. A pair of enchanted red shoes ties these young couples together. If they are to survive the shoes’ dark magic, history must be both confronted and integrated.
Emil navigates a shifting chaotic world alongside his more ego-driven twin brother, Brighton, consumed by his numbers and likes on social media. Both are still reeling from the death of their father. When Emil shocks everyone by discovering his own latent powers, Brighton hates the idea of suddenly being unremarkable and left behind. Silvera shoots off his plot like a gun and writes action sequences as if they were car chases — relentless, quick-cutting, sparks flying.
“We grew up on books and movies where ordinary teens discover they’re special — chosen ones, long lost wizards, whatever. It rarely plays out that way in real life, but who knows,” Brighton says. Is it too dreamy to imagine Emil battling a specter on the big screen? Or Lavinia and Alifair’s romance? Or Echo Brown’s love letter to her childhood self? If “Black Girl Unlimited” is made into a movie, may Gabrielle Union not play her mother because she’s already busy shooting another in which she plays someone average — and all the more special for it.