This year, J’ouvert was supposed to be different.
With all of the additional resources, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said, hopes had been “very high” that bloodshed, like the shooting death last year of a lawyer in the administration of Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, could be avoided.
Four people were shot, two of them fatally, at J’ouvert festivities, which started in Brooklyn well before dawn on Monday, according to police officials. The two killed were Tyreke Borel, a 17-year-old who was shot in the chest, and Tiarah Poyau, a 22-year-old who was shot in the face. They may have been unintended targets, said Assistant Chief Patrick Conry, the Brooklyn chief of detectives.
The two shootings occurred within a block of each other on Empire Boulevard just east of Prospect Park, the heart of the celebration, which takes places hours before the far larger West Indian American Day Parade.
A 72-year-old woman and a 20-year-old man were also shot in the volleys of gunfire that broke out between 3:30 and 7 a.m. Both were expected to survive.
The violence left city officials crestfallen and struggling to figure out what more could be done to increase security at the event. People drawn to J’ouvert, a contraction of the French term for daybreak, say it is a tradition they used to celebrate in their native Caribbean countries. Under the cover of darkness, people transform themselves into royalty wearing crowns and rhinestones, or into oil-coated dancers and painted pranksters.
Medical workers treated a victim of the shooting near Empire Boulevard and Flatbush Avenue.Credit...John Taggart for The New York Times.
But along with colorful costumes and dancing in the streets, there has been another constant: violence. Over the past decade, 21 shootings and other violent acts have been recorded at J’ouvert festivities, said Assistant Chief Steven Powers, the department’s Brooklyn South commander.
He compared the J’ouvert festivities with other large New York City celebrations like the St. Patrick’s Day Parade and the Puerto Rican Day Parade, both of which were once far more raucous.
Mr. Bratton said there were many elements of the overnight celebration that the department had no control over. Unlike some other events, the parade does not require attendees to pass through security checkpoints or metal detectors.
What also sets J’ouvert apart is its location and timing. Many large parades and festivals are held during the day in relatively low-crime areas in Manhattan. The West Indian American Day festivities play out overnight along a stretch of Brooklyn with persistent pockets of violence.
Tiarah Poyau, 22, was killed during a dispute, the police said.
Gang rivalry has been at the root of much of the bloodshed in recent years, according to police officials. Last year, it was a bullet fired in a shootout between gangs that police officials said killed the Cuomo administration lawyer, Carey W. Gabay, as he celebrated with his brother. On the same night, another man was fatally stabbed in a separate episode.
The wee hours of Monday at this year’s celebration started peacefully, though somewhat chaotically. The police kept shifting barricades, confusing people who were trying to find the beginning of the J’ouvert parade.
The floodlights also created a different mood, regular attendees said. Some said the lights made them feel safer, while others found the illumination overbearing.
Serrano Smith, a street vendor, said that the crowd seemed smaller than in previous years and that he had plenty of unsold flags of Guyana, Jamaica, Trinidad and Tobago, and other countries. “Last year, I didn’t have enough hands to sell,” he said.
Janet Lewis, 68, who was regal in sequins, a white ball gown and silver accessories to match, said she felt safer than in the past. She recalled how the killings last year had shaken her. “It was frightening for us,” she said.
The peace this year did not last long. Around 4 a.m., police vehicles were winding through the streets with sirens blaring and lights flashing. The noise mixed with the soca played by steel bands and the reggae that blared from car stereos.
The din was so loud inside Prospect Park, where bands and crowds had gathered, that few heard the gunshots not far away on Empire Boulevard.
Tyreke Borel, 17, was shot in the chest.
It was there, near the intersection with Flatbush Avenue, that Mr. Borel was shot once in the chest around 3:50 a.m. The 72-year-old woman, whose name was not released, was hit in the arm in the same shooting, officials said. Both were taken to Kings County Hospital Center, where Mr. Borel was pronounced dead.
David Jones, who identified himself as Mr. Borel’s stepfather, said that he had moved to Brooklyn from Trinidad nine years ago and that he wanted to become a mechanic. Mr. Borel had two brothers and a sister, he said.
About 30 minutes later, and not far away on Empire Boulevard, Ms. Poyau was shot in the face during a dispute, police officials said. She was pronounced dead at Kings County Hospital Center.
She remembered giving Ms. Poyau hugs and kisses a few years ago when she graduated from high school. “She wanted to have a little fun last night, and then this happened,” she said.
Ms. Poyau shared an apartment with two aunts, said Anna Jackson, the president of a neighborhood block association. No one answered the door at her family’s home.
Assistant Chief Powers said the large crowds made it difficult to distinguish who fired the shots. By Monday night, the circumstances of the shootings were still not clear and no arrests had been announced.
After the ambulances departed, people stepped over yellow and blue police caution tape and the party continued.
A young man, who would identify himself only as J.C., led a group in song as another young man beat percussion on a wooden box.
Still, the violence was a setback for an event that has been the lesser-known cousin of the West Indian American Day Parade, which is organized by a different group and attracts millions of spectators. For the first time in its 22-year history, the predawn J’ouvert parade was given an official permit. The police estimate the event draws about 250,000 people.
William Howard, the president of the West Indian American Day Carnival Association, which organizes the West Indian American Day Parade, said he hoped revelers would not dwell on the violence and instead focus on the celebration of Caribbean culture.
Before the West Indian American Day Parade on Monday, City Councilman Jumaane D. Williams, a Democrat who represents several Brooklyn neighborhoods, said that he had come out “because I have a right to celebrate my culture,” but that he had almost decided to stay home because of the violence.
