Last week, the crisis was a bomb that blew up the United States Capitol. This week, it’s … viral videos.
Episode 2 of “Designated Survivor” jumps into Tom Kirkman’s first full day as the president. He’s already averted one confrontation in the Middle East and tried to calm a fearful nation with his first news conference. But it’s nearly impossible to control anything when most citizens have access to their own cameras and screens. The episode keeps the action moving while persuasively addressing racial and technological issues that have spurred so much recent conflict.
Mr. Penn, for his part, still hasn’t quite settled into the show; he’s a bitter comic actor working within a solemn network drama formula, and some of his facial expressions suggest he’d rather end lines with his own quippy wisecracks than with a platitude. But his presence is still welcome, especially here — his unease is a reminder that these messy racial issues can’t just be addressed and then smoothed over.
The problem of racial profiling expands from the personal to the systemic as Governor John Royce of Michigan deploys officers to round up Muslims. Is it a coincidence that, in 2016, the show would conflate “grave overstepping of political power” with “nationalist racism?” I’m not sure, but I know that when the governor defends his action by claiming of his citizens that his “first and only priority is to make sure they’re safe,” it sounds eerily familiar.
Overall, the dialogue is still wooden, but the compelling moments are adding up. A case in point is the climax of the episode, which comes when Kirkman pays his respects to the victims of the Capitol bombing. I found it horrifying to see a realistic representation of the wreckage of a national landmark, especially the remains of half of the dome. But the show’s creators understand the difficulty of lingering over a bomb site, and smartly turn the scene into a commentary on political photo-ops. These sorts of visits, the show seems to say, are an easy way to play to people’s emotions and take command of a nation’s image.
Until, of course, everyone instead turns to the images in their pockets. As Kirkman preaches unity and rebirth, a video of a police officer beating a Muslim-American to death in Michigan quickly circulates. Kirkman’s audience demands answers, and the chaos in the crowd leads to a gun scare, spurring a panicked retreat. Another video soon surfaces, this time of Kirkman, shielded by a panicked entourage, retreating to an armored car.
The mobile phone has usurped the megaphone. And the scene is even more poignant and prescient given last week’s fatal shooting in Charlotte, and the ensuing attempt by the police to conceal video of the violent episode. Within seconds, Governor Royce is outed as a dangerous bigot, and Kirkman as a feeble figurehead.
Eventually the standoff between the two men ends behind closed doors with some old-fashioned politicking. Kirkman threatens the governor with charges of obstruction of a fictitious federal investigation, and gets him to stand down.
But it’s all a bluff. While everyone in the room celebrated Kirkman’s victory, I was shocked. The man just strong-armed a governor with a blatant lie, and no one was remotely bothered by his tactics? I guess that’s just the way Washington works.
• Can we talk about the opening title sequence? It’s an extremely quick seven-ish seconds, with a small silhouette of Kiefer Sutherland in a trench coat appearing, turning and walking away, in the middle of a red and blue graphic that looks like a giant middle finger pointed toward the audience. If I saw the clip on its own, I would guess it belonged to a Cold War espionage thriller, or maybe a drama about a hit man.
• I’m still trying to figure out what version of American history we’re in. President Bush is mentioned by name in this episode, and at a different point Tom’s wife, Alex, mentions that Kirkman had served the previous president for three years. So did they make Obama a one-term president, putting us in January 2016? Are we in 2020? Readers, what say you?
• There’s always room for romance amid terror, and this week saw a lot of meaningful glances between the rivals-turned-colleagues Aaron and Emily. I’m calling a hookup by end of season.