Adriano Espaillat’s victory in a Democratic primary for a New York congressional seat was a watershed for Dominican immigrants hoping to send one of their own to Washington for the first time.
Although his triumph in the November general election is virtually assured in the heavily Democratic 13th Congressional District in Upper Manhattan and parts of the Bronx, Mr. Espaillat’s battles are not over.
He is backing a Dominican woman, Marisol Alcantara, in the Sept. 13 Democratic primary to choose a candidate to replace him in the State Senate — a contest that could be a measure of whether his earlier victory augurs an increase in the influence of Dominican voters in New York City and his own status as a potential kingmaker.
Mr. Espaillat is also asserting his influence in a State Assembly race, where he has supported another Dominican woman, Carmen De La Rosa, who served as his campaign manager in the congressional primary and as the chief of staff to Ydanis Rodriguez, a Dominican city councilman.
Ms. De La Rosa is seeking to unseat the incumbent, Guillermo Linares, long a bitter rival to Mr. Espaillat within the Dominican community. Mr. Linares was the first Dominican to be elected to public office in New York City, winning a City Council race in 1991; Mr. Espaillat was the first elected to a state office. Both sought the Democratic congressional nomination that Mr. Espaillat won in June.
Ms. Alcantara, 43, and Ms. De La Rosa, 30, often campaign together in places where the Senate and Assembly districts overlap.
“This is a historic moment, two Dominican women running at the same time,” Ms. Alcantara told a voter outside a subway station in the Inwood section of Upper Manhattan, where she campaigned with Ms. De La Rosa. On that day they were joined by Mr. Espaillat.
As he passed out leaflets where his picture was placed prominently beside a photo of the two women, he dismissed the suggestion that the outcome of the primary races would reflect on his personal influence and whether or not his recent victory had coattails.
Both women face obstacles. In the Senate race, Ms. Alcantara may run smack into the same phenomenon that helped Mr. Espaillat win the congressional primary: When there is no incumbent in the race, a past challenger may be best placed to swoop in and win the prize, even over the outgoing officeholder’s chosen candidate.
In June, Mr. Espaillat won against a crowded field seeking to replace longtime Representative Charles B. Rangel, beating, by about three percentage points, the candidate endorsed by Mr. Rangel. Mr. Espaillat was familiar to voters: Not only had he represented Upper Manhattan in both the State Senate and the Assembly, he had run against and lost to Mr. Rangel in the two previous congressional primaries.
That same pattern would now seem to favor Robert Jackson, one of the four candidates in the primary for the Senate seat that Mr. Espaillat is vacating. Mr. Jackson is a popular former city councilman who represented Washington Heights and Harlem, and he ran strongly in a loss to Mr. Espaillat in a Senate primary two years ago.
“I’ve been there. I have a proven track record and people trust me,” said Mr. Jackson, 65, while handing out leaflets recently in Washington Heights, stressing that he is the only candidate to have held elected office. He is well known for initiating a lawsuit that won a court order to increase state funding for city schools. “That’s what people want to know, where have you been, what have you done and can they trust you, and for me the answer is, ‘Absolutely yes,’” he said.
Ms. Alcantara is a labor organizer who has worked with the nurses union and Local 32BJ of the Service Employees International Union. Another candidate, Micah C. Lasher, 34, is a former chief of staff to the state attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman (who held the Senate seat before Mr. Espaillat), and also served as the city’s legislative director in Albany when Michael R. Bloomberg was mayor. Luis Tejada, a local activist who also ran in the last Senate primary, rounds out the field.
Many Dominican leaders support Ms. Alcantara, in the hopes of consolidating a political power base rooted in Washington Heights, the city’s main Dominican enclave.
Senate District 31 is a gem of gerrymandering, running from Marble Hill and Inwood at the upper reaches of Manhattan, through Washington Heights, down a swath of West Harlem and the Upper West Side, into Hell’s Kitchen and Chelsea. The district is heavily Democratic, so whoever wins the primary will be considered a shoo-in in November.
Among citizens of voting age in District 31, 47 percent are Hispanic, 36 percent are white and 15 percent are black, according to an analysis of census data by Andrew A. Beveridge, of Queens College.
“We shouldn’t make this about ethnic politics,” Ms. Alcantara said. “It just so happens I am Latina. It just so happens I am black. I have faith people can transcend ethnicity and color and vote for me.” She said she had strong progressive credentials through her union work, validated by her role as a Democratic National Convention delegate for the presidential candidate Bernie Sanders.
But Ms. Alcantara has been criticized by her opponents for aligning herself with the Independent Democratic Conference, a small breakaway group of Democratic senators who have helped Republicans maintain control of the Senate, even when the Republicans did not hold a majority of the seats.
The race has also seen the resurrection or continuation of some old enmities.
Fernando Ferrer, a former Bronx borough president, endorsed Ms. Alcantara, giving her the chance to criticize Mr. Lasher for an episode in 2001 when he worked as a campaign staffer for Mark Green, who at the time was running in the Democratic mayoral primary against Mr. Ferrer.
Mr. Lasher had a hand in producing a campaign flier that included a New York Post editorial cartoon depicting Mr. Ferrer planting a kiss on the buttocks of Al Sharpton. Ms. Alcantara said the flier was perceived as being racist and that it was distributed in Jewish neighborhoods, where Mr. Sharpton was very unpopular.
Mr. Lasher said he was 19 at the time, and while he was in charge of printing fliers for the campaign, was not involved in deciding their content.
“I wish I had had the wisdom and the maturity to deny that request,” he said of being instructed to print the flier.
Another retired politician with a long memory is Brian Murtaugh, 79, who showed up on a recent afternoon to support Mr. Jackson.
Mr. Murtaugh was a 16-year member of the Assembly, representing the 72nd District, when he was upset in a Democratic primary by Mr. Espaillat in 1996 — giving impetus to Mr. Espaillat’s political career.
Mr. Murtaugh is now helping organize support for Mr. Jackson and for Mr. Linares, the incumbent for the very seat that Mr. Murtaugh and Mr. Espaillat once held.
“It will be a blow to his prestige if his two candidates do not win,” Mr. Murtaugh said of Mr. Espaillat. He admitted that he took pleasure in stirring up the waters where his old rival is now the big fish.
