If you live in California, the value of your vote this November will be much smaller than a neighbor’s a few miles away in Nevada. The same contrast exists along many other state borders, like those of Vermont and New Hampshire.
That’s because the Electoral College system leaves people in deeply red or deeply blue states relative bystanders in presidential elections — even when a race is desperately close.
If you live in safe blue states like California or Vermont or a safe red one like Alabama, is it possible to make your vote count more?
First, some perspective: Even in a battleground state like Nevada, where the Electoral College votes could help tip the election, one person’s vote is extremely unlikely to make a difference. When millions vote, a single ballot can be like a teaspoon of water in a swimming pool.
Forty states have voted for the same party in four straight presidential elections. And the electoral map doesn’t look all that different this fall.
That means that roughly the same swing states have continued to wield influence. And two of those already have outsize sway for a reason other than the Electoral College: Iowa and New Hampshire traditionally shape the race with early primary contests.
Another separate reason that New Hampshire might be a power broker this year is that a close down-ballot race — Kelly Ayotte vs. Maggie Hassan — could determine which party controls the Senate.
At the other extreme are states like California, Texas and New York. Their combined population is more than a fourth of the United States total, and their residents are essentially sitting out another presidential election.
Q. Vote buying is obviously illegal. But what about gray areas?
1) Let’s say you’re a Californian and you’re feeling left out of the election. You have a nephew in Florida who is apolitical and a big sports fan. You tell him that if he votes for Donald J. Trump, you’ll take him to a Lakers game and a nice dinner the next time he visits Los Angeles. (It’s understood that you’ll pay for the tickets and dinner because that’s what you normally do on such occasions.) Would that be considered against the law? If so, and if it somehow ever came to light, what might the penalty be?
2016 Election Forecast: Who Will Be President?
The Upshot’s presidential forecast, updated daily.
A. These questions are similar to those that commonly come up in bribery prosecutions. When is there enough evidence of a deal (a “quid pro quo” exchange) to show that the transaction is illegal.
2) Like the first example, it turns on intent, and the familial relationship may make it harder to prove it is illegal vote buying. But if the aunt says to the niece, “I will give you $50 to vote for Hillary Clinton,” that could well be found to cross the line.
Q. College students can have the choice to vote in their college town instead of their hometown, with the possibility of choosing a battleground state over a safe state. Do some states make it tougher for out-of-state college students to register and vote?
A. There have been instances in which local officials have made it harder for college students to vote. This is not just an issue for presidential elections, but for local elections as well, where people who live in a town don’t want college students to swamp their votes. The Supreme Court, however, has ruled that college students have the right to vote at the place they consider their residence — Symm v. United States, 439 U.S. 1105 (1979). Still, states sometimes do things that make it harder for students to vote, such as imposing strict voter identification rules but not accepting IDs issued by colleges for proof of identity. Texas, for example, accepts concealed weapons permits but not student IDs. Sometimes local bodies refuse to put polling stations near colleges. The Brennan Center offers a Student Voting Guide that helps students navigate the sometimes complex rules for voting.
Q. If someone owns homes in different states and wants to choose to vote in a state that is a battleground, how much leeway does that person have?
A. The clear rule is that a person can have only one residence for voting at a time, and one cannot vote twice in the same election for president. There is some leeway on establishing what counts as one’s residence. An article in the Election Law Journal explores this issue for college students, but it is a much broader issue, and the question of what counts as one’s residence can be murky. Here’s how the Federal Voting Assistance Program explains it for military and other overseas voters: “Your voting residence is within your State of legal residence or domicile. It is the true, fixed address that you consider your permanent home and where you had a physical presence. Your State of legal residence is used for State income tax purposes, and determines eligibility to vote for federal and State elections and qualification for in-state tuition rates.” There has been a movement to allow nonresidents to vote in certain local elections when they are vacation homeowners, but that doesn’t affect the rule about voting only once in presidential elections.
Q. Internet-aided vote swapping seems to have occurred first in the 2000 election. Some partisans of Al Gore and Ralph Nader had a friendly arrangement to help Gore in swing states in exchange for helping Nader in safely Democratic states. It seems to have worked, but the problem for Gore is that the swapping didn’t happen quite enough.
What would be considered crossing the line, and what type of dynamic could we see this fall?
A. In this election, it would allow, for example, a Jill Stein supporter in a swing state like Ohio to vote for Hillary Clinton in exchange for a Clinton supporter in a safe state like California to agree to vote for Jill Stein. The supposed benefit of this trade is that the Ohio voter helps Clinton get elected in a place where a vote for a third-party candidate can act as a spoiler, but Stein’s overall popular vote totals would be the same, potentially entitling Stein to some public financing for her campaign and showing the candidate’s popularity.
Some have claimed that vote swapping constitutes illegal vote buying under federal law or state statutes. The California Secretary of State went after a website that offered vote swapping in the 2000 election, claiming that it violated state anti-vote buying prohibitions. The case, Porter v. Bowen, went to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, which held that the activity was protected by the First Amendment and did not raise the danger of an exchange of money for votes. The state tried to take it to the full Ninth Circuit, which refused to take the case. Three judges, however, issued a dissenting statement suggesting that vote swapping is illegal vote buying not protected by the First Amendment, and it is quite possible that another court would agree with the dissenters should the issue arise again.
Q. What’s your own view on the legality of vote swapping?
A. I am uncertain whether vote swapping would count as illegal vote buying. One key point is that these kinds of agreements are inherently unenforceable, given the secret ballot. You might tell me you are Stein supporter in Ohio who would vote for Clinton if I would vote for Stein, but you could be someone sitting in another country, or a Stein supporter in Ohio who still plans to vote for Stein.
But the larger point is that people are looking for ways around the fact that we have this odd system, where we make it really easy for third-party candidates to get on the ballot in most places, but almost impossible for them to win. A much more rational solution to this problem would be to adopt instant runoff voting [in which voters rank candidates in order of preference] so that a vote for Stein could go to Clinton (or for Gary Johnson could go to Trump) if that’s a voter’s second choice.