These reporters will assess the accuracy of assertions made by either candidate, or by the moderator, in real time as the debate unfolds, with an aim of posting each fact check within five minutes of the statement’s being made.
The fact-check operation is an important dimension of an expansive coverage plan for the debate, which begins at 9 p.m. The Times will stream the debate live on its home page and will provide real-time analysis from our regular team of reporters on political debates: Maggie Haberman, Nicholas Confessore, Adam Nagourney and Alan Rappeport.
We will also provide continually updated highlights for those joining the debate after it has begun.
• and Steve Eder and Mike McIntire, two of our investigative reporters.
On the Opinion side, The Times will publish quick responses to the debate from columnists and other prominent writers before, during and after the debate. Starting around 4 p.m. at nytimes.com/opinion, Gail Collins, Charles Blow and others will describe what they will be watching for from the candidates. During the debate, Paul Krugman, Roger Cohen, J. D. Vance and other observers will offer quick commentary. And once the debate concludes, columnists and contributors will provide reaction.
The Times will also offer coverage through Facebook Live, which can be viewed at facebook.com/nytimes. At 7 p.m., the political reporters Amy Chozick, Nick Corasaniti and Jonathan Martin will offer a preview of the debate from Hofstra University on Long Island and take questions from Facebook users.
When the debate begins, at 9 p.m., The Times will be live on Facebook with two streams: one showing the debate itself, and another that will pair audio of the debate with live cartooning by Bob Eckstein, an illustrator for The Times.
The live streams on Facebook will incorporate other features of Times coverage, including commentary from our Opinion writers and fact checks and analysis from our reporters. When the debate ends, Donald J. Trump is scheduled to attend an after-party, and Mr. Corasaniti will cover that event live.
Mr. Corasaniti also shared what to watch for on The Times’s Snapchat account this morning.