WASHINGTON — Former Secretary of State Colin L. Powell has long been one of the high priests of the Washington establishment, staying quiet in this year’s raucous presidential campaign while tending to his reputation as a thoughtful officer and diplomat.
But a hack of Mr. Powell’s email this week has ripped away the diplomatic jargon and political niceties to reveal his unvarnished disdain of Donald J. Trump as a “national disgrace,” his personal peeves with Hillary Clinton and his lingering, but still very raw, anger with the Republican colleagues with whom he so often clashed a decade ago.
In the email messages, which an aide to Mr. Powell confirmed were authentic, the retired four-star general who served as President George W. Bush’s top diplomat also accuses Mr. Trump, the Republican nominee for president, of having embraced what Mr. Powell called a “racist” movement when he aggressively questioned the validity of Mr. Obama’s birth certificate and his legitimacy to serve as the country’s top elected official.
But the emails, many of which were sent in recent weeks, also reveal Mr. Powell’s disapproval of Mrs. Clinton’s handling of her email scandal and expose his sometimes unflattering observations of the Democratic presidential nominee and her husband. In a series of exchanges, Mr. Powell lamented efforts by Mrs. Clinton’s “minions” to drag him into the controversy surrounding her use of a private email server by claiming he had advised her on the issue.
In the 2014 email, Mr. Powell, though offering no independent knowledge, alluded in graphic language to coverage in The New York Post suggesting that Bill Clinton had continued to cheat on his wife.
Mr. Powell appeared to be angry that NBC proposed that he appear on “Meet the Press” with Mr. Cheney and his daughter, who were promoting a book they wrote together. In the email, Mr. Powell said the network agreed to invite the Cheneys at a later date.
Mr. Powell’s emails appeared on a website called DCLeaks.com, which had previously posted documents that the site had obtained after hacks into the accounts of prominent Democrats and some Republicans, including Gen. Philip M. Breedlove, the former commander of NATO forces in Europe, and George Soros, a wealthy backer of liberal causes. It is unclear who operates DCLeaks.com.
Peggy Cifrino, an aide to Mr. Powell, responded Wednesday morning to an inquiry about the emails: “We are confirming that General Powell has been hacked and that they are his emails. We have no further comment at this time.” Mr. Powell did not respond to an email sent directly to his personal account.
But the emails make clear that Mr. Powell, who also served as the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, has no intention of supporting Mr. Trump. In one back-and-forth with a former aide, Mr. Powell insisted that Mr. Trump should not be elected president.
Mr. Powell dismissed as completely ineffective Mr. Trump’s recent attempts to reach out to black voters, saying that the Republican nominee “takes us for idiots.” Mr. Powell said that nothing Mr. Trump could say to black voters would improve his standing, in part because of the things he said about Mr. Obama.
In the emails, Mr. Powell blamed the news media for helping fuel Mr. Trump’s candidacy. In December 2015, he turned down a request from CNN’s Fareed Zakaria to discuss Mr. Trump. “It is time to start ignoring him. 
In August 2015, Mr. Powell predicted that Mr. Trump would “take it to the convention” in part because news networks were chasing ratings. “He appeals to the worst angels of the G.O.P. nature and poor white folks,” Mr. Powell said in the email.
In that email, Mr. Powell in part defended Mrs. Clinton's actions in the attack on the American diplomatic compound in Benghazi, Libya, in 2012.
In December 2015, he told Condoleezza Rice, his successor at the State Department, that the Republican political attacks on Benghazi were “a stupid witch hunt” and wrote that “basic fault falls on a courageous ambassador who thought Libyans now love me and I am O.K. in this very vulnerable place.” He added that “blame also rests on his leaders and supporters back here,” including Mrs. Clinton.
