TEHRAN — The United States on Wednesday removed a final hurdle for Western aircraft manufacturers to sell planes to Iran, a country desperately in need of hundreds of new aircraft.
The Treasury Department granted the aviation giants Airbus and Boeing licenses to deliver planes to Tehran. The decision is a boon not only for the two companies but also for Iranian politicians who want to expand Iran’s engagement with the world now that sanctions linked to Iran’s nuclear program have been lifted.
A spokesman for Boeing said the license covered the sale of 80 planes to Iran’s national carrier, Iran Air. Airbus confirmed that it received a license for an initial sale of 17 planes, part of a larger deal that involves a total of 118 planes.
The green light for aircraft sales allows Iran, a country of 80 million, to start rebuilding its aging fleet of Boeing and Airbus planes and other secondhand aircraft purchased clandestinely from other countries. Over the past four decades, hundreds of Iranians have died in crashes caused by malfunctioning or poorly maintained aircraft.
“From today, we will have safe planes,” President Hassan Rouhani of Iran promised in January when the accord between Iran and six world powers, including the United States, became fully operational.
Under that deal, Iran has given up parts of its nuclear program in exchange for sanctions relief. Since then the country has managed to increase its oil sales, but it has not been able to sign major deals with Western companies because of continuing banking restrictions related to non-nuclear sanctions.
While the United States has relaxed many of its sanctions against Iran, Washington still demands that even non-American manufacturers wishing to sell to Iran obtain an export license if their products include materials made in the United States. Airbus, based in Europe, buys more than 40 percent of all its aircraft parts in the United States.
The granting of the licenses is likely to draw protests from some members of Congress, who have noted that Iranian commercial aircraft have been used to transport troops and weapons into Syria. Representative Peter Roskam, Republican of Illinois, said in a statement that the Obama administration “has once again made a political decision to appease Iran at the expense of our national security.” He said Congress was committed to making the process of delivering the planes as difficult and expensive as possible.
Western political analysts who specialize in Iran said the Treasury’s decision reflected an effort by the Obama administration to help Mr. Rouhani, who staked much of his political reputation on promised economic dividends from the termination of nuclear sanctions.
Iran had called for a meeting on the sidelines of the United Nations General Assembly with representatives of the world powers that signed the nuclear agreement — Russia, China, Germany, France, Britain and the United States — to complain about the lack of progress in carrying out the terms of the deal.
Some in Iran, however, objected to what they said was political maneuvering in the timing of the Treasury Department’s decision to grant the licenses.
Mr. Rouhani is scheduled to address the General Assembly on Thursday.
According to the Treasury Department, the licenses contain strict conditions to ensure that the planes will be used exclusively for commercial passenger use, and cannot be resold or transferred to another entity.
A Boeing spokesman said the company was hoping to sell 46 single-aisle 737s; 30 wide-body 777s and four 747s.
Justin Dubon, an Airbus spokesman in Toulouse, France, confirmed that the plane maker had obtained an initial license from the Treasury to sell 17 planes to Iran — part of a landmark, multibillion-dollar order announced in January for 118 Airbus aircraft, ranging from smaller single-aisle jets to several 555-seat A380 “superjumbo” wide-body aircraft.
It remains unclear how Iran is planning to pay for the aircraft. After years of sanctions and low oil prices, the state’s coffers are empty. International credit continues to be virtually unavailable, with large banks shying away from dealing with Iran because of complicated regulations and continuing unilateral American sanctions against the country, designated a “state sponsor of terrorism” by the United States.
The news that the final barrier to the aircraft sales had fallen was applauded by an Iranian pilot revered for the kind of heroic action for which Capt. Chesley B. Sullenberger III became famous.
In 2011, Captain Shahbazi saved 120 passengers on a flight from Moscow to Tehran when the landing gear of the 40-year-old Boeing 727 he was piloting jammed. Captain Shahbazi deftly manipulated the brakes to balance and slow the plane, then tipping its nose down for a miraculous controlled crash landing.
The landing, captured on video, became a symbol of the consequences of nearly four decades of American sanctions against Iran’s airline industry. As a result of the sanctions, Iran was left with a ragtag fleet of old planes, bought during the era of the pro-Western government in Iran, and secondhand workhorses purchased from countries like Ukraine.
