JERUSALEM — Palestinian politics are constantly in disarray. This time, the chaos is by court order.
The Palestinian high court on Thursday suspended municipal elections, scheduled for Oct. 8 in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, pending a second hearing after a challenge by a lawyer over balloting in East Jerusalem. A Palestinian official said the next hearing would be on Sept. 21, although reports said it would not take place until December.
Mr. Dajani was speaking by telephone from the West Bank city of Ramallah, where the authority has headquarters.
President Mahmoud Abbas’s party, Fatah, which dominates the Palestinian Authority in the West Bank, has long had a bitter rivalry with Hamas, the Islamic militant group that controls the coastal territory of Gaza.
The two parties have not faced off in an election since 2006 when Hamas trounced Fatah in legislative elections. Hamas seized full control of Gaza a year later.
The authority held municipal elections in the West Bank in 2012, after balloting was postponed twice, but they failed to reflect popular sentiment because Hamas did not participate or allow balloting in territory it controls.
The court case that has snarled the latest effort was brought by a Palestinian lawyer and is largely based on his complaint that there will be no municipal balloting in East Jerusalem.
The Palestinians demand East Jerusalem as the capital of a future state. The Israelis claim sovereignty over it as part of their capital, although its annexation from Jordan in 1967 has not been internationally recognized.
The Palestinian court is also examining issues related to the legality of municipal voting in the Gaza Strip, where Hamas has been using the courts to block some Fatah candidates.
The decision to suspend the elections unleashed speculation, with Hamas saying the court had come to the rescue of Fatah, which feared electoral losses.
Hazem Kassem, a spokesman for Hamas in Gaza, said that the court ruling was a political decision “to protect the Fatah movement” after some of its lists of candidates fell apart.
