In a decision that could fundamentally reshape public education in Connecticut, the state was ordered on Wednesday to make changes in everything from how schools are financed to which students are eligible to graduate from high school to how teachers are paid and evaluated.
Reading his ruling from the bench for more than two hours, Judge Thomas Moukawsher of State Superior Court in Hartford said that “Connecticut is defaulting on its constitutional duty” to give all children an adequate education.
Judge Moukawsher’s decision was a response to a lawsuit filed more than a decade ago that claimed the state was shortchanging the poorest districts when it came to school funding. What separates the decision from those in dozens of similar suits around the country is that rather than addressing money only, it requires the state to rethink nearly every major aspect of its system.
Joseph P. Moodhe, who represented the plaintiffs in the case, Connecticut Coalition for Justice in Education Funding, said that virtually every state had faced an education funding suit. This year, the Kansas Supreme Court ruled that the state’s financing plan created “intolerable” inequities. And in New York, a 2006 lawsuit was supposed to yield additional money in New York City and districts with high poverty rates, but a battle persists over whether the state is meeting its obligations.
In his ruling, Judge Thomas Moukawsher of State Superior Court in Hartford said that “Connecticut is defaulting on its constitutional duty” to give all children an adequate education.
Connecticut is known for the quality of its schools, and the decision cited several impressive statistics about the good ones, including the highest average reading scores in the country for fourth and eighth graders on the 2013 National Assessment of Education Progress, or N.A.E.P., often called the nation’s report card.
But the state is also home to failing schools, especially those serving poor children. The 2015 N.A.E.P. report found that poor students in 40 other states, including perennial poorly performing Mississippi and Arkansas, did better than poor students in Connecticut. Schools serving the poorest children are concentrated in 30 of the state’s 169 municipalities.
Connecticut finances its schools with a combination of local property taxes and federal and state money in a way that is supposed to offset the huge disparities in property values between rich and poor towns. Bridgeport, court documents noted, has nearly eight times the population of nearby New Canaan, but property in that wealthy Fairfield County town is worth more than $1 billion more.
The state has faced a punishing fiscal crisis this year, resulting in layoffs and spending cutbacks. That led the General Assembly to cut state education aid to some of the poorest districts, with more than $905,000 cut from Bridgeport, and more than $600,000 cut from New Haven. Comparatively wealthy districts got more money: Branford, a New Haven suburb, got a funding increase of $300,000.
“An approach that allows rich towns to raid money desperately needed by poor towns makes a mockery of the state’s constitutional duty to provide adequate educational opportunities to all students,” Judge Moukawsher wrote.
The heart of the decision was a critique of the different quality of education the state’s children receive.
Sixth graders in the richest school districts are four grade levels ahead of children in the poorest districts.
The judge also criticized how teachers are evaluated and paid. Teachers in Connecticut, as elsewhere, are almost universally rated as effective on evaluations, even when their students fail. Teachers’ unions have argued that teachers should not be held responsible for all of the difficulties poor students have. And while the judge called those concerns legitimate, he was unconvinced that no reasonable way existed to measure how much teachers managed to teach.
“Why bother measuring students if it never has any direct connection to how they’re being taught,” he wrote.
He said that the state also needed to revamp how it identified and served children with special education needs because the criteria for receiving services varied widely from town to town.
Judge Moukawsher did not dictate any new funding formula in his ruling or explain what the state’s graduation requirements or other policies should be. Instead, he ordered the attorney general’s office to submit plans within 180 days to fix the areas he had found deficient. It was not immediately clear who might draw up the proposals or whether the state would appeal the decision.
When the lawsuit was filed in 2005, Gov. Dannel P. Malloy, a Democrat, was mayor of Stamford and spoke out in favor of the suit.
