Hillary Clinton vowed not to send American ground troops to Iraq “ever again” and Donald J. Trump insinuated that he had learned shocking new information involving President Obama — without ever revealing it — as the two candidates made back-to-back appearances Wednesday night at a forum that foreshadowed their highly anticipated debate later this month.
Mr. Trump was withering in his attacks on her record while vague about his own, and defensive about his shifting stands on the Iraq war over the years. He repeatedly declared that he was ready to handle national security issues, without being challenged.
“A hundred percent,” Mr. Trump said, one of several instances when he made blunt assertions but provided no details. He was especially insistent in defending his praise of the Russian president, Vladimir V. Putin, arguing that Mr. Putin had “an 82 percent approval rating” in his country.
“I think when he calls me brilliant, I’ll take the compliment, O.K.?” Mr. Trump said.
Of the two candidates, Mrs. Clinton faced by far the tougher and most probing questions from the moderator, Matt Lauer of NBC, and from an audience of military veterans about her use of private email, her vote authorizing the Iraq war, her hawkish foreign policy views and other issues.
The forum, which took place at the Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum in Manhattan, served as a preview of sorts for the first Clinton-Trump debate set for Sept. 26, with both candidates drawing differences over policy and testing out lines on national security and other issues.
It was also a rare moment when Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Trump all but appeared in the same room together, talking one after the other and facing the same audience and moderator. By the end of the night, the candidates offered a study in contrasts on substance and style.
Mrs. Clinton was far more specific than Mr. Trump in laying out her ideas to provide mental health care and create jobs for veterans, and she highlighted her extensive foreign policy experience as secretary of state and as a member of the Senate Armed Services Committee.
On body language, the two diverged as well. Mrs. Clinton was far more likely to look audience members in the eye, nod along as they expressed concern or curiosity, and give relatively direct if sometimes uncomfortable answers. Mr. Trump came off as more relaxed but also far lighter on policy explanations, and he faced no questions about his past insults of veterans and their families or his own Vietnam-era draft deferments.
It wasn’t the first debate, but at least Ms. Clinton and Mr. Trump were on the same stage on Wednesday, though not at the same time. Here’s how we analyzed tonight’s forum live.
One of the most surprising moments of the night came when Mr. Trump chose to answer a question about the confidential national security briefings that he has recently begun to receive — a topic that presidents and presidential candidates rarely discuss with any openness.
It was a classic Trump moment — a dark insinuation without evidence — and his campaign declined to provide details after the debate.
Mr. Trump ridiculed Mr. Obama as much as he did Mrs. Clinton during his 25-minute appearance, deriding the president over the recent diplomatic incident in China where local officials would not provide the requisite staircase for Air Force One. “They wouldn’t give him stairs,” Mr. Trump said.
Both candidates also lamented the surge in suicides among veterans, with Mrs. Clinton offering the most details and expressions of empathy over the problems of poor mental health care and the widespread use of painkillers for veterans.
Have You Done Something to Support or Oppose Trump’s Brands?
Have you registered your disapproval or approval for Donald J. Trump’s candidacy by, say, discarding or returning Trump-brand clothes — or by booking a night at a Trump hotel? We want to hear your stories.
“I’ve spent a lot of time with family members, survivors, who have lost a loved one when he or she came home,” Mrs. Clinton said. “We’ve got to remove the stigma” of depression and other mental health problems.
Several polls have shown Mr. Trump with a solid lead over Mrs. Clinton among veterans, yet she has drawn an unusually strong number of endorsements from generals and admirals as well as national security experts who served under Republican presidents.
Mr. Trump, who went to pains to point out that several generals in the audience were supporting him, has increasingly sought to position himself as the candidate of the military — in part, aides say, to increase his chances of winning swing states like Florida and Virginia, where there are sizable numbers of veterans and military families.
Earlier on Wednesday he called for a massive expansion of the military, including many thousands more troops for the Army for a total of 540,000 and increasing the number of Marine Corps battalions from 23 to 36. To do so, Mr. Trump said he would ask Congress to eliminate so-called sequestration caps on military spending that have forced the reduction of troops — budget limits that Mr. Trump had supported until recently.
But in a sign of the relatively gentle questioning of Mr. Trump at the forum, no one challenged him over the chances that his proposals would come to pass. Democrats in Congress have stood firm against lifting the caps unless domestic spending is allowed to grow too, and some military analysts have questioned the need for some spending goals.
One of the few confrontations between the two candidates — albeit indirect, with Mr. Lauer pressing one after the other — came over the future of government-run veterans’ hospitals and other services. Mrs. Clinton promised to improve services and then, in a potent warning to veterans and their family members, suggested that Mr. Trump would harm veterans’ services by putting them in the hands of private health providers.
“I will not let the V.A. be privatized and I do think there’s an agenda out there supported by my opponent to do just that,” Mrs. Clinton said.
Mr. Trump adamantly denied the charge. “I never said take the Veterans Administration private,” he said. “I have too much respect” for veterans, he added.
It was one of several moments when Mr. Trump bobbed and weaved — a concern that Clinton advisers have about the coming debates if the moderators do not force him to back up his statements.
He denigrated military generals during the forum, saying they had been “reduced to rubble” under Mr. Obama, but he was not pressed on those assertions.
And he did not back away from his 2013 Twitter post in which he suggested that the integration of women into the military had played a role in sexual assaults.
”It is a correct tweet,” he said.