Updated, 11:46 a.m.
Good morning on this glum Friday.
For those who endured a long and hectic commute across the Hudson yesterday, you may have to plan for another this morning.
The fatal train crash at the Hoboken Terminal hampered mass transit there, resulting in various routes being suspended or running on modified schedules today.
All New Jersey Transit train service in and out of Hoboken is suspended this morning. Among other changes to normal service, the Main, Bergen, Pascack Valley and Port Jervis lines will all end (or originate) in Secaucus and will run on a modified weekend schedule.
However, PATH trains and the Hudson-Bergen Light Rail have resumed their weekday schedules in Hoboken. And more buses will be added between Hoboken and the Port Authority.
Ferries are serving Hoboken Terminal and are providing additional capacity on certain routes.
For the most complete and up-to-date information, read our transit guide or check out New Jersey Transit’s website.
Investigations will continue to try to determine what caused the crash, which killed one person and injured more than 100 others.
New Jersey Transit faced significant troubles even before Thursday’s tragedy, as Patrick McGeehan writes. A lack of executive leadership and budget shortfalls were among the agency’s headaches.
And customers have long complained about frequent delays and shorter trains.
Kim Siebel, who lives in Summit, N.J., left work in Manhattan hours early Thursday afternoon to avoid a particularly congested Pennsylvania Station.
As if commutes weren’t messy enough this morning, the weather won’t be much help.
Rain and wind are predicted to lash the city, and clouds will darken our skies.
The high is near 61.
Don’t expect any different this weekend, rain and gray skies are in the forecast through Monday.
• Scoreboard: Yankees tatter Red Sox, 5-1.
• For a global look at what’s happening, see Your Friday Briefing.
• Yankees host Orioles, 7:05 p.m. (YES). Mets at Phillies, 7:05 p.m. (SNY). New York City F.C. at Houston Dynamo, 8 p.m. (UniMas).
• Mets at Phillies, 1:05 p.m. (FOX). Yankees host Orioles, 4:05 p.m. (YES). Red Bulls host Philadelphia Union, 7 p.m. (MSG+).
• Watch “The New York Times Close Up,” featuring The Times’s Maureen Dowd and other guests. Saturday at 10 p.m. and Sunday at 10 a.m. on NY1.
• The Bushwick Film Festival wraps up with screenings and discussions at various locations around Brooklyn. Various times and prices.
• Jets host Seahawks, 1 p.m. (FOX). Yankees host Orioles, 3:05 p.m. (YES). Mets at Phillies, 7:05 p.m. (SNY).
• Alternate-side parking: in effect until Oct. 3.
The Mayor’s Office of Media and Entertainment started a five-part initiative on Thursday, including a $5 million fund, to support women in film and theater.
The announcement means New York is set to become the first city in the country with a major municipal program geared toward promoting gender equality in film, theater and television.
The program will also offer workshops, opportunities to connect with financiers, a screenwriting contest, a new block of programming on Channel 25 focused entirely on women, and a report analyzing gender inequity in film directing.
