Politics|Donald Trump Gets Cool Reception at Black Church in Flint, Mich.
Donald Trump Gets Cool Reception at Black Church in Flint, Mich.
During a visit to a church in Flint, Mich., Donald J. Trump was interrupted by the pastor who said she had invited him to “thank us for what we've done in Flint, not to give a political speech."
FLINT, Mich. — Donald J. Trump traveled Wednesday to Michigan, a state that has not voted Republican in more than two decades, as he reached out to African-Americans with remarks at a local church and toured a water-treatment plant in a city that has battled dangerously high levels of lead and contaminated water.
The trip did not exactly go as planned. In a stop at the predominantly African-American Bethel United Methodist Church here, a pamphlet was distributed indicating that the speech “in no way represents an endorsement.” Mr. Trump was then interrupted in the middle of his remarks by the pastor, the Rev. Faith Green Timmons, after he started to criticize Hillary Clinton.
The candidate continued, but members of the crowd repeatedly shouted questions, at one point interrupting him about reports that his housing empire had “discriminated against black tenants” in the past, according to news media pool reports.
“No, I never, never would,” Mr. Trump responded from the stage.
After Mr. Trump finished speaking, one woman in the crowd followed the candidate off the stage, according to the pool reports, repeatedly asking him what he meant by “you have nothing to lose,” a line the candidate has said repeatedly in his efforts to attract minority voters.
The candidate’s swing through Flint, a town with a majority African-American population, follows his campaign’s recent outreach to minorities elsewhere and Mr. Trump’s visits to states where Republicans haven’t won Electoral College votes in decades. The last time Michigan voted for a Republican was in 1988, and most recent polls there have shown Mrs. Clinton maintaining a comfortable lead over Mr. Trump.
Democrats and environmentalists were dismissive of Mr. Trump’s appearance in Flint, noting that when the city’s lead contamination was discovered, he offered no proposals to help. On the broader issue of clean-water policy, Mr. Trump has vowed to roll back a recent Environmental Protection Agency rule known as Waters of the U.S., which is meant to increase federal oversight of water sources.
Mr. Trump’s visit comes before a vote expected in the Senate this week to authorize $9 billion in spending on the nation’s water infrastructure, including $270 million in direct spending to address the crisis over Flint’s contaminated drinking water.
Senator Gary Peters and Ms. Stabenow, both Democrats, have spent months pushing the bill, which would provide $100 million in grants to assist states with drinking water emergencies, $70 million to subsidize loans for water infrastructure projects, $50 million to provide grants to help small and disadvantaged communities comply with drinking water standards, $30 million to provide grants for programs to reduce lead exposure among children, and $20 million to develop a national lead exposure registry.
Those Flint-related provisions would be paid for by cutting $300 million in spending on an Energy Department program devoted to researching advanced vehicle technology.
It is not clear if or when the House would pass a similar measure for aiding Flint. The House’s water infrastructure package does not include the direct spending provisions for lead-free water, but Ms. Stabenow said she hoped that the spending could be attached to another bill or passed as a stand-alone measure.