The landscape painter Julian Onderdonk spent nearly half his career in New York, but tried to cover up that unprofitable phase of his life. Onderdonk, a San Antonio native who died in 1922 at 40, moved to Manhattan while a teenager, and worked prolifically under pseudonyms to support his family. This fall, a new book and an exhibition in Houston will contrast his largely forgotten scenes of Central Park snowbanks, marshy Bronx riverfronts and Manhattan water towers with his later popular views of sun-bleached dirt roads in Texas.
“Julian Onderdonk: A Catalogue Raisonné” features images of about 1,200 artworks, starting with Onderdonk’s childhood sketches of Texas streambeds and coastlines. The authors, Harry A. Halff and Elizabeth Halff, spent 20 years tracking down the works.
Onderdonk’s father, Robert, was also a painter. He struggled to make a living, though, and kept moving his family around Texas. He worried that Julian would “face a similar fate” in the harsh art world, the Halffs write in the new book. But by age 2, Julian already showed signs that he “dearly loves to paint,” his mother, Emily, wrote in her diary in 1884. By age 10, he was winning prizes at state fairs for his watercolors.
Despite Onderdonk’s success with Chase and other prominent instructors — including Robert Henri — he found New York depressing, he told his parents after he arrived. He tried with little success to market his paintings of the Manhattan skyline, Hudson River docks, Staten Island orchards, Shelter Island coves and Catskill farms.
A little more than a year after he moved to Manhattan, he married a teenage neighbor, Gertrude Shipman. To support her and their daughter, Adrienne, he tried to make money teaching, and founded the Onderdonk School of Art on Staten Island. But it lasted only a few months. He turned out what he described as potboilers, and he reported to his family that he felt cheated by a dealer who sold them for a few dollars each. Onderdonk used pseudonyms like Charles and Chase Turner and Roberto Vasquez for the works.
Those artworks inspired a book in 2014, “Julian Onderdonk in New York: The Lost Years, the Lost Paintings,” by the art historian James Graham Baker. Mr. Baker said in a recent interview that he and his wife, Kimel, were planning to update the book; more of Onderdonk’s early works with Turner signatures have surfaced since its publication.
Onderdonk returned to Texas in 1909, and only occasionally visited New York. Collectors in his home state began to clamor for his works, which he priced at up to $750 each. (His Texas landscapes now sell for hundreds of thousands of dollars each, and his New York views typically bring tens of thousands of dollars.) His gabled studio from his San Antonio property has been moved to the grounds of the Witte Museum in that city.
After Onderdonk’s death, the family kept his studio and archive largely untouched, including his box of notecards recording which families had bought his paintings over the years. Numerous works still belong to descendants of original owners.
On Oct. 2, an exhibition, “Julian Onderdonk and the Texan Landscape,” opens at the Museum of Fine Arts, Houston. About 35 paintings will be on view, including scenes of Staten Island pastures and Southampton dunes.
And on Oct. 29, Heritage Auctions in Dallas will offer a half-dozen paintings by Onderdonk depicting Texas and the New York area.