Our Race/Related reporting project asked for your stories about race and education. Here are excerpts of what a handful of parents, teachers and students of pre-k – 12 had to say about how race and diversity are being discussed in schools and at home.
These responses have been lightly edited for space and style.
I am a parent of a fourth grader and kindergartner. I’m also an urban sociology professor. I do research on race. I live in Brooklyn because I thought it would alleviate me and my children from some of the scars of racism, at least those that I experienced growing up in, of all places, Puerto Rico.
I’ve avoided many cities and we’ve created a strong diverse community in Brooklyn, where my kids see their reflection. But they are not immune. They go to an elite private school where there are few faces that look like them.  She wonders why. And I explain, or at least try to explain, inequality.
I took both my children to Black Lives Matter. They know they matter. But their life is already questioned. In a trip to the beach, kids told them they didn’t want their “black feet” in their sand pool. They hurt. Would people want an extra cleaning of the cabin we stayed in if they found out a black Latino family had been there, they ask? It’s inequality and injustice we (the parents) say. And slowly we tease out the difficult interpretations of when and how race matters.
It’s a lifelong project, though I wish it wasn’t. I wish my kids didn’t have wonder whether they would be rejected at the playground, whether their feet were clean enough to be celebrated. At home, I’m thinking of opening the space for intimate conversations between families of different backgrounds. That doesn’t happen nearly enough. I’m doing it with a trusted friend. Perhaps it will make for a better world.
We just moved from New York City and have twin four-year-old girls (bi-racial: white/black). Moving from an area where so many brown people surrounded us to a suburban white town prompted the twins to take notice of their different skin color. We had this conversation the other night.
Ryan said: “There is only one other brown boy at our school...  And I cried hard after I put them to sleep but not before having a long talk about beautiful brown women and watching YouTube videos of the brown Olympic gymnasts and the American Ballet Theater’s first brown principal dancer.
Cassie Herr / 33 / white / Carmel, Ind.
I read books that are written by diverse authors. Also, books that tell the stories/history of people of color in our country and other countries. This year our school is partnering with Poetry Pals, an organization that links Christian, Muslim, and Jewish schools together. Their goal is to learn about each other’s faiths through poetry and discussion.
Elaine Sage / 60 / Caucasian / Evanston, Ill.
There is a profound difference between diversity and transformation. Diversity is in the head and can be measured by ticking boxes on paper. Transformation requires embodiment. It is about our individual and collective hearts and guts, and requires vulnerability and a willingness to grow and change. This is what our schools can engage students in. But we need to really listen to young people’s experience.
I am raising two African-American sons. The police brutality against African-American males has made me realize that I have to have conversations with my children about what they can and cannot do in this world. My oldest son is away for his first year at boarding school. Our conversations have centered around teaching him that he does not have the privilege to do what his peers of other races can do. Things he say and do can and will be interpreted differently simply because of the color of his skin. Something as simple as jaywalking can have different ramifications for him compared with his peers.
Our K-8 school placed equity and social justice at the center of everything it did. Diversity was noticed, recognized, learned about, and celebrated. It was individualized, too. That is, because we had students and families for whom English was not their first language, newsletters, meetings, and other events were translated. Students learned about specific groups of people, studying slavery, colonialism, and civil rights movements. There was no gifted program because all the children were viewed as gifted, with different talents and learning requirements. There was a commitment to equity and language used to talk about race, class, and more explicitly.
Similarly, at his high school, race is discussed explicitly, with a focus on equity and social justice and a deep commitment to creating a learning environment that produces critical, well-informed citizens who have strong identities and see themselves as playing a role in collaboratively creating community; not being better than, or superior over other races or groups of people.
Students take Ethnic Studies and other courses on identity, learn about other races through events and courses, and leadership uses data and best practices to look at and reduce the achievement gap. There is a wellness center on campus so if students need rest, food, or support, they can get it. There are celebrations, a Black Student Union, and teachers who are trained to teach against racism. There is a great deal of effort put into how the school is run and courses taught as well as on what the material covers. There is research on how to create a supportive school environment and these schools read it. And we have people of color in leadership positions.
Michael Daniele / 57 / Caucasian / Northwood, N.H.
I am a parent and an educator. Every day I see children suffer because of their race. The go without so many basic things and while it looks like a result of socio-economic issues...  I have not discussed much about race at home or with my students. I don’t want to give my daughter a complex because she attends a majority-white school. I don’t discuss it with my own students because I want my job.
If I could be honest, I would tell both my students and my daughter that there are people out there who think less of you because you are black. They think you aren’t as smart, aren’t as hard working or as worthy of success as they are. Why? Because their families used to own our families. Why would I tell them this? Because they need to know why things are the way they are. I work in a majority-black school and I don’t see nearly enough done to lift the esteem of these often destitute black children.
Jaynaia Griggs / 35 / African-American / Charleston, S.C.
I live in a very homogeneous town with 91-percent whites according to 2010 Census and negligible percentage of Asian-Americans. I have three boys (ages 12,10, 5) and the two older ones in school have experienced far too many racial bias, prejudice and discrimination to fit into this text box. Being a minority in this town and America means having to have a conversation about diversity or lack of, almost on a daily basis. It’s gotten to the point where my children don’t share some of the incidents that happen at school with me because my wife and I erupt with frustration at the situation, the school and the community we live in.
We are constantly evaluating our continued residence in this town and considering a move to someplace more diverse. That said, we do use current events (i.e. police shootings, racial profiling) as an opportunity to discuss race and how even though as Asian-Americans we don’t experience the same type of racism as African-Americans, it still manifests itself in different ways and are damaging to personal development. We try to be balance the pros and cons of being “different” in America when having conversations about race with our children.
What is extremely upsetting and discouraging is the lack of progress made I’ve witnessed in my lifetime. I immigrated to American when I was 7 years old. I, along with my parents did not speak any English at the time and were not aware of the many cultural nuances of being an American (i.e. clothing, food, etc.) So I can see how I stood out and was victim to racially motivated bias or bullying in school. However, my children are fully “American” as any other child in this town having the benefit of our education, wealth, cultural and English fluency. And yet, my boys are asked by their peers about their race when no other white kid is asked the same question. One white mother shared with me that her son was concerned about being invited to dinner by my child because he assumed we would serve something that was foreign to him. I made chicken Parmesan and pasta. This may be a benign symptom of his ignorance but it manifests itself in other ways in the classroom and on the playground.
Bob Kim / 45 / Korean-American / Chatham, N.J.
We have an administration at my school that really wants more diversity in A.P. and honors classes. What they’ve said the problem is when I’ve talked some teachers and administrators is that there are many outside social factors that affects students of color in school. My school doesn’t really openly talk about race. We are seen as being a diverse school because we have a large population of African-American students, but the problem is we have a lot of self-segregation. I think we still see race as a taboo topic. We have really great newspaper at my school and. occasionally, they will do really good articles on the topic of race in the classroom, but those articles don’t cause much change and there are very few people of color on the newspaper staff. My school is sometimes seen as having two schools within it: one for white students and one for black students. I think if my school talked about race, we could have a better environment in our classes.
Growing up in Los Angeles, the community is much more diverse than other parts of the country. I’ve lived in a Hispanic- and Asian-majority community for my entire life. Kids are exposed to virtually all races and cultures as a child. At the elementary school I went to, the school would regularly celebrate Chinese New Year and Cinco de Mayo. I remember who we would learn about different cultures around the world in kindergarten. However, kids can also be very vicious when it comes to race without even knowing it. After 9/11, I recall the Middle Eastern children in the school being treated much more harshly. They would be teased as being terrorists, and I don’t recall a lot of intervention from adults in these issues. Elementary schools are definitely more vicious when it comes to racial matters, as kids reciprocate what they see on TV, throwing racially charged comments even without realizing the true meaning behind them.
High school life was much better. My high school was inclusive of a lot of cultures, and many students were very forward thinking. Imagine someone like me, who essentially grew up as a weaker Asian kid in elementary school, suddenly being talked to by people that the “mainstream” world would consider as “school bullies.” I got along with senior students that were part of the cholo culture, who would look out for me for essentially nothing in return but my friendship. What’s better was that I didn’t need to change who I was. I continued hanging with my friends from elementary school who were part of my “nerd” clique. People were allowed to be open about who they were, and nobody was made fun of for their race. I didn’t encounter my first case of racism until I traveled out of the country.
Looking back, I felt that kids in elementary school need to be actively taught about racial tolerance. The biggest influence in children’s lives is TV, and there is a lot of racially biased content. It’s up to schools to encourage to be open-minded and tolerant.
I have been really pleased with how Denali Montessori Elementary, a public school in Anchorage, Alaska, celebrates and acknowledges the incredible diversity in the student body. From the principal’s introduction in talking about the strengths of the school, to the lessons taught in the classroom, to special events on campus, the celebration of diversity is front and center. My first-grade daughter is learning stories from around the world with kids from many cultural backgrounds. Geography is a cornerstone of the curriculum. I think this makes the world feel smaller and more known. Regular school events celebrate and teach about cultures from around the world. I think my daughter will have a very positive and sophisticated understanding of what culture means and the value of diversity before she even goes to middle school.
Megan Richotte / 40 / white / Anchorage, Ala.
We have a week at school to teach about racism terms, and concepts. These things are talked about in their academic classes, but we do this to bring the school together. It’s not nearly enough. I serve on our school’s equity team, which meets monthly. Our district has varying degrees of support from year to year to address how we work with racism in our institutions and our individual/cultural biases (either conscious or unconscious bias).
Students do not currently have a forum to talk about racism and how it affects them. I hope to start something to support students as they navigate this challenging terrain. I want to be sure my students are equipped with the terms and concepts to help talk about race, and to be able to navigate their feelings and PTSD around racism.
Abigail Alwin / 42/ white / Ann Arbor, Mich.
As an educator, issues about race arise regularly in classrooms. For example, a 1st grader told a classmate, “Your backpack can’t touch mine because you’re black.” Our teachers receive pre-service training in how to address racial issues in the classroom. In the example provided, most teachers would’ve shut down the conversation with a forced apology.
At our school, we unpack the comment to understand where it comes from.  After a brief discussion about what it feels like to hear those words and the invalidity of the notion, the offender asked for forgiveness.
Cynthia Rosario / 46 / Latina / Yonkers, N.Y.
There are daily occurrences that prompt discussions of race with my child. Every day she is faced with the negative imagery and society’s acceptance of a racial slur. The continued use of redskins and the images used projects the impression that her culture and history are not respected by the community.
We have worked so hard to keep our culture alive only to have those around us tell us that we are being just too sensitive and that our feelings are irrelevant. No one in schools or in the broader community addresses these issues. Once a year at Thanksgiving the American Indian community is deemed important enough to give a partial history lesson rather than celebrating our continued culture and the people we have become.
Caitlin Wesaw / American Indian / Washington, D.C.
Despite excellent teachers, the school culture sabotaged learning. A majority of students were reading below a 6th grade level, and their focus was survival! The trauma of urban living dominated the atmosphere in the halls. The ratio of counselor to student was about 300 to 1. These kids were not in a “head-space” to learn. They were preoccupied with Mazlov’s pyramid base: safety, home, food!
We need a Marshall Plan to build up these children and help them reach a plateau where they can manage their feelings and make wise choices. In every school situation there are heroes. Our school police officer was wonderful and perhaps the most trusted adult in the school. And, there were those students, despite the obstacles, kept their eyes on the prize and headed out to into the world as competent learners...preparing for life!
Tom Owen Smith / 71 / white / Reston, Va.
As a teacher of international school students, I find they’re generally very open-minded and easygoing about race; current high school students more so than ever. There are still sometimes cases where children are not — and there’s a hierarchy to it — with lightest skinned and boys at the top and darkest skin and girls at the bottom.
I teach in elementary school, and in my classroom I try to disrupt that hierarchy by valuing all of my students and inviting them to bring their own home life and experiences into the classroom. Young children do notice differences in skin color and I model how great I think that is.
I also directly teach respectful language: How to agree and disagree respectfully and how to ask questions respectfully and show interest about the unfamiliar and about preferences. I think that children need to be given the language to have their own open conversations about race and culture, which is not what I experienced as a child.
