A bicycle deliveryman is suing David N. Dinkins, claiming that the former mayor of New York was driving a car in June that struck and injured him, according to court documents.
The deliveryman, Rodrigo Garcia, 32, was riding on the Upper East Side on June 30, when he and a car driven by Mr. Dinkins collided, the police said. Mr. Garcia’s lawyer, Joel J. Turney, said on Saturday that Mr. Garcia, who was making a restaurant food delivery, was on York Avenue near 69th Street when Mr. Dinkins clipped a basket on the front of Mr. Garcia’s bicycle. Mr. Garcia was whipped around, Mr. Turney said, and broke two bones in his ankle.
Mr. Dinkins left the scene of the accident, according to the lawsuit, which was filed on Friday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
Mr. Dinkins, 89, said in a statement on Saturday that he was driving his wife, Joyce, to a hospital emergency room when the episode occurred and that he did not know he had hit anyone until he was a block and a half away, when a man approached his car and told him. Mr. Dinkins said his wife was in “medical distress” at the time and that he had returned to the crash scene after checking her into the emergency room at NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital/Weill Cornell Medical Center, which is about a block away from where Mr. Garcia said he was hit.
Mr. Turney said Mr. Garcia had not yet returned to his job at the restaurant, which he declined to identify.
Mr. Dinkins said he had cooperated with the police, who interviewed him at the hospital. “I take my responsibilities as a driver in New York City very seriously,” he said.
A Police Department spokesman said the accident report did not indicate Mr. Dinkins had left the scene and that officers had not cited him for any violations. When the police arrived after the collision, they found Mr. Garcia “conscious and alert,” the spokesman said.
Mr. Dinkins, whose term as mayor ran from 1990 to 1993, was hospitalized this year for congestive heart failure, according to WNBC. He is a professor at the School of International and Public Affairs at Columbia University.