Times Insider|Why Is Sarah Jessica Parker Following Me?
Why Is Sarah Jessica Parker Following Me?
Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how news, features and opinion come together at The New York Times. In this piece, Susan Dominus, a staff writer for The Times Magazine whose profile of Sarah Jessica Parker is on the cover of Sunday’s Arts & Leisure section, muses on some eerie similarities between the trappings of her own life and those of the leading TV characters Ms. Parker has played over the last two decades.
Last winter, I was at the Hastings Station Cafe, a beloved coffee shop located right at the train station of Hastings-on-Hudson, a suburb of New York, when I had a sudden surge of superficial pride in my town, admiring all the customers: What a well-dressed, good-looking lot they were! It took me a moment to realize that all those lookers were in fact professionally attractive extras who were there for a shoot, for Sarah Jessica Parker’s new HBO show, “Divorce.” As my train pulled away to take me into New York that day, I caught a glimpse of Sarah Jessica Parker herself on the train platform, waiting for a shoot to start, in a shabby chic coat. She looked so familiar, I had to stop myself from waving enthusiastically to her, as if she were an old friend who would be equally excited to see me.
I am 46. In the late ’90s, when “Sex and the City” first aired, I worked at a literary sex magazine. I was not a sex columnist, and I was useless in high heels, but I did my fair share of serial dating — enough that “Sex and the City” made for painful viewing. I believe I may have actually left the room in discomfort on more than one occasion if it was on television at the time. I enjoyed it much more in reruns, once I was happily married and pregnant in the mid-2000s. Lolling on the couch, huge with twins, I indulged in binges of nostalgia for all those a-minus-list parties I hit in Manhattan with all my then-single girlfriends, wearing a razzle-dazzle wardrobe I would finally bequeath to my skinniest neighbor once I realized those pre-pregnancy days were never coming back.
A lot of us female New Yorkers who were single in the late ’90s ginned up reasons to identify with at least one of the stars of “Sex and the City”; more often than not, that was Carrie, who was sweet and imperfect-looking yet winsome and winning. It was one thing to relate to her in New York City; it was another to find that Sarah Jessica Parker — or rather, her latest fictional alter ego — had followed me to Hastings-on-Hudson, where I ended up with those twins and my husband. I had left Carrie behind along with my 20s; now here was Sarah Jessica Parker, at least 50 and still smashing, once again in my own environment.
If “Sex and the City” was a more glitzy, well-art-directed version of my 20-something life, “Divorce,” I found — once I was assigned a profile of Sarah Jessica Parker — was a grimmer version of my middle age: The character’s marriage is falling apart, her kids are giving her the finger from the school bus (please tell me that’s not in my future) and her finances have cratered disastrously. There were mundane details, captured in the show, that were eerily familiar: the quick walk to the train station past our favorite French restaurant, Saint George Bistro; the best friend on the Metro-North commute; the steps outside the home that are desperately in need of more salt on a snowy day.
“I feel like these producers were eavesdropping through my window,” said a friend who watched several episodes and was slightly freaked out by all that perceptive verisimilitude.
If “Sex and the City” captured a moment in my youth, and in New York’s history, when all was perceived through the flattering, and also blinding, flash of a booming Dow, “Divorce” captures a more complicated time, in my friends’ lives and in my own life, and for New Yorkers, post-crash, post-9/11 — post a lot of things.
I now have this scary sense that when I end up in some elder-living assisted-care housing in an exurb of Orlando in about 30 years, I will turn on my device — the chip in my brain, or the thing embedded in my fingernail — to watch Sarah Jessica Parker, looking fabulous and hip at 80, portray some version of my life in that very same exurb. Will it be an idealized version? A dystopian one? Whatever it is, it will tell me something about where I have landed. And as long as my cyborg eyes let me, I’ll probably keep watching.