Although it is bounded by the heavily trafficked Bronx-Whitestone and Throgs Neck Bridges, the Whitestone section of Queens is surprisingly quiet. It’s a sleepy waterfront neighborhood of tree-lined streets, manicured lawns and salty breezes off the East River.
It was a destination for Stacy Tsatsaros when she was living in Astoria, Queens, and driving her children to classes at Whitestone’s Landrum School of Performing Arts, where her daughters, now 8 and 10, have been studying acting, singing and dance for several years. The school — founded in 1946 by a one-time Rockette and owned for the last 36 years by Annette Vallone — helped Ms. Tsatsaros become acclimated to the neighborhood.
Ms. Tsatsaros, 40, an ultrasound technician, and her husband, Tony, 43, an owner of an ice cream truck franchise, were accustomed to the plethora of Greek markets in Astoria. They now shop for groceries at the Greek Food Emporium, one of the mom-and-pop shops on the blocks around the intersection of 150th Street and 14th Avenue, which is known as Whitestone Village. “They have great cheese and olive oils, and I especially love their sweet bread called tsoureki,” she said. The owners, Maria and Konstantinos Mavros, offer 10 types of feta cheese and said 98 percent of their products are imported from Greece.
After 15 years living in a semidetached house on Whitestone’s southern border with Flushing, he and his wife, Tricia, recently bought a four-bedroom house for nearly $1.9 million in the Bridges at Whitestone development. There Tim O’Sullivan, a builder who grew up in the neighborhood, is erecting the first 11 of 45 single-family houses planned for a six-acre parcel a block from the river that was part of the now-defunct Cresthaven Country Club. “It’s where I learned to swim and play tennis,” Mr. O’Sullivan said.
The Whitestone 11357 ZIP code is generally used to define the neighborhood, which is bordered roughly by the East River on the north, 25th Avenue on the south, Utopia Parkway on the East and the Whitestone Expressway on the west. The northwestern corner extends beyond the expressway to the estate section known as Malba, an enclave of about 400 single-family houses. According to a 2014 Census Bureau estimate, Whitestone’s population is around 40,600.
Housing stock includes Tudors, Dutch colonials, Victorians, Cape Cods, ranches and stucco houses built mostly between the 1920s and 1950s. Teardowns and rococo top-to-bottom renovations are common.
Co-ops include the 1958 Le Havre, which has 1,024 apartments in 32 buildings on 28 acres with tennis and two pools. South of the Cross Island Parkway is Clearview Gardens, a co-op with 1,788 garden apartments on 88 acres.
The median house price through July 2016 was $816,500, a rise of about 14 percent from the same period in 2015, according to Jonathan J. Miller, the president of Miller Samuel, an appraisal and consulting firm. The median co-op was $210,000, up around 13 percent. Condominium sales were few.
According to Carollo Real Estate, on Sept. 19, there were 109 single and multifamily houses on the market, and 74 co-ops and condos.
Rentals, mainly in multifamily houses, are about $1,400 a month for one-bedrooms, $1,700 for two-bedroomsand $2,000 and up for three-bedrooms, Mr. Carollo said.
Public gathering places are by the waterfront. At the foot of the Bronx-Whitestone Bridge, Francis Lewis Park has a kayak launch, bocce and basketball courts and a stream of limousines on weekends, when wedding parties stop to take pictures.
By the foot of the Throgs Neck Bridge, there’s an entrance to Little Bay Park, which has a dog run and extends into neighboring Bayside, where, across the Cross Island Parkway, the city-owned Clearview Park Golf Course has a stately clubhouse, a pro shop and a restaurant.
Residentskeep up with local events on the Welcome to Whitestone and We Love Whitestone Facebook pages. They are loyal to independent businesses in Whitestone Village, like Harpell Chemists, which opened in 1906; Cherry Valley Deli and Grill, open 24 hours;and Caldwell Connection, amusic store that offers lessons and sells instruments along with records.
The food scene is dominated by traditional Italian bakeries and restaurants like the Clinton, owned by the Babich family since 1939. Other options include Ginger and Lemongrass, a small, stylish new Vietnamese restaurant; Honey Bee Cakes, a cheerful cafe and bakery; and Liola, a white-tablecloth restaurant owned by a Sicilian chef, Angelo Alaimo.
Among the most arresting buildings are St. Nicholas Orthodox Church with its distinctive blue onion dome, and the salmon-colored Greek Orthodox Holy Cross Church.
Whitestone has four elementary schools within its borders for prekindergarten through fifth grade. Public School 79 Francis Lewis, the largest, has about 1,090 students; in 2014-2015, 52 percent met state standards in English compared with 30 percent citywide and 70 percent in math compared with 39 percent, according to the city’s School Quality Snapshot.
The others are P.S. 193 Alfred J. Kennedy, where 43 percent met state standards in English, and 63 percent did in math; P.S. 209 Clearview Gardens, where 61 percent met standards in English and 74 percent in math, and P.S. 184 Flushing Manor, where 48 percent met standards in English and 65 percent in math. Among the junior high schools serving area students are J.H.S. 194 William Carr and J.H.S. 185 Edward Bleeker.
The QM2 express bus reaches Midtown in roughly 45 minutes. The QM32 goes to Manhattan’s East Side. To reach the 7 train, residents take the Q15 or Q15A bus to the Flushing-Main Street station or drive to the Southfield Commuter Lot by Citi Field for the Mets-Willets Point station.
Whitestone was named for a large limestone boulder found in 1645 by the Dutch, who bought the land from the Matinecock tribe. In the early 20th century, the area was home to movie stars like Mary Pickford, Charlie Chaplin and Rudolph Valentino.