Ian Kennedy and three relievers combined for a two-hitter, and the visiting Kansas City Royals beat Chris Sale and the Chicago White Sox, 2-0.
Kendrys Morales homered on the first pitch of the second inning and Eric Hosmer homered on the first pitch of the fourth. The Royals won their second straight to stay four games out of an American League wild-card spot.
Kennedy (11-9) walked four, but Adam Eaton’s leadoff single was the only hit he gave up in six innings. He improved to 5-0 in his last six starts.
A SHARP RETURN Chris Tillman pitched six impressive innings in his return from the disabled list and Baltimore won at Detroit, 3-1.
Tillman (16-5) had not pitched since Aug. 20 because of bursitis in his right shoulder. He gave up a run on four hits.
AROUND THE MAJORS David Ortiz hit his 535th home run to move ahead of Jimmie Foxx into sole possession of 18th place on the career list as Boston outslugged host Toronto, 11-8. Corey Kluber struck out 10 in seven innings, Carlos Santana hit a three-run homer and visiting Cleveland beat Minnesota, 7-1. Mark Reynolds homered leading off the 10th inning, and Colorado won at San Diego, 3-2. Matt Moore struck out 11 in seven innings, and San Francisco beat host Arizona, 5-3. Ketel Marte hit a tiebreaking single in the ninth, and Seattle beat host Oakland, 3-2, for its fifth straight win.
Landon Donovan, the top scorer in the history of M.L.S. and the United States men’s national team, ended his 21-month retirement by playing about 10 minutes of the Los Angeles Galaxy’s 4-2 victory over visiting Orlando City.
Donovan, 34, entered the game as a substitute in the 83rd minute to a lengthy standing ovation. He had last played in the 2014 M.L.S. Cup final.
COSTA SAVES CHELSEA Diego Costa scored twice, including on an overhead kick in the 81st minute, and Chelsea salvaged a 2-2 draw at Swansea in the English Premier League.
Swansea had taken a 2-1 lead after second-half goals three minutes apart by Gylfi Sigurdsson and Leroy Fer.
D.C. UNITED RALLIES AGAIN The Red Bulls surrendered two goals in the waning moments — one in the 89th minute and one in stoppage time — to draw with D.C. United, 2-2.
It was the second time this season the Red Bulls had allowed D.C. United to tie after a two-goal deficit.
Nairo Quintana pedaled into Madrid unchallenged to win the Vuelta a España, 1 minute 23 seconds ahead of the rider who beat him in the Tour de France.
Quintana, a Colombian riding for Movistar, had cemented his lead over the Tour de France winner Chris Froome a day earlier. The two riders rode together and chatted for part of the final stage.
A school bus driver was killed and several passengers were injured when a bus carrying members of a high school football team from Broomfield, Colo., veered off a road and crashed at Denver International Airport.
The bus was one of three carrying members of the Legacy High School football team after they had flown home from a game in California on Friday night.
At least 10 people were being treated at hospitals.