Mets Manager Terry Collins told his players after the conclusion of their previous series against the Washington Nationals that there was no time to relax despite the cushy schedule awaiting them over the final two weeks of the season.
In the fourth inning of the Mets’ game against the Minnesota Twins on Friday night at Citi Field, Collins must have momentarily felt like an ignored parent whose repeated cautions go unheeded.
Max Kepler led off the fourth by hitting a routine line drive to Yoenis Cespedes in left field. Cespedes, barely budging from his spot, casually lifted his glove up and dropped the ball, the kind of blunder Collins had fretted about.
But Bartolo Colon, the ever-calm elder sage, was not shaken. He had already escaped a bases-loaded jam in the third inning and made a spinning throw to a running Asdrubal Cabrera to start a double play that ended the first.
Colon regrouped to pick off Kepler and retired the Twins in order, on his way to seven scoreless innings and six strikeouts as the Mets easily swatted away the Twins with a 3-0 win. Colon allowed only three hits and improved to 14-7.
After the fourth inning, Colon waited for Cespedes to jog in from left and consoled him with a slap on the back.
“I just kind of wanted to wait for him to just let him know, let’s forget what just happened, you can do this and let’s go,” Colon said through an interpreter.
Afterward, Cespedes did not miss another fly ball hit in his vicinity. He further atoned with a run-scoring single in the seventh inning, tacking another run onto the 2-0 lead Jose Reyes and Cabrera had created with back-to-back home runs in the third.
Collins smiled knowingly when asked if he had felt the need to approach Cespedes about the gaffe. He said he was satisfied with Cespedes’s production through the rest of the night.
With Colon cruising and the Mets more seriously heeding their manager’s warning, Collins faced few strategic conundrums. In the coming days, when he encounters those instinctual situations that define pennant races, there will be more options at his disposal.
Before Friday’s game, Juan Lagares was activated from the disabled list. He had not played since July 28 after having surgery to repair a torn ligament in his left thumb.
On Saturday, Lucas Duda is expected to come off the disabled list, where he has been since May with a stress fracture in his lower back. On Sunday, Jacob deGrom will make his first start since Sept. 1 after experiencing soreness in his right forearm.
With the new ingredients available to him, Collins can become an artisanal manager, using the specialized skills of his roster as the Mets attempt to return to the postseason.
With their victory, the ninth in 12 games, the Mets hold at least a one-game lead over the St. Louis Cardinals for the last National League wild-card spot with 15 games remaining.
Lagares still has not been able to pick up a bat, so he will be used as a defensive replacement and perhaps as a pinch-runner. For the time being, Duda will come off the bench as a pinch-hitter.
Wilmer Flores may also be a few days away from returning from inflammation in his wrist. Steven Matz will throw a bullpen session Saturday to determine his next step.
The Mets have been reinforced by the unexpected contributions of unsung prospects and veteran reserves, but the return of a former Gold Glover in Lagares and of a legitimate slugger in Duda could further strengthen the team. And even though Robert Gsellman and Seth Lugo have thrived as starters, a healthy deGrom could be pivotal in determining how far the Mets travel into October. DeGrom won three road games during last year’s run to the World Series.
He threw about 30 pitches in a bullpen session Friday, with Collins reporting that he had looked “great.” Collins said he expected deGrom to throw 75 on Sunday.
Though Colon had no problem with the Twins (55-93), they should in theory also present an ideal opponent for deGrom, who usually pitches better during weekend afternoon games. Including Minnesota, the Mets have only one series against a team that entered Friday with a .500 record — the Miami Marlins — allowing for a sliver of wiggle room for some fine-tuning as the Mets try to re-acclimate old, familiar pieces in their playoff pursuit.
Asdrubal Cabrera left the game with cramping in his right leg but said he would be ready to play Saturday.