In the Tuscan countryside, Holly Lueders and her daughter, Venetia Sacret Young, restored a former convent into a home. Here, ceramics and a watercolor portrait of one of the family’s Jack Russells, Loukoumi, all made by Lueders.
Wild Queen Anne’s lace grows in the field in front of the 16th-century Franciscan convent. It was designed by the Florentine architect Antonio da Sangallo the Younger, a creator of both the Palazzo Farnese and the Villa Madama in Rome — and abandoned for 60 years before the mother-daughter duo took it on.
Lueders and Sacret Young on the travertine stone staircase they designed.
An original 16th-century mantel and chimney flanked by a 19th-century chair and a sofa bought at a local antique store.
A view into the convent’s cloister. With original tiles and travertine stone details, it is planted with roses, jasmine and aromatic herbs.
A ground-floor bathroom, formerly a chapel, features a 19th-century ceramic tub and antique plates on the wall.
In the vault-ceilinged guest bedroom, once a provisional kitchen, a custom headboard is upholstered in antique silk damask beneath walls treated to appear stained.
The living room, from another angle. Unframed 20th-century prints feature Franciscan monks, depicted in moments of spiritual ecstasy.
The pair share a penchant for salvaging old buildings, and in the early 2000s, while Sacret Young was working on a mosaic for her mother’s garden on Patmos, Lueders suggested they find a place in Italy, the country where she had always dreamed of living. Assuming it was a lark, Sacret Young went along for the ride, which evolved into a multiyear quest, with each shuttling back and forth from Patmos (where Sacret Young now has a house as well). Lueders knew only that she wanted something “old and cheap,” and not near the sea: “We have enough of that in Greece.” They asked friends and acquaintances for leads, visiting dozens of rundown properties — farmhouses, villas — across the country. Eventually they found a convent on a road that links Pitigliano to the nearby town of Sorano. Protected by a high wall, it looks out onto an archaic landscape of ravines and pathways carved into stone by the Etruscans who settled this area more than 2,500 years ago. A dirt road winds its way across fields of wildflowers to an iron gate and into the convent’s cloister.
The pair moved into the building’s two livable rooms directly after buying it. The only source of warmth was a fireplace so large they could sit inside it; a small refrigerator and four light bulbs were powered by a tiny generator. Plastic sheets were nailed over the windows to keep out the cold. Determined to restore the 6,500-square-foot property with as little outside help as necessary, the women cleaned the place and painted the walls using natural pigments mixed with lime: white with a touch of ocher for the corridors and stairwells; a moody cerulean for Lueders’s bedroom and what Sacret Young describes as “watery clouds” for one of the bathrooms. They tinted the lower-level floors a deep yellow ocher by rubbing pigment directly into the cement. “We found out about this abandoned factory in Mount Amiata,” Lueders says, “and inside we found all this yellow ocher powder just left there unattended. We took several sacks full of it back to the convent and mixed it with turpentine and linseed oil, and worked it in by hand.” The staircase was extended using local travertine slabs, which after setting, the pair doused with gallons of acid to age it and harmonize its appearance to the rest of the stairs. They reupholstered salvaged furniture and sewed curtains from each of their vast collections of old fabrics. Scattered throughout are ­Lueders’s ceramics, mostly plates and vases, which were made in situ, as well as Sacret Young’s abstract photographs of Greek landscapes, and the flotsam of a free-spirited life: bits and pieces of handmade bricolage, wicker baskets filled with crockery for picnics, candle stubs on the dining room table, vases filled with freshly cut wildflowers.
It’s a soulful place, full of personality and spirit, and while both admit that the renovation process, which is ongoing, hasn’t been easy — “It’s like a never-ending building site,” Lueders says — they also say that the difficulties are all part of the romance of the experience, of making something hard-won together. Today the two entertain in the cloister, where white-and-green striped cushions set on stone seats are shaded by a pergola wound with jasmine and wisteria.
