Li Yang had no interest in being a fashion designer when he was growing up in the industrial city of Changchun, China. He liked science best at school — and though he would play after class in his mother’s clothing factory, where she manufactured mass-market apparel, he read Japanese manga, never fashion magazines. The feminine figures he sketched resembled Hayao Miyazaki’s Princess Nausicaä, heroine of the post-apocalyptic tale “Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind” — not the typical elongated croquis of fashion illustrations.
This boyhood fascination with fantasy and science fiction continues to drive the 29-year-old designer today at his Paris-based brand Quetsche. For his recent fall/winter 2016 collection, his third collection to date, Li imagined a world where giants discover naked humans living under their floorboards. Touched by their frailty, the giants refashion their own clothes to cover the humans’ nudity. In Li’s hands, the unisex collection features winter coats with comically oversize pockets that appear to be cut from giant wool trousers, and tube-like silk dresses look as though they have been crafted from enormous shirt sleeves. Elsewhere, an apron dress appears to be fashioned from the fly of jumbo-sized pants.
“I like creating a character, and that’s why I like fashion — because I can create a particular woman,” Li says of his work. “She’s always a strong woman, who has a certain idea about fragility, and wears an armor to hide her femininity — she reminds me of my mother.” As well as running the factory, Li’s mother raised him for the most part on her own — his father, who held a post in the Chinese military, was rarely home. “I would only see my father once a year,” he says now, “I hated the military for that reason.” Still, his father made a mark as well: a military influence is ever-present in Li’s designs, but is always kept in balance with femininity. For spring/summer 2016, this translated into a collection of bomber jackets, trench coats and baggy utilitarian pants overlaid with delicate silk organza, while fall/winter 2016 featured a map motif that resembles a camo print.
