Considering how many medals U.S.A. Gymnastics brought home from the Rio Games — an amazing 12, including Simone Biles’s three individual golds and the women’s team gold — the federation’s post-Olympics glow should be brighter than ever.
A 36-city tour starring Biles and other standouts is starting Thursday in Spokane, Wash. A rush of money is pouring into the sport. After every Summer Games, gyms typically see a bump in enrollment because kids, including my 4-year-old, watched the Olympics and want to do what their new heroes do.
It’s usually a happy time. But this year is anything but usual: Reports of sexual abuse in the sport, published before and since the Games, are reminders that gymnastics is not solid gold.
The first report, published in August by The Indianapolis Star, revealed that U.S.A. Gymnastics had kept files of complaints involving more than 50 coaches suspected of abusing athletes, yet in many cases failed to alert law enforcement of possible wrongdoing.
A second report by The Star, published Monday, said two women claimed that Larry Nassar, a longtime team doctor for U.S.A. Gymnastics, sexually abused them. One of the women filed a police complaint against Nassar, who, through his lawyer, denied any wrongdoing. The other woman, a medalist on the 2000 Olympic team, filed a civil lawsuit against Nassar that included U.S.A. Gymnastics as a defendant.
The lawsuit claimed that the federation, which oversees the sport in the United States and sets rules and policies for athletes and coaches, buried complaints about Nassar and failed to adequately supervise him. In the court filing, the Olympian said she was 12 or 13 when Nassar began molesting her and that he did so, fondling and groping her, until she was 18.
This battery of accusations against U.S.A. Gymnastics has turned a post-Olympic glow into something more of a haze. The federation has so much to address and to clarify, but in the short term that is not happening: U.S.A. Gymnastics officials did not immediately respond Tuesday to a request for an interview regarding the federation’s sexual abuse prevention policies and what, if anything, it plans to do to improve them. Instead, they released a lawyerly statement restating their commitment to the policies they have in place, and a pledge to continue their effort to review them.
Gymnastics, like many sports, has its dark corners and shadows, places where devious coaches can lurk and children can pay the price. So whatever U.S.A. Gymnastics does to keep its athletes safe — educating parents, setting policies to screen coaches, compiling public lists of coaches who are barred because of findings of sexual abuse — it will never be enough.
Within U.S.A. Gymnastics’ giant pool of 3,000 member gyms there will always be a chance for aberrant behavior, just as in society. And the sad fact is there will always be victims who are too scared or embarrassed to come forward.
But when abuse accusations come at such a fast pace, the federation should at least stand up to say something to the girls and boys who participate in the sport, and the parents of those children. Tell them that U.S.A. Gymnastics is watching over them and doing everything it can to make things better. Tell them that the federation cares about its members.
Yes, there are lawsuits to deal with now, and words must be chosen carefully. But there is a time and a place to be a vocal leader on this scary yet important topic. It might not fit in with the sport’s post-Olympics marketing push, but for U.S.A. Gymnastics, that time is now. It’s crucial that parents and athletes are aware of the sport’s problems, so they can protect themselves.
Some gym owners aren’t waiting for guidance or inspiration to do the right thing. They already consider it their responsibility to protect the kids who walk through their front doors.
Mihai Brestyan, coach of the three-time Olympic gold medalist Aly Raisman, runs Brestyan’s American Gymnastics Club in Burlington, Mass. A veteran of 40 years in coaching, he acknowledged that U.S.A. Gymnastics can do only so much to police — and prevent — sexual abuse.
Brestyan, who owns a gym with his wife, Silvia, forbids anyone but athletes — even parents — from entering his gym’s locker rooms. No coach is allowed to be alone with an athlete at any time.
There are 14 coaches at Brestyan’s gym, including three men, and Brestyan says he is vigilant about looking for signs of inappropriate contact between coaches and athletes. Maybe a coach is hugging an athlete too much. Or adjusting her leotard. Or making unnecessary hands-on corrections.
Like Marvin Sharp, U.S.A. Gymnastics’ 2010 coach of the year. Sharp, an elite coach who owned an Indianapolis gym only 15 miles from the headquarters of U.S.A. Gymnastics, was arrested last year on charges of child molestation and child pornography.
U.S.A. Gymnastics has been said to have had a file on Sharp, receiving a detailed accusation against him in 2011, but it did not report him to the police until four years later. The official case against Sharp began with complaints that he was taking inappropriate photos of children in the studio in his gym. A few months later, he killed himself in his jail cell.
Sharp was stopped, far too late, but what about the next coach? Alerting U.S.A. Gymnastics has not always guaranteed action: A file tucked away in the federation’s offices won’t do much to stop a predator. How can a federation conduct a proper investigation anyway, when its main goal is to run and promote its sport — not to point out its flaws?
For Brestyan, there is a better step, a simpler step, at the first sign of trouble.
