CHICAGO — Faced with intensifying pressure to solve this city’s cascading violence, Mayor Rahm Emanuel on Thursday evening laid out what he described as a comprehensive plan for public safety: more police, more mentors, more jobs.
Rarely in Mr. Emanuel’s more than five years as mayor has he given a speech with stakes as high or circumstances as tense.
Chicago’s soaring rate of murders and shootings this year has captured national attention and become an issue in the presidential race. At the same time, the Justice Department is investigating the police force after the release of a video last year showing a white officer shooting Laquan McDonald, a black teenager, 16 times, and also after years of rising distrust between the police and African-American residents.
Through all of it, Mr. Emanuel’s place has been complicated. While calls months ago for his resignation have quieted, his relations with some residents remain strained and tenuous. In a poll conducted this spring, 62 percent of residents said they disapproved of his job performance, and two-thirds disapproved of his handling of the police. His approval rating was even worse among African-Americans.
The speech had been a matter of much anticipation here. Mr. Emanuel announced it weeks ago, then delayed it a few days. That raised speculation over its content and whether Mr. Emanuel, known for his blunt, hard-charging style, could address questions about race, policing and parenting without alienating residents.
In the end, Mr. Emanuel spoke directly about young gang members: the group of people who the police say are responsible for a majority of the shootings in Chicago, and who are also a majority of those being shot.
“To have any chance of stopping them from killing each other and the innocent bystanders, we have to stop them from giving up on themselves and their future,” Mr. Emanuel said, pledging $36 million in government and donated funds over the next three years to provide mentors to 7,200 eighth, ninth and 10th graders in the city’s most violent neighborhoods.
Mr. Emanuel has faced criticism before over gun and gang violence in Chicago, particularly in some of the hardest-hit neighborhoods on the city’s South and West Sides. In 2012, Chicago saw an increase in homicides — more than 500 people were killed that year — and the Police Department sent more officers into volatile neighborhoods and used new methods to track gang affiliations.
This year the numbers are far worse. With months to go in 2016, killings have already surpassed 500, more than in Los Angeles and New York combined. More than 3,000 people have been shot here. And in some months, the violence has reached levels closer to what Chicago saw in the 1990s, intensifying the pressure on Mr. Emanuel to find new answers and to step forward with a sweeping plan.
On Thursday evening, he backed a major increase in the size of the Police Department, which is already the nation’s second largest. The city plans to add nearly 1,000 police officers at a cost expected to exceed $130 million a year. But Mr. Emanuel did not say how Chicago, grappling with a fiscal crisis, would pay for that.
Mr. Emanuel choked up at points in his speech as he reflected on some of those killed here, including the 19-year-old son of a Chicago police officer, who Mr. Emanuel said had returned to work at the department despite his loss.
