Whoa! You can charge Philip Roth with misogyny in his work, and many do. But to suggest by coy indirection (“Poor Sophie Portnoy”) that he is among those Jewish writers and comics who worked the theme of the overbearing Jewish mother because they were (if, indeed, any of them were; how does she know?) “desperate to assimilate into mainstream society and spewed their mommy issues across the page, stage and screen” — what a dimwitted insult to a giant.
To want to be seen as an American writer rather than a Jewish writer, sure. But I can’t think of another American novelist who seems as deeply disinclined to be assimilated into mainstream society, whatever and wherever that may be.
The Levy’s slogan was “You don’t have to be Jewish to love Levy’s Real Jewish Rye.” The phrase “You don’t have to be Jewish to be a Jewish mother” is from my book, “How to Be a Jewish Mother,” which Bleyer probably read, since it was on the New York Times best-seller list for many weeks.
Jennifer Bleyer notes that the Hebrew word for sin, chet, means “missing the mark.” That happens to be the exact definition of the Greek word hamartia, which plays a central role in Aristotle’s definition of tragedy. And being a mensch, which Bleyer cites as a master password that unlocks all the other values, is not so different from Aristotle’s overarching virtue, magnanimity.
FAIR LAWN, N.J.
Because I have spent the last four years reading about world literature in the course of writing a dissertation on obstacles to internationalizing the American high school curriculum, I read Tim Parks’s column on international literature (Roving Eye, Aug. 28) with interest.
However, Parks’s commentary on the International Edinburgh Book Festival seemed uninformed. He begins with the “logic of globalization,” suggesting that “it’s one world . . . so we must all read the same books.” I’ve never heard anyone say we all need to read the same books because of globalization. And from what he says about the conference, nobody there said it either. Besides, we are in fact reading many of the same books. And they are mostly English-language books, specifically British and American.
As we know, the market for translations from English far outpaces the market for translated works into English. It seems to me the Edinburgh Book Festival was trying to air out this conundrum.
Celebrating Baker’s perspective is a slap in the face of dedicated, full-time teachers who pour their hearts and souls into the work of educating K-12 students. For example, there are teachers who have as many as 140 students a day and three different preparations at the high school level.
In addition, they may be assigned to four different classrooms a day because of lack of space, and the technology in many of those classrooms is faulty at best. There are dedicated teachers who are working 70 to 80 hours a week, and they don’t give up after 28 days.
Change must occur in our nation’s educational system, as Baker and Keizer agree; however, we must derive what works from the experience of dedicated, excellent teachers (who really exist in our schools, despite the paucity of sound leadership and poor work environments).
The writer is a recently retired high school English teacher.
The Book Review wants to hear from readers. Letters for publication should include the writer’s name, address and telephone number. Please address them to books@nytimes or to The Editor, The New York Times Book Review, 620 Eighth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10018. Comments may also be posted on the Book Review’s Facebook page.
Letters may be edited for length and clarity. We regret that we are unable to acknowledge letters.
Information about subscriptions and submitting books for review may be found here.