ATLANTA — The nadir of the Mets’ season may have been Aug. 19. They were two games under .500, and five and a half games out of the second National League wild-card spot. Playoff projections had the Mets’ percentage chances of reaching the postseason in the single digits.
Fast forward three weeks, and the Mets’ situation is starkly different. Thanks to Friday’s 6-4 comeback win over the Atlanta Braves, the Mets maintained their hold on an N.L. wild-card spot after an improved stretch of play shot them past three teams in the standings.
Following months of up-and-down play, the Mets have more reason to be optimistic. Unlike their suddenly contending crosstown neighbor, the Yankees, the Mets have an easier road ahead to the playoffs. According to the Elias Sports Bureau, the Mets’ remaining opponents entering Friday had a combined winning percentage of .446, the lowest in baseball.
Of their final 21 games, the Mets play only three against a team — the Washington Nationals — with a winning record. After this weekend’s three-game series against the Braves, one of the worst teams in baseball, the Mets will play a three-game series in Washington.
The Mets will then face the lowly Minnesota Twins, the Braves again, the rebuilding Philadelphia Phillies, the floundering Miami Marlins, and the Phillies again to close out the season.
The Yankees, on the other hand, face a more difficult path to a potential playoff appearance. The Yankees, who traded some of their best players a month ago to stockpile young talent, are now one game out of the second American League wild-card spot after defeating the Tampa Bay Rays, 7-5, on Friday night.
But to stay alive in the race, the Yankees must face the N.L. West-leading Los Angeles Dodgers, the A.L. East-leading Boston Red Sox twice, the Toronto Blue Jays, the struggling Tampa Bay Rays twice, and the Baltimore Orioles. The Blue Jays hold the top A.L. wild-card berth, while the Orioles and the Detroit Tigers are tied for the second one.
As the Mets labored through the summer with uneven play and countless injuries, the history of the wild-card race kept them hopeful. Last year was an anomaly, with the Pittsburgh Pirates winning 98 games and the Cubs 97 on their way to capturing the N.L. wild-card berths. In the previous three years, the second N.L. wild-card team averaged about 89 wins.
After a strong April, the Mets treaded water and fell to .500 by late summer. If they could hold on until injured players returned, they felt they could make a run, with the schedule aiding them.
The Mets received a significant boost on offense when Asdrubal Cabrera, Yoenis Cespedes and Reyes all returned from injuries in late August. Despite injuries to their starting pitchers, they are 15-4 since Aug. 19. The rotation fill-ins Seth Lugo and Robert Gsellman, both unheralded prospects, have mitigated the losses of Jacob deGrom and Steven Matz to injury.
Gsellman allowed four runs over five innings on Friday. The Mets’ bullpen provided scoreless relief, enough to allow the offense to mount a comeback. Granderson delivered two big hits: a two-run blast in the sixth, marking his fourth straight game with a home run, and a run-scoring single in the eighth-inning rally. The Mets took the lead with a four-run eighth, punctuated by Kelly Johnson’s pinch-hit run-scoring double.
Alderson and the Mets’ front office made several roster changes, from inside and outside the organization, to spark an improvement in play during the summer. Alderson also credited the steadying hand of Mets Manager Terry Collins.
Collins cautioned against overlooking the feeble opponents during the final three weeks of the Mets’ regular season.
