In perhaps the biggest moment of Tuesday’s 5-4 loss to the Atlanta Braves, Jay Bruce was not on the field or at the plate for the Mets. Yet most of the questions posed to Manager Terry Collins after the game centered on Bruce, the slumping right fielder who was brought to New York on the Aug. 1 trading deadline to spark a playoff push.
Bruce understood why Collins, in the midst of a Mets rally that fell just short, had turned instead to Eric Campbell, a little-used bench player. Bruce has hit .176 in 40 games since he became a Met. Collins did not start Bruce on Sunday or Monday, hoping the mental break would jump-start his bat. Instead, Bruce went 0 for 3 on Tuesday, and when the Mets were rallying in the eighth inning, Collins made a tough choice.
Curtis Granderson’s R.B.I. double brought the Mets to within three runs of the Braves. After T. J. Rivera’s sacrifice fly trimmed the deficit to two runs, the Braves brought in the left-handed reliever Ian Krol. Bruce has had trouble with left-handed pitchers this season, and Collins had warned him in the prior inning that he might have to pinch-hit for him if this situation arose.
Collins’s move paid off — Campbell delivered a run-scoring single — but it left him and Bruce open to questions about his struggles.
After Campbell’s hit, Collins sent Kevin Plawecki up to bat for James Loney, and his ground ball led to a fielding error by Braves third baseman Adonis Garcia that put runners at the corners. But Travis d’Arnaud, another underperforming Mets hitter, grounded out to end the threat.
Collins has been dumbfounded by the struggles of Bruce and d’Arnaud. Bruce was an All-Star for his stellar first half of the season with the Cincinnati Reds. D’Arnaud has less of a track record, but he was a big factor in the Mets’ second-half run in 2015. Collins said it has been difficult balancing playing time for his starters while also putting in the players who give the team the best chance of winning.
The Mets’ stumbles on Tuesday underlined the problems with their offense. But they still have a chance to recover. The September schedule had given the Mets a gift: matchups against some of the worst teams in baseball, and a chance to pad their playoff résumé.
But the Mets have dropped two consecutive games to the Braves. The Mets’ hot play over the past month had afforded them a sliver of wiggle room in the National League wild-card race, but after their loss to the Braves, couple with the Cardinals’ victory over the Colorado Rockies, the Mets and St. Louis were tied for the top wild-card spot.
Before the Mets’ mistakes began in the sixth inning, Robert Gsellman held his own against Julio Teheran, the Braves’ ace. Gsellman cruised through the middle innings until the sixth. He gave up singles to Ender Inciarte and Garcia, and he walked Freddie Freeman to load the bases.
Facing the slugger Matt Kemp, Gsellman got the result he likely wanted: a soft fly ball to the outfield near Mets defenders. But Granderson, normally a right fielder who was playing center field out of need, and Bruce, a right fielder, both ran toward the ball and then stopped to avoid a collision. Because of the miscommunication, the ball fell in and the Braves tied the score.
With little margin for error, Collins hooked Gsellman and called on the left-handed reliever Josh Smoker to face Nick Markakis, the Braves’ left-handed-hitting right fielder, with the bases loaded. Smoker threw some pitches close to the strike zone, but Markakis did not bite, drew a walk and drove in a run to give the Braves a 2-1 lead.
An inning later, Jerry Blevins entered the game and inherited a base runner and an out. He coughed up a single to Inciarte and then a three-run homer to Garcia. The Mets nearly came all the way back in the eighth and threatened in the ninth, but Bruce was the focus.
