NEWARK — The jury of seven women and five men that will decide whether a political scandal involving the closing of approach lanes at the George Washington Bridge rose to the level of a federal crime includes a certified paralegal who lives in the same town as Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey and says she does not like him.
“My grandmother loathes him,” the woman, who writes a blog about cooking and weight loss, said during questioning by Judge Susan D. Wigenton.
While the defense was allowed 14 strikes against potential jurors, it exercised only eight before saying it was satisfied with the panel. Prosecutors used all but one of their nine strikes.
The two days of jury selection in Federal District Court here underscored how much the case is about Mr. Christie, even though he is not charged and has repeatedly tried to disassociate himself from the lane-closing scheme.
Prosecutors say the two defendants on trial — Bill Baroni and Bridget Anne Kelly, both close allies of Mr. Christie, a Republican — used the governor’s office and the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which runs the bridge, as arms of Mr. Christie’s re-election campaign, to reward mayors who endorsed him and punish those who did not.
Lawyers for Ms. Kelly, once a deputy chief of staff and loyal soldier and friend to Mr. Christie, will try to separate her from him, and to persuade the jury that it was improbable that she had the power or the inclination to carry out any kind of political retribution, or to engage the Port Authority’s vast resources to cover it up. The real scheming, they have argued, happened above her head.
Mr. Baroni, who was Mr. Christie’s top staff appointee at the Port Authority, is trying to separate himself not only from Mr. Christie but also from David Wildstein, a former friend whom Mr. Baroni hired to be a kind of enforcer at the agency. Mr. Wildstein, who had previously written a gossipy anonymous political blog in New Jersey, received Ms. Kelly’s email — “Got it,” he replied — and has pleaded guilty in the lane-closings case in exchange for his cooperation.
Lawyers for both defendants have said their clients will testify. “We are looking forward to clearing Bill’s name,” said Michael Baldassare, a lawyer for Mr. Baroni.
The judge did not release a copy of the questionnaire potential jurors had to complete. It had 85 questions, and lawyers said it borrowed heavily from those used in the political corruption trials of Bob McDonnell, the former Virginia governor, and William J. Jefferson, a former congressman from Louisiana.
The questionnaire included a list of about 250 names of people expected to either be mentioned or to testify at the trial. Lawyers for Mr. Baroni eliminated a potential juror who said she was a family friend of one person on the list: William Palatucci, one of Mr. Christie’s closest political advisers.
The judge has said she expects the trial to last six weeks. Opening statements are scheduled for Monday.