SPRINGFIELD, Mass. — When Shaquille O’Neal was 10, his father made a prediction. Friday night when his son became a Hall of Famer, it was realized.
O’Neal and Allen Iverson headlined the 10-member Class of 2016 enshrined into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame. It also featured the international star Yao Ming, the W.N.B.A. standout Sheryl Swoopes, Coach Tom Izzo and Jerry Reinsdorf, an architect of the Michael Jordan-led Chicago Bulls championship teams of the 1990s.
“If I know my father, he’s up there arguing with Wilt that his son is the best big man in the game,” O’Neal said, referring to Wilt Chamberlain.
Posthumous honorees were the N.B.A. referee Darell Garretson; John McLendon, the first African-American coach in a professional league; Zelmo Beaty, the former N.B.A. and A.B.A. star; and Cumberland Posey, an African-American star of a century ago who is also a member of the Baseball Hall of Fame.
Iverson, wearing black, blew kisses as tears began to form in his eyes.
Fighting tears throughout, Iverson thanked his former Georgetown coach, John Thompson, “for saving my life.” He also thanked his Philadelphia 76ers coach Larry Brown for constructive criticism that helped him become an M.V.P.
The 7-foot-6 Yao’s arrival from China to the NBA in 2002 instantly helped bring the game to a broader international audience.
He was Friday’s first inductee, an honor which he joked that should have gone to Iverson. “You know why? Because I need more practice than him,” Yao said to applause from the crowd and a laugh from Iverson.
Yao also thanked his early mentors in China; former N.B.A. Commissioner David Stern for his vision in wanting Yao to play in the league; and his first teammates on the Houston Rockets. He also singled out his N.B.A. coaches, including Rudy Tomjanovich and Jeff Van Gundy.
Izzo has become the face of the blue-collar Michigan State team while leading it to seven Final Fours and the N.C.A.A. championship in 2000.
He thanked his parents, Carl and Dorothy, for being his first mentors. The 90-year-old Dorothy was in attendance, but Carl died last September.
Izzo briefly got choked up as he spoke of his father, who he said instilled in him a work ethic that remains with him today. “The seven Final Fours and championship are just frosting on the cake,” Izzo said.
Like his father, O’Neal had a wish. “One day when some father quizzes his sons on the greats of the game, I hope Shaquille O’Neal will be the answer,” he said.