But the elder Laing hasn’t been forgotten: Five years after his death from cancer, a retrospective dedicated to the British-born artist opens this week at the Fine Art Society in London. Many of the works on show are part of the Laing family’s private collection at Kinkell Castle, now Ogilvie-Laing’s home.
Laing’s first success, in the early ’60s, came with paintings derived from newspaper images of starlets of the day, such as Brigitte Bardot and Anna Karina, and more political works that responded nimbly to events of the time. He first worked in New York in 1963, traveling over while still a student at London’s St Martin’s College with letters of introduction to Andy Warhol, Roy Lichtenstein, Jim Rosenquist and Robert Indiana. He worked for a while as Indiana’s studio assistant before returning to London to complete his studies.
And so, in the summer of 1968, Laing and his wife, Galina, set out on a quest, crisscrossing through rural Scotland in search of a medieval castle suitable for restoration. They found Kinkell, which stands on an eight-mile-wide spit of land known as the Black Isle and was built in 1594 (according to the date chipped into the mantelpiece of its great hall). A fortified defensive tower, it had neither a roof nor floors when Laing and Galina undertook the renovation. On completion, Laing’s reputation ensured considerable interest in the project, and their new home was lovingly documented in the Sunday magazines of the day. Inside, the building was brightly decorated with contemporary tapestries made by a local weaving studio established by Laing in 1970.
The Scottish landscape also inspired Laing to experiment with sculpture of a rougher finish and larger scale than his New York works — notably the vast “Pyramid Folly” (1972), which still dominates the site, albeit through a veil of ivy. Present throughout the garden and house are the graceful and often distinctly erotic bronze figures known as the “Galina” series (1973–80), dedicated to the artist’s wife.
Laing returned to painting and engagement with current affairs in his later work, creating first a series in response to the war in Iraq and then to the singer Amy Winehouse. “He had exhausted himself with the Iraq War paintings, so wanted to look at something a bit more frivolous, maybe,” explains Ogilvie-Laing, who today has the six-foot-high Winehouse painting “The Kiss II” (2008) on display in the family sitting room alongside other later works by his father.
