RIYADH, Saudi Arabia — As wave and after wave of bombs fell on areas of eastern Aleppo in Syria, ground forces loyal to the Syrian government seized a rebel-held neighborhood on Saturday, intensifying the siege against the rebels and the many civilians who live among them.
The advance was the first sign that an intensive bombing campaign by Syrian and Russian jets that began Thursday night was working to bolster the position of the Syrian government’s forces.
Since a cease-fire brokered by the United States and Russia collapsed this past week, the Syrian government has made no secret of its intention to use military force to crush its enemies.
At the United Nations on Saturday, Syria’s foreign minister, Walid al-Moallem, said the army was “making great strides in its war against terrorism,” thanks to support from Russia, Iran and fighters from Lebanon’s Hezbollah group.
Throughout the five-year conflict, which has killed hundreds of thousands of people and displaced half the population, Syrian officials have dismissed the rebels as foreign-backed “terrorists” seeking to destroy the country.
The United States has blamed President Bashar al-Assad for most of his citizens’ deaths, but has not launched a direct military intervention against him. Nor has the United States found a diplomatic means to end the violence or ensure aid reaches besieged civilians.
The recent bombing campaign has exacerbated the humanitarian situation in rebel-held areas of eastern Aleppo, which have been surrounded by government troops and cut off from aid.
On Saturday, large bombs left craters in roads, destroyed buildings and buried residents in rubble. More than 45 people were killed in the city and at least seven others in the countryside, according to conflict monitors and rescue squads.
Medics said hospital space and supplies were running low, while antigovernment activists shared videos of wounded men in bloodstained bandages sprawled on crowded clinic floors.
The bombing helped government forces, and the militias that fight alongside them, to seize the Handarat camp for Palestinian refugees, which the rebels had controlled. Controlling the camp, on the city’s north side, strengthened the government’s position near what had been the rebels’ main supply road before the army seized it.