Megan Price is executive director of the Human Rights Data Analysis Group, or Hrdag, a nonprofit, nonpartisan organization that collects and analyzes data to investigate and document human rights violations around the world.
READING I’m in a sci-fi book club, and for that I’m in the middle of “Air” by Geoff Ryman. What happens at the beginning of the book is the international community is launching a version of the internet that taps straight into people’s brains. They do a test that, of course, goes horribly awry. It all plays out in a rural village in Asia where everyone is jockeying for position, and some understand the technology and some don’t.
For nonfiction, I’m also currently reading “Burning Country: Syrians in Revolution and War” by Robin Yassin-Kassab and Leila Al-Shami. It really digs into the various stages and evolutions of the current conflict. One of the main projects Hrdag is investigating right now is the number of people killed in the ongoing conflict in Syria, and I became aware of the book through that work.
LISTENING I listen to a lot of podcasts. For fun, I like “Pop Culture Happy Hour” and “Death, Sex & Money.” For work, I listen to the Joan Garry podcast “Nonprofits Are Messy.” At home I’ll usually put on a Pandora station we named “Jamgrass” — a mix of bluegrass, folk and a bit of country. I’m happiest when it serves up one of my favorite bands, Elephant Revival.
WATCHING I recently finished watching “Parks and Recreation,” and I’m really sad it’s over. It’s so genuine without that underpinning of irony and cynicism that I think is really common these days. Also, when my husband and I were dating, he was horrified I hadn’t seen any of the “Star Trek” series. So he and I are working through all the “Star Treks.” We finished “The Next Generation” and “Deep Space Nine,” and we’re about halfway through “Voyager.” I don’t know that I would have committed to quite this much “Star Trek” without the added marital motivation. But I am enjoying them, especially now that we’re on “Voyager,” which features a female captain.
FOLLOWING I have a pretty full blogroll. Regular reading includes “Get Bullish.” I love the tagline “aggressive lady-advice.” I also follow Andrew Gelman’s blog “Statistical Modeling, Causal Inference, and Social Science” to keep a finger on what other research questions people are working on. Human Rights blogs include Americas South and North, International Justice Monitor and Political Violence @ a Glance.
PLAYING I love board games. Settlers of Catan, Forbidden Island, and 7 Wonders are all pretty common at our house. For card games we really like Star Realms. It’s a great two-player game and the artwork is beautiful. I spend so much of my day sitting in front of a screen that it can be really nice to get together with friends and look at their faces.
SQUEAKING I have a 60-pound rescue pitbull-cattle dog mix, and she loves toys that squeak. A friend recently gave her what may be the perfect toy — Tuffy’s Jr. Squid Toy. The squeaker is somewhat hard to find, so it keeps her busy, and when she does find it, it’s very quiet and delicate, but still makes her tail wag.