Brooklyn Academy of Music - Fishman Space, 321 Ashland Pl.
The “King Lear” evoked in “Songs of Lear” shares so little with Shakespeare’s tragedy that the show’s director, Grzegorz Bral, delivers an explanatory introduction onstage. This is doubly helpful because “Songs of Lear” also shares little with traditional, linear storytelling, and large parts of it are in untranslated Latin and Polish — in other words, it’s hard to tell what’s going on. While you don’t need to know “King Lear” to appreciate the show, it certainly helps.
But then this is an impression of the play, not a staging of it, and much of the material extrapolates on the famous tale.
The hourlong production, from the Wroclaw company Song of the Goat Theater and playing a short run at BAM, is structured as a series of vignettes that Mr. Bral calls “paintings” though they rely entirely on singing, much of it a cappella. The dominant character here turns out to be Cordelia (played by various actors), who drives the most intense paintings. An especially striking one imagines her pain and anger as a child. In another, she warns her father of his impending doom, backed by a violin and a mournful harmonium.
Some of the lyrics are lifted from the play, but the rest will be mystifying to those not versed in Latin or Polish. Yet choral singing, even when incomprehensible, has a way of casting a spell — there is a reason Gregorian chants remain popular and the eerily beautiful “Le Mystère des Voix Bulgares” records were hits in the late 1980s.
Letting the songs carry the show’s emotional burden might have been enough if the music by Jean-Claude Acquaviva — a founding member of the vocal group A Filetta, which has been key in the renaissance of Corsican polyphonic singing — and Maciej Rychly was a little more diverse.
Deviations from the ethereal norm stand out all the more, most notably a powerful war-themed vignette in which the cast members pound on chairs as if they were percussion. Suddenly it’s as if we were watching the Dothraki warriors from “Game of Thrones” field a team in a “Pitch Perfect” movie: viscerally awe inspiring.