U.S.|Donald Trump Keeps Insulting Rosie O’Donnell. Here’s How Their Feud Started.
Donald Trump Keeps Insulting Rosie O’Donnell. Here’s How Their Feud Started.
Hillary Clinton’s accusation during Monday night’s debate that Donald J. Trump had once mocked a teenage Latina beauty queen as “Miss Piggy” and “Miss Housekeeping” unexpectedly led to familiar territory: He rehashed his decade-old feud with the comedian Rosie O’Donnell.
“Somebody who has been very vicious to me, Rosie O’Donnell, I said very tough things to her and I think everybody would agree that she deserves it and nobody feels sorry for her,” Mr. Trump said, after Mrs. Clinton’s accusation that he had mistreated Alicia Machado, a Venezuelan who won the Miss Universe competition in 1996.
Over the years, Mr. Trump has returned again and again to his feud with Ms. O’Donnell — whom he has called “fat” and “a slob” — hurling insults at her on talk shows, Twitter and from the debate stage during the Republican primaries. How did the whole thing start?
As it turns out, with another young beauty queen.
In 2006, 20-year-old Tara Conner won the Miss USA pageant, a franchise of which Mr. Trump was a co-owner, but she soon found herself under fire because of tabloid reports that she was drinking, using drugs and had been seen kissing a woman.
Mr. Trump was not pleased. Ms. Conner faced the prospect of losing her crown until he relented, publicly forgiving her in a televised news conference at Trump Tower. “I’ve always been a believer in second chances,” he said.
That is where Rosie O’Donnell came into the picture. Ms. O’Donnell was then a co-host on “The View,” and she used her seat around the show’s signature table to criticize Mr. Trump (who at the time had been divorced twice after accusations of marital infidelity) as a hypocrite for his showy display of public forgiveness.
Ms. O’Donnell mocked his haircut, tousling her hair to mimic a comb-over, and put on a cartoonish Queens accent. She criticized his many bankruptcies and his record of not paying contractors who had done work for him. She said he was like a snake-oil salesman.
Indeed, for Mr. Trump, it all seems to have been too much.
He threatened to sue. He unleashed a verbal fusillade on “Entertainment Tonight,” calling Ms. O’Donnell “disgusting” and “a slob” with “a fat, ugly face.” He said he wanted to take her to court so he could “take some money out of her fat-ass pockets” and wondered aloud why anyone would choose to be in a romantic relationship with her.
And then there is Twitter, Mr. Trump’s social media platform of choice for personal attacks.  In 2013, a Twitter user asked if his feud with Ms. O’Donnell was over. “No, it will never end, but she has become totally irrelevant!” he replied.
For years, Mr. Trump’s attacks on Ms. O’Donnell were treated by many as a source of humor — just a reality TV host stirring up a spectacle — and he frequently repeated his insults in interviews and online.
In 2014, Ms. O’Donnell told People magazine that his attacks were probably the worst bullying she had experienced. “It was national, and it was sanctioned societally. Whether I deserved it is up to your own interpretation,” she said.
