1. Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump returned to the campaign trail, but their first debate on Monday night dominated headlines. The ratings alone were newsworthy: 84 million viewers, possibly the most for a debate ever.
Mrs. Clinton reveled in largely positive reviews, while Mr. Trump’s main strength was on trade issues. Mr. Trump has raised a host of complaints about the debate, including about his microphone and Lester Holt, the moderator.
An unexpectedly powerful issue: his derision of a Latina beauty queen for gaining weight after winning the 1996 Miss Universe pageant. Above, Mrs. Clinton at a rally in North Carolina.
2. Syrian government troops pushed into the ravaged city of Aleppo, backed by the fifth day of aerial bombardments by allied Syrian and Russian forces.
Rebel forces disputed the government’s claim of a major advance, but the city suffered possibly the most ferocious assaults in five years of civil war.
4. “It’s just a 10-week funding bill,” the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, groused.
He was exasperated after a mix of Democrats and Republicans blocked his effort to advance a temporary spending bill that would head off a government shutdown this weekend. The vote fell 15 votes short of the 60 needed for passage.
The issue: Democrats refuse to pass a bill that includes flood relief for Louisiana unless it also includes help for the lead-contamination crisis bedeviling Flint, Mich.
5. The man who has admitted responsibility for the 2013 Bridgegate scandal in New Jersey directly tied Gov. Chris Christie to the events.
David Wildstein, who worked at the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, said he told Mr. Christie during a Sept. 11 memorial service about organizing the closing of lanes leading to the George Washington Bridge.
The point was to snarl traffic in Fort Lee, N.J., as a punishment for the town’s mayor.
Mr. Christie, he said, laughed.
Or rather, it’s about a glimpse of the person behind the food TV showman: supersmart, politically conservative, divorced, in a midlife crisis.
7. Judges in the Hague sentenced this radical Islamist, Ahmad al-Faqi al-Mahdi, to nine years in prison for his role in demolishing historic Muslim shrines in Timbuktu, Mali.
It was the International Criminal Court’s first prosecution for the destruction of cultural heritage as a war crime.
8. The W.H.O.’s most comprehensive analysis so far of outdoor air quality worldwide revealed that 92 percent of the world’s people breathe unhealthy air.
The report linked about three million deaths a year to outdoor air pollution, mostly from cardiovascular, pulmonary and other disease. The hardest-hit areas are Southeast Asia and the Western Pacific region.
9. The tech billionaire Elon Musk laid out the details of his plan to get people to Mars.
In fact, to colonize Mars.
His plans for his SpaceX company don’t stop there — he spoke of an Interplanetary Transit System capable of ferrying scores of passengers at a time to other planets.
“It’s something we can do in our lifetimes,” he said, in a presentation to the International Astronautical Congress. More than 100,000 people watched the live-stream.
10. A bill awaiting President Obama’s signature gives most Olympic and Paralympic medalists a tax break.
For those who earn less than $1 million a year, the measure designates the value of their medals and their bonuses — $25,000 for every gold, $15,000 for every silver and $10,000 for every bronze — tax-exempt.
The one representative who voted against the bill, Jim Himes, Democrat of Connecticut, said Congress should be dealing with more urgent matters. “We’ve got a Zika crisis, an opium epidemic and gun violence in the news every day,” he said.
The character was not just an outsider and a principal in the Kirk-Spock bromance; he was also a rare multiracial role model on American television.
