ATTERIGEVILLE, South Africa — On a sunny winter day in May 2015 in this run-down suburb, a 45-minute drive from the shiny office buildings and shopping centers of central Johannesburg, 30 tables were symmetrically arrayed in a large, shabby hall. At each one sat two tense-looking children, a chessboard between them, with spectators clustered in stands on either side of the hall. The actress Lupita Nyong’o, dressed in a bright yellow robe, clutched a small child at her side, as the director Mira Nair yelled directions at officials walking up and down the aisles.
It was Day 32 of a 54-day shoot in South Africa and Uganda for Disney’s “Queen of Katwe,” opening on Sept. 23. Set in Uganda, the film has two big stars — Ms. Nyong’o and David Oyelowo. But Madina Nalwanga, who plays the young heroine, and much of the cast were nonactors from Katwe, a sprawling slum in Kampala where the story — of Phiona Mutesi, a street child whose life was irrevocably changed when she learned to play chess — is set.
Ms. Nair, the Indian-born director of “Salaam Bombay!” and “Monsoon Wedding,” reflected on what is a landmark film for the studio — a movie set in Africa about Africans, featuring only black actors.
“It’s bizarre to think that a modern tale of Africa without animals hasn’t really been made before,” Ms. Nair said over lunch in her trailer.
“Queen of Katwe” is based on a true story, first spotted in a church magazine and picked up by ESPN, which was then in talks with Disney about potential coproductions. Tendo Nagenda, a executive at Disney whose father is Ugandan, was immediately interested and approached Ms. Nair, who is married to a Ugandan academic and lives for part of the year in Kampala, where she runs a film school, Maisha.
Ms. Nyong’o, who shot to fame when she won an Oscar in 2014 for her role in Steve McQueen’s “12 Years a Slave,” was Ms. Nair’s first thought for the role of Harriet. She started her film career with an internship at Ms. Nair’s production company in New York, later working in an administrative position at Maisha. “I learned I’d rather be a participant when I acted in one of the films the students made,” Ms. Nyong’o said over breakfast at her hotel.
