Leslie H. Martinson, a ubiquitous director whose long list of credits is a veritable capsule history of prime-time television through the postwar decades and beyond, died on Saturday at his home in Beverly Hills, Calif. He was 101.
His death was confirmed by his son-in-law, Doug Carner.
Mr. Martinson directed a smattering of feature films, many of them long forgotten. Probably the best known is “PT 109” (1963), about the wartime exploits of John F. Kennedy, played by Cliff Robertson. But from the early 1950s through the 1980s, television was his primary medium.
TV studios recognized his ability to complete in days what other directors would take weeks to accomplish and kept him steadily employed, in both dramas and comedies.
He was in his 80s when he retired.
Leslie Herbert Martinson was born in Boston on Jan. 16, 1915, to Lewis Martinson and the former Gertrude Cohen. He studied advertising at Boston University before becoming a reporter for The Boston Evening Transcript.
Mr. Martinson, in an undated photograph.
While on a writing assignment in Los Angeles, he decided to remain on the West Coast and jump into an entirely different career.
“I looked at the walls of MGM, and said that’s where I want to go,” Mr. Martinson recounted in a television interview in the 1980s. MGM, one of Hollywood’s most powerful studios at the time, hired him in 1936 to work in its production office as a script clerk. He later became a script supervisor.
With the outbreak of World War II, he was drafted into the Army and served in the Pacific, at Guadalcanal and Fiji.
Mr. Martinson’s first credit as a director was for the TV series “City Detective” in 1953. His subsequent work on westerns in the 1950s and ’60s was acknowledged in 2006 when he was presented with a Golden Boot Award by the Motion Picture and Television Fund.
Mr. Martinson’s feature film directorial debut was “The Atomic Kid,” a fanciful 1954 comedy (with a story by a young Blake Edwards) starring Mickey Rooney as a uranium prospector who becomes radioactive when bomb tests go off in the desert. He then helps the F.B.I. break up a spy ring.
Mr. Martinson was later hired by 20th Century Fox to direct “Batman: The Movie” (1966), a theatrical feature version of the widely popular TV show starring Adam West, which the studio wanted made quickly to cash in on the show’s popularity.
Another of his notable projects was the 1978 thriller “Missile X: The Neutron Bomb Incident,” starring Peter Graves. (It was retitled “Teheran Incident” when released on DVD.) An international co-production, it was one of the last films shot in Iran by Western producers before the revolution there in 1979.
Mr. Martinson also directed Rosalind Russell in her final film, “Mrs. Pollifax: Spy,” released in 1971, and Ronald Reagan in one of his last acting roles, in a 1964 episode of “Kraft Suspense Theater” titled “A Cruel and Unusual Night.” Two years later, Reagan ran successfully for governor of California.
Mr. Martinson was president emeritus of the board of the West Coast Jewish Theater in Los Angeles, where he had been president for eight years.
He is survived by his wife of 60 years, the former Constance Frye, the host of the syndicated television show “Connie Martinson Talks Books”; a daughter, Julianna Carner; and a grandson.