Europe|Italian Grows Forgotten Fruit. What She Preserves Is a Culture.
Italian Grows Forgotten Fruit. What She Preserves Is a Culture.
SAN LORENZO DI LERCHI, Italy — There are probably few places as tranquil as the languorous hills that surround Umbria’s Città di Castello. But on her farm, Isabella Dalla Ragione pursues a personal mission — saving ancient fruit trees from extinction — with a strong sense of urgency.
In that race, she picked up the baton at a young age from her father, Livio Dalla Ragione, who began scouring the surrounding countryside decades ago, searching for neglected fruit trees that no longer satisfied changing agricultural trends, market demands and modern tastes.
He collected branches with fresh buds and grafted them onto rootstock to create an orchard of endangered cherries, figs, apples, pears, peaches, quinces and other sundry species in a farmyard belonging to an abandoned church that he had bought in 1960.
Ms. Dalla Ragione, 59, began tagging along as a child, studied agronomy at a university to bring technical knowledge to their enterprise and, after her father died in 2007, continued to maintain the orchard.
“When he started, people didn’t speak of biodiversity or genetic erosion,” Ms. Dalla Ragione said, even though the loss of varieties was already a documented fact.
Fruit farming treatises at the beginning of the 19th century noted about 100 varieties of apples. One hundred years later, the number had declined to around 50, and today, three varieties make up 80 percent of production in Italy, she said.
Ms. Dalla Ragione’s initiative to preserve dwindling varieties is not unique in Italy, but San Lorenzo and its surroundings have provided an especially vital trove of diversity.
The Upper Tiber Valley was for centuries a crossroads of travelers and pilgrims, “a place of arrivals and departures and exchanges, and like all areas of passage, the biodiversity is extraordinary,” Ms. Dalla Ragione said.
To find and collect their forgotten varieties, for decades she and her father chatted up farmers and motley locals in the Umbrian and Tuscan countryside. They gathered branches, and with them the traditions and chronicles tied to the fruits.
Every plant conserved at San Lorenzo has a history — deeply rooted links to the territory and to its long-gone inhabitants — that Ms. Dalla Ragione is laboring to pass on.
“These plants are significant because they are saturated with culture and history,” she said, “and you have to tell that story, because otherwise you don’t understand their importance” — why they were selected by farmers, why they continued to be cultivated.
In her hunt for forgotten fruit, Ms. Dalla Ragione also began combing estate archives, convent records and ancient books.
But because fruit was not always described in detail in written records, she also began to examine the works of Renaissance and Baroque painters working in Umbria and Tuscany at a time when “artists had close relations to agriculture” and were sensitive to the seasons and local varieties, she said.
Ms. Dalla Ragione spent four years studying the work of Cristofano Gherardi, also known as il Doceno, who painted palace frescoes for two families in Città di Castello and nearby San Giustino. She recognized several varieties from his decorations in her collection, effectively dating them.
She also came across some bloopers. “Art historians, alas, don’t ask agronomists, and they’ve made some terrible blunders,” she said.
Sitting at her kitchen table — in a picturesque farmhouse, dating to the 12th century, that brings classical fairy tales to mind — Ms. Dalla Ragione picked up a rather bruised, longish yellow fruit very much resembling a pear.
“In reality, it’s a muso di bue apple,” named after its similarity to an ox’s snout, she said.
The once popular and widely cultivated apple, which lingers on in only a few family homesteads, has tricked legions of scholars. A closer look at Albrecht Dürer’s “Virgin and Child With Pear,” at the Uffizi Gallery in Florence, for example, reveals a clear misnomer, Ms. Dalla Ragione said.
She added that “there are many other clamorous cases” of misidentification but asked with a laugh, “Who is a little country agronomist” to go up against art-history scholarship?
Ms. Dalla Ragione has several muso di bue apple trees in her eight-hectare farm (about 20 acres), along with 40-odd other apple varieties. There are about a dozen cherry varieties and nearly 30 different pear trees among about 500 trees in all, which she lovingly tends.
It is backbreaking work, which she does mostly alone, hauling water from a cistern in the valley below, pruning trees, grafting new plants even as she tries to keep deer, boars, squirrels and birds at bay.
“Scarecrows do nothing,” she said wryly.
Ms. Dalla Ragione created a nonprofit foundation, the Arboreal Archaeology Foundation, in 2014 “because it made it easier to give a future to all this,” she said. Through the foundation, whose main proviso is to preserve the collection, she hopes to gain access to funding from the European Union and other sponsors.
Local governments and other public financiers have all but ignored her, she said.
“We think it’s important to have public involvement because this is a public memory, not a private one,” she said, but public funds have dried up amid Italy’s long economic drought.
To support the foundation, Ms. Dalla Ragione sells small trees from a nursery on her farm, and donors can adopt trees. One Australian fan recently visited the farm and asked to adopt the culo d’asino apple, so named because it resembles a donkey’s backside.
In the meantime, she continues to chronicle her finds for posterity, as best as she can.
