NEWARK — Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey was told about the George Washington Bridge lane closings — and that they were done to punish a mayor who had declined to endorse him for re-election — during a Sept. 11 memorial service two days after they began, a former ally who orchestrated the scheme testified in federal court here on Tuesday.
Mr. Christie, the witness recalled, laughed at the news.
The closings of the access lanes in September 2013 continued for two more days, creating a catastrophic traffic jam that created gridlock for emergency vehicles, school buses and commuters in Fort Lee, N.J.
But Mr. Christie made no effort to reopen the lanes and end the gridlock.
The former ally, David Wildstein, who has pleaded guilty to being the culprit behind the lane closings, testified as prosecutors showed a series of photographs of him, Mr. Christie and Bill Baroni, then the governor’s top staff appointee at the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which runs the bridge, at a service in Lower Manhattan on the 12th anniversary of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.
The photos showed the three men in a loose huddle outside the governor’s official vehicle on a dirt roadway between the Sept. 11 memorial and the World Trade Center construction site.
Mr. Christie, who has previously said he did not recall the conversation, appears engaged and animated, looking directly into Mr. Baroni’s eyes, raising his eyebrows and laughing in some of the frames and reaching out to touch the other men’s arms.
“We were all very relaxed,” Mr. Wildstein testified.
“Were you and Mr. Baroni bragging?” asked Lee Cortes, an assistant United States attorney.
Mr. Wildstein’s testimony narrating the set of photographs was the first detailed accounting of how the governor learned about the closings — which would ultimately become a scandal damaging his presidential ambitions.
Mr. Christie is not charged in the case. Prosecutors have declined to explain their decisions on whom to charge, but the United States attorney for New Jersey, Paul J. Fishman, has said that simply knowing is not a federal crime. He noted that when Ms. Kelly and Mr. Baroni were charged that there were unindicted co-conspirators, but said his office had brought only charges it believed it could prove beyond a reasonable doubt.
Mr. Baroni began, Mr. Wildstein testified on Tuesday, by telling Mr. Christie in a sardonic tone that there was a “tremendous amount of traffic” in Fort Lee and told Mr. Christie, a Republican, he would be “very pleased to know” that the mayor, a Democrat, was “very frustrated,” Mr. Wildstein testified.
Mr. Wildstein testified that Mr. Christie had not known about the lane closings before they happened. But the governor did know that the mayor, Mark Sokolich, had fallen out of favor with the Christie team for refusing to endorse him despite nearly three years of wooing with gifts and favors from the administration.
And Mr. Christie did not signal disapproval.
“From this conversation, were you concerned about continuing the lane reduction?” the prosecutor, Mr. Cortes asked.
Events in the scandal that has settled around Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey regarding the motives behind the shutdown of some traffic lanes to the George Washington Bridge.
“No, not at all,” Mr. Wildstein said.
Beginning with a marathon news conference in January 2014 after the lane closing scheme had become public, Mr. Christie has insisted that he had nothing to do with planning or executing the shutdown of two of the three access lanes from Fort Lee to the bridge, the world’s busiest.
At an event in Trenton on Tuesday, he denied Mr. Wildstein’s allegations that he knew about the closings as they were happening.
But here, where Mr. Baroni and Bridget Anne Kelly, a former deputy chief of staff to Mr. Christie, are on trial in United States District Court on charges including fraud and conspiracy, prosecutors and defense lawyers alike have said Mr. Christie understood what was going on while the lanes were closed.
Mr. Wildstein also named other members of Mr. Christie’s inner circle who he said had known well before it became public that the lane closings had been intended as retaliation against the mayor.
Among them was a confidant of the governor’s, David Samson, then the chairman of the Port Authority. He came later to the conversation at the Sept. 11 memorial, according to the testimony and photographs presented in court.
As he did, Mr. Samson told Mr. Christie that another Democratic mayor, Steven Fulop of Jersey City, was pressing him to meet to discuss Port Authority business, Mr. Wildstein recalled.
But the Christie administration was mad at Mayor Fulop as well, for not endorsing the governor. The governor, Mr. Wildstein said, had previously ordered his administration to cancel a day’s worth of meetings intended to help introduce the mayor to administration officials who could help him.
Two days later, Mr. Wildstein testified, Mr. Samson reassured Mr. Baroni that he would help “retaliate” against a New York official who had ordered the lanes reopened.
Two months later, when Mr. Christie had won re-election but reporters were continuing to pose questions about the lane closings, Mr. Wildstein met with Michael DuHaime, the governor’s political strategist.
Mr. Wildstein testified that he told Mr. DuHaime that he had directed the scheme, and that Mr. Baroni was involved, along with Ms. Kelly and Bill Stepien, the governor’s campaign manager. He also told Mr. DuHaime that he had told Mr. Christie about it on Sept. 11. “I told him that we had discussed it with Governor Christie and that Governor Christie seemed to be enjoying it,” Mr. Wildstein testified.
“Mr. DuHaime was upset with me,” he added. “He thought this had been a very bad idea.” He recalled Mr. DuHaime’s saying, “I wish you had spoken with me; I would have told you not to do it.” Mr. Wildstein said he told Mr. DuHaime that he was willing to resign “so the story might go away” and others would not get in trouble.
