An estimated 72,315 American health care providers and suppliers — from hospitals and nursing homes to dialysis facilities and care homes for those with intellectual disabilities — will have a little over a year to meet federal disaster preparedness requirements completed this week by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
The new rule is aimed at preventing the severe breakdown in patient care that followed disasters including Hurricane Katrina and Hurricane Sandy, while also strengthening the ability to provide services during other types of emergencies, such as pandemics and terrorist attacks. The rule is unusual in that it has provisions for 17 different provider types, among them those that patients rely on to live at home, like outpatient surgery sites, physical therapy offices and home health agencies.
While the vast majority of organizations have had to adhere to at least some emergency preparedness requirements for accreditation, others were not subject to any, including hundreds of residential psychiatric facilities, nearly 200 community mental health centers, dozens of organ procurement organizations and nearly 4,000 outpatient hospices, which treat patients with limited life expectancies.
“It’s going to have a big impact on these facilities,” said Emily Lord, the executive director of Healthcare Ready, a nonprofit focused on preparedness that provided feedback to the government on the implications of the rule.
According to the government, the cost of putting the rule into effect will be just over $279 million. Others believe it will be more. “They didn’t account for any time to get up to speed,” Ms. Lord said.
The final requirements acknowledged those concerns, but argued that preparedness investments would overall be beneficial. “Planning for the protection and care of patients, clients, residents, and staff during an emergency or a disaster is a good business practice,” the rule said.
The original proposal for the requirements, released in December 2013, drew nearly 400 responses during a formal comment period, primarily from health care providers and industry groups. While they generally supported the goals of the rule, they attacked certain requirements as costly and unnecessary. At least some of those provisions were significantly modified in the final version.
Chief among them was a proposal that hospitals and nursing homes test their backup power systems for a minimum of four hours every year at the full load needed in an emergency, rather than the current standard of once every three years. Generators have failed catastrophically in hospitals and nursing homes around the country during prolonged power outages, endangering patients and leading to chaotic evacuations.
However, the government removed the enhanced testing proposal, stating that there was not enough evidence it “would ensure that generators would withstand all disasters.” That change was welcomed by health care industry groups, including the American Hospital Association.
Instead, institutions will need to meet National Fire Protection Association standards for testing generator equipment and will still need to plan for what to do when power is lost.
