Often these days it can be hard to distinguish between a film festival and a fashion week: Both are rife with models, gowns, celebrities, brands and posing.
But even by that measure, the world premiere of a documentary at the Venice Film Festival on Friday night is going to stand out, largely because of whom it brings out: the fashion A-list, including the designers Valentino and Azzedine Alaïa; the model Naomi Campbell; the photographer Paolo Roversi; Jonathan Newhouse, the chairman of Condé Nast International; and Franca Sozzani, the editor of Italian Vogue.
But all the fashion folk that are in attendance may be a little surprised by what they see, not to mention anyone else who hasn’t thought much about the everyday demands of life behind the glossy curtain. Though it may seem like yet another entrant into the established genre known as fashion documentary (a category introduced in 1995 with “Unzipped”), “Franca” was made by Ms. Sozzani’s son and only child, the photographer and director Francesco Carrozzini.
It is as much about their relationship and the everyday costs of being a working parent as it is a hagiography to Ms. Sozzani’s indisputable influence and power. In an industry devoted to beautiful illusions, where in 2005 Phoebe Philo was the first high-profile designer ever to take a maternity leave, it is a topic too often ignored.
“When my father died five years ago, I realized I had missed out on knowing him,” Mr. Carrozzini said. His father, a former Club Med and advertising executive, began a relationship with Ms. Sozzani while he was still married, and the two split up when Mr. Carrozzini was about 4. His father was a distant presence in his life thereafter.
You, Mr. Carrozzini said. She was not convinced.
“I’m not the kind of person who really talks about my life in front of everyone,” she said later, via phone.
Not that it was easy for either of them. Mr. Carrozzini dipped in and out of his mother’s life for four years, combining eight-millimeter film of her playing on the beach as a child and walking with her family with thousands of Italian Vogue photographs, including her first cover (a declaration of change with a model in a white shirt), her most controversial shoots (a model on a beach covered in oil after the 2010 BP oil spill), and interviews about her style as an editor and public figure with people like the artist Jeff Koons and the philosopher Bernard-Henri Lévy.
Still, the most intimate moments with Mr. Carrozzini’s mother occur, largely, in a car while she is driving to an event. The professional canvas is so big, and the personal so small, it can make for a weirdly bifurcated film. But that, it turns out, was partly the point. “She’s so busy, the car became our confessional,” Mr. Carrozzini said. It’s in the car that he asks his mother about failure and relationships, and it is where their fights take place.
“Oh, the fights,” Ms. Sozzani said, laughing.
Something she hated, for example, and made him cut: a video of her as a child doing the twist on a balcony. Things she didn’t mind as much: questions about relationships.
According to Lapo Elkann, the industrialist, founder of Italia Independent and a longtime friend of Mr. Carrozzini’s, “They were a very atypical Italian family,” which is probably putting it mildly. As a boy, Mr. Carrozzini said, he was one of only about three classmates with working mothers, and of those three, his mother had the fullest schedule.
Some other facts revealed in the film: When her son was born, Ms. Sozzani could not tell her friends the name of the father. (He was still married at the time.) Not only that, but her son discovered the initial subterfuge on film. She has a degree in literature and philosophy and was not particularly interested in fashion.
But after getting married young and having the wedding annulled after three months, she wanted to prove to her parents that she could succeed on her own, so her sister Carla got her a job at Vogue Bambini. At the time, she didn’t even like children.
Also, when she finally landed the job atop Italian Vogue in 1988, Jonathan Newhouse considered firing her, because the radical changes she made to the magazine were sending shock waves through the advertising community.
She does not think she failed at anything, except maybe her personal life. She compares moving on from relationships to turning the pages of a magazine, and when it comes to magazines, “The day after it comes out, it’s already old,” she says in the film.
She would take him with her when she could. He remembers being 8 or 10 and seeing Naomi Campbell and Stephanie Seymour running out of Azzedine Alaïa’s kitchen to go to Les Bains Douches, and going on holiday with Giorgio Armani on Pantelleria, an island near Sicily. But there wasn’t a lot of space for anything else in her life.
Mr. Elkann, the grandson of Gianni Agnelli of Fiat, said he and Mr. Carrozzini share the anxiety of trying to succeed in the shadow of famous family members. Indeed, Mr. Carrozzini moved to New York at 20 in part to get away from that. And he has anticipated the film’s possible blowback.
“Nepotism is a motivational thing in my life,” he said. “Some things hurt.” But, he pointed out, when Beyoncé asks you to do a private portrait session when she is pregnant, you have to assume you’re doing O.K. on your own. So while he knows there may be whispers, making the film “was a moment of emancipation,” he said.
Specifically, he wants to move away from still photography and into feature films, and he is in the middle of moving to Los Angeles.
Right after Venice, he will be in New York to unveil “The House of Peroni,” a curated exhibition for which he signed on as creative director and programmer for the Italian brewer. It will be open to the public from Sept. 8 to 10 in the old Patricia Field store on the Bowery, which has been reimagined as the Villa Malaparte in Capri, and will feature work by artists like Vanessa Beecroft and talks from figures like the costume designer Catherine Martin.
Whatever judgments may come, making the film has changed both Ms. Sozzani’s relationship to her son — “making me see him as a grown-up and not just my child” — and the way Mr. Carrozzini thinks about his own choices.
