IT’S back-to-school time, when students are selecting backpacks, moving into dorms and, apparently, fielding scary calls about fictional taxes.
But there is no such tax. And it’s not the I.R.S. calling.
Callers impersonating I.R.S. agents often demand that money be wired immediately or sent in another form, and may become aggressive and threaten to sue or to report the student to the police to be arrested.
“As students and parents enter the new school year, they should remain alert to bogus calls, including those demanding fake tax payments from students,” the I.R.S. commissioner, John Koskinen, said in a prepared statement.
The “student tax” calls are the latest iteration of fake calls from I.R.S. impersonators, who try to trick people into sending them money. The I.R.S. says that nearly 8,000 people have lost more than $44.5 million to such scams since October 2013.
Like legitimate marketers, the fraudulent callers try to adapt their message to fit the season. “They try to do it in a timely way,” said Edgar Dworsky, founder of the website Consumer World.
The calls can be unnerving because they often use “spoofing” technology so the phone number on the caller identification screen appears to be coming from the I.R.S.
The legal use of robocalls for purposes like marketing or debt collection may contribute to confusion when people get the fake calls, said Suzanne Martindale, a lawyer with Consumers Union. Struggling student loan borrowers, in particular, she said, may have had a bad experience with a bill collector and be unnerved by a call about a purported student tax.
The I.R.S. says that most tax scam calls used to come from live callers, but that they are increasingly made using robocalling technology. Recipients get an urgent voice mail message, telling them to call a phone number to “settle” their tax bill. Often, the message says the call is the “last warning” before legal action. When the victims call back, they may be threatened with arrest, deportation or the revocation of their driver’s licenses.
How can I tell if a tax call is legitimate?
Consumers should be wary of any unexpected call supposedly from the I.R.S., the Federal Trade Commission warns, because the agency generally initiates contact with taxpayers by United States mail.
The I.R.S. says it will “never” call to demand immediate payment by a specific method, like wire transfer, and it won’t ask for credit or debit card numbers over the phone. In a spate of calls over the summer, the agency said, impostor agents demanded payment via iTunes gift cards. Any request to pay a tax bill using a gift card is a “clear indication” of a scam, the I.R.S. said.
An I.R.S. spokesman, Matt Leas, says that if consumers have any doubt about whether a call is legitimate, they can hang up and call the main I.R.S. telephone number.
Don’t give out any information, and hang up immediately, the I.R.S. advises.
Then, contact the Treasury inspector general for tax administration to report the call.
You should also report it to the F.T.C.
If you get a voice mail message, don’t call back, the F.T.C. advises. The agency on Thursday posted on its website a consumer warning about fraudulent tax calls that included a recording of one such message.
What if I think I might really owe taxes?
You can contact the I.R.S. directly at |||PHONE_NUMBER||| .