STONY BROOK, N.Y. — As school started at Stony Brook University this month, two freshmen, Juan Adames and John Taveras, set out to buy textbooks.
They had not heard yet that the bookstore was a books store no more.
This summer, Stony Brook, part of the State University of New York, announced a partnership with the online retailer Amazon, now the university’s official book retailer. Students can purchase texts through a Stony Brook-specific Amazon page and have them delivered to campus.
In the campus store where the textbooks used to be, there are now adult coloring books, racks of university-branded polos and windbreakers and three narrow bookshelves displaying assorted novels. The rest of the store is a vibrant collage of spirit wear and school supplies: backpacks and baseball caps; pompom hats and striped scarves; notebooks and correction fluid. There will soon be a Starbucks.
“I was a bit thrown off by the appearance,” Mr. Adames said.
It is a conversation occurring on campuses across the country: If more and more students are buying and renting their course books online, why do they need a bookstore?
The Queens College bookstore went digital in April, forgoing brick-and-mortar altogether, Adam L. Rockman, the vice president of student affairs, said. Students order their books online, then have them shipped to personal addresses or to campus, where they are held until students pick them up.
The shift at Stony Brook is an attempt to provide more affordable options to students, according to Peter Baigent, the university’s vice president for student affairs. Amazon is “more of a marketplace,” where students can comparison shop, he said, as opposed to a conventional, fixed-price store. Eventually, students will be able to order texts for delivery to an Amazon area, which is still under construction, and pick them up from storage lockers.
Ripley MacDonald, director of Amazon Student Programs, said the company was also the primary course materials provider for Purdue University in West Lafayette, Ind., and the University of Massachusetts, Amherst. Neither campus currently has a brick-and-mortar textbook store, and as at Stony Brook, the former bookstore in Amherst now sells novels and campus merchandise but not textbooks.
Purdue students can still buy textbooks from stores just off campus, including one that calls itself University Bookstore.
Other schools are using Amazon as a supplementary course materials provider, Mr. MacDonald said. Amazon has opened pickup locations at 12 universities since 2015, he said, and will have 17 by the end of this year.
According to an article by Jeffrey R. Young in The Chronicle of Higher Education, schools that team up with Amazon receive approximately two percent of sales from the web retailer.
Robert D. Wynkoop, managing director of Purdue University treasurer’s office, told The Chronicle that the school had made $1 million on the partnership since 2014.
But partnerships with online vendors have potential downsides, Bob Walton, chief executive of the National Association of College Stores, said. Using any remote supplier means students may acquire the wrong books; students on financial aid must figure out how to order books and get reimbursement passes. The buyback system is thrown off.
Kevin Costello, a sophomore studying biomedical engineering at Stony Brook, politely vented his “frustration and confusion” when he learned that employees at the former bookstore could not help when Amazon sent him the wrong course material.
Eventually, students will be able to take their questions to the Amazon pickup area, where the staff will provide customer service.
According to Mr. Walton, textbooks are generally not the focus of college bookstores, anyway. A school on a two-semester system has an approximately eight-week period of textbook activity per year, he estimated.
Admissions tour groups pass through; visiting alumni stop by; faculty and staff members go there for the convenience, Mr. Walton said.
Barnes & Noble College, which operated the Stony Brook store when it sold textbooks, will continue to run it, and is also taking over the other two campus stores, neither of which sell textbooks.
Barnes & Noble College Bookstores dropped “bookstores” from its name several years ago.
However, 98 percent of the stores Barnes & Noble College operates still carry course materials in various formats, Mr. Maloney said.
Though perhaps not only for books: In recent years, Barnes & Noble College has been offering engagement programs to bring students into its bookstores nationwide, like “V.I.P. shopping nights,” for students who want help in the textbook aisles or advice from peers, and “de-stress events,” where students can spend time coloring, or play with puppies.