When Courtney Donaldson arrived at the airport in Buenos Aires for the first time, in January 2012, he was unfamiliar with the language and the customs of Argentina and did not know a soul there.
As he approached an area where family members and drivers greet arriving passengers, he looked for the person who was supposed to pick him up, wondering if he had made a huge mistake.
But as his eyes darted to and fro, he spotted a man in tennis apparel with the distinct rusty fuzz of red clay caked on his socks.
It was exactly what he was looking for.
The red Argentine clay, which accumulates like a badge of honor on the shoes and socks of anyone who plays on it, was the precise reason he was taking his son, Jared Donaldson, to Buenos Aires.
Some Americans go to Argentina to learn the tango, others to study the fine art of winemaking or to immerse themselves in the language.
Jared Donaldson, a 19-year-old from Rhode Island, went to Argentina when he was 15 for the better part of two and a half years to learn tennis on Argentine clay and to study the fine art of topspin.
What Donaldson learned there helped him upset 12th-seeded David Goffin in the first round of the United States Open and then beat 32nd-ranked Viktor Troicki, 7-5, 6-3, 6-3, on Thursday.
Against Troicki, who seemed worn out from his five-set match in the first round, Donaldson took control by forcing him to run and by implementing the point-construction skills he had honed on the South American clay.
The unorthodox idea to take Donaldson to Argentina came mostly from his father, the owner of a construction company in Rhode Island who never played much tennis. But as his son began to show promise and declare his ambition to become a professional tennis player, Courtney Donaldson started to pay close attention.
He saw how his son hit flat lasers close to the net. On the hardcourts in Rhode Island — and throughout much of the United States — he was being rewarded for that power game with quick winners.
But that was not the game Courtney Donaldson was seeing on television, with the pros hitting arcing shots higher over the net with considerable topspin. While watching an exhibition match between Roger Federer and Andre Agassi, Donaldson saw Agassi hit a shot flat and hard for a winner. Donaldson said he heard Federer caution Agassi: Don’t you know the game is about spin now?
Donaldson said he had read a Federer book and remembered a line about training indoors on hard, outdoors on red. If it was good enough for Federer, then it would be fine for his son, too.
He made some inquires in Spain, where red clay is also the favored surface, but did not get any timely responses. By chance, a friend of his knew Pablo Bianchi, a former pro who coached players in Argentina. When Donaldson reached out to him, Bianchi responded to come on down.
Jared could have trained in the United States, but his father felt he needed to work extensively on clay, which can be difficult to find there.
They went out to dinner, tucking into luscious grilled steaks and savory empanadas, and gradually learned enough Spanish to get by. One of Jared’s cultural takeaways was that “in Argentina, it took them two hours to drink a small coffee,” he said.
After a few months, Jared’s mother, Rebecca, would visit, and his father would return to Rhode Island to be with Jared’s sister.
When his father was in Argentina, they went to sporting events, like Boca Juniors soccer games, polo matches and tennis tournaments. When his mother was there, they saw the sights and went to museums, especially the Museum of Latin American Art of Buenos Aires.
He returned to the United States for months at a time in the spring and summer but went back to Argentina for two more stints over the next couple of years, until the style of play finally took hold.
“In Argentina, you are going to have to hit the ball with shape and learn how to play full-court tennis,” said Taylor Dent, a retired player and a coach.
When Donaldson returned to the United States for good, he needed help with his serve and hired Dent and Dent’s father, Phil, a serving expert. No one will ever know for certain if the Argentina experiment made Donaldson a better tennis player, but the family sees it as a great success for other reasons.
