Hillary Clinton undoubtedly had a tough weekend, but how much will it affect the election?
Then on Sunday, Mrs. Clinton staggered in public. Following hours of uncertainty, her campaign disclosed that she had previously been diagnosed with pneumonia, prompting renewed questions about her health and her secretive tendencies.
Both episodes are receiving extensive news media coverage, but past experience shows that what many consider to be gaffes typically have very limited effects on the actual vote. Candidate health issues, however, could be more unpredictable.
To take two recent examples, there is little indication that President Obama’s statement in 2008 that people in small towns were “bitter” about economic decline and “cling to guns or religion” or that Mitt Romney’s 2012 claim that 47 percent of Americans are “dependent upon government” harmed either candidate significantly.
Mr. Trump’s campaign has only provided more evidence that controversial statements have limited effects. Even though he has repeatedly crossed the perceived boundaries of what a national politician can say, he’s still consolidating the Republican base and pulling relatively close to Mrs. Clinton in the polls.
The most likely outcome, of course, is that Democrats and others who are inclined to vote for Mrs. Clinton will stick with her. Survey data and scholarly research show that concerns about the age of older candidates, like Bob Dole and John McCain, were disproportionately concentrated among people from the opposing party and those who intended to vote for the other candidate.
However, a modern precedent does exist for serious concerns about a candidate’s age and health. Ronald Reagan’s meandering closing statement in the first presidential debate during the 1984 campaign was widely perceived to have harmed him; one study estimated that the debate cost him about three percentage points in the polls. But Mr. Reagan made up this ground with a stronger performance during the second debate and went on to win re-election in a landslide over Walter Mondale.
For Mrs. Clinton, then, the goal is to quickly reassure voters, as Mr. Reagan appeared to do back in 1984, that she is in good health. If she does, the long-term consequences of her health episode are likely to be limited (though rumors and conspiracy theories will probably continue to circulate despite her campaign’s promise to release more medical information). But the lack of recent precedent for a more serious illness to a candidate means we cannot be confident about what effect it would have on voters.