William J. Bratton marked his final day as New York City police commissioner on Friday by strolling through a receiving line of hundreds of officers, a joyful smile on his face as he exited Police Headquarters to applause and the wail of bagpipes, which all but drowned out a small number of protesters.
The officers, assembled in their dress uniforms for the Police Department’s traditional send-off, known as a walkout, were joined by a host of other well-wishers, among them Mayor Bill de Blasio.
The event signaled the end of Mr. Bratton’s second stint running the department, and a changing of the guard for the nation’s largest municipal police force. It also was the conclusion of a law enforcement career spanning more than four decades, during which Mr. Bratton also led agencies in Los Angeles and Boston, and became one of the most influential figures in American policing.
Recruited to return to New York after Mr. de Blasio was elected mayor in 2013, Mr. Bratton boasted of continued efforts to drive down crime, as the city became far safer than it was when he first took over the Police Department, in 1994.
But the past few years have also been distinguished by the tensions playing out between minority communities and law enforcement across the country. That turmoil flared up in New York less than a year after Mr. Bratton’s return, when Eric Garner, a black man on Staten Island, died after an officer placed him in a chokehold.
Mr. Bratton, 68, announced last month that he was stepping down as commissioner and that he would join Teneo Holdings, a company advising corporate executives. He will be succeeded as commissioner by James P. O’Neill, who, as chief of department, had been the highest-ranking uniformed member under Mr. Bratton.
In his letter to the mayor, and during a string of valedictory events in recent days, Mr. Bratton noted the recent accomplishments of the Police Department: the new units that have been created to face terrorism, the new technology being deployed, and a new neighborhood policing model intended to foster better relations between officers and residents of some neighborhoods.
On Thursday morning, Mr. Bratton went to his final CompStat meeting, where police commanders from around the city huddle around long tables with thick binders filled with statistics. He recounted how, when he first became commissioner, there were only two statistics the department tracked day to day: robberies and red-light enforcement. Years later, after holding on to his numbers-driven approach, he said police officials had a much stronger command of crime figures.
Mr. Bratton’s departure on Friday was notably different from that after his first stint as commissioner, which came to a rocky ending after 27 months, even as New York experienced what was then the sharpest two-year drop in crime in its history. But that victory stood at the heart of a rivalry between Mr. Bratton and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, as they jostled over credit for the decline.
His first run as commissioner was defined by a push for aggressive policing, particularly for small crimes, in keeping with the “broken windows” philosophy. He said in his early days as a commissioner then that he wanted to “take back the city block by block.” His forceful style trickled down through the department’s ranks; the approach drove down crime, but critics said it also inflamed tensions between the police and residents who felt they had been targeted and marginalized by officers.
His return as commissioner had centered on adjusting his approach to a different New York and a different era in policing. He addressed the divide between African-Americans and the police in conciliatory terms, saying it was critical to find common ground.
As Mr. Bratton leaves, some officials have praised him as a driving force in lowering crime and modernizing the Police Department.
When it began, the walkout tradition at 1 Police Plaza was a relatively informal event, with officers merely gathering to salute and applaud a retiring official, Lt. Tony Giorgio, the commander of the department’s ceremonial unit, said. It has evolved into an organized affair, in Mr. Bratton’s case one the unit planned for weeks. His included a helicopter flyover, officers on horseback and from canine units, as well as a group in uniform playing Top 40 hits on calypso drums, in the lobby.
Mr. Bratton seemed to savor each step as he walked with his wife, Rikki Klieman, shaking officers and commanders’ hands all along the line. Waiting under the archway of the Manhattan Municipal Building were the mayor, Chief O’Neill, who would be sworn as commissioner later in the day, and a vintage Emergency Services Unit truck from 1930, that would be his farewell ride.
When he reached the end of the line, the departing commissioner embraced Mr. de Blasio and climbed into the back of the truck, waving and smiling as it carried him away.