The first crisis to silence Simon Keenlyside — the British baritone whose refined musicality and edge-of-your-seat theatricality have made him a favorite in both recital halls and opera houses — hit nearly two years ago in the most high-profile of settings.
It was the opening night of a new production of Verdi’s “Rigoletto” at the Vienna State Opera. Mr. Keenlyside was singing the title role in a performance being simulcast in theaters when a vocal cord injury he sustained during rehearsals suddenly flared up — and he had to be replaced mid-opera.
Just when he had recovered a few months later, he underwent thyroid surgery, which kept him offstage for 10 more months. Now Mr. Keenlyside, 57, is finally back in action, and is preparing to sing the title role in Mozart’s “Don Giovanni” at the Metropolitan Opera on Tuesday after canceling his last two Met engagements. In a wide-ranging conversation, he discussed the often-taboo subject of vocal health and recovery, his evolving interpretations of some of his greatest roles and his love of Mozart, lieder and the blues.
Singing opera is a uniquely fragile endeavor. Since the dawn of crooning, pop stars and singers on even small Broadway stages have used microphones, but opera singers still rely on their diaphragms, lungs and throats to fill cavernous theaters — the Met holds 4,000 people — without amplification. Most are reluctant to ever discuss physical setbacks.
He said his vocal cords had healed from that Vienna “Rigoletto” and that he had just sung Verdi’s “Macbeth” in Japan on a tour with the Royal Opera House in September 2015 when his doctors told him that his thyroid needed attention.
“Luckily it was a false alarm, but they had to take some out, and they did a bad job,” he said, explaining that it had taken him 10 months to heal from the procedure.
He has carefully worked his way back — singing recitals, appearing as Fagin this spring and summer in the musical “Oliver!” at Grange Park Opera in England, and now returning to the Met as Don Giovanni, which he once recorded under the baton of Claudio Abbado but has never done in New York.
Mr. Keenlyside said that he did not believe his recent difficulties arose from his decision to begin singing heavier Verdi roles, which was seen as a daring choice for a lyric singer whom Gramophone magazine once described as “the best baritone singer and interpreter of Schubert this country has ever had.” He noted that Verdi had made it clear that he wanted versatile singers who could sing very softly when needed.
His vision of some roles has evolved over time. After breaking six ribs while singing Berg’s “Wozzeck” in Munich after slipping on a stage that had been covered in water, Mr. Keenlyside came to realize that he had been making the title character, an oppressed soldier, too “wacko,” he said, perhaps because he had been inspired by the way the actor Klaus Kinski approached the role in a 1979 film.
Indeed, Mr. Keenlyside said that he had come to realize that too much physicality in general could be merely distracting. He recalled that after one particularly acrobatic Britten performance, he had overheard a member of the chorus saying that he should be reminded that he was playing Billy Budd and not Billy Smart, a famous circus performer.
He sees all of the Mozart operas as ruminations on freedom — he even hears echoes of the tune later used in the “Marseillaise” in some of Papageno’s music — and said that he looked forward to singing “Don Giovanni” in New York, noting the disturbing way its composer makes his antihero title character much more seductive than the more earnest Don Ottavio.
It is a return that Mr. Keenlyside said he worked “very, very hard” to achieve.
