A report by a news agency linked to the Islamic State claimed on Sunday that a “soldier of the Islamic State” was behind a stabbing attack on Saturday night at a Minnesota shopping mall, an episode that the F.B.I. said it was investigating as a “potential act of terrorism.” Nine people were injured in the attack before an off-duty police officer fatally shot the knife-wielding man, the authorities in St. Cloud said.
The terror group’s bulletin went on to say the attack was a response to the group’s call to “target citizens of countries belonging to the crusader coalition,” a term referring to the United States-led coalition carrying out airstrikes against the group. The language of the bulletin — down to the reference to the perpetrator as a soldier of the Islamic State — mirrors claims of responsibility the group issued for numerous attacks in recent weeks.
This summer, a spokesman for the Islamic State, Abu Muhammad al-Adnani, advised his followers overseas to carry out jihad at home. He said that it was no longer necessary to join the group in Iraq and Syria, and that aspiring jihadists should instead use whatever means they had to kill.
“It’s an awful day, honestly,” Chief Anderson said.
Later Sunday, Mr. Kleis identified the off-duty officer as Jason Falconer, a police officer in nearby Avon, Minn. Mr. Kleis said video footage of the shooting, which has not been released publicly, showed Officer Falconer confronting the attacker in a Macy’s store and shooting him as he charged with a knife.
“For me watching it, it looked like a training video for what law enforcement should do,” Mr. Kleis said.
Patrons at a St. Cloud, Minn., mall were forced to stay inside until the police completed a security sweep and checked IDs. Nine people were injured before a knife-wielding man was shot by an off-duty police officer.
The mayor said the wounded included seven men, one woman and a teenage girl, all from the St. Cloud area.
The disruption to a carefree night of shopping in central Minnesota occurred on the same day that 29 people in New York City were injured in an explosion and that an explosive device detonated near the route of a race in New Jersey. The authorities on Sunday night were becoming convinced that the New York and New Jersey episodes were connected, but have given no indication of a link to the stabbing in St. Cloud.
Chief Anderson said officers had searched two local residences on Sunday in connection with the case. He said the police had had at least three prior interactions with the attacker, mostly for minor traffic violations.
Richard Thornton, the special agent in charge for the F.B.I. in Minneapolis, said the agency was treating it as a potential terrorist act but was still investigating.
Chief Anderson said the attack had started around 8 p.m. and played out at different sites within Crossroads Center, including multiple businesses and common areas. Mr. Kleis, who went to Crossroads Center after the attack, said that “there were a lot of people in that mall and clearly a lot of witnesses,” and that police interviews had stretched well into Sunday morning.
Witnesses and local journalists spoke of a busy, crowded and confusing scene after the attack, as well as a swift police mobilization.
“One guy was bleeding from the side of his face,” Sydney Weires, a college student who was inside the mall, told The St. Cloud Times. “He was screaming at us” to get out.
