WASSENAAR, the Netherlands — The Dutch chemical company executive and art collector Joop van Caldenborgh was attending a dinner in London in the 1990s when the American abstract artist Ellsworth Kelly approached him.
“Blue Ripe” (1959), one of Mr. Kelly’s early colorist paintings, is the first work that visitors encounter when they enter the Ellsworth Kelly retrospective at Mr. van Caldenborgh’s new private museum here, Museum Voorlinden, situated on a 100-acre nature preserve in the meadows and on the dunes of the Netherlands’ west coast. The exhibition, “Anthology,” is the first large-scale survey of Kelly’s work since the artist died in December.
That this low-profile Dutch businessman could pull together such a significant representation of Kelly’s work — with loans from the Museum of Modern Art and the Whitney Museum in New York, Tate London, the Pompidou Center in Paris and the artist’s own studio — for his private museum in a far-flung corner of the Netherlands indicates the kind of leverage that Mr. van Caldenborgh, 75, and other major collectors, now have in the art world.
It is an era when collectors around the world are building museums for their own collections: The top examples include François Pinault in Paris, Eli and Edythe Broad in Los Angeles and Budi Tek in China. But the collections vary widely.
In the case of the Voorlinden, it has landed a star director: Wim Pijbes, 54, once general director of the Rijksmuseum, who left the top position at that Dutch national museum this year. Mr. van Caldenborgh did not even court him for the position, Mr. Pijbes said. While a member of the organization’s board, he asked to be considered for the post. He would not disclose his salary, but said it had nothing to do with his decision to make the change.
The museum, which opened on Sunday and occupies nearly 65,000 square feet, is founded on Mr. van Caldenborgh’s significant holdings: several thousand artworks acquired since the 1960s, though he declined to be more specific, saying he “never talks numbers” about the scope of his collection or the value. For many years, he displayed them at home or showcased them in the offices of his chemical company, Caldic, which has its headquarters in Rotterdam and 20 offices worldwide.
According to Quote magazine, which compiles an annual list of the wealthiest people in the Netherlands, Mr. van Caldenborgh, who is now retired, is worth about 400 million euros, or $450 million.
He began working on the plan to build a museum about seven years ago, and took meticulous care to ensure that it was lit with natural light, filtered through a vellum scrim, and that all of the museum’s technology — air conditioning vents, fire alarms, even exit signs — would be hidden to avoid distracting viewers from the art.
In addition to the Kelly retrospective, the Voorlinden is also presenting about 40 other works from Mr. van Caldenborgh’s own collection in “Full Moon,” an exhibition curated by the museum’s artistic director, Suzanne Swarts. Works are assembled with no particular chronology or hierarchy into interesting juxtapositions, often using color as a link.
In one room, the lushly Fauvist landscape “Maannacht IV” (1912), by the Dutch artist Jan Sluijters, is displayed next to a vibrant sculpture of epoxy resin on wood, “The Performance,” by Esther Tielemans, with similar blue, red and mustard hues. In another room, a small installation by the Belgian poet and artist Marcel Broodthaers, “The Curse of Magritte,” hangs on the wall opposite “The Curse,” the original 1960 René Magritte painting that inspired it, of clouds in a blue sky.
The halls toward the back of the museum offer the most jaw-dropping works in the Voorlinden: monumental sculptures permanently positioned in spaces designed just for them. These include a labyrinthine Richard Serra steel sculpture; a room designed by James Turrell with a skylight that remains open in every kind of weather so visitors can watch the changing of the light; and a giddy “Swimming Pool” by Leandro Erlich of Argentina, which creates the illusion that visitors are walking under water.
Aside from what is on display currently at the Voorlinden, Mr. van Caldenborgh also owns a rare trove of books made by artists like Matisse and Picasso; an enormous collection of self-portraits by Man Ray, Henry Moore, Rineke Dijkstra, Bill Viola and others; and enough monumental outdoor sculptures by artists like Sol LeWitt, Jeff Koons and Jean Arp to fill a sculpture park called Clingenbosch, on his 50-acre estate a few minutes’ drive from the Voorlinden.
