More than 5,000 signatures have been posted on a petition started by the dancers of the Staatsballett Berlin to protest the appointment of the contemporary dance choreographer Sasha Waltz as one of the company’s next artistic directors. The announcement that Ms. Waltz and Johannes Öhman, now the director of the Royal Swedish Ballet, would succeed the current director, Nacho Duato, in 2019, was announced last week by Michael Müller, the mayor of Berlin.
The Staatsballett Berlin, formed after the reunification of Germany, consolidated three Berlin ballet companies, has 89 dancers and a strong classical tradition. The 2014 appointment of the Spanish-born Mr. Duato, also a contemporary choreographer, was strongly criticized, and he has had a troubled tenure, with yearlong dancer strikes over pay in 2015 and poor critical reception for his own work. His movement style, however, is more aligned to ballet technique than that of Ms. Waltz, who has created pieces for ballet companies, but whose work tends to be more closely affiliated to the dance theater of Pina Bausch.
Mr. Öhman has a ballet background, but the petition states an “outright rejection” of the idea of joint directors, demanding a single candidate “with a clear artistic vision and relevant experience.” It contends that these appointments, announced three years in advance, are politically rather than artistically motivated, since Mr. Müller, who is also the cultural senator of Berlin, is standing for re-election for both positions on Sunday.
Elinor Jagodnik, a French corps de ballet dancer who is one of six dancer representatives, said the dancers discovered the news online on Tuesday evening after Mr. Duato was told that his contract had not been renewed.
She added that the negotiations for her appointment, and that of Mr. Öhman, had taken over a year and that it was not a quick decision motivated by the coming elections.
Ms. Waltz said that Mr. Öhman had already had “a long exchange” with dancer representatives from the company, and that both she and he would meet with them next week. “I hope their fear will be softened,” she said.