SANTIAGO, Chile — Discontent has been brewing for years in Chile over pensions so low that most people must keep working past retirement age. All the while, privately run companies have reaped enormous profits by investing Chileans’ social security savings.
The bubbling anger boiled over in July when Chileans learned that the former wife of a Socialist Party leader was receiving a monthly pension of almost $7,800 after retiring from the prison police department. That figure dwarfs the average monthly pension of $315, which is even less than a monthly minimum-wage salary of $384.
In a country already battered by widespread political and corporate corruption, this was the last straw.
Hundreds of thousands of people marched through Santiago, the capital, and other cities to protest the privatized pension system. More than 1.3 million people, according to organizers, turned up in August, the largest demonstration since Chile’s return to civilian rule in 1990.
One protester was Luis Montero, 69, whose monthly pension is about $150. Like many Chileans, Mr. Montero has mainly worked informal jobs without a contract at wages too meager for him to save enough for retirement. He still does maintenance work at a school to make ends meet.
In 1981, the military dictatorship of Gen. Augusto Pinochet privatized the old pay-as-you-go pension system, in which workers, employers and the government all contributed.
Under the privatized system, which President George W. Bush hailed as an example to follow, workers must pay 10 percent of their earnings into accounts operated by private companies known as pension fund administrators, or A.F.P.s, the initials of the term in Spanish. The administrators invest the money and charge workers a commission for transactions and other fees. Employers and the government do not make any contributions to the workers’ accounts.
The money invested by the administrators bolstered Chile’s capital markets, which stimulated economic growth and yielded reasonable returns. Today six A.F.P.s — half of them owned by foreign companies — manage $171 billion in pension funds, equivalent to about 71 percent of Chile’s gross domestic product, according to the office of the supervisor of the pension funds.
But the pioneering privatized system has failed to provide livable pensions for most retirees. If the stock market dips or investments go awry, workers’ savings and retirees’ pension checks decline.
Women fare worse than men do because they earn less, are more likely to work intermittently, retire earlier (the retirement age is 65 for men and 60 for women) and have a longer life expectancy.
A commission on pension reform, appointed in 2014 by President Michelle Bachelet, found that the median A.F.P. pension was equivalent to 34 percent of a retiree’s last average salary (24 percent in the case of women and 48 percent for men). The overall figure rose to 45 percent with supplements from a federally funded safety net established during Ms. Bachelet’s first term in office.
After warning that the pension system was “in crisis,” her government in 2008 introduced a minimum pension of about $140, funded by the state, for those who were unable to save for retirement during their working lives, and additional payments for retirees whose pensions did not reach that amount. More than 1.3 million Chileans, two-thirds of them women, receive such benefits.
But when examining projections for the next 10 to 20 years, the commission found that “it only gets worse,” said David Bravo, the director of the Catholic University of Chile’s Longitudinal Survey and Study Center, who presided over the commission.
The commission’s report laying out policy options languished in a drawer for almost a year until the recent protest marches grabbed the government’s attention. In early August, Ms. Bachelet announced a general outline for reforming the pension system without returning to a state-managed system, a primary demand of the protesters.
The pension funds chafe at the criticism. The low pensions are not their fault, said Rodrigo Pérez, the president of the Association of Pension Fund Administrators, but a consequence of many factors. They include, he said, insufficient or irregular contributions by the many self-employed workers and those with unstable, seasonal or low-paying jobs, as well as the failure of some employers to send money deducted from employees’ salaries.
A study carried out by the association found that only a quarter of those who retired last year had paid into the pension system for more than 25 years, and that 62 percent of women had contributed to their accounts for less than 15 years.
Roughly half of the more than 10 million participants in the private pension system had contributed on a regular basis, according to a state office overseeing the fund companies.
Manuel Riesco, an economist with the National Center for Alternative Development Studies, agreed that the funds had done well — for themselves. The money they collect from salary deductions is more than twice as much as they pay out in pensions.
Ms. Bachelet said her government would seek a “national agreement” on pension reform, and had met with lawmakers, party leaders, business representatives, the pension funds and members of the protest movement, known as No+A.F.P.
But a return to the old system seems to be off the table. The options being considered include creating a state-run pension administrator, raising the retirement age, instituting a 5 percent contribution from employers and adopting stronger regulations for the pension fund administrators.
