MEXICO CITY — The chief of criminal investigations for Mexico’s attorney general resigned late Wednesday amid an internal affairs inquiry into his office’s handling of the case of 43 college students who vanished nearly two years ago.
The statement did not explain the reasons for the resignation, but an official in the attorney general’s office said it was intended to repair relations with the students’ families, who have maintained relentless pressure on the government to solve the case and had demanded Mr. Zerón’s removal.
But Mr. Zerón was not leaving government entirely. Hours after his resignation, President Enrique Peña Nieto named him as the “technical secretary” of Mexico’s National Security Council. Mr. Zerón could not immediately be reached for comment.
Mr. Zerón was deeply involved in some of the country’s highest-profile criminal cases, though arguably none were as big as that of the 43 young men. The students, undergraduates from a teachers college in Ayotzinapa, in the Pacific coast state of Guerrero, disappeared in September 2014 during a night of violence involving Mexican security forces in the city of Iguala.
The remains of only one student have been found. The case has become an albatross for Mr. Peńa Nieto, who took office in 2012 promising to reduce violence, and it has contributed to his plunging approval ratings.
The government has been widely criticized for its adherence to its preferred narrative that the students were killed by a drug gang that incinerated their bodies and dumped the ashes in a river. The former attorney general declared that conclusion “the historic truth,” yet independent investigators have systematically dismantled it.
In two voluminous reports, a panel of foreign human rights and legal experts who spent a year examining the case at the invitation of the Mexican government questioned the authorities’ ability and intentions to thoroughly investigate the disappearances, and raised doubts about the integrity of the Mexican judicial system.
Mr. Zerón’s behavior was singled out for criticism in the panel’s final report, and at an accompanying news conference in April, just as the group’s mandate ended.
The panel highlighted events that took place on Oct. 28 and 29, 2014, along the banks of the San Juan River near the town of Cocula, where the government said it believed the students’ ashes had been dumped.
At the news conference, the experts showed video clips of Mr. Zerón accompanying a detained suspect to the scene on Oct. 28, and of plastic bags that resembled one recovered from the river the next day and that contained incinerated bones, including a fragment that provided the only known DNA link to one of the missing students.
Yet none of that day’s investigative activities were recorded in the case file, the panelists said, raising the possibility that investigators had manipulated or planted evidence.
Mr. Zerón defended his actions, declaring them legal and transparent. Nonetheless, the attorney general’s office opened the internal affairs inquiry. Mr. Zerón remained in his post but was reportedly quarantined from the investigation into the missing students.
It was unclear whether Mr. Zerón’s resignation was prompted by findings in the internal affairs investigation, which, officials said Wednesday, was continuing.
Several weeks ago, the missing students’s relatives, who had been meeting regularly with the attorney general or members of her staff, suspended those meetings in protest over the administration’s refusal to fire Mr. Zerón.
The news was welcomed by the students’ relatives and their advocates, who have been clamoring for months for Mr. Zerón’s removal from the case.
“We hope this resignation can make possible a greater deepening and transparency in the investigation,” said Mario Patrón, director of Miguel Agustín Pro Juárez Human Rights Center, an organization in Mexico City.
“The Mexican state is still in debt to the students’ families and relatives,” he added.