Lionel Messi’s first goal of the Champions League season took three minutes. Manchester City never got the chance to start.
Messi’s fast start was the first of a hat trick in host Barcelona’s 7-0 rout of Celtic, and his fellow superstar forwards, Neymar and Luis Suárez, also scored. Celtic had a penalty saved when trailing, 1-0, midway through the first half.
Heavy rain in Manchester, England, forced City’s game against Borussia Möenchengladbach to be called off 20 minutes before kickoff.
City, headed by Coach Pep Guardiola, will try again Wednesday night.
Bayern Munich, Guardiola’s former club, did well under its new coach, Carlo Ancelotti, beating the Champions League newcomer Rostov, 5-0, in Munich.
Pinch-hitter Yonder Alonso hit a two-run double in the eighth inning, and the Oakland Athletics rallied to defeat the Kansas City Royals, 5-4, at Kauffman Stadium.
The defending World Series champion Royals dropped five games out of the American League wild-card race with only 18 games left.
Joakim Soria blew his seventh save in eight opportunities after he was called on in the eighth with the Royals leading, 3-2.
ORIOLES GAIN ON RED SOX J. J. Hardy hit a three-run homer, Nolan Reimold added a two-run shot, and visiting Baltimore thumped Boston, 6-3, to pull to within two games of the A.L. East-leading Red Sox.
SCULLY’S CAREER TO END OCT. 2 The announcer Vin Scully said his final ballgame will be the Los Angeles Dodgers’ regular-season finale. Scully, 88, told The Los Angeles Times that his Hall of Fame broadcasting career will end Oct. 2 in San Francisco.
Jacksonville said running back Chris Ivory was released from the hospital and was doing well, but his availability for Sunday’s game at San Diego remained in question.
Ivory was hospitalized Sunday with a “general medical issue” and missed the season opener, a loss to Green Bay. Ivory was limited in three practices last week because of a calf injury, but his hospital stay was for an unrelated condition.
The Jaguars said there was no timetable for his return.
Without Ivory, a 1,000-yard rusher for the Jets last season, the Jaguars averaged 1.8 yards per carry against the Packers.
GIANTS RELEASE KICKER The Giants released kicker Randy Bullock a day after adding kicker Josh Brown to their 53-man roster. Brown was suspended for the regular-season opener after violating the N.F.L.’s personal-conduct policy.
Katie Smith, the Liberty’s associate head coach, received a chance to be a head coach for a game when the team hosted the Washington Mystics. The Liberty lost, 75-62.
Coach Bill Laimbeer was happy to step aside, even though he will be charged with the loss.
“I should have got kicked out a couple games earlier,” he joked before the game.
Stefanie Dolson scored a career-high 23 points for the Mystics (13-19), who kept their slim playoff hopes alive.
The Liberty (21-12) had already clinched the third seed in the postseason.
Tina Charles had 22 points and 11 rebounds for the Liberty. Shavonte Zellous added 11 points.
Rutgers and Maryland will stage a wrestling-football doubleheader at Yankee Stadium next year.
The schools said the event, which will be called the Big Ten Battle in the Bronx, will be held Nov. 4, 2017.
The wrestling match, the first in the history of the Stadium, will be held first. There will be a contingency plan in case of inclement weather.
Rutgers is 2-1 in three football games at the current Yankee Stadium, including two appearances in the Pinstripe Bowl.