TORONTO — In his terrific new documentary, “Into the Inferno,” Werner Herzog leads you to the edge of the red-hot abyss, using airborne cameras, philosophical asides and his boundless interest in the depths of human mystery. Written, directed and narrated by Mr. Herzog, the movie takes you to volcanoes across the globe — from Iceland to Ethiopia and North Korea — in a voyage into wonders and terrors. During this expedition, you discover that North Korean lore asserts that the nation’s founder, Kim Il Sung, led the fight for independence at the foot of Mt. Paektu, using a log cabin with the optics of an Abraham Lincoln shrine and the sacredness of a Bethlehem manger.
Mr. Herzog likes to take you places you may have never gone and may not have ever thought you wanted to go, which is something that memorable movies and cinephile events like the Toronto International Film Festival both do. One of the largest of its type, the festival (which ends on Sunday) doesn’t have the red-carpet muscle of Cannes, the brandmastery of Sundance or the niche identity of the Pordenone Silent Film Festival. Toronto’s identity is instead largely defined by volume (almost 400 shorts and features this year) and seasonal timing: It’s where a lot of the big mainstream titles begin their sprint toward Oscar, and where many from earlier festivals prep for their theatrical openings.
For me, Toronto is where I shake off the summer-movie blahs and blues by submerging myself in eight, nine, 10 hours of moving pictures a day, an immersion akin to a cinematic ritual bath, if from the comfort of stadium seating. Like Mr. Herzog, I also like to globe-trot, which Toronto makes easy, both with its far-flung offerings and its two fairly adjacent, overstuffed multiplexes. It’s why a festivalgoer can run from “I Am Not Your Negro,” a thrilling documentary about James Baldwin by the Haitian director Raoul Peck, straight into “Barry,” a touching, smart drama about the 20-year-old Barack Obama from the Indian-American filmmaker Vikram Gandhi.
Brilliantly edited, “I Am Not Your Negro” moves across time and space, seamlessly — insistently — sliding from the historical civil rights movement to more recent events, including Ferguson. Mr. Peck draws on a wealth of found and original visual material, including appalling excerpts from the F.B.I.’s files on Baldwin; Mr. Peck’s decision to use a lot of color images of the civil rights movement, rather than the more familiar black and white, is a particularly impressive formalist stroke because it closes the distance between past and present. A former Haitian minister of culture, Mr. Peck is a consummate filmmaker who deserves a larger American audience. He’ll get it when “I Am Not Your Negro” opens.
The focus in “Barry” is only technically narrower. Anchored by a sympathetic, multilayered performance from Devon Terrell as the young Barry, the movie opens just as its title character arrives at Columbia University for his junior year. A transfer student who’s very much without a home, Barry moves into a dump at the southern end of Harlem, a symbolic passage that leads to other journeys — intellectual, spiritual and existential. Working from Adam Mansbach’s script, Mr. Gandhi avoids hagiography and instead offers up a portrait of a recognizably real man who’s by turns prickly, arrogant and overeager, and who consistently stumbles during his search for self.
Narratively accessible, “Barry” is the kind of coming-of-age movie that should find love and an audience in the overpacked American theatrical market. One of the pleasures of Toronto is that it incorporates a wide range of movies from across the globe, as well as across genres. It’s expansive enough to contain cinematic multitudes: westerns, musicals, melodramas and art films of the more rarefied type find a home here. In the end, much of the news out of the festival will be about higher-profile titles like “Arrival,” a very good, poignant drama with Amy Adams as a linguist who learns to communicate with extraterrestrials that have popped in on a freaked-out Earth.
“Arrival,” along with another of Ms. Adams’s movies, Tom Ford’s “Nocturnal Animals,” will suck up a certain amount of the entertainment media oxygen when they’re released. Both are worth seeing, but audiences should also find time for the likes of “A Quiet Passion,” Terence Davies’s exquisitely directed film about Emily Dickinson. It opens with the teenage Emily voicing pronounced skepticism about her religious instruction, a moment of intense if restrained opposition in a life shaped by the push and pull of conformity and resistance. Slowly but surely, Emily — who, in time, is played by the suitably swan-necked Cynthia Nixon — retreats into her room, bathed in light and love and maybe touched a little by madness, making her mark one carefully scratched poem at a time.
As he has done before, Mr. Davies approaches the past through a glass darkly. In “A Quiet Passion,” the characters initially register as so otherworldly in both gesture and in language that they, too, seem like extraterrestrials in need of a good translator. The effect is at first somewhat off-putting; you feel almost as if Mr. Davies were keeping you at an intellectual and emotional remove, like the characters themselves. Yet this distance fades as the characters, with their stiff physical formality and syntactically foreign sentences, grow familiar. In other words, he brings you into Dickinson’s world — interior, exterior — rather than tailoring it to your 21st-century expectations.
The Filipino director Lav Diaz works in an entirely different register in “The Woman Who Left,” a wholly absorbing four-hour opus about a wrongly convicted prisoner who’s released after 30 years. It opens in 1997, shortly before the prisoner, Horacia (a great Charo Santos-Concio), is liberated into an almost unrecognizable world. Shot in stark, black-and-white digital video in humble, sometimes impoverished locales, the story opens and closes like an accordion, alternately bringing you into Horacia’s private reveries and thrusting you out into the larger, often alien milieu. Dickensian in scope, this is a great achievement from an exemplar of the art.
The single most delightful and narratively adventurous movie I saw at Toronto, “The Ornithologist” very loosely recasts the story of Anthony of Padua, a Portuguese saint who died in the 13th century. Set in the present, this genre-buster pivots on Fernando (the lovely, pillow-lipped French actor Paul Hamy), whose one-man expedition into the wild goes weirdly, at times hilariously, wrong and then right. During Fernando’s travels, he’s waylaid (and hogtied) by pilgrims; takes a tumble with a goatherd; and exchanges gazes with the locals, notably the birds who look down upon him in long shots that, in movies, are known as bird’s-eye or God’s-eye views.
Directed by João Pedro Rodrigues of Portugal, “The Ornithologist” meanders as headily as its protagonist, zigging and zagging through one pastoral location and down one narrative byway after another. I’m still trying to figure out who the three bare-breasted huntresses are; they turn up on horseback with a heraldic blast of a horn, dogs barking and hooves pounding. That isn’t a complaint, but an acknowledgment of the story’s glories and mysteries, which makes “The Ornithologist” a good metaphor for both moviegoing and the festival experience at its best. Mr. Rodrigues opens up a world like a scroll as he shifts from realism to the fantastical and then the allegorical; pauses to meditate on the beauty of the world; and insists on the fusion of the spirit and the flesh. I can’t wait to see it again.