NEXT WAVE FESTIVAL The Brooklyn Academy of Music’s fall festival has begun, with a host of new and revived works on the horizon. The rigorously curious John Jasperse reflects on the aftermath of performance in “Remains” (Sept. 21-24); Kyle Abraham brings back his 2012 “Pavement,” inspired by the film “Boyz n the Hood” and W.E.B. Du Bois’s “The Souls of Black Folk” (Nov. 2-5); and Jonah Bokaer unveils “Rules of the Game,” with a score by Pharrell Williams (Nov. 10-12). In “Thank You for Coming: Play,” Faye Driscoll continues unpacking the idea of audience members and performers as co-conspirators (Nov. 16-19). Through Dec. 18, bam.org.
NEW YORK CITY BALLET Female choreographers have been glaringly absent from City Ballet’s roster in recent years, but this season brings a welcome change. The fall gala (Sept. 20) includes premieres by the principal dancer Lauren Lovette and the Belgian-Colombian choreographer Annabelle Lopez Ochoa, alongside new works by the corps de ballet member Peter Walker and the company’s stellar resident artist, Justin Peck. (It’s a busy year for Mr. Peck, who will create two more premieres for the winter and spring seasons.) Also in store are a new ballet by the prolific Alexei Ratmansky (opening May 4) and the reliable return of “George Balanchine’s The Nutcracker” (Nov. 25-Dec. 31). David H. Koch Theater, Lincoln Center, nycballet.org.
JENNIFER MONSON Fall at Danspace Project begins with Ms. Monson’s “in tow,” a collaborative venture in which she opens up three years of research for public viewing. A sublime improviser and deep questioner, Ms. Monson brings together colleagues from an array of disciplines, places and generations for an experiment that unfolds differently each night. Sept. 23-Oct. 1, danspaceproject.org.
ANNE NGUYEN This Parisian choreographer brings her vision of street dance to New York with two works presented as part of the Crossing the Line Festival. The ambitious “Graphic Cyphers” features 20 dancers shaking up the structure of the hip-hop cypher at locations in the Bronx and Times Square. In “Autarcie (….): a search for self-sufficiency,” performed at Gibney Dance in Lower Manhattan, four women communicate and compete through a fluid language of breaking, popping and waacking. Sept. 24-Oct. 1, fiaf.org.
NY QUADRILLE For this unusual season opener, the Joyce Theater is giving itself a temporary makeover and upending its standard seating arrangement. Taking cues from the quadrille, an 18th-century European social dance and cousin of American square dancing, the choreographer Lar Lubovitch has invited four colleagues to make dances that can be viewed from four sides. The intriguing group — Pam Tanowitz, Tere O’Connor, RoseAnne Spradlin and Loni Landon — will present the results on a platform stage constructed for the occasion. Sept. 27-Oct. 9, joyce.org.
FALL FOR DANCE In its 13th year, this City Center sampler continues offering plenty of bang for your buck. The lineup of five programs, with four companies on each, includes the Australian troupe Bangarra Dance Theatre, the Kuchipudi soloist Shantala Shivalingappa and the storied flamenco dancer Farruquito. There will also be commissioned new works by Wayne McGregor — for the beloved ballet duo Alessandra Ferri and Herman Cornejo — and by the self-described “extreme action architect” Elizabeth Streb. Sept. 26 through Oct. 8, nycitycenter.org.
NEW YORK LIVE ARTS Born in 2011 from the merger of Dance Theater Workshop and the Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company, Live Arts has been changing up its leadership ever since. The director of programs, Thomas O. Kriegsmann, left unexpectedly this summer, but not before assembling an eclectic season. First up is “Pandaemonium,” a multimedia dance-theater work from Lars Jan, Geoff Sobelle and Nichole Canuso (Sept. 28-Oct. 1). The year’s most compelling offerings may be those developed through the theater’s Live Feed residencies, by artists including Gillian Walsh, Andrea Kleine and Adrienne Truscott. Through June 17, newyorklivearts.org.
FALL FOR FORSYTHE This Los Angeles series honors the prodigious choreographer William Forsythe, who joined the faculty of the Glorya Kaufman School of Dance at the University of Southern California last year. Presented with the Music Center and the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, the festival includes discussions and demonstrations with Mr. Forsythe, who has done much to invert the rules of classical ballet, as well as a costume exhibition and performances by Houston Ballet, Pacific Northwest Ballet and San Francisco Ballet. Sept. 29-Oct. 23, kaufman.usc.edu.
SUNDAYS ON BROADWAY At her sprawling SoHo loft, the choreographer and video artist Cathy Weis hosts this free weekly salon, where some of the sharpest minds in downtown performance toss ideas around. This month’s guests include Yvonne Meier and Julie Atlas Muz (Oct. 2); Vicky Shick and Eva Karczag (Oct. 6); and Yvonne Rainer, who will give a lecture, “What’s So Funny? Laughter and Anger in the Time of the Assassins” (Oct. 16). Through Dec. 4, cathyweis.org.
CROSSING THE LINE If you’ve never seen the work of the French choreographer Jérôme Bel, now’s the time. The 10th edition of this multigenre festival features no fewer than four of Mr. Bel’s spare productions, including his 1995 self-titled work (Oct. 27-29 at the Kitchen) and a new piece for staff members of the Museum of Modern Art, performed in the museum’s Marron Atrium (Oct. 27-31). The Cyprus-born artist Maria Hassabi offers the latest in her lucid studies of stillness (Oct. 4-8 at the Kitchen), and Rachid Ouramdane harnesses the power of repetition in “Tordre (Wrought)” (Oct. 13-15 at Baryshnikov Arts Center). Through Nov. 3, fiaf.org.
DEBORAH HAY Through decades of making dances, Ms. Hay, a founding member of the 1960s collective Judson Dance Theater, has kept a spirit of inquiry alive in her work. She describes “Figure a Sea,” for 20 dancers from Sweden’s Cullberg Ballet, as “a space for self-reflection: for seeing oneself seeing.” Set to an original score by Laurie Anderson, the production has its United States premiere as part of Peak Performances at Montclair State University in New Jersey, Oct. 6-9, peakperfs.org.
PLATFORM 2016: LOST & FOUND Danspace Project’s latest platform — a deep dive into one theme through performances, conversations and other events — explores the impact of AIDS on past and present generations of artists. Organized by the choreographers Ishmael Houston-Jones and Will Rawls, the series focuses on the years 1981 to 1996, while asking how the intense loss of that period reverberates today. The roster of more than 50 participants includes Bill T. Jones, Neil Greenberg, Archie Burnett, Charles Atlas and Hilton Als. Oct. 13-Nov. 19, danspaceproject.org.
ICA/BOSTON Boston’s Institute of Contemporary Art has a full dance slate this year, bookended by Big Dance Theater’s delightful “Short Form,” a celebration of brevity on the page and stage (Oct. 14-15), and a new work by the incisive Beth Gill (May 12-13). On the heels of his troupe’s two-week Joyce season in New York, Bill T. Jones presents the United States premiere of his “A Letter to My Nephew,” which teases out the relationship between the personal and the political (Nov. 11-13). Bostonians shouldn’t miss Alessandro Sciarroni’s “FOLK-S, will you still love me tomorrow,” a test of endurance that rewards those who stick it out (Feb. 17-18). icaboston.org.
ROBERT WILSON AND MIKHAIL BARYSHNIKOV Inspired by the 1919 diary of Vaslav Nijinsky, the great Russian ballet dancer who chronicled his own descent into madness, this illustrious director-performer pairing has teamed up to create “Letter to a Man,” which has its United States premiere at the Brooklyn Academy of Music. Though billed as “theater,” it should be of serious interest to dance lovers. Oct. 15-30.
AMERICAN BALLET THEATER Ballet’s biggest celebrity, Misty Copeland, is just one reason to see this company during its two-week run at Lincoln Center. The season includes a world premiere by Jessica Lang, the return of Alexei Ratmansky’s poetic “Serenade After Plato’s Symposium,” the company premiere of Benjamin Millepied’s “Daphnis and Chloé” and a revival of George Balanchine’s “Prodigal Son.” Oct. 19-30.
THE CHOCOLATE FACTORY For over a decade, this artist-run space in Long Island City, Queens, has been a destination for risk-taking, rule-breaking performance. Its 11th season, organized by the founder and director Brian Rogers, kicks off with Sara Juli’s “Tense Vagina: an actual diagnosis” (Oct. 19-22), which sheds light on rarely discussed realities of motherhood, and continues with new works by Sam Kim, Anna Azrieli, Ursula Eagly and others. Through June 11. chocolatefactorytheater.org.
BALLETCOLLECTIVE Troy Schumacher, a dancer and choreographer with New York City Ballet, founded this company as a forum for collaboration, and he leads it with integrity and heart. For two new works at N.Y.U.’s Skirball Center, he joins forces with the architects James Ramsey and Carlos Arnaiz, exploring the intersections between his art form and theirs. Oct. 27 and 28, nyuskirball.org.
SOUNDS OF INDIA The music and dance of South India are the focus of this year’s White Light Festival at Lincoln Center. Organized by Mark Morris, who has often traveled to the region over, the series features the Kerala Kalamandalam Kathakali Troupe, the transcendent Odissi dancers of Nritygram and Mr. Morris’s own ensemble in works informed by South Indian traditions, including a world premiere with music by Terry Riley. Oct. 27-Nov. 6, whitelightfestival.org.
VAIL DANCE FESTIVAL: REMIX NYC The Vail International Dance Festival is home to some of the country’s most enticing summer dance offerings, yet Vail Valley, Colo., isn’t the most accessible destination. As if reading the minds of longing New Yorkers, the artistic director Damian Woetzel, in honor of his 10th year in that role, is bringing some festival favorites to Manhattan. City Center may lack the Rocky Mountain vistas, but a consolation prize will be exceptional dancers like Wendy Whelan, Fang-Yi Sheu and Lil Buck on the same stage. Nov. 3-6, nycitycenter.org.
BAAD/JACK The vibrant dance scenes of Brooklyn and the Bronx don’t intersect as often as they should, but this cross-borough exchange is helping to change that. A mixed bill featuring choreographers from both ends of the city — Niall Noel Jones, Milteri Tucker, Filip A. Condeescu and others to be announced — will spend two nights at Jack, a progressive performance space in Clinton Hill, Brooklyn, and a third way uptown at the Bronx Academy of Arts and Dance (BAAD). Nov. 4-6, jackny.org.
AKRAM KHAN Mr. Khan, whose work blends contemporary dance and Kathak, a classical Indian form, has revised his visually striking “Desh” for family audiences. “Chotto Desh” (meaning “small homeland” in Bengali) still wrestles with the feeling of being torn between two cultures (Mr. Khan was born in England to Bangladeshi parents), but with a more playful touch. Directed by Sue Buckmaster, the production comes to the New Victory Theater Nov. 4-13. newvictory.org.
LIZ GERRING Ms. Gerring’s engrossing dances can be coolly restrained or daringly athletic, sometimes both at once. In “(T)here to (T)here,” two performers cycle between dancing together and apart, their environment enhanced by Kay Rosen’s projected text and Michael J. Schumacher’s soundscape. Part of the White Light Festival, the work has its world premiere at Baryshnikov Arts Center, Nov. 10-12, bacnyc.org.
NATALIA OSIPOVA & ARTISTS Outside of her day job as a principal with the Royal Ballet, Ms. Osipova has been exploring the more contemporary styles of Sidi Larbi Cherkaoui, Arthur Pita and Russell Maliphant. In a trio of new works by those choreographers, she’ll be joined by her partner in art and life, the YouTube star and so-called “bad boy” of ballet, Sergei Polunin. Produced by Sadler’s Wells in London, the program has its United States premiere at City Center, Nov. 10-12, nycitycenter.org.
JODI MELNICK As part of the Guggenheim’s Works & Process series, Ms. Melnick brings her expansive imagination to a new work for three terrific dancers of New York City Ballet: Jared Angle, Gretchen Smith and the electric Sara Mearns. Watching this trio in Ms. Melnick’s exacting, slippery style — something quieter than City Ballet’s repertory — should be a profound pleasure. The critic and poet Claudia La Rocco, a New York Times contributor, moderates a conversation with the artists. Nov. 13 and 14, guggenheim.org.
BROOKLYN TOURING OUTFIT During the Merce Cunningham Dance Company’s farewell tour, a friendship blossomed between the troupe’s octogenarian archivist, David Vaughan, and Pepper Fajans, an artist and stage technician in his 20s. The jauntily charismatic Mr. Vaughan, now 92, and the thoughtful Mr. Fajans, 31, explore their enduring companionship in an evening of movement, storytelling and puppetry at Baryshnikov Arts Center, joined by the dancers David Neumann and Holley Farmer, a celebrated Cunningham alum. Nov. 16-18, bacnyc.org.
DORRANCE DANCE Before she was anointed a “genius” by the MacArthur Foundation, the forward-thinking tap dancer and choreographer Michelle Dorrance brought “The Blues Project” to the Joyce Theater for three sold-out nights. In one of its smartest programming choices this season, the Joyce gives that production a two-week reprise, Nov. 15-27. With live music by Toshi Reagon and BIGLovely, the show spotlights some of today’s finest tappers, including Dormeshia Sumbry-Edwards and Derick K. Grant, who share the choreography credits with Ms. Dorrance. joyce.org.
RONALD K. BROWN The Brooklyn-born Mr. Brown has always had strong roots in his home borough. His company, Evidence, is the resident troupe at BRIC House in Fort Greene, and it returns for its annual fall season with four pieces spanning the last two decades of his career. Mr. Brown’s signature blend of ballet, modern and African dance will be on display in works like “She Is Here” (2016), a solo performed by the company’s women, and “Ife/My Heart,” created for Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater in 2005. Nov. 17-20, bricartsmedia.org.
LUCINDA CHILDS A choreographer with a mathematician’s mind, Ms. Childs achieves almost mystical effects through her use of repetition. In the first of two weeks at the Joyce Theater, her company offers “Lucinda Childs: A Portrait,” a retrospective of her dances, from the 1963 “Pastime,” which she performed as a member of the iconoclastic Judson Dance Theater, to the premiere of “The Sun Roars Into View.” The second week is devoted to her seminal “Dance,” performed against Sol LeWitt’s moving images to a score by Philip Glass. Nov. 29-Dec. 11, joyce.org.
ALVIN AILEY AMERICAN DANCE THEATER These impeccable dancers return to City Center for December, under the keen direction of Robert Battle. The season’s premieres include a tribute to Martin Luther King Jr., by the longtime company member Hope Boykin, and Kyle Abraham’s completed “Untitled America” trilogy, which examines the impact of the American prison system on African-American families. Mr. Battle’s militant “The Hunt” joins the repertory, and “Revelations” does its perennial job of spreading holiday joy. Nov. 30-Dec. 31, alvinailey.org.
THE JOFFREY BALLET This Chicago company is retiring its 1987 “Nutcracker” by Robert Joffrey and ushering in a new rendition by Christopher Wheeldon, the Tony Award-winning choreographer of “An American in Paris.” Adding local flavor, Mr. Wheeldon sets his version of the Christmas classic at Chicago’s 1893 World’s Fair, with the help of a high-profile creative team that includes the set and costume designer Julian Crouch and the puppeteer Basil Twist. Dec. 10-30, joffrey.org.
REGGIE WILSON A frequent fall highlight at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Mr. Wilson’s Fist & Heel Performance Group returns to the Next Wave Festival. In “Citizen,” a New York premiere, he shapes his supple movement, an idiosyncratic style drawn from cultures of the African diaspora, into five intertwining solos as he explores questions of belonging. Dec. 14-17, bam.org.
AMERICAN REALNESS Dance producers and curators flock to New York in January for the Association of Performing Arts Presenters conference, prompting a citywide explosion of festivals and showcases. American Realness, founded in 2010 by Ben Pryor, is among the more experimental, packing the three theaters of Abrons Arts Center with boundary-pushing performances. This year’s schedule, yet to be released in full, includes a suite of solo works by Meg Stuart, an American choreographer better known in Europe, and a new piece by Montreal’s Dana Michel, whose “Yellow Towel” was a high point of the 2015 festival. Jan. 5-15, abronsartscenter.org.
MONICA BILL BARNES & COMPANY Forget your morning trip to the gym: The Metropolitan Museum of Art will open its doors before business hours for “The Museum Workout,” a tour designed to wake up the body and mind. Conceived and choreographed by Ms. Barnes, a deft physical comedian, the journey gets underway at 8:30 a.m., with a disco and Motown playlist. The writer and illustrator Maira Kalman designs and narrates the route through the galleries. Jan. 19-Feb. 12, metmuseum.org.
ALEXANDRA BACHZETSIS The Museum of Modern Art presents a new evening-length performance by this Swiss choreographer and visual artist. In “Massacre: Variations on a Theme,” Ms. Bachzetsis continues her ongoing investigation of popular culture, pulling from sources as varied as Northern Soul and Yoruba traditions. By day, she opens her rehearsals to the public. moma.org.
MERCE CUNNINGHAM: COMMON TIME When the Merce Cunningham Dance Company closed in 2011, its archive of sets and costumes — designed by the likes of Robert Rauschenberg, Andy Warhol and Jasper Johns — went to the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis. This major exhibition, presented simultaneously at the Walker and the Museum of Contemporary Art in Chicago, puts that trove on display. The Walker’s galleries will also house performances of Cunningham’s work — beginning with an Event, or a site-specific collage of excerpts from his choreography — and several new commissions. (Feb. 8-Sept. 10, Minneapolis; Feb. 11-April 30, Chicago.) walkerart.org.
MARTHA GRAHAM DANCE COMPANY While sustaining the legacy of its founder, this troupe continually brings in new works by contemporary choreographers. None have been so successful as the recent staging of Annie-B Parson’s “The Snow Falls in the Winter,” which called for a dry delivery of movement and text that we rarely see in these dancers. So it’s exciting that Ms. Parson is collaborating with them again, on a new work inspired by Graham’s 1941 comic ballet “Punch and the Judy.” For its Joyce Theater season, the company also offers plenty of Graham classics and a premiere by the Belgian choreographer Sidi Larbi Cherkaoui. Feb. 14-26, joyce.org.
HARKNESS DANCE FESTIVAL Between year-round programs like Fridays at Noon and Dig Dance, there’s no shortage of dance at the 92nd Street Y, but this five-week festival is the centerpiece of the season. The latest edition opens with the sprightly and sophisticated dancers of New York Theater Ballet (Feb. 25 and 26) and concludes with a new work by Jillian Peña, a choreographer influenced by ballet but less beholden to its conventions (March 24 and 25) than other choreographers. Also on deck are Philadanco, Jessica Lang Dance and the young company Boomerang. 92y.org.
PAUL TAYLOR AMERICAN MODERN DANCE Still choreographing at 86, Mr. Taylor unveils his 145th and 146th dances during his company’s annual Lincoln Center engagement. The former company member Lila York returns as a choreographer, creating a new work to Max Richter’s take on Vivaldi’s “Four Seasons.” March 8-26.
NIHON BUYO DANCE The term “Nihon Buyo” translates to “Japanese dance,” but its history is far more complex. The Japan Society will illuminate the form’s past and present in this presentation by Geimaruza, a group of young alumnae from the esteemed Tokyo University of the Arts. The program includes a range of Kabuki and Japanese folk dances, accompanied by live music and preceded each night by an in-depth lecture-demonstration. March 3-5, japansociety.org.
RICHARD MOVE This year’s Live Ideas festival at New York Live Arts, envisioned by the guest artist-curator Mx Justin Vivian Bond, imagines a world without binaries, embracing the fluid spectrum over the rigid divide. The cross-disciplinary series, titled Mx’d Messages, starts with the premiere of Richard Move’s “XXYY,” a meditation on gender and genetics. Mr. Move’s excellent collaborators include the theater artist Alba Clemente, the visual artist Paolo Canevari, and the performers Catherine Cabeen and Katherine Crockett. March 8-19, newyorklivearts.org.
ANNE TERESA DE KEERSMAEKER Ms. De Keersmaeker and her Brussels-based company, Rosas, visit New York twice this year, bringing her “Vortex Temporum” to the Brooklyn Academy of Music (Oct. 14-15) and “Work/Travail/Arbeid” to the Museum of Modern Art (March 25-April 2). The first piece, named for its Gérard Grisey score, tries to visualize the passage of time through movement for dancers and musicians. The second reimagines that work for a museum setting, guided by the question “Can a choreography be performed in the form of an exhibition?” Many artists seem to be asking similar questions of late, but Ms. De Keersmaeker, whose formalism brims with feeling, should have a distinctive answer.
STEPHEN PETRONIO While continuing to make his own fiercely physical dances, Mr. Petronio has also been looking back, restaging the works of postmodern dance pioneers who have inspired him. For the third installment of “Bloodlines,” as the initiative is called, his troupe returns to the Joyce Theater with three short pieces by Yvonne Rainer (“Trio A,” “Chair Pillow” and “Diagonal,” all from the 1960s), an excerpt from Steve Paxton’s improvisational “Goldberg Variations” (1986) and Anna Halprin’s sly solo “The Courtesan and the Crone” (1999). It’s a gem of a program, completed by the premiere of Mr. Petronio’s “Untitled Touch.” March 28-April 2, joyce.org.
YACKEZ This irreverent song and dance duo, also known as Larissa and Jon Velez-Jackson or Twitta and Papi Jon, can work a crowd with such deliberately dissonant tracks as “Accolades,” “Yackez Dot Com” and “Get an Education.” In “Give It to You Stage,” they corral their hits (and flops; this pair embraces failure) into a two-act theatrical event at New York Live Arts. The show features a “queer pro-wrestling dance ensemble,” according to the theater’s site, and a cohort of adventurous seniors from Ms. Velez Jackson’s fitness classes. March 29-April 1, newyorklivearts.org.
ON THE BOARDS Seattle’s center for experimental performance highlights local artists this year, including the uncompromising Heather Kravas, who re-envisions her stark “The Green Surround,” originally for nine women, with a cast of dancers who identify as male (March 30-April 2). Out-of-town guests include the former Merce Cunningham dancers Rashaun Mitchell and Silas Riener, who have teamed up with the filmmaker Charles Atlas on “Tesseract,” a live performance, part gallery installation and 3-D film (May 18-21). That three-pronged project will have its premiere at the Walker Art Center, March 16-18. ontheboards.org.
BALLET ACROSS AMERICA This popular sampler of regional ballet troupes returns to the Kennedy Center in Washington. The lineup (to be announced) will be selected by the guest curators Misty Copeland and Justin Peck, two of the most beloved figures in American ballet today. April 17-23, kennedy-center.org.
OKWUI OKPOKWASILI After her bracing “Bronx Gothic,” which earned her a 2014 Bessie Award for outstanding production, Ms. Okpokwasili turns her attention from personal coming-of-age stories to larger-scale histories. “Poor People’s TV Room,” the culmination of a two-year residency at New York Live Arts, draws connections between two events in Nigeria: the Women’s War of 1929 and, 85 years later, Boko Haram’s abduction of 300 girls. Ms. Okpokwasili cites as other influences “dystopian folklore, speculative fiction, Igbo cosmology and the futures and commodities markets.” Live Arts hosts the work’s New York premiere, April 19-29, newyorklivearts.org.
JIMENA PAZ A subtly magnetic performer, most recently as a shadowy presence in the work of Juliette Mapp, Ms. Paz can speak volumes with the toss of an arm or bend of a knee. During an evening of solos by multiple choreographers at Danspace Project last spring, her contribution invited more than one viewing. For a new work presented by the Chocolate Factory, she collaborates with the estimable dance artists Ralph Lemon and Vicky Shick, reflecting on life in her native Argentina, what she calls “the subculture of my dancing body.” April 19-29.