213 pp. Holt, $26.
139 pp. Knopf, $24.95.
Schiff writes slim, ice-pick stories about sex and death and nighttime cab rides, sharpened by humor and extreme candor. This debut collection coheres around what’s seemingly one main character, a woman named only in the story “Welcome Lilah,” which takes its title from a note “that maybe needed a comma.” The missing punctuation, of course, turns the title from a greeting to a command — telling us to make room for this character who will be with us for a while. (If we’re meant to allow for plural narrators, they’re all very much alike.) In most of the stories she appears in the first person, often as an underemployed young Jewish woman in Brooklyn, mourning her father’s death from cancer, writing, dating aimlessly. Yep: another Brooklynite writing pithy stories about someone apparently like herself. But Schiff is in on the joke. The main character of “Third Person” is — cheekily or defensively or both — named Rebecca, and the collection closes with a story called “Write What You Know.” The only surreal story in the bunch, “Rate Me,” in which a woman sends her body parts off to be surgically improved, suggests this writer is in no way limited by her own experience. It’s a shining moment in an already stellar collection, an Amy Schumer sketch as chewed up by Andrea Dworkin. And it’s a sign of the wonderfully dangerous places this author might go next. With or without a comma, welcome Rebecca.
298 pp. Doubleday, $26.95.
Haddon remains best known as the author of “The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time,” but that book’s playfulness eludes this dark collection. The title story recounts, in wrenching detail, the collapse of a busy seaside promenade in 1970 and the deaths of 64 people. Short and brutal, the story does not attempt to make sense of loss; it just piles it on. It’s a fitting introduction to a bleak collection where death features in every story, if at times only glancingly: an attempted suicide, a dead deer, a vivid dream of a father’s death, an intruder who is killed and then revives. These are the strongest stories, the least grimly predictable. The others all end with the demise of their main characters — unexplored deaths that reach for gravitas, but only grab it by the toe. While the stories approach technical brilliance, their endings do little but slam us with mortality and ask us to be shocked or moved. Other commonalities — several stories rely on recent breakups as character development or the impetus for a journey, in one case to another planet; nearly all feature out-of-body experiences — work to make the collection, despite its impressive range in subject and setting, monochromatic. Rather than themes, these repetitions start to feel like ruts. “I wish that this were a happier ending,” a character writes in a journal at the end of one story as he’s, yes, dying. We don’t necessarily need happier endings — just deeper, more original ones.
258 pp. Dial, $26.
All the stories in this collection take place on or near Merritt Island, Fla., in the shadow of Cape Canaveral. Sometimes the connections to the space program go deep. In the title story, a teenage boy becomes enthralled with a former astronaut. In “Go Fever,” we see a rocket engineer’s extramarital affair in the wake of the Challenger explosion. Elsewhere, the idea of space exploration is more tangential, a plume of smoke from a distant rocket launch. Ryan, the author of three books for younger readers and one adult novel, writes brilliantly about adolescents — young characters, many coming of age in the 1960s and ’70s, feature in most of these stories, notably the stunning ­opener, “The Way She Handles,” and the heartbreaking “The Fall Guy.” The writing here is not particularly experimental or tricky or innovative, and it doesn’t need to be; Ryan is a master of that old-­fashioned, captivating storytelling that deceptively reads as effortless. If the endings are occasionally a bit trite — in “Fountain of Youth,” a man living in a senior facility under the witness protection program asks a friend, in the story’s predictable final moment, to call him by his real name — those neat conclusions are not entirely unearned. By that point we’ve been riveted, we’ve been entertained, we’ve been reminded that trips to the moon are not impossible. Unlike Haddon, Ryan never actually sends his characters into space; but his orbits of the human heart are enough.