It took a while for the most prolific power hitter of the summer to understand his potential. But doing so was essential to reaching the majors, said Brian Dozier, whose epiphany came on a golf course.
Dozier, the slugging second baseman for the Minnesota Twins, played four seasons at the University of Southern Mississippi and hit only 16 home runs. In his first two and a half minor league seasons, he hit just seven.
But late in the 2011 season, at Class AA New Britain, Dozier played golf with Tom Brunansky, his hitting coach, who took part in the inaugural major league All-Star home run derby in 1985. Brunansky recognized a slugger in the tee box.
“He saw that I was hitting the drive a long way,” Dozier said. “He kind of stopped right then and there and said, ‘We’ve got to translate that onto the baseball field and to your swing.’ It’s not like I hit 30 home runs that season, but that kind of changed everything for me.
 I just tossed it up in this little drill, just to see how far I could hit it to create that bat whip — selling out, so to speak, to get that feel of really attacking a baseball.
Everyone has seen it lately. Dozier has hit more home runs each season since his debut in 2012, from six to 18 to 23 to 28 last year, when he also went deep in the All-Star Game. Through Friday, Dozier had already hit 39 homers this season — including a mind-bending 22 in 36 games from July 31 to Sept. 6.
Just one other player has hit at least 39 homers in a season for the Twins: the Hall of Famer Harmon Killebrew, who did it eight times from 1961 to 1970. The only player in the majors with more homers than Dozier this season was Baltimore’s Mark Trumbo, with 41.
The Twins have been the majors’ worst team this season and are seeking a new general manager. Dozier, 29, said he hoped the team would “go out and make a splash” this off-season. He is tied to the franchise through 2018 with a four-year, $20 million contract and is part of the fabric of a team that is sometimes criticized as being too loyal to its people.
There may be merit to that notion, but Twins alumni have clearly helped Dozier unlock his talents. Besides Brunansky — now the major league hitting coach — and Thome, Dozier speaks regularly with Torii Hunter, the former Twins All-Star outfielder who retired after last season.
When Dozier was struggling in April, trying to pull everything before adjusting his approach to drive balls to center and right field, Hunter gave him a secret to power hitting.
Dozier’s surge cannot erase his team’s discouraging record, which was 52-89 through Friday. But as a highlight in an otherwise bleak year, it counts for something.
Seth Lugo, the Mets’ rookie right-hander, has gained some notoriety for the spin rate of his curveball, which set a record for the two years of data compiled by Statcast. When Lugo fanned Miami’s Xavier Scruggs on Aug. 30, Statcast measured the spin of his third-strike curveball at 3,498 revolutions per minute, about 1,000 more than the major league average.
Lugo, who has never had arm problems, said he was 19 before he learned the slider. But he said that the curveball, thrown properly, was not at all dangerous. And long before Statcast came along, an extremely high spin rate was his goal.
Two plays last week, in games between teams in the pennant race, illustrated the imperfections of baseball’s replay system. When fans can instantly see on their televisions or phones that a call is wrong, it should be reversible by replay. Yet both times, incorrect calls on the field were not eligible for review.
In the ninth inning on Tuesday at Yankee Stadium, the bat of Toronto’s Edwin Encarnacion made contact with the glove of Yankees catcher Gary Sanchez. Some Blue Jays players immediately saw what had happened, and yelled and pointed from the dugout. But the plate umpire, Mark Wegner, missed it. Encarnacion ended up singling to make the point moot, but it could have been significant.
On Thursday in Cleveland, a blown wild-pitch call by the plate umpire Jim Joyce led directly to two runs for the Indians. David Paulino, the Houston pitcher, threw a ball that bounced in the dirt and deflected high off the bat of Lonnie Chisenhall, who was trying to check his swing. Two runs scored on the play, and the Astros went on lose, 10-7.
Baseball’s rationale for making such plays ineligible for review is that it would, in theory, lead to similar calls that would be much more complicated to fix. If an umpire called a foul tip — and replay found it to have not been a foul — then umpires would have to determine placement of runners, whether the pitch had been a ball or a strike, whether there had been a checked swing, and so on. Essentially, they would be forced to guess what would have happened when nothing actually did.
Fair enough, but replay was designed to catch and reverse the clearly missed calls that change games. In the New York and Cleveland examples, a replay umpire could have, theoretically, overruled the umpires on the field without much confusion. The replay system has been modified over time, and that open-minded approach must apply again to close these kinds of loopholes.
Yes, expanded September rosters lead to tedious pitching changes, as managers — armed with increasingly detailed scouting information — seek every possible edge. But the month also brings interesting roster additions sprinkled throughout the game.
The Oakland Athletics promoted Jharel Cotton, who won his major league debut with six and a third strong innings on Wednesday. Cotton, who was acquired from the Los Angeles Dodgers on Aug. 1 in the Rich Hill trade, became just the second starting pitcher ever from the United States Virgin Islands, after Al McBean, who started for Pittsburgh and San Diego in the 1960s.
The Tampa Bay Rays welcomed Eddie Gamboa, 31, giving the major leagues a third knuckleballer, after Toronto’s R. A. Dickey and Boston’s Steven Wright. Gamboa, who has worked with the Hall of Famer Phil Niekro, walked 6.7 batters per nine innings at Class AAA in 2015, but he cut that to 3.7 this season, with a 2.68 earned run average.
Then there is Jose Martinez, an outfielder who reached the majors with the St. Louis Cardinals on Tuesday. He is the son of Carlos Martinez, the former Cleveland infielder best known for hitting the ball that bounced off Jose Canseco’s head for a home run in 1993. Jose Martinez has played for four organizations in a career that began a decade ago.
When the Rays fired their longtime hitting coach Derek Shelton on Tuesday, they chose Chad Mottola to replace him. Mottola, who coached Toronto’s hitters in 2013, had been the Rays’ minor league hitting coordinator and played parts of five seasons in the majors from 1996 to 2006.
More notable — to Yankees fans, anyway — is Mottola’s entry into professional baseball. After starring at the University of Central Florida, he was chosen fifth over all by the Cincinnati Reds in the 1992 draft. The player picked next was a high school shortstop from Kalamazoo, Mich., named Derek Jeter.
The Houston Astros, the Cleveland Indians, the Montreal Expos and the Baltimore Orioles also picked before the Yankees took Jeter, who collected 3,465 hits and five World Series rings over 20 seasons. None of the franchises that passed on Jeter have won a championship since.