Despite the fashion calendar shifting continents and an entire fashion week unfolding in the interim (London’s five-day schedule ended yesterday evening), attention is still being drawn back to New York; namely, to Marc Jacobs. Last Thursday afternoon, Jacobs unveiled his spring/summer 2017 show, to generally positive critical reviews — and a social media brouhaha. The focus was the models’ hair, braided into multicolored dreadlocks inspired by the transgender filmmaker Lana Wachowski and sourced online. The designer was subsequently accused of cultural appropriation, of lifting influences from black culture and showing them on a cast of predominantly white models. Jacobs was rapidly tried and sentenced by a public jury; a fusillade of comments rained down on Instagram and Twitter. Jacobs responded, first by “justifying” his actions and then, after that engendered further criticism, apologizing for the justification, and for any offense caused. The story had already leapt from the fashion pages: Time ran a piece, as did many other general-interest publications.
Fashion has been “borrowing” from other cultures for decades. Elsa Schiaparelli based her upturned shoulders, the ones that set the silhouette for the ’30s and ’40s, on the costumes of Balinese dancers. Yves Saint Laurent pillaged the Steppes and the Far East. Almost everyone’s turned to Japan at some point — or an idea of Japan, like those laid out by Edward Said’s 1978 book “Orientalism,” and which are applicable to collections by designers as diverse as Paul Poiret, Yves Saint Laurent and Giorgio Armani.
But at what point did appropriation become inappropriate? When did designers start being called out on their picture-postcard odes to foreign lands and people — what’s changed?
“When I was teaching two years ago, I showed the Yves Saint Laurent ‘African’ collection,” says Caroline Evans, an author and professor of fashion at London’s Central Saint Martins, of the couturier’s 1967 collection. “For the first time ever, a student challenged that. They said it was cultural appropriation.” This was the first generation, Evans reasoned, who had not only read Said but grown up in a Internet-mediated society rendered hypersensitive to cultural transgression.
It’s interesting to contrast the furor over Jacobs’s show against, say, John Galliano’s fall/winter 1998 Dior haute couture collection — the one titled “A Voyage on the Diorient Express, or the Story of the Princess Pocahontas,” wherein Native American patterns and artifacts were glibly mixed with 16th-century court dress. Today, watching a video of that show — with its tomahawk-wielding, war-whooping “redskins” — your eyebrows shoot skyward. At the time, apparently, they didn’t. “Costumes were shown as the couture clients clamored for clothes,” said Amy Spindler, the New York Times fashion critic, of Galliano’s Dior outing, underlining a general critique of the Dior clothes as pantomime. Their politics were never questioned.
Some did react against styles like Galliano’s, or indeed the “African”-inspired 2000 collection from Alexander McQueen — called “Eshu,” after a Yoruba deity — which included mud-plastered clothes and jewelry that resembled the neck rings of the Ndebele people. However, if committed to print, it was in dusty theoretical tracts dissecting fashion’s embedded cultural capital, rather than the instant, enraged epithets that bombarded Marc Jacobs’ personal and professional social media accounts following his show. The internet democratized fashion — which, to the industry, generally means selling more stuff and showing more pretty pictures. But a fundamental tenet of democracy is to give the people a voice, and fashion won’t always like what they have to say.
What should we learn from our period? Perhaps that every look will be analyzed, and criticized, and that the criticism will be vocal via a permanently plugged-in, Wi-Fi world. That, regardless of intent or stated inspiration, every nuance and reference could be second-guessed. That it’s not easy to riff on other cultures without someone feeling ripped off, and that the offended are quick to take to social media to voice their disdain. That’s a good thing, potentially — it makes designers stop and think about other cultures, hopefully to gain a better understanding of their references, which probably makes their designs better, or at least more intelligent. There’s also a simpler lesson: that you’ll never please all of the people all of the time. But it’s good to try to understand their point of view.
There are probably better tools than Twitter and Instagram for that, though.