In 1898, Alexander Phimister Proctor, one of America’s foremost animaliers — artists who use canvas and clay to conjure the animal kingdom — created a pair of sleek bronze panthers to guard an entrance to Prospect Park, the verdant heart of Brooklyn.
They still do. Perched vigilantly atop limestone pedestals by Stanford White, the great cats keep their ears forever cocked for the slightest rustle. They stand warily at ease, their muscles just tense enough that they look as if they could pounce from the pedestals before you could blink.
In 1998, the twin 18-foot-tall monuments, known as “Panthers” or “Pumas,” were brought back to vibrancy through a restoration financed by the City Parks Foundation. The sculptures were cleaned and repatinated, and the pedestals were cleaned and repaired.
But the dramatic spell they cast was shattered last week when a Citi Bike kiosk and solar panel, half as high as the monument, were installed directly in front of the north pedestal.
“I’m sure Proctor and White would both be horrified,” Laura Proctor Ames, the sculptor’s great-granddaughter, said after seeing a photograph sent by The New York Times. “We were not aware of it, and I have a pit in my stomach.” Ms. Ames is the director of the A. Phimister Proctor Museum in Hansville, Wash.
The city’s Department of Transportation, which had approved the location of the bicycle docking station, announced several hours after this article was published on Wednesday that it was revisiting its decision.
The principal stakeholder in this case is Prospect Park. Its administrator, Susan M. Donoghue, is also the president of the Prospect Park Alliance, which had asked the transportation agency to move the docking station away from the “Panther” pedestal.
What remained a mystery on Wednesday was who — exactly — thought it was a good idea in the first place. Mr. Gastel would not say.
And neither would Dani Simons, the director of corporate communications at Motivate, the company that runs the Citi Bike program, which is expanding into neighborhoods like Park Slope, on the edge of Prospect Park. The docking station at “Panthers,” Third Street and Prospect Park West, is among the new locations.
Ms. Donoghue would not assign blame, saying she hoped it was simply a “disconnect” between Motivate and its contractor.
