Suppose you’re at a conference. The panels and keynotes and forums have broken up, and you head off to get a drink with a handful of attendees. Are you on the record?
Suki Kim, a New York Times best-selling author, found herself in such a situation when she attended a book festival in Brisbane, Australia, over the weekend. After listening to a controversial keynote address on racial and cultural identity, Kim and a few other authors retreated to a small room in the hotel for what was billed by the conference hosts as an “artist-only” private conversation over cocktails.
But four days later, Kim found herself quoted in The New York Times, in a piece in which she criticized another prominent author by name, lamenting that his and other books by white males on topics similar to her book’s tended to be better received. Kim was outraged, and still is, that the Times reporter Rod Nordland, who she acknowledges speaking with at the event, would quote her for an article. Nordland is the Times Kabul bureau chief and is himself a recent author of a book on Afghanistan. That’s the basis on which he was invited to the book festival, and to the smaller reception: he wrote a book.
Kim says she knew Nordland was a journalist (she considers herself a journalist as well) but she says she had no idea they were having an on-the-record conversation for a story. They were at a book festival, after all, one exclusively for authors, and Nordland never mentioned he planned to write an article for The Times.
That’s Kim’s version of events. But the more interesting fact is that’s Nordland’s version too.
I spoke to both of them by phone after Kim wrote to the public editor’s office Tuesday, angry that she had been quoted by name in the story.
Nordland agrees about the circumstances of their meeting: it was authors only, in a hotel room, with eight to 10 people. But Nordland insists that because Kim knew he was a journalist, she should have had an expectation that the conversation was on the record. He also says that at the time of their conversation, he didn’t have any plans to write a story about the conference.
Nordland also notes that Kim made similar comments the previous day at a larger forum, during which she complained that white males who do investigative journalism for a book are generally taken more seriously than women of color (she is Korean-American). But Kim says that she didn’t mention any male authors by name at the more public event. A review of the Facebook Live video of the event confirms her version.
Our normal practice is for reporters to identify themselves when they are reporting. But in this case, Rod didn’t go to the event expecting to write a story — he only realized later that there was a potentially interesting story here. That’s not so unusual — good reporters often find stories that they didn’t set out intending to cover. In this case, it led to an unfortunate misunderstanding or clash of expectations. In the ideal world, that wouldn’t happen. In retrospect, it may well have been better to circle back to Suki Kim directly to interview her on the topic. On the other hand, as I understand it, this was a hotel room full of people, and she apparently was aware that Rod was a journalist. So I’m not sure how much expectation of privacy there could reasonably be.
That seems like a stretch to me in this case. I believe Kim did have an expectation of privacy at this “artists-only,” “private” gathering — as the literature promoting the event described it. She was discussing books with a man she knew was an author and journalist, just like her. And there was no mention of any story.
Kim is insisting, unsuccessfully, that the quote be removed.
Disagreements between sources quoted in stories arise with some regularity in newsrooms. They are difficult to sort out and take any action on because it quickly turns into one person’s recollection against another’s. What’s unusual about this case is the agreement over the circumstances — Nordland acknowledges he didn’t ask to quote Kim or mention any story.
That strikes me as outside the bounds of good journalistic practice. If Nordland didn’t know until the next day that he intended to write a story, he should have gone back to Kim and asked whether she was willing to be quoted. Or he should have quoted what she said the previous day at the event captured on video for the general public — the version that didn’t attack an individual author.
I believe editors should speak to Nordland and make clear that his approach did not meet Times standards and was not good journalistic practice.
I also believe a note should be attached to the piece saying that a portion of Kim’s remarks were inappropriately obtained at a private event. Unfortunately for Kim, at this point in the publication cycle it probably makes no sense to remove the passage.
That’s too bad, because Kim had every expectation of privacy, and didn’t get it.