Satellite photos by Google can be a fun way to see your house — or your neighbor’s — from high above.
But in the case of an island in the South China Sea that is claimed by four countries, sometimes those photos can be too revealing.
That is the position maintained by Taiwan, which has asked Google to blur satellite images of the disputed island — Itu Aba, also known as Taiping Island — that show what appear to be new military installations.
United Press International, citing The China Times of Taiwan and “other local sources,” reported that the images seemed to be of antiaircraft gun blockhouse towers bigger than the existing 40-millimeter antiaircraft weapons systems on the island.
Taiwan has controlled the 110-acre island since 1956. However, the land is also claimed by China, the Philippines and Vietnam.
The British Broadcasting Corporation quoted Chen Chung-chi, a spokesman for the Taiwan Defense Ministry, as saying that “we have requested Google blur images of important military facilities” to protect military secrets and for security.
The company did not respond to additional questions about how long ago the photos were posted and how often it had received requests like this.
The request would help to “ratchet up the tension,” James Edward Hoare, associate fellow at Chatham House, an independent think tank in London, said, according to an NBC News report. The request was puzzling because it would not stop surveillance by nations with interests in the South China Sea, he said.
In July, the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague broadly rejected China’s claims that it had historic rights to control most of the South China Sea.
A notable finding by the tribunal was its declaration that Itu Aba, the largest land feature in the South China Sea, was not an island that could sustain human habitation or economic activity. The finding that Itu Aba is a rock means that Taiwan is entitled to a territorial sea extending for 12 nautical miles around it but not a 200-nautical-mile exclusive economic zone.
