Prabal Gurung, flanked by models, on the runway at a Clinton fund-raiser in New York on Tuesday. The group was wearing the designer’s T-shirt, a sold-out item in the candidate’s “Made for History” online shop.Credit...Lucas Jackson/Reuters..
The first big event of New York Fashion Week, which officially begins on Thursday, was not the Tom Ford and Kanye West calendar-breaking shows being held on Wednesday, but a Hillary Clinton fund-raiser Tuesday night that drew a phalanx of fashion heavyweights.
The event, a fashion show held at Spring Studios, a favorite Fashion Week venue, was co-hosted by Anna Wintour, the editor of American Vogue, and attended by Michael Kors, Tory Burch, Diane von Furstenberg and Joseph Altuzarra, as well as others from fashion’s A-list.
Also, it should be said, by several hundred members of the public who had paid $100 to $25,000 to see what turned out to be a parade of fancy T-shirts orchestrated not only by Ms. Wintour but also by Chelsea Clinton and Huma Abedin, the top aide to the Democratic presidential candidate who recently separated from her husband, the disgraced former Congressman Anthony Weiner.
After all, the show was not only a show: It was a fund-raiser for the Clinton campaign, the Democratic National Committee and state candidates.
And it was proof positive, as if any were needed, that caring about fashion and caring about politics are not antithetical. Plus, it was the first direct-to-consumer catwalk event of a season where a number of designers are experimenting with see-now/shop-now.
After all, the T-shirts — created by 15 designers including Marc Jacobs, Ms. Burch, Ms. von Furstenberg and Marcus Wainwright of Rag & Bone, and modeled by ballet dancers, members of the Marching Cobras New York band, and the Knicks player Carmelo Anthony and family (among others) — are sold on the campaign’s website for $45 to $60 each.
Before the show, Chelsea Clinton — wearing a T-shirt designed by Ms. von Furstenberg with the words “Proud to support Mme President” scrawled across it, paired with simple black pants and black heels — implored the crowd several times to encourage friends to register to vote, and to buy T-shirts.
As it turned out, there was a shirt option for pretty much everyone. A design from Georgina Chapman, half of the Marchesa design pair, featured black cursive lettering and beading on a dark gray background, and was paired with floor-skimming ball gown skirts. Ms. Burch’s print, worn by La La Anthony and others, had a rainbow-colored font that spelled out “Women’s Rights Are Human Rights.” Jason Wu’s was a mosaic of states in different shades of blue, seen not only on the runway but also on Ms. Wintour (who had the designer transform the print into a short-sleeved A-line dress) and on Ms. Abedin, who paired the T-shirt with an orange skirt by Chris Gelinas.
The woman in question was not at the event — she was on the campaign trail in Tampa, Fla. — which might underscore to some her personally uneasy relationship with fashion, but Grace Coddington, Vogue’s editor at large, said that such a perceived ambivalence was probably a good thing.
But before the audience could file out, Chelsea Clinton dashed onto the stage one more time to remind everyone to buy a T-shirt.
Think of it as see-now/buy-now/vote-soon.