In 2007, Koshin Paley Ellison and Robert Chodo Campbell founded the New York Zen Center for Contemplative Care, a nonprofit in Chelsea that offers meditation training and study programs for medical professionals and caregivers. Since then, they and their students have worked with over 80,000 people. Dr. Paley Ellison, co-editor of the new book “Awake at the Bedside: Contemplative Teachings on Palliative and End-of-Life Care,” lives on the Upper West Side with Mr. Campbell, who is also his husband, and two Maine coon cats.
CAT O’CLOCK Usually the cats wake me up around 6. One is 7 and his name is Obi and he’s 25 pounds. The other is Boychik — Yiddish for little boy — he’s the baby; he’s 13 pounds. Then I have some breakfast, usually quinoa and some protein. Right now I’m excited about making coffee that’s half coffee and half matcha topped with a little splash of dark chocolate almond milk — oh, it’s great. Before I leave, I always kiss Chodo, because you never know.
GETTING INTO HIS BODY Sometimes I’ll go to the gym and work out with my trainer, Kenny Ulysses Grant. He’s probably 6’4” and he looks like a superhero. He’s always reminding me, “Get out of your head.” I feel like it’s a great way to get going and get into my body and be more connected to the world.
ZEN TIME I get to the Center around 9:30. We sit for 30 minutes, walk for 10 minutes, sit for 30 minutes and walk for 10 minutes, and then there’s a dharma talk about how these Zen teachings of attention, wisdom and compassion apply to our everyday life. 
SHARING AROUND THE TABLE We have a few friends who are palliative care doctors and sometimes we have brunch with them. It’s a wonderful opportunity to share about the practice and caring for people.
SHARING BEDSIDE I visit someone who’s sick. It feels like a privilege to do that and just show up and see what’s needed, without any agenda. It’s such a rare opportunity to sit across from someone and really wonder what it is to be them.
SKYPE WITH SENSEI Every Sunday at 5 I Skype with my Zen teacher, Sensei Dorothy Dai En Friedman. She’s this 87-year-old marvelous life giver, and I’ve known her for about 15 years. We talk about the particulars of our day, my day in particular, and how I’m investigating.
RESTAURANT OPTIONS, FAIRY TALES We have a Chinese place that we like a lot, Szechuan Garden, and there’s a place called Henry’s and Community Food & Juice, which is like organic everything. Sometimes we go to Le Monde and sometimes this Mexican place. Then we come home and read and chill, relax into the night. Right now, I’m reading a book of Russian fairy tales. It’s pretty great — it’s really about life, it’s like a map of life.
CATS IN, LIGHTS OUT So, snuggles and then lights out around 11:30. Boychik doesn’t know that he’s a cat so he’s the dog, he sleeps at the foot of the bed, and then Obi, the giant cat, sleeps on my head. My Sunday routine doesn’t feel routine, each thing feels so imbued with what matters to me: to love the beings in my house, to be in my body, to take care of the mind, to have friendships and to take care of people in our community. It makes me want to cry sometimes how I just feel so blessed. It’s really cool.