Armed with her trusty .32-caliber revolver and a bottle of Irish whiskey, Dead Shot Mary is back in town.
Her real name was Mary Shanley, and she was nicknamed for her skill at pulling a pistol from her handbag and compelling fleeing pickpockets to halt in their tracks, even on the crowded streets of Manhattan.
She was credited with more than 1,000 arrests during her 26-year career with the New York Police Department, from 1931 to 1957, and as one of the earliest female first-grade detectives was considered a trailblazer.
She died in 1989 at age 93, but here she was, portrayed by Rachel McPhee, at a rehearsal for “Dead Shot Mary,” a one-woman show that opened recently.
Although the production is a modest one — the Bridge Theater at Shetler Studios, on West 54th Street in Midtown, seats only 30, and the monthlong run will end on Oct. 15 — it serves to revive a larger-than-life New York figure who has been all but forgotten today.
The show portrays the poignant side of a woman defined by the hard-edge language of the crime blotter; during a rehearsal, Ms. McPhee paced in front of a backdrop of enlarged news clippings, reflecting on the ups and downs of her character’s career as a tough plainclotheswoman.
Detective Shanley was the star of the pickpocket squad, and dressed to match the crowd she was disappearing into, at a department store, a fancy Fifth Avenue boutique or a large theater on Broadway.
Though she never married or had children, she would sometimes pose as an innocent mother by bringing her young niece along with her, recalled a relative, Patrick Mullins.
Detective Shanley grew up in Hell’s Kitchen, with little money but plenty of street savvy, he said. She was a spirited storyteller and loved cocktails and big cars, and often showed up unexpectedly with presents for his family.
According to articles published in The New York Times, Officer Shanley was promoted in 1935, earning a third-grade detective’s shield, then rose steadily until she earned the first-grade rank in 1939, at age 43. She was the fourth woman in the Police Department’s history to do so. She was also perhaps the first policewoman in New York to use a gun in the capture and arrest of a suspect.
One early arrest, in 1931, involved a fortuneteller who feigned telepathy by keeping a phone hidden in her headdress. There was the time she collared one Chinatown Charlie, a notorious pickpocket who preyed on shoppers along Fifth Avenue.
Then there was the arrest during a Mass at St. Patrick’s Cathedral. Dressed as any other worshiper in a black suit, black jeweled hat and glasses, Detective Shanley saw a female pickpocket take cash from a woman kneeling in prayer. She fired two shots to stop the woman from fleeing.
In 1935, she was hospitalized after being thrown down a flight of stairs by a “masher” she was trying to apprehend at the Savoy Theater, The Times said.
In 1937, she arrested two stickup men by firing a warning shot in the air, and was promoted to second-grade detective. During the ceremony, Mayor Fiorello H. La Guardia told her he considered it an honor to be “pinning a badge on you,” The Times reported.
She was on patrol in a smart gray wide-brimmed hat and polka-dot green dress in June 1938 when she confronted a suspect outside Macy’s in Herald Square. He pushed her in the face and ran, but was felled by a swing of her leather pocketbook, The Times reported.
By the time two nearby officers arrived to help, she had her badge in one hand and was holding the suspect by the collar in the other.
A Daily Eagle story from 1950 described Detective Shanley, at age 54, apprehending a 22-year-old man “evidently embarked on a homicidal jaunt” inside a Macy’s store in Jamaica, Queens.
Revolver raised, she sneaked up behind him and said, “Drop that gun, boy,” the paper reported.
A 1955 article in The Times described her firing a shot while pursuing a “seat tipper” — a criminal who tips back a folding seat to nab a purse — in a theater. Wearing a pale blue hat and light earrings, she was punched by the man, but he was apprehended anyway.
Once, having spied a crowd in pursuit of Grace Kelly while the actress was out shopping, Detective Shanley broke up the crowd. Then she escorted Ms. Kelly for two hours.
Part of the play touches on a scandal that enveloped Detective Shanley in 1941, which began with a barroom altercation near her apartment in Jackson Heights, Queens.
According to a Times article, Detective Shanley and her bulldog, Jiggs, had dropped in to the Spanish Rail saloon around 3 a.m., but the barman refused to serve her, even after she displayed her detective’s shield.
A man, drinking at the end of the bar with some friends, insulted Detective Shanley and her Irish ethnicity. She brandished her gun and shot in his direction, narrowly missing him.
She was arrested and charged with “conduct unbecoming an officer and overindulgence in intoxicants,” The Times reported. She was hospitalized, perhaps for a mental breakdown, and temporarily demoted back down to the rank of policewoman.
Detective Shanley retired in 1957, at age 61, after 26 years on the job. “Nemesis of 1,000 Criminals, Will Retire to Log Cabin,” a Times headline read. She spent some time in Florida but eventually returned to New York, where she died.
The show, directed by Stephen Kaliski, has attracted the interest of law enforcement groups. One performance will be held for members of the Policewomen’s Endowment Association, a group that represents active and retired female officers.
