A group of elected officials and activists in New York stood on the steps of City Hall on Tuesday to renew their call for officials to release basic findings of misconduct against the police officer who held Eric Garner in a chokehold.
A State Supreme Court judge ordered last year that summaries of misconduct findings against the officer, Daniel Pantaleo, from before Mr. Garner’s death in 2014 should be made public. The decision was viewed by some activists as a significant strike against a provision of state law that has long been cited by city lawyers in shielding such information.
But a year later, as the city pursues an appeal, members of the City Council and activists are still pressing for the information.
Lawyers for the city have argued that the 2015 ruling, by Justice Alice Schlesinger, was inconsistent with previous court decisions, and that with the appeal, the city was seeking clarity from a higher court. Mayor Bill de Blasio said the city was required to follow the law, Section 50-a of the state’s Civil Rights Code, which shields the disciplinary histories of police officers, correctional officers and firefighters from public view.
Last month, police officials cited the law in ending a longstanding practice of making available “personnel orders,” a bulletin of assignment changes and retirements that included disciplinary action, to journalists working in Police Headquarters.
The push for the information about the record of Officer Pantaleo began after a grand jury on Staten Island did not find enough evidence to indict Mr. Pantaleo in Mr. Garner’s death in 2014. Efforts to unseal the grand jury transcripts were unsuccessful.
Justice Schlesinger had found that the information was not exempt from disclosure under Section 50-a.
The law, which has been in place for four decades, says the records of police officers and firefighters that would be used to evaluate their performance or employment status are considered confidential and should not be available to outside review without the person’s written consent or a court order.
But police advocates said the law, especially now, remained critical to protecting police officers.
