In the course of a long and itinerant career as a journalist, I have moved 28 times, not counting a muddy residency toiling on a dairy farm. Over those years, as both a renter and a homeowner, I have interacted with enough real estate agents to fill a suburban bowling alley.
Twenty-four of the moves went fine; three were needlessly stressful. The latest was appalling, though not uncommon. I recount it here because it serves as a cautionary tale for innocents like me who believe that what you see is what you get in the sometimes dodgy world of home hunting.
Last fall, I was living in a two-bedroom rental cottage in Westchester County, N.Y., with my 11-year-old son. It was perfect for us. Midway through our two-year lease, the owners experienced a financial setback and informed us that they needed to sell the house as soon as possible. They asked if we could vacate early, and I said we would try.
Despite a paucity of rental homes in the area, we lucked out, chancing upon another cottage, only two blocks away, that came on the market the same day. The rent was steep — $3,600 a month, nearly $1,000 more than we had been paying — but the house was too convenient to pass up, close to my son’s friends and our pool club. My agent forwarded my offer to the owner’s agent, who responded within hours that it had been accepted.
I asked if I could sign the lease right away, but the owner’s agent told mine that we had to wait until the following week. This, I learned too late, is a common ploy used by some brokers: If a property finds a buyer or renter right away, the agent accepts the offer. The owner is elated. But then the agent stalls on the actual signing, waiting for a higher offer.
“I can’t tell you how many times I have heard that story,” said Jim Gricar, general sales manager at Houlihan Lawrence, which was not the agency with which I dealt. While most ethics complaints are resolved by the local brokerage, Mr. Gricar handles the thornier issues.
When I expressed concern about the delay in signing the lease, the owner’s agent — whom I never met nor spoke with — informed my agent that there was nothing to worry about; the house was mine. That afternoon, I notified the owners of the cottage where my son and I were living that we would vacate in about six weeks, a relief for all involved.
The following morning the owner’s agent called my agent to say that someone had offered $200 more for the house.
If I wanted to make another offer, fine; if not, the house would go to the highest bidder. For $200, we had been thrown off a cliff.
I was beyond furious. We were six weeks from being homeless — I would not break my word to my current landlords — in a very tight rental market. I had little choice but to instruct my agent to enter the bidding, and wound up paying $4,000 a month, or $9,600 more over a two-year lease.
I spoke with another agent from the same agency and was told the same thing — essentially that nothing is final until the contract is signed. It was my fault; I should have known.
Then I sent a letter to the chief executive of the brokerage house. He did not respond.
Over the next few weeks, I sought out nearly 20 agents and other real estate professionals for their opinions. Virtually all acknowledged that I had been treated unethically, if not contemptibly. But basically it always came down to this: Unless an agreement is in writing, “you have the house” doesn’t necessarily mean you have the house.
So what did I learn from my ordeal?
Rule No. 1: Insist on getting an agreement in writing, even if it’s only on the palm of your hand. (Just don’t forget to photograph it before touching the steering wheel.) Signing something other than the lease may not be legally binding, but it supports your case if you make a formal complaint to local or state authorities.
Most real estate agents undergo ethics training throughout their careers. In New York State, it is part of the initial licensing curriculum as well as the mandatory continuing education. Large firms like Houlihan Lawrence, Century 21, Weichert, Douglas Elliman and others hold periodic in-house training sessions for new and veteran agents.
And to be sure, most real estate agents are honest. Nonetheless, the home hunting process is so fraught with anxiety and second-guessing, it’s no wonder the profession is held in relatively low esteem. A 2014 Harris Poll on the prestige in which various occupations are held in the United States found that “real estate broker/agent is the profession with the highest percentage of adults considering it to have less prestige (73 percent), with 50 percent feeling it does not have that much prestige and 24 percent believing it has no prestige at all.” And a 2015 survey by the National Association of Realtors found that only 67 percent of clients said they would “definitely” recommend their agent to others.
But if you find yourself dealing with an agent who is less than ethical, as I did, what are your options?
I looked up the code of ethics established by the National Association of Realtors, an advocacy and educational organization with 1.1 million members. (There are an estimated two million real estate agents in the United States. The association makes a distinction between a Realtor with an uppercase R and a real estate agent with a lowercase R. A Realtor is a real estate professional who is member of the organization and subscribes to its code of ethics.) The association is not an enforcement body; that is generally the purview of local real estate associations or the state.
Nevertheless, its code of ethics is nothing if not comprehensive. You could probably close the deal on a beachfront condo in the time it takes to digest the dense 8,000-word document, which bears more than a passing resemblance to the Articles of Confederation, ratified by the 13 original states in 1781.
Fortunately, I found what I was looking for under the first of 17 articles.
I did not feel I had been treated honestly, but again, I had nothing in writing.
Some years back, on a cross-country flight, I made the acquaintance of a person who was prominent in New York real estate. During our conversation, she described some of the sales techniques she had employed over the years to bump up interest in properties. When hosting an open house for an apartment, for example, she said she would create a sense of urgency and drum up competition by flooding the event with friends, acquaintances and co-workers.
Is this the natural extension of staging a house, only this time with people instead of flowers? Misrepresentation or savvy? No one was deliberately lied to, as I felt I had been with my rental.
As I was a resident of Westchester County, one avenue of appeal was the Hudson Gateway Association of Realtors, a trade group of 10,000 industry professionals in Westchester, Putnam, Rockland and Orange counties, and sections of the Bronx. Disputes are heard by a panel of three arbiters — all members. Penalties can include fines of up to $15,000 and revocation of membership. But for any number of reasons — because many issues are resolved at the local level, because the prospect of a complicated, drawn-out process is off-putting, and because many major cases are tried in civil court — few consumer complaints are filed.
I could also take my grievance to the New York Department of State’s Division of Licensing Services, which investigates real estate complaints. If violations are found, it can suspend or revoke a license and issue fines of $1,000 for each violation. But in 2015, there were relatively few actions taken: 98 fines, 35 revocations, 18 suspensions and 1 reprimand.
If I lived in Connecticut, I could have gone to the Department of Consumer Protection, which essentially acts as investigator, judge and jury, with subpoena power and the ability to impose fines and revoke licenses. Richard E. Maloney Jr., the director of the trade practices division, said the rules in the National Association of Realtors’ code of ethics are often vague and difficult to enforce.
“I kind of ignore those and go by statutes and regulations,” he said, referring to the state and federal laws that govern all sorts of fraud, negligence and breach of contract. Because this way his agency has subpoena power, he said, “a licensee can’t hide the facts.” Ninety cases were prosecuted in Connecticut last year.
In New Jersey, complaints are investigated by the Real Estate Commission, a division of the state Department of Banking and Insurance, composed of five brokers, two members of the public and one department employee, according to the department’s website. Details of individual hearings are accessible on the site.
That sort of transparency is one of the ways technology is revolutionizing the industry. But it’s also changing things in less positive ways.
Whereas brokers and clients used to speak frequently and develop nuanced business relationships, he said, much communication today is through email and texting, which increases the chance of miscommunication. Moreover, he continued, the anonymity and power afforded by the web have emboldened some agents to play fast and loose with the facts — manipulating property postings, for example, and engaging in bait-and-switch tactics.
As for me, I have learned my lesson. I suppose I could appeal my case to the state licensing board. But the cottage is snug and my son and I are happy there. At the moment, I’m thinking that the best option may be never to move again.
The most common complaints received by the state licensing boards for real estate brokers in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut include: misrepresenting a sales or rental situation (for example, saying that a property has numerous bidders when it does not to inflate the price); failing to disclose faults in a property; mishandling security deposits; encouraging clients to bid higher than necessary to close a deal; failing to perform contracted services, including required paperwork; withholding relevant information; attempting to sell someone else’s exclusive listing; and posting misleading or inaccurate information online.
