LONDON — Two Polish immigrants were eating takeout pizza against a brick wall on a muggy night in Harlow, a working-class town about 20 miles northeast of central London.
The second man, who was not identified by the police, was hospitalized with bruises and hand fractures.
Six boys from Harlow — five 15-year-olds and one 16-year-old — have been arrested on suspicion of murder in the attack, which occurred shortly before midnight on Saturday. All have been released on bail. The police have appealed for witnesses to come forward, and they said they were investigating reports that the attackers had hurled racist abuse at the victims.
Mr. Jozwik in a photograph provided by the Essex police.
In early July, laminated cards with abusive messages like “No more Polish vermin” and “Go home, Polish scum” were left on cars and at several properties in Cambridgeshire, north of London.
The death of Mr. Jozwik has been devastating for his family. His brother, Radoslaw Jozwik, spoke this week outside the pizzeria with his wife, Sylwia. He said that his mother, who had worked alongside Arkadiusz at the meat factory, was struggling to cope with his death.
Arkady Rzegocki, Poland’s recently appointed ambassador to Britain, said in an interview that he feared the decision to leave the European Union had given license to xenophobia, and that more minorities were being targeted. He visited the crime scene in Harlow on Wednesday and met with Mr. Jozwik’s family. He plans to participate in a “march of silence” organized by the Polish community on Saturday.
Mr. Halfon added that Polish immigration to Harlow had helped regenerate the town, which is dotted with grocery stores run by immigrants.
Britain’s foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, was scheduled to meet with his Polish counterpart, Witold Waszczykowski, in Potsdam, Germany, on Thursday to discuss recent attacks on Poles in Britain.
Mr. Rzegocki, the ambassador, emphasized that there had been an outpouring of support from residents of Harlow, and from Britons of all walks of life, since the killing.
“There are two faces of Britain,” he said.