WASHINGTON — President Obama, reaching Asia on Friday, will reassure allies of his determination to win congressional approval of the far-reaching Trans-Pacific Partnership trade accord, but back home in congressional races, his party is on the air and online slamming it as a bad deal — and hitting Republicans for supporting it.
The friendly fire from Democratic candidates and committees speaks to the formidable challenge that Mr. Obama now faces in getting Congress to endorse the 12-nation agreement that was the signature economic goal of his second term.
 Without approval by the United States, the accord liberalizing trade among Pacific Rim countries representing 40 percent of the global economy cannot take effect. Both major-party candidates to succeed Mr. Obama oppose it.
White House officials insist that Democratic efforts against the trade pact are misguided. “It’s apparent that some members of Congress might be a little behind the curve when it comes to the politics of the president’s strategy around trade policy,” Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary, said on Wednesday.
Especially in several manufacturing states that are crucial to the Democrats’ quest to recapture the Senate, Republicans are caught in a vise between Democrats’ attacks and fear of alienating Mr. Trump’s antitrade, working-class voters — damned if they endorse the T.P.P. and damned as flip-floppers if they oppose it.
Democrats have had Republican senators on the defensive on trade in Pennsylvania, Ohio, Illinois, Wisconsin and Missouri. The Senate race in Pennsylvania recently has been a prime example.
Senator Patrick J. Toomey of Pennsylvania, one of the most endangered Republicans, in mid-August announced his opposition to the trade accord, after long being considered a supporter. Last year Mr. Toomey voted to give Mr. Obama the “fast track” negotiating authority that expedited final talks on the T.P.P., by giving Congress only a yes-or-no vote on the agreement, without the power to amend it. Mr. Toomey also had lauded its potential for creating jobs in Pennsylvania.
Several of those deals were the work of Democratic presidents, Bill Clinton and Mr. Obama. And Mr. Toomey’s switch from early support for the Pacific trade accord, like that of some other Republicans, was not unlike Mrs. Clinton’s change of heart once she was a political candidate.
The Republican incumbent who had perhaps the most to fear from the trade issue was Senator Rob Portman of Ohio, whose portrait hangs in the Washington office of the United States trade representative, the job he held under President George W. Bush, who began negotiations toward the Pacific trade deal. Soon after it was concluded in October, Mr. Portman announced his opposition, despite his trade pedigree.
Mr. Portman’s lead is not the only evidence that a pro-trade stance is not necessarily perilous — as the president has argued.
With the victory on Tuesday of Representative Debbie Wasserman Schultz in Florida’s Democratic primary elections, all 28 House Democrats who last year supported trade promotion authority for the president have come through party primaries with little or no competition, despite threats from liberal antitrade groups.
Mr. Earnest pointed that out to reporters aboard Air Force One on Wednesday, as the president began the trip that will take him to the summit meetings in Asia where T.P.P. will be a main topic.
Democratic campaign committees do tend to attack Republicans’ flip-flops on trade rather than the agreement itself. “Republican senators are hitting the panic button and flip-flopping on T.P.P. in a blatant and desperate effort to cover up their records,” said Sadie Weiner, communications director at the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee.
“They’re trying to have their cake and eat it, too,” said Andrea Bozek, communications director at the National Republican Senatorial Committee.