She has a pitching coach. She’s on a strict pitch count. And she’s in a lot of pain after a day of throwing.
Fox has done everything it can to make Ms. Bunbury, who plays the first woman to reach the big leagues, a plausible Major League pitcher. This includes having her learn how to, well, pitch.
But she’s got plenty of support.
There are plenty of hurdles that “Pitch,” which debuts on Sept. 22, has to jump. Once the novelty of its attention-grabbing gimmick wears off, how will it keep an audience? For a show that its creators have described as inspirational and feel-good, how will it handle some unsavory parts of the game and a culture that can be insular and sexist? (Not to mention, how will M.L.B. feel about the show’s confronting those issues?) And how will it cater to the hard-core baseball fan expecting authenticity while still appealing to women, whom Fox is depending on for much of its viewership?
Last year, Dan Fogelman, one of the show’s creators, met with Rob Manfred, the commissioner of Major League Baseball. He had no desire to make “Pitch” without the league’s approval — a fictional ball team was not going to work when verisimilitude was so important to the show’s world.
In addition to a battery of former big-leaguers who are serving as advisers — the former reliever Gregg Olson is Ms. Bunbury’s pitching coach — the league has given the show a team (the Padres), uniform rights and use of stadiums for shooting. Fox Sports, a longtime TV home for baseball and the sole broadcaster of the World Series since 2000, has deployed its own talent, with Joe Buck, John Smoltz, Katie Nolan and Colin Cowherd all getting regular cameos.
The Padres are eager for a barrier-breaking appearance (the team’s owner is played by a Branch Rickey-like Bob Balaban, and the Padres’ slick flirt of a general manager is played by Mark Consuelos), but Ginny is no lock for a Cy Young Award. She’s a fill-in rotation starter who, to the chagrin of some of her teammates, is getting love from the front office because of the adulation (and ticket sales) she can bring to a mid-market team. Her battery mate, the star catcher, is played by a bearded Mark-Paul Gosselaar (“Saved by the Bell,” “Franklin & Bash”).
And though M.L.B. has signed on, the creators said they will not shy away from examining the less forgiving side of the game, as the clubhouse isn’t exactly filled with enlightened male attitudes to a woman who parachuted into the men’s workplace. It will also pay special attention to the sometimes noxious repercussions of demanding, even overbearing, sports fathers.
Fox has a lot riding on “Pitch.” Last season, the network finished third among the four broadcast networks in the 18-to-49-year-old bracket important to advertisers, and with “American Idol” off the air, it has a lot of new hours to fill. Amid a sea of reboots and revivals, including “Lethal Weapon,” “Prison Break,” “24: Legacy” and “The Exorcist,” “Pitch” may mollify bloodthirsty critics who say the network is starved for original content.
Mr. Barclay also compared “Pitch” to “The West Wing” — a workplace drama in a high-profile setting (and a show he also worked on). One plotline in the first season of “Pitch” is concerned with the trading deadline and the stress and hardships it places on players and their families.
But for every “The West Wing,” there is also a graveyard reserved for other behind-the-scenes shows like “Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip,” Aaron Sorkin’s 2006-07 dramedy about a sketch comedy series. That show started strongly but ultimately lost two thirds of that audience, and NBC canceled it after one season.
