Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump are spoiling for an extraordinary clash over race and gender that could come as early as Monday’s debate, with both presidential candidates increasingly staking their fortunes on the cultural issues that are convulsing the nation.
Mr. Trump last week emphatically endorsed “stop-and-frisk,” a contentious policing tactic that is loathsome to many African-Americans. His political pitch to black voters, as he put it at a rally on Saturday in Roanoke, Va., is, “What do you have to lose?” At the same event, Mr. Trump mangled the name of the new National Museum of African American History and Culture and bragged about his respect for women, just hours after threatening to invite Gennifer Flowers, who accused Bill Clinton of having an adulterous relationship with her, to the debate.
In a campaign that has veered from traditional policy arguments toward a battle over national identity and values, Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Trump are more sharply opposed over racial and gender issues than any two presidential opponents in decades. Rather than play it safe with milquetoast positions, Mrs. Clinton wants to increase turnout among African-Americans and women by tackling issues of bias and respect. Mr. Trump is positioning himself at the vanguard of white men.
Many Democrats believe Mrs. Clinton has an edge: Her party is energized around these issues and seems eager for a fight, while some Republicans sound fatigued about racism in law enforcement.
Yet Republicans see electoral advantages for Mr. Trump. He won the nomination largely by appealing to the resentments of whites, especially working-class voters who say they are tired of debating racism and appreciate Mr. Trump’s message of law and order. He is also emphasizing security at a time of unpredictable violence in American cities, such as Friday’s fatal shooting of five people at a mall near Seattle.
Even in other times of social unrest, few if any presidential candidates have constructed their political arguments around themes of race, gender and cultural diversity as much as Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Trump. And their message has only intensified before the first debate, which looms as a showdown for a wide spectrum of voters — minorities and women and more educated voters on one side, white men and working-class voters on the other.
Mrs. Clinton, who holds a slim lead in national poll averages, has responded to the violence of the last week by casting herself again as a champion of diversity and inclusion. She spoke out quickly after the fatal police shooting of a black man in Tulsa, Okla., to denounce “systemic racism” against blacks. And after the recent bombings in New York and New Jersey, she rushed to make the case that Mr. Trump had endangered the country with his oratorical attacks on Muslims.
Mr. Pence and several Republican lawmakers have drawn criticism for such remarks on race, including a congressman from North Carolina, Robert Pittenger, who said that protesters in Charlotte “hate white people because white people are successful and they’re not.” Mr. Pittenger later apologized.
Facing polls that show most voters see him as intolerant of minorities and women, Mr. Trump has sought to reassure voters that he could also be an inclusive president. He has visited black communities a few times, and at the rally in Roanoke on Saturday, Mr. Trump called the new African-American museum in Washington “a beautiful place” and vowed to support black Americans as president.
Mr. Trump also boasted of having employed women in influential jobs. But he risked alienating some women voters over the weekend by threatening to provide a front-row seat at the debate to Ms. Flowers as retaliation to remarks by Mark Cuban, the billionaire who has been a vocal Trump critic.
Celinda Lake, a Democratic pollster, said Mrs. Clinton’s focus on “bringing people together” would resonate with female voters, many of whom are troubled by the recent police shootings.
“Hillary Clinton has a real chance to get these independent women out of the undecided column with her messages about race and gender rather than Trump’s divisive views,” Ms. Lake said.