A California company that operated a natural gas storage system that leaked last year, spewing thousands of tons of methane and other chemicals into the air and forcing the evacuation of more than 8,300 households, reached a $4 million settlement with state prosecutors, officials announced on Tuesday.
The company, Southern California Gas Company, pleaded no contest to a misdemeanor of failing to immediately report the Oct. 23, 2015, gas leak to the California Office of Emergency Services and to the local Certified Unified Program Agency. As part of the plea, the company will be ordered to pay $307,500 in fines and penalties, the Los Angeles County district attorney, Jackie Lacey, said in a statement.
The company will also be required to install and maintain an infrared methane monitoring system at the site in Aliso Canyon that will cost up to $1.5 million. Other provisions call for pressure monitors at each gas well, an outside company to test and certify the systems, and the hiring of six full-time employees to operate and maintain the new leak detection systems around the clock.
The total cost for these positions will be about $2.25 million for the next three years, according to the prosecutor’s office. The company will also pay $246,672 for the cost of the investigation and emergency response by the Los Angeles County Fire Department’s Health and Hazardous Materials Division.
Terms of the settlement must be completed by a Nov. 29 sentencing date. The agreement will not interfere with pending civil suits against the company, Ms. Lacey said.
The agreement stems from a natural gas leak that engineers believed was caused by a rupture 500 feet below the surface. Residents who returned after being evacuated continued to complain of being sick from the odors even after the leak was declared capped in February.
Alexandra Naga, a senior organizer with the group Food & Water Watch, which has been campaigning to shut the site, called the fine “barely a slap on the wrist” for the company.
“No fine can make SoCalGas’ aging Aliso Canyon storage facility safe,” she said in a statement.
Matt Pakucko, the president and a founder of the group Save Porter Ranch, which has been monitoring the well system and also seeks its closing, worried about what will happen when its wells are restarted. He noted that the company reported a leak from a pipe as recently as Monday.
The rupture led to state reforms about the regulation of the Aliso Canyon storage site specifically and the introduction of legislation about the placement of natural gas wells statewide.