Windows were smashed, glass doors broken and trains stuck. The day after an explosion injured 29, causing mayhem in Chelsea, residents of the Manhattan neighborhood recounted the blast.
As detectives scoured every inch of the bomb scene in Chelsea on Sunday, New Yorkers were conducting their own investigations. But theirs were turned inward, as they felt around for the psychological shrapnel that an explosion on a busy city street is designed to release, as damaging in its way as the kind that tears into flesh.
A walk around Manhattan revealed glimpses of these inquiries, quiet but as intense as those beneath the emergency klieg lights.
Suzie Shapiro got as close as she could to the scene on Sunday.
On an uptown subway on Sunday, a group of doo-wop singers performed just as they do every other day, but added as they left the train, “Be safe out there.” Moments later, the F train bypassed the 23rd Street station near the bomb scene “due to a police investigation.” The conductor spoke in bored tones over the intercom, as if it were like any other incident.
Getting on with life in New York has been a work in progress for at least 15 years.
In 2010, a car bomb was found in a Nissan Pathfinder parked in Times Square, though it did not detonate. The episode rattled the city even as residents spoke of the proverbial dodged bullet. But the bullet is always out there, as Saturday night reminded everyone.
No lives were lost. Had New York dodged another one?
Eleven-year-old Natalie Wollen did not think so. She said she did not want to leave her Chelsea apartment all day on Sunday, but did so to walk her dog.
“I’m still scared,” she said, her lips quivering. She had heard reports, which were later retracted, of a third bomb. “If there were three already, there could be another one,” she said.
Years after Sept. 11, 2001, some New Yorkers still use that day as a guide, a measure for examining anxiety not unlike the minimum-height sign outside the scary ride in an amusement park. When something like this happens, they ask themselves, does this day feel as bad as that day, that line on the wall of my psyche? Better? Worse?
“I don’t feel anywhere near that kind of intensity,” said Merril Stern, sitting in a Starbucks near the blast site.
Similarly, Tyschelle Doucette from Queens was greeted by Mayor Bill de Blasio, and she told him, as if seeking to reassure the leader of a jittery city: “I was here for 9/11. If it’s happening, it’s happening.” The mayor called her an example to other New Yorkers.
For Will Finnegan, 31, a former Marine, the news of the blast brought him back to the full-alert levels he worked in while deployed for five years in Afghanistan, he said. He went to work checking on friends in the neighborhood.
For others, the images of the explosion, as seen on television and smartphone screens (a bright flash and people running away, looking back over their shoulders), belonged somewhere else. Somewhere far away.
“New Yorkers, we see now, here, what we have seen only abroad,” said James Mitchell, 54, an Access-a-Ride driver. “Chickens have come home to roost.” He thought back to 2001 and found something more troubling in the Chelsea explosion, he said.
Downtown, sitting on a bench in the West Village, a 51-year-old mother, Maria Lugo, might beg to differ. To be a parent in these times is to know fear, she said.
His father, Kyle Li, did not correct him. But he mourned what he said he lost on Saturday night.
