Illustrated. 439 pp. Twelve. $30.
 Yes, one candidate insults the press while the other avoids it; yes, a major party is in the process of shattering to pieces at the hands of a possibly unstable demagogue. And yes, the consequences of voters’ seeming masochism in nominating two historically dislikable individuals are, if not dire for democracy, at least a bit weird. But there’s nothing better than a good story, and 2016 is, as political stories go, one for the ages.
It is true this year, of course. But it was also true in 1980, when Ronald Reagan — “a B-list actor with simple views” — was counted out; in 1948, when Harry Truman was “a gone goose”; and in 1824, when Andrew Jackson “was not a serious contender.” Even in the Republic’s early days, the powers that be were sure that “there was a pattern to how these things went,” but the voters scotched their theories.
Dickerson delights in stories like these, when the pundits’ dismay was the newsman’s joy. Many of the tales retold here are familiar: Reagan grabbing the microphone in New Hampshire in 1980, Howard Dean screaming himself hoarse in Iowa in 2004. (One man’s burst of emotion was rewarded, the other’s punished.) But while these stories may have hardened into lore, they are enlivened here by Dickerson’s range of reference and eye for texture.
No bold new ground is broken here, no unknown moments rescued from obscurity or history reinterpreted in trenchant ways. Grand theoretical claims are not advanced; this is a work of storytelling. The book is organized by theme, not chronology, which sometimes makes it a jumble, particularly when events that led to one another are presented out of order: The battle inside the Republican Party between Barry Goldwater and Nelson Rockefeller in 1964, for example, comes before the ­conservative-versus-establishment showdown between Robert Taft and Dwight Eisenhower in 1952.
But Dickerson knows what he is doing: “Whistlestop,” he writes at one point, is a book “to luxuriate in on the couch while you watch the sun move across the living room.” This is precisely the lyrical, laid-back rhythm the book achieves. It should be kept on the night stand and dipped into when you crave a good tale. Like Dickerson as an interviewer, it has sturdy charm; it is inquisitive, generous, probing and thoughtful. You read “Whistlestop” to put the chaos of today’s campaign into perspective — or, perhaps, to escape from it.