Jerry Lang was a safety for the St. Norbert Green Knights in 1983 when they defeated Fordham, 18-9, in what turned out to be the last college football game played at Lambeau Field in Green Bay, Wis.
Lang, now an orthopedic surgeon at the University of Wisconsin, recalled the rain and the sloppy turf, the fumble he recovered, the four interceptions St. Norbert overcame, and the scant number of people in the stands.
“We had about 53,000 no-shows,” Lang said.
Only 842 souls were reported to have attended that game, at the home of the Packers.
Finishing the season at Lambeau — for the second consecutive year — was special for St. Norbert, a Catholic college only miles from Green Bay. The Packers were (and still are) part of the college’s campus in De Pere, living there during training camp in a 60-room dormitory.
Fordham also had a connection to the Packers, through Vince Lombardi, one of the university’s Seven Blocks of Granite in the 1930s, who later coached the Packers to five N.F.L. championships. And both season-ending college contests were called the Vince Lombardi Memorial Game.
On Saturday, Lambeau will finally host another college football game, between Wisconsin and Louisiana State, and it is likely to be a prelude to more. It will also bring the Packers into the ranks of professional teams that host college football games in their stadiums. Jerry Jones, the owner of the Dallas Cowboys, has brought 52 college football games to seven-year-old AT&T Stadium in Arlington, Tex. The latest version of Yankee Stadium, which is also seven years old, has hosted 10 games, six of them the annual Pinstripe Bowl.
The Packers do not need to bring college football to Lambeau to buttress their bottom line. The N.F.L. business is quite profitable. In fiscal 2015, they earned a franchise-record $75 million in operating profits on revenue of $408.7 million. “But we’re a community-owned team, so for us, giving back to the community is a real priority,” said Mark Murphy, the president of the Packers.
Giving back is defined, in part, by importing major events to add tourism to the area, like Kenny Chesney concerts last year (one of which, rife with drunkenness, led to 25 arrests and up to 300 ejections) and the Frozen Tundra Hockey Classic in 2006.
Brad Toll, president of the Greater Green Bay Convention & Visitors Bureau, said L.S.U. fans arriving at the local airport from Baton Rouge on seven charter flights were generally booked for three-night stays in the area, as were many Wisconsin fans and alumni coming from Madison and other parts of the country.
A crowd of more than 80,000 is expected Saturday at Lambeau for the game, which will be televised by ABC at 3:30 p.m. Eastern, preceded by “College GameDay” on ESPN at 9 a.m. The game is the sort of neutral-site matchup designed to enhance the profile of the programs, help their recruiting and aid their early-season strength of schedule.
Saturday’s college schedule includes three other games at N.F.L. stadiums: Oklahoma-Houston at NRG Stadium, in Houston; Georgia-North Carolina at the Georgia Dome, in Atlanta; and Alabama-Southern California at AT&T Stadium. On Sept. 10, Tennessee and Virginia Tech will meet at an unusual spot: Bristol Motor Speedway in Tennessee.
Murphy said that he and Barry Alvarez, Wisconsin’s athletic director, began to informally discuss Lambeau as a site for a game several years ago. But it did not become a reality until ESPN was trying to match L.S.U. with an opponent for one of its events, the Texas Kickoff at NRG Stadium.
The Packers are paying Wisconsin $3 million and L.S.U. $2.1 million to play at Lambeau. In 2014, ESPN paid L.S.U. $3 million and Wisconsin $2 million for the Texas Kickoff. Wisconsin was paid $4 million to play Alabama at AT&T Stadium to start its season last year.
Lang, one of the few college players to have experienced Lambeau, will be in the area on Saturday to watch St. Norbert play its first game of the season. If he gets a ticket, he will also watch Wisconsin play L.S.U.
