The pop, the pulp and the politics of “Empire” are often so explosive they might be expected to send the show flying in a million different directions. Episodes like this week’s, however, go a long way toward explaining why that’s never happened: Quiet scenes involving the three Lyon sons, like the scotch-fueled exchange that appears near the end of the hour, frequently serve as the invisible thread that holds the whole thing together.
In the exchange, equal parts rueful and playful, Hakeem, Jamal and Andre all face serious burdens. Jamal has finally accepted that he has PTSD, and that it’s preventing him from performing. Andre is mourning the death of his wife, Rhonda, and battling the bipolar disorder he fears he can’t successfully treat without her help. Hakeem has a newborn daughter, but the family’s byzantine interpersonal politics and his own reluctance to settle down have stopped him from stepping up as her father.
With Andre’s smiling but steely encouragement behind them — a far cry from his wild-eyed, hallucinatory antics earlier in the episode, and a better fit for actor Trai Byers’s natural Gary Cooper demeanor — the three young men agree to face their demons head-on. Together, they toast to Hakeem’s daughter, but not before cracking wise about their seemingly never-ending bad-luck streak.
“Man, everybody messed up,” Hakeem says, attempting to offer big-picture perspective.
“Ain’t nobody messed up as the Lyon brothers, I’m sorry,” Jamal jokes in response.
Scenes like this one showcase the easy fraternal interplay between Mr. Byers and his fellow actors Jussie Smollett (Jamal) and Bryshere Y. Gray (Hakeem). These guys sound and act like brothers do, and the warmth that radiates from them when they’re getting along earns this soapy show substantial good will every time.
That good-natured vibe doesn’t necessarily vanish when the three brothers are separated. Earlier in the episode, a striking and sweet scene in the studio — edited montage-style, jumping back and forth between the writing and recording processes — shows Hakeem and his new collaborator Nessa (Sierra McClain) having the time of their lives as they work on a new song together. Mr. Gray and Ms. McClain are beautiful people and their physical chemistry makes their characters’ artistic relationship seem both convincing and joyful, despite the menacing shadow Nessa’s uncle Shyne casts over their interactions.
What’s more, Hakeem and Nessa’s duet echoes the similarly cheeky, cheery musical meeting between Lucious and Cookie, whose first encounter is shown here in flashback. A Catholic schoolgirl with a good head on her shoulders, the young Cookie is drawn to Lucious not by his evident job as a low-level gangster, but by his adorable rendition of Biz Markie’s goofball rap classic “Just a Friend.” (In the present, Lucious notes that Cookie always saw him as a talent, not as trouble, and seems sincerely grateful that someone did.) The payoff comes in the form of Biz himself, who shows up to serenade Cookie with his signature song at Lucious’s behest. Watching her stagger out of bed and open the door only to discover the larger-than-life M.C. in the middle of the song’s over-the-top chorus is a highlight of the series so far.
But this is “Empire,” a show that can’t keep it too light for too long without sacrificing thrills or thematic relevance; this episode came stocked with both. It introduces us to City Councilman Angelo DuBois (Taye Diggs), a handsome do-gooder from a wealthy family, whose anti-violence organization bears goes by the nearly self-parodic acronym WOKE (We Organize for Knowledge and Empowerment).
At first, both Jamal and his mother, Cookie, blow off DuBois’s message as respectability politics that places blame for the difficulties of black Americans on themselves, not on the systemic obstacles of racism, poverty and segregation. But Jamal, still reeling from being shot last season, quickly warms to the anti-gun message, while his mother warms to the man himself. (Mr.  For his part, DuBois begins to temper his rhetoric so as to de-emphasize victims and victimizers and focus, instead, on the shared struggle for survival amid what Cookie refers to elsewhere as “everything this world throws at black people.” None of this cuts any ice with Lucious, who sees him as an interloper with his son and a romantic rival for his ex.
Lucious, of course, has his own problems, although he seems to have solved one by the end of the hour. Last week, his half brother Tariq planted a bug in the nursery where Lucious and his wife of convenience, Annika, tend to Bella, her daughter with Hakeem. In a delightfully clever scene to which any parent who’s ever struggled with a baby monitor can relate, albeit not in such a high-stakes way, Annika stumbles across the camera and microphone when they produce feedback with the monitor’s walkie-talkie unit. As a slumbering Lucious wakes up and wordlessly begins paying attention, Annika, realizing something’s wrong, slowly moves the monitor from one stuffed animal to another until they find the offending teddy bear; Lucious destroys the bug by literally tearing out the stuffed animal’s eyes. As techno-thrillers go, it’s not “Mr. Robot,” but it’s a lot of fun.
Andre’s fate in the episode’s final scene is the opposite of fun. Returning to his and Rhonda’s tony old neighborhood to remove the last of his belongings from their house, Andre is reported to the police by a white neighbor and immediately treated like a suspect for entering his own home. The show pulls no punches about the N.Y.P.D. officers who show up: They’re aggressive; they react to his friendly and cooperative responses as if he’d given them the finger; they’re even harsher when he starts returning some of their verbal barbs; and in the end they call him “boy” as they wrestle him to the ground and hold a gun to his head, shouting “Stop resisting!” as a pretext for whatever they might inflict upon him next.
It would almost read as too clear-cut a case of police misconduct, if it weren’t for the fact that far worse transgressions are broadcast nationwide via cellphone footage virtually every day. “Empire” knows it’s a soap opera, with an obligation to give viewers all the romance and skulduggery that entails, but amid its manufactured madness, the show displays an equal sense of obligation to reflect the world in which we live.