SANTA CLARA, Calif. — A postgame professional football locker room is a primal cave. Massive and bruised men dress and move slowly, their bodies lost to ache. I noticed a curiously ebullient man, San Francisco 49ers linebacker Eli Harold, and wandered over to hear what he had to say.
His team had just recorded a dominating 28-0 victory on Monday night over the Los Angeles Rams in a dull, prolonged nap of a game. But he talked instead of listening last week to ESPN as Trent Dilfer, a yakker and retired quarterback, opined that Colin Kaepernick, the 49ers’ backup quarterback, should remain quiet and stop taking a knee during the national anthem as his way of protesting racial injustice and police brutality. Such actions, Dilfer said, threatened to rip the 49ers apart.
I had landed in the Bay Area hours before this game, curious to hear what 49ers fans made of Kaepernick, a once-favored son whose skills may be eroding but whose political voice is finding flower.
Their answers offered a welter of anger and joy, and ambivalence brimming over. But it was most intriguing to stand in that locker room and listen as young men, most often celebrated for their ability to conduct feats of savage excellence, searched for the words to express their nascent political consciousness.
San Francisco 49ers backup quarterback Colin Kaepernick brings his protest against racial inequality to a nationally televised Monday Night Football audience.
Last year, we in New York had a chance to listen and watch as Carmelo Anthony, a basketball star in the middle age of his career, embraced the struggles of Baltimore, his wounded hometown, and the battle for gun control. Here in Santa Clara, Kaepernick has undergone a similar metamorphosis, speaking and donating hundreds of thousands of dollars to charity.
He came out of the shower Monday night and slipped a shirt over his lithe and tattooed torso. He stood in the locker room, his hair in neat cornrows, as reporters surrounded him, a bristling thorn bush of microphones and cameras and recorders. Calmly, he answered question after question.
Are you proud of your role in stirring players around the N.F.L. — several knelt or raised fists Sunday during the various anthems — to take a role in protesting police brutality?
Kaepernick’s question tugs at his team’s fans no less than its players. Their reaction to Kaepernick broke along often uncomprehending lines of race.
White fans spoke, often with genuine empathy, of Kaepernick’s right to speak. But few approved of his actions. They spoke of cops who are friends, or relatives in the military, or they said they sympathized with the same. Cody and Shiloh Oden, two bearded, 30-something brothers, walked toward the stadium wearing red jerseys emblazoned with the names of former 49ers: Frank Gore and Jerry Rice. They came from Nevada, where Kaepernick had a celebrated college career.
Several white fans asked if I realized Kaepernick, who is biracial, was raised by white parents who adopted him. When I asked why that was significant, our conversations trailed away. Their assumption seemed to be that if he was raised by whites, he must know that they meant well.
Sitting, or kneeling, as the case may be, during the national anthem is a time-honored means of protest.
Long ago, as a high school student during the last years of the Vietnam War, I sometimes remained seated during the anthem at Shea Stadium, and unhappy fans sometimes gave me a beer-flecked shower.
Fans of the San Francisco 49ers had mixed reactions to Colin Kaepernick's protesting by declining to stand during the national anthem.
Donald J. Trump, the Republican presidential nominee, was born to fabulous comfort; as a young prince he oversaw his father’s real estate empire, which was reliably accused of discriminating against black potential tenants. White racist nationalists are among those who have flocked to his campaign banner, and Trump’s campaign has retweeted some of their messages and symbols.
Trump replied by administering his own rhetorical beer-soaking of Kaepernick, saying he found something “very sad” about Kaepernick’s protest.
This is the state of our land in 2016. Maybe the final words on action and silence should be left to Kaepernick. Reporters asked him what he made of the former quarterback Dilfer’s insistence that as a backup quarterback he should remain in the shadows.
Kaepernick, who kept a courtly aspect during the interview, flared for the first time.
That was the sound of a young man who has found his voice.