I grew up in Sierra Leone, on the campus of Fourah Bay College, the oldest university in West Africa. My father was an engineering professor, my mother an accountant and together they agreed that someday I would become a doctor. They wholeheartedly encouraged me to study the sciences. My father, in particular, embraced the impartiality of science and math. “Wherever you go, two plus two will always equal four,” my father routinely told me. I could be a small African girl who spoke English with a heavy accent, but calculus and physics would not care: They would display my abilities objectively, unequivocally and unapologetically.
It was my mother’s voice that I heard first every morning before school. Mom woke up early, got ready for work, then started making the meal that would be the foundation of our day. It could be a chicken stew and fried plantains or boiled yams. As soon as she entered the kitchen, she started her wake-up chant: “Come eat or you’ll miss your bus!” By the time breakfast was at the table, so was her family.
Then one day my mother fell ill with what seemed to be malaria. This was the first time I saw her sick. Her chest heaved, she vomited violently, and she fell to the ground so hard that I feared she would not get up again. I was crying. My father was never good with uncertainty or illness, but that day he was very good. He made food and cleaned up, and his calmness reassured me.
That evening, my Uncle Moi, who was a university student, brought five of his Bible study friends to pray for Mom.
Born into Muslim families, both my parents and their siblings had been introduced to a new faith as children in schools run by missionaries. They were also given new names: Momodu and Jillo were baptized as Joseph and Rachel. But there was no resentment here — in Sierra Leone, religions intermingle, and Christians and Muslims celebrate each other’s holy days side by side. As for my parents, they believed in God but did not regularly practice religion.
That was until the prayer group came to our home.
Uncle Moi, my father’s younger brother, was one of those people who worked hard to come off as serious, but there was always a hint of mischief behind his big eyes. I could never really read him. The first and only time I ever took a puff of a cigarette was because he offered me his. He then immediately told my parents that I had smoked.
“Today we will pray for our sister Rachel,” he said reverently.
“Amen!” they said. His friends tightly clasped small Bibles.
“Let us pray for our sick sister!” he said again.
To his right was a very pretty girl, a stylish college student that I had noticed around campus. That day she wore an orange-and-red fitted outfit. Long braids spilled down her back. Her braids were extensions, fake hair, but the expensive kind.
This time the pretty girl also raised an arm to the sky. She squeezed her eyes tight for further emphasis.
They placed my dehydrated mother in a chair in the middle of the room. The heat and her fever kept her sweating.
I watched from the corner as the rhythm of the prayers began to build.
“Hallelujah!” Everyone was excited; there was screaming, clapping of hands, stomping and loud mutterings of incomprehensible sounds.
Uncle was somewhat subdued. He could not speak in tongues or throw himself in the air in leaps of faith as those around him seemed to do with ease.
The pretty girl was moved to tears.
My mother’s eyes were open. She wasn’t sweating.
Mom slept well that night. In the morning she had my father and me pray with her in thanksgiving. That Sunday, and every subsequent Sunday, we went to church.
But we never saw my uncle at church. When my mom finally confronted him on this, his answer was simple, as truthful answers often are.
