When the singer-songwriter Sara Bareilles came to New York from her native California in 2013 and rented what she described as “a really sweet one-bedroom” in the West Village, who knew — certainly not Ms. Bareilles — that she’d soon be crooning a love song to the city?
“I was just testing the waters. I thought I would only be here for a year,” said Ms. Bareilles, 36, who composed the Tony-nominated score for the Broadway musical “Waitress” and is a five-time Grammy nominee in categories including song of the year and album of the year. She would have her New York adventure, she figured, then happily return to her life in Los Angeles and her house in the seaside neighborhood of Venice.
The pops come courtesy of a cherry-red poster with white script reading “I Love You,” an aqua throw pillow on the sectional, a striped Peruvian rug on a wall in the studio and a pair of poufs — Ms. Bareilles calls them sister poufs — one turquoise, one red.
Ms. Bareilles has taken more care this time around, shipping out some of her favorite pieces from California. “That made a huge difference,” she said. The haul included a chair and a half where she reads and meditates; those two poufs; a wood-and-metal cabinet; a stained-glass guitar lamp made from found materials, a gift to herself when she finished her third album, “Kaleidoscope Heart”; and a Yamaha upright piano.
She bought some pieces for the new apartment, including a sheepskin-covered bench and a custom-made table for the kitchen nook — “I’ve always wanted a kitchen nook,” she said — where she has her morning coffee and answers email.
A feng shui-minded friend urged Ms. Bareilles to reposition the bed so that her feet would be pointing toward the door. She acquiesced, and “I swear to God I started sleeping better.” Consequently, when this same friend advised that the first thing you see in the morning should have special meaning, Ms. Bareilles needed no convincing. On a trip to ABC Carpet & Home, she saw a pink wire sculpture spelling out the words: “You always had the power, my dear. You had it all the time.” It now hangs on the wall opposite the bed.
Because her house in Venice is small, Ms. Bareilles had no difficulty adjusting to apartment living. Actually, she relishes it.
