CHARLOTTE, N.C. — This city’s leaders, faced with mounting demands for transparency after a fatal police shooting of a black man led to rioting, resisted calls on Friday for the immediate release of video of the killing and argued that a rushed disclosure could compromise a criminal inquiry.
The status of the police video of the shooting of Keith Lamont Scott, 43, and the shooting’s circumstances have been debated here for days, and the discussion deepened on Friday, especially after lawyers for Mr. Scott’s wife, Rakeyia, released a cellphone video that she took of the episode on Tuesday afternoon.
During a news conference shortly before Ms. Scott’s video became public, city officials alternated between declaring their commitment to openness and insisting that no official footage should be released before the conclusion of the inquiry by the State Bureau of Investigation.
The Charlotte police chief, Kerr Putney, warned that hastily distributed footage might endanger the city’s wary and fragile peace.
As protests continue over a fatal police shooting, residents try to adjust to the upheaval.
As protests continue over a fatal police shooting, residents try to adjust to the upheaval.CreditCredit...Gerry Broome/Associated Press..
The demands of protesters, who have sometimes chanted for the release of the footage, gained traction Friday, even after the city made its public defense. When demonstrators took to Charlotte’s streets on Friday for the fourth consecutive night of protests, they reiterated their plea. Protesters also marched in Atlanta.
Hillary Clinton, the Democratic nominee for president, said on Twitter that the city should release its footage without delay. Mrs. Clinton initially planned to visit Charlotte on Sunday, but she postponed her trip after Ms. Roberts publicly asked her and Donald J. Trump, the Republican nominee, to avoid visiting the city for now.
Earlier, Cornell William Brooks, the president of the national N.A.A.C.P., said the release of the video could not wait. “It’s important the public have as much information as possible,” he said.
The state attorney general, Roy Cooper, also urged Charlotte officials to make their footage public.
Richard Wright Jr., 29, of Charlotte, N.C., participated in a third night of protests in the city on Thursday, after a police shooting of a black man ignited demonstrations. “I really felt in my heart I wanted to be about something,” Mr. Wright said.
Gov. Pat McCrory, a former Charlotte mayor who signed the new measure into law this summer, expressed reservations about releasing the footage.
In other developments, the police said that a man had been arrested in connection with the Wednesday night shooting death of a protester, Justin Carr, in central Charlotte. Jail records showed that Rayquan Borum, 21, of Charlotte, was charged with first-degree murder.
Mr. McCrory said he hoped that the arrest would quell speculation among some protesters that a police officer had opened fire and killed Mr. Carr during Wednesday’s march.
Officials were also bracing for the possibility of unrest over the weekend, and Ms. Roberts did not lift the city’s midnight-to-6-a.m. curfew, which she ordered late Thursday. The police did not enforce the curfew early Friday, and Chief Putney indicated that officers might not ever do so.
Mr. McCrory said he anticipated that the National Guard would remain in Charlotte until at least Sunday, and President Obama, in an interview aired Friday on ABC’s “Good Morning America,” urged calm.
