372 pp. A Marian Wood Book/G.P. Putnam’s Sons. $27.
Suffused with details of small-town life and feelings of regret, Dianne Warren’s new novel has the seductive melancholy of a country song being played on a long drive home. Indeed, references to female singers (particularly those who come to a bad end) pepper this mesmerizing tale of bad choices and their consequences.
“Liberty Street” opens with a middle-aged woman named Frances suddenly telling her partner of 20 years that she once had a husband and lost a baby. He is understandably unhappy about this revelation, and from the confession onward Frances’ life with him unravels: She abandons him, quits her job and returns to her hometown on the prairies of Saskatchewan to settle unfinished business. Coiling backward into her past, we discover that the heart of the novel isn’t marriage, as we suspected at the beginning, but a monumental struggle between a mother and a daughter. We become complicit travel companions, witnessing two women hurting each other yet unable to stop.
If motherhood equals entrapment, then what is her daughter supposed to make of that? To rebel, Frances disregards her mother’s ambition, trundling through school getting B’s and C’s. She doesn’t quite fit in, a circumstance partly exacerbated by the fact that her parents are English, having moved to Canada after World War II. But despite this, she is in no rush to escape, and so the psychological tussle with her mother intensifies.
Dislike of babies — or, rather, a complicated negative response to them — is the only subject on which mother and daughter seem to agree, as Frances hurtles along the trajectory of an ill-advised marriage. “There’s a pill now,” her mother reminds her. “Do you know about the pill?” Frances is certain she will never be tempted to have children, although the ramifications of this choice play out in the relationships she forms later in life, providing a reminder that for many women the attainment of personal freedom requires stark choices.
Warren’s crisp, evocative and controlled prose allows the highly charged emotions of her characters space to breathe. The frustrations and simmering racist violence underlying the community are powerfully conveyed, and as with Warren’s debut novel, “Juliet in August,” the Saskatchewan landscape is almost hallucinated into life, from the “snows and snows” of winter to the vast, hot, vacant plains of summer. When I finished, I wanted to go straight back to the start and be taken on the journey again, preferably with a soundtrack by Patsy ­Cline.