BOOTHBAY, Maine — The craggy coast of Maine, dotted with lobster shacks, tidal inlets and fishing villages, has long been a popular summertime destination.
But beneath the picturesque scenes here is a roiling debate over the area’s future.
The intensity of the debate is surprising, given that its proximate cause is a rather mundane bit of road construction and whether to add a traffic roundabout on Route 27, which runs down the spine of this peninsula.
But the real cause of the inflamed passions is the man pushing the roundabout — a wealthy developer named Paul Coulombe (pronounced “Kuh-LOME”), who has won as many admirers as adversaries in his few short years here.
The debate will come to a head on Nov. 8, the same day as the presidential election, when the question of whether to build the roundabout will appear on the ballot. Although the roundabout would serve as a gateway to the entire region, only Boothbay’s 2,502 registered voters can vote on it. For now, they appear just as split over the construction as they are over Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump.
Mr. Coulombe has been buying up the town piece by piece with the intention of converting it from a comfortable old shoe of a place into a luxury destination to compete with other high-end coastal towns like Kennebunkport, Camden and Bar Harbor.
He has upgraded the golf course and invested $50 million in the adjacent clubhouse. He has transformed a nearby lighthouse into a bed-and-breakfast that costs $500 a night. He has built for himself a $30 million, marble-laden mansion with, among other features, a 14-karat-gold chandelier modeled on one in Versailles, an infinity pool and 37 televisions.
And he conveys confidence that he knows what is best for Boothbay.
“I think you need to open your doors and open your eyes and open your minds to a better future for the town,” Mr. Coulombe told residents at a meeting in 2013 as he laid out his plan.
Many people, including the town leaders, agree. But critics object to his vision, his approach and his display of wealth, saying they are at odds with New England values.
“You have a nouveau riche person who has decided to change Boothbay Harbor from a cozy, treasured spot to a destination point for the rich and wealthy,” said Sumner H. Lipman, a lawyer who represents several clients with whom Mr. Coulombe has tangled.
“When he doesn’t get his way, then he takes action to punish people until they give up,” Mr. Lipman added.
The roundabout has become a symbol of Mr. Coulombe’s attempt to put his stamp on Boothbay and a proxy for an identity crisis that the town did not quite know it had. Suddenly, everyone is debating whether Boothbay’s future lies in upscale development or in maintaining its more modest aesthetic.
“Maine is a place that is simultaneously terrified that it won’t change and terrified that it will,” observed Charles Colgan, a longtime economic forecaster in Maine and now the director of research at the Center for the Blue Economy in Monterey, Calif., which studies coastal communities.
Mr. Coulombe, who is from Lewiston, 50 miles to the northwest, is considered an outsider — in Maine parlance, he is “from away.” But he visited this area as a child and loved it. When he sold his family-run White Rock Distilleries in 2012 to the parent company of Jim Beam for $605 million, he decided to spend much of his fortune here.
Mr. Coulombe, who declined to be interviewed for this article, has said that the roundabout would reduce congestion, improve safety and create a welcoming gateway to several harbor towns. But mainly, he has indicated that it was part of his grand design to make the area more attractive to young families, strengthen the year-round economy and revitalize the region.
Boothbay may be relatively affluent, but parts of the seasonal economy are flagging. With retirees moving in, the area’s population is among the oldest and fastest-aging in the country. Young people are leaving, and school enrollment has plunged by a third over the past decade.
“The fishing industry has been suffering for 20 years now and has been slowly dying away,” said Michael Maxim, the manager of Abacus, a craft shop in adjacent Boothbay Harbor. An official with the chamber of commerce, Mr. Maxim supports the roundabout.
The Coastal Maine Botanical Gardens, established in Boothbay in 2007, is a big draw, pulling in 146,000 visitors last year. From Nov. 21 to Dec. 31, its inaugural “Gardens Aglow” LED light display had 36,000 visitors, a sign to many that the off-season could become an on-season — and that road improvements were needed to manage the mushrooming traffic.
Julie Roberts, who, with her husband, Paul, owns Coastal Maine Popcorn Company, in Boothbay Harbor, is among the merchants who back Mr. Coulombe’s plans. “We support anything he can do to bring business to town and make it nice for people so they want to come back,” Ms. Roberts said.
Opponents acknowledge that the economy needs a lift. But they resent Mr. Coulombe’s trying to impose his will, complain that he is pricing out locals and say he is homogenizing this pre-Revolutionary War area.
“A lot of people feel like their heritage is being taken over by someone throwing his weight around,” said Fred Kaplan, an author and historian who has led the opposition.
For example, Mr. Coulombe, whose plans for the roundabout involve land occupied by the regional ambulance service, gave $1.6 million to move the service into a new building. He has planned a collection of shops, called Boothbay Village Square, that would be made accessible by the roundabout.
Critics say he is essentially buying off the town.
Some of Mr. Coulombe’s own statements have undermined his efforts. He was quoted last year in Boston Magazine as saying that his lifelong dream was “to own my own town,” infuriating many residents, who say they are not pining to be owned by anybody. He later told The Portland Press Herald that he had been misquoted and that he actually had said he wanted to “plan and create a small town.” But a review by The New York Times of audiotapes of Boston Magazine’s interview showed that Mr. Coulombe had indeed said he wanted to own his own town.
One of the few who shrugs over the controversy, even as she plans to vote against the roundabout, is Bet Finocchiaro, who runs Bet’s Fish Fry, a seafood shack near where the roundabout would go. Mr. Coulombe tried to buy her out, but she refused to sell.
“I like my town the way it is,” she said as she breaded haddock for the dinner shift.
