“As If,” by Blake Morrison; “The Underground Railroad,” by Colson Whitehead; Virginia Woolf’s “A Writer’s Diary.” I’m also listening to the audiobook of “A Brief History of Seven Killings,” by Marlon James.
“A Little Life,” by Hanya Yanagihara. I came to it rather late — I’d been put off by what I’d heard about the upsetting subject matter, but when I heard Hanya speak about the book at the Sydney Writers’ Festival in May I changed my mind. And I’m so glad I did, because while it was every bit as traumatic as everyone said it would be, it is also a remarkable study of friendship, suffering and the difficulty of recovery.  
Pat Barker; Kate Atkinson; Cara Hoffman; Petina Gappah; Julie Myerson; John Boyne; Elena Ferrante; Sebastian Barry; Olivia Laing; Deborah Orr; Joan Smith; Musa Okwonga; Philip Gourevitch; John Lanchester; Ta-Nehisi Coates; Teju Cole; Clive James.
Do you have an all-time favorite author?
I love a clever psychological thriller, although I tend to avoid crime novels and thrillers altogether while I’m writing. I’m partial to a good war story, too, although I do find myself primarily interested in the 20th-century ones — Pat Barker’s “Ghost Road” and “Life Class” trilogies are amongst my favorite books. I have (shamefully) never read any sci-fi, and I tend to avoid horror because I’m a wimp.
Oddly, I think nonfiction books tend to stay with me longer than novels do: “The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat,” by Oliver Sacks; “We Wish to Inform You That Tomorrow We Will Be Killed With Our Families,” by Philip Gourevitch; and “The Shadow of the Sun,” by Ryszard Kapuscinski, are among those that have affected me most deeply.
Who writes the best thrillers?
Patricia Highsmith; Barbara Vine; Megan Abbott; Tana French; Gillian Flynn; Robert Harris; Louise Welsh; Ryan Gattis.
I don’t. They’re all over the place. It takes forever to find what I’m looking for.
What books might people be surprised to find on your shelves?
The ones about Arsenal Football Club.
It would be a tossup between “The Soccer War,” by Ryszard Kapuscinski, and “In Cold Blood,” by Truman Capote.
What’s your favorite TV, film or theater adaptation of a book?
The Coen brothers’ adaptation of “No Country for Old Men,” by Cormac McCarthy.
I’m drawn to villains — they’re so often the most interesting characters in fiction. For example, I was transfixed and horrified by Chigurh in the aforementioned “No Country for Old Men.” Lady Macbeth is a fascinating, transgressive woman, as is Gillian Flynn’s (in my opinion) much-maligned Amy Dunne.
On the side of the angels, I love Jackson Brodie, Kate Atkinson’s marvelously melancholy detective, as well as his sparring partner and sometime love interest, Louise. I adore almost all the characters in Armistead Maupin’s “Tales of the City,” but particularly Anna Madrigal and Michael Tolliver. And Willem Ragnarsson from “A Little Life” is a recent addition to the list.
Not a particularly highbrow one. I read a great deal of Enid Blyton, but I also loved C. S. Lewis and Roald Dahl — “James and the Giant Peach” was a great favorite, as was “The Voyage of the Dawn Treader.” I also loved “The Three Royal Monkeys,” by Walter de la Mare. My grandmother banned me from reading “The Secret Diary of Adrian Mole, Aged 13¾” (she thought it was obscene), so I used to take it to my best friend’s house, and we’d read passages aloud to each other. It remains one of the funniest books I’ve ever read.
In my early teens I discovered Agatha Christie — the clever plotting of “And Then There Were None” made a great impression on me. It was also around this time that I started reading political books — “I Write What I Like,” by Steve Biko, was quite the eye-opener.
Only three? Simone de Beauvoir, Ryszard Kapuscinski and Dorothy Parker.
If you could be friends with any author, dead or alive, who would it be?
Nora Ephron. Brilliant, funny, glamorous and a good cook.
It will be one of: “The North Water,” by Ian McGuire; “He Said/She Said,” by Erin Kelly; “The Crime Writer,” by Jill Dawson; “Eileen,” by Ottessa Moshfegh; or “Running,” by Cara Hoffman.