One of the pleasures of “Avid Reader” is watching this apparent wallflower — in a cartoon, he’d be drawn by Roz Chast or Edward Koren — begin to sprout wild hairs. A good deal of fun is recalled in this book: dinner with Bob Dylan, who tried to do the dishes; pajama parties with the novelist Edna O’Brien; raiding the refrigerator with Bill Clinton at 1 a.m.; ice cream fights with the choreographer Twyla Tharp.
Mr. Gottlieb emerges as a kind of Zelig of American publishing. The most acclaimed editor of the second half of the 20th century, he seemed to have a hand in everything that mattered.
At Simon & Schuster, where be started in 1955, he edited “Catch-22” by a then-unknown Joseph Heller, as well as Chaim Potok’s “The Chosen” and Charles Portis’s “True Grit.” He moved to run Knopf in 1968 and edited Toni Morrison, Robert Caro, Lauren Bacall, Salman Rushdie, Janet Malcolm, John le Carré, Katharine Graham and Mr. Clinton, among many others.
In 1987 he left to edit The New Yorker, where he inherited a staff antagonized by the deposing of the longtime editor William Shawn. Mr. Gottlieb ran that magazine smoothly and sanely until he too was defenestrated, five years later, to make room for a more astringent change agent in Tina Brown. Now 85, he still keeps a hand in at Knopf.
“Avid Reader” manages to cover all this territory, as well as Mr. Gottlieb’s decades-long association with New York City Ballet, with grace and guile and a sometimes-barbed wit. There are moments when this book moves at a clippity-clop pace, as if the author were merely turning the pages of old book catalogs and reminiscing.
And at times this book has, perhaps justifiably, a self-congratulatory ring. But this is an indispensable work of American publishing history, thick with instruction and soul and gossip of the higher sort.
Mr. Gottlieb was born in 1931. His father, a lawyer, worked his way out of a poor Lower East Side childhood; his mother was a New York City public-school teacher from a genteel Boston family. An only child, Mr. Gottlieb graduated from Columbia in 1952 and then spent two years doing graduate work at Cambridge University in England.
Early on, he learned the lessons that would sustain him in publishing. Vital among them: Get back to your authors quickly — overnight, if possible — when they send a manuscript. Another lesson: Titles, book covers, author photos and advertising are not trivial matters and should not be left entirely to others.
Many happy working relationships are detailed in “Avid Reader.” Mr. Gottlieb and Mr. Heller heavily revised “Catch-22.” Ms. Bacall came into the Knopf offices to write her memoir in longhand. Katharine Hepburn, during the writing of hers, liked to receive visitors — including Mr. Gottlieb — in her bed. He is proud of talking Anne Tyler out of labeling her breakthrough book, “Dinner at the Homesick Restaurant” (1982), a volume of stories. He felt it was a novel, and regardless, readers could decide. He was right.
Some readers will want to pick this book up for its chapter on Mr. Gottlieb’s time at The New Yorker alone. About the granular details of events at the magazine of that time, now almost 30 years ago, he writes, “I mean, who cares?” But he digs in anyway.
His primary antagonist was the writer Lillian Ross, who had not yet outed herself as Mr. Shawn’s longtime lover. Ms. Ross organized a campaign against Mr. Gottlieb and later, “in a scene out of a ’30s weeper,” begged that Mr. Shawn be given an office down the hall from the new editor’s. This did not happen.
Jamaica Kincaid and Pauline Kael were among those who treated Mr. Gottlieb rudely; he coolly repaid Ms. Kincaid, he says, by politely and definitively cutting her in public. He enjoyed his time atop The New Yorker, however, regretting only the messiness at the start, for which he partly blames Mr. Shawn.
Throughout his long career, if one of his writers was blocked, Mr. Gottlieb liked to tell him or her, “Don’t write, type!” If a manuscript was overdue, he could be as patient as a monk. One of his memoirists, the Merce Cunningham dancer Carolyn Brown, turned in her book 30 years after signing her contract.
