1. Brad Pitt is a plant murderer.
The worst kind, too. The kind who lets a plant starve to death. The evidence, at two opposing corners of his office in Beverly Hills; skeletal remnants that long gave up hope of ever being watered. He’s been away for 10 months, he says. An explanation, if not exactly an excuse. Regardless, I vow to expose his plant-murdering ways because the American public deserves to know, and besides, at 52 one should take whatever notoriety one can get.
I’m at Plan B, the film production company Pitt co-founded in 2001 and now owns, and I’ve decided to impress him with my knowledge of architecture, something he learned about while helping to rebuild the Lower Ninth Ward in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina. I figured I’d introduce him to Shigeru Ban, famous for his Cardboard Cathedral in Christchurch, New Zealand, and other disaster-relief projects around the world. But there, sitting on Pitt’s bookshelf, is an entire monograph of his work.
Near his record player are Joe Strummer’s albums with the Mescaleros, not a surprise, but also rare books on fringe culture, including Danny Lyon’s “The Bikeriders,” which are. This is a revelation not because Pitt is a megastar, which can lead to a certain out-of-touchness, but because he’s a father, and the first thing that goes after having kids is coolness. The first thing that comes are jorts. So when he gets up to shake my hand — dressed in a white T-shirt, white jeans and a white fedora — he seems more like the Dude than a dad.
2. Brad Pitt knows money can’t buy happiness.
3. Brad Pitt is very aware of your opinion of celebrity opinions.
But one of the reasons I agreed to this interview was to do more than remind the world that, aw shucks, he’s just a regular guy. Such a thing would be ridiculous, anyway: A Google search of his name yields roughly 45 million results; nearly 10 million pop up for “Brad Pit” alone. This is, after all, the guy who as a seductive thief in “Thelma & Louise” proved there’s no such thing as a small part. Someone once famously said that he is a character actor trapped in a leading man’s body, which is true, but he’s also the last real movie star to come out of Hollywood. I don’t ask him if he likes to puzzle over his kids’ homework.
4. Brad Pitt and I agree about Mel Gibson.
5. Brad Pitt’s “I’m getting old” joke is better than yours.
6. Maybe Brad Pitt is a regular guy.
The good thing about playing an interview slow and loose, especially when you’ve caught your subject on a free day, is that you can slide into the type of half-substantial, half-trivial conversation only possible with truly friendly people. Not to say that Pitt isn’t sometimes on his guard when it comes to discussing touchy subjects like income inequality and whitewashing in Hollywood. But there’s a casual intimacy to the few hours we’ve spent together, shooting the breeze with a rapport so easy that I keep turning the recorder back on after I assume the interview is over; him talking about falling under the spell of New Orleans, or being a “sucker for an underdog story,” or how “Beasts of the Southern Wild” is an amazing film that broke his heart.
The bad thing about playing an interview slow and loose is that you’re never sure how to end it. So I keep hanging out at his office, touring the compound and overhearing him on the phone dealing with daddy business, when I realize I’m about to miss my flight. He orders me a car and walks me outside to the gate. It’s not until this moment, under the glare of the California sun, that I’m confronted with the absurdity of standing next to Brad Pitt, on the side of the road, waiting for an Uber.