The Presidential Suite is 4,000 square feet of pure opulence, with three bedrooms, a fitness center, a butler’s pantry and a bathroom tiled with Calacatta Gold marble from an Italian quarry.
Need a little more space?
Then the hotel’s Trump Townhouse might be for you, with 6,300 square feet, a private entrance and a dining room that seats 24. The price starts at $18,750 per night. Unless you want it for the presidential inauguration, when the nightly rate is $100,000. With a minimum stay of five nights.
Yes, Donald J. Trump is coming to Pennsylvania Avenue, whether he wins the election or not.
The Trump International Hotel, Washington D.C. will open its doors next week, ensuring that Mr. Trump, the Republican presidential nominee, will not only be involved in January’s inaugural — the hotel is on the path of the parade — but will also be part of the Washington firmament for many years to come. The list of high-end hotel options in the capital, including the Jefferson, the Madison, the Hay-Adams and the Mayflower, will soon include the Trump.
It has been one of the most peculiar subplots in a campaign full of them. Even as Mr. Trump zips across the country, trying to whip up support for his candidacy, he has been building a 263-room hotel in a historic federal building, the Old Post Office, six blocks from the White House. And like his campaign, the project has been a polarizing proposition.
It wasn’t the first debate, but at least Ms. Clinton and Mr. Trump were on the same stage on Wednesday, though not at the same time. Here’s how we analyzed tonight’s forum live.
“He does not deserve this building,” said John Cullinane, who resigned about 18 months ago as the preservationist architect for the project.
Mr. Trump won the competition to develop the Old Post Office in 2012, entering a 60-year contract with the very government that he is now aspiring to run. “The hotel is going to be incredible, super luxury,” Mr. Trump said in March at a news event at the construction site, scolding a reporter for asking him a question about the presidential race rather than about the property.
Much as Mr. Trump crashed the gates of the 2016 presidential campaign, riding roughshod over the established political culture, his personally branded hotel will cut an anomalous figure in an understated city where the most potent power is invisible and conspicuous displays of wealth are generally avoided.
The hotel’s first big test will be the inauguration in January, when the city will overflow with party-hoppers willing to pay a premium for a decent night’s rest after their last ball. The hotel is ideally situated for the festivities, but a room at the Trump comes with baggage — at least if it is Hillary Clinton’s supporters who are flooding into Washington for the week.
“I don’t think a lot of Democrats are going to be staying there,” said Andrew Tobias, the longtime treasurer of the Democratic National Committee, who will be at the Mayflower if Mrs. Clinton wins.
While Mr. Trump often does little more than license his name to hotels, leaving the management to others, he took complete control of the Post Office project, with his daughter Ivanka handling much of the day-to-day work. Though the building had been underused for decades — and narrowly escaped demolition more than once — it is considered an architectural masterpiece. Built in the Romanesque Revival style, it dates to 1899; it is the tallest high-rise federal building in the city.
In many ways, the marriage of Mr. Trump’s over-the-top sensibility with this stately old building is as awkward as his alliance with the Republican establishment.
There have been similar signs of strain. Both the original architect for the project, Arthur Cotton Moore, a sixth-generation Washingtonian who has worked on numerous landmark buildings in the city, and Mr. Cullinane, who was originally hired to oversee the renovation, quit along the way.
Mr. Moore, who is credited with almost single-handedly saving the Old Post Office from the wrecking ball in the 1970s, stepped down less than a year after he helped Mr. Trump win the bid, citing a medical issue. He declined to comment, but Mr. Cullinane was blunt about the reasons for his departure.
While the exterior of the building is unchanged, Mr. Cullinane said the Trumps had reneged on many of their stated commitments to preserve elements of its interior, carpeting over the original marble floors, covering the windows overlooking the atrium, removing the original plaster walls and using gold leafing.
He also said the Trumps had assured a preservation committee that they would not use heavy backlighting on the exterior of the hotel, but then reversed course, behavior which he characterized as typical for the operation.
“The model of the office is you apologize, you don’t ask permission,” Mr. Cullinane said.
The architect who succeeded Mr. Moore, Hany Hassan, disputed the suggestion that the renovation was insensitive to the building’s history. “They followed the rules and the standards of historic preservation meticulously,” he said of the Trumps.
Mr. Hassan said the exterior lighting was designed “to softly highlight the architectural features of the building,” and “to create the sense of activity and vibrancy in the area.” The gold leafing, he added, is being used only in an addition to the building that is not part of the original: the 13,200-square-foot Presidential Ballroom.
This is not the only controversy hovering over the hotel. Mr. Trump is in litigation with two well-known chefs who backed out of the project last summer, after the candidate referred to Mexican immigrants illegally entering the United States as rapists and murderers. And he is suing the District of Columbia in an effort to reduce his tax bill for the property.
The Trumps tried to bring in another celebrity chef. Among those contacted was Tom Colicchio, a founder of Gramercy Tavern in New York. “I said, ‘Absolutely not,’” Mr. Colicchio said.
They eventually abandoned the idea. The hotel will feature a restaurant from the BLT franchise, BLT Prime, when it opens to a limited number of guests on Sept. 12. A “grand opening” event including the entire Trump family is slated for late October, shortly before Americans go to the polls.
If Mr. Trump wins the presidency, the opportunities for synergy will presumably be endless. It’s not hard to imagine the hotel as an unofficial bunkhouse for wealthy Republicans, not to mention diplomats and heads of state.
The more interesting question is what will happen if he loses. Will the memory of Mr. Trump’s divisive campaign turn off potential guests, leaving the new hotel half empty during Washington’s biggest event of the year and beyond?
Entry-level rooms for the inaugural — priced at $1,250 a night, with a five-night minimum — are still available, as are the Presidential Suite and the Trump Townhouse. But Mickael Damelincourt, the managing director for the project, predicted with Trumpian confidence that everything would be sold well in advance, regardless of who is leading the inaugural parade down Pennsylvania Avenue.
“This is the chance to see the new president, and this is the best spot for it,” he said.
Whatever happens in November, the hotel could become its own sort of Washington monument, if not to one of the country’s great leaders, then to one of its most unusual presidential candidates.
