Donald J. Trump visited the Detroit Economic Club last month to tell a story about a once-great city destroyed by free trade.
Like much of Mr. Trump’s nostalgic campaign, his promise to keep manufacturing jobs in America seems better suited for the attitudes — and the voters — of the 1980s. Back then, Michigan was in a xenophobic mood, especially toward the Japanese, who were often doing a better job of building the fuel-efficient cars Americans wanted to drive. In a suburb of Detroit, a Chinese-American man was beaten to death in a bar brawl by a Chrysler foreman who told him, “It’s because of you we’re out of work.” In Flint, people at a United Automobile Workers fund-raising event paid $5 to whack a Toyota with a sledgehammer.
I grew up in Michigan, and even then, we were told the manufacturing jobs that Mr. Trump is now promising the state weren’t coming back. I was a sophomore at Lansing J. W. Sexton High School in 1982. In December of that year, Michigan’s unemployment rate was almost 17 percent. It was the pits of a recession that helped transform the industrial Midwest from the Arsenal of Democracy into the Rust Belt.
But services and knowledge-based industries are playing a more and more significant role in Michigan’s economy. The typical Michigan worker no longer builds cars. In the 2000s, health care surpassed manufacturing as the state’s No. 1 private employment sector. There are only about 160,000 autoworkers (manufacturing and parts) in the state now — 4 percent of the work force, and about half the number since 2000.
Mr. Trump has his reasons for focusing on manufacturing, though. They don’t all have to do with economics. He ignores the fact that many of Michigan’s auto industry jobs were lost to automation, or to foreign manufacturers operating in the right-to-work South, because depicting the Chinese, Japanese and Mexicans as job-stealing alien villains better fits his America First narrative.
Mr. Trump’s economic nationalism is inseparable from the ethno-nationalism that’s turning off so many African-Americans, Latinos, Asians and Muslims who might agree with him on trade, but understand deep down that jobs aren’t all he wants to bring back from his good old days.
Marcus Riddle is an example. I met him outside a Coney Island diner in Flint’s North End. He’s exactly the kind of dispossessed autoworker Mr. Trump was talking about when he called Nafta “a total disaster for the United States.” Mr. Riddle once held a well-paying job with an auto parts manufacturer, but was laid off when the company moved some of its operations to Costa Rica. Now he works at an adult foster-care home, earning “$9 an hour after nine years.” Mr. Riddle likes Mr. Trump’s stands on terrorism and illegal immigration, but he’s planning to vote for Hillary Clinton.
Michigan was a key state for the Reagan Democrats: hawkish, socially conservative autoworkers who ignored the U.A.W.’s entreaties to vote for Jimmy Carter and Walter Mondale. Mr. Trump is winning their heartland, Macomb County, in the blue-collar suburbs of Detroit. He’s also ahead among voters ages 50 to 70, who came of age when a factory job was still a birthright, and share his nostalgia for those years.
But the future of Michigan’s economy isn’t a new auto plant in Detroit. It’s a business like Niowave in Lansing, which draws on the skills of both physicists and skilled tradesmen to manufacture particle accelerators. According to “The New Path to Prosperity: Lessons for Michigan From Two Decades of Economic Change,” a report by Michigan Future, an organization devoted to encouraging Michigan’s transition from an industrial to a knowledge-based economy, the state added about 313,000 jobs in “knowledge-based services” from 1990 to 2011 — almost exactly the same number as it lost in manufacturing.
Since the “lost decade” of the 2000s, during which Michigan lost more than half its automaking employment, and General Motors and Chrysler were bailed out by the federal government, the state has added more than 400,000 jobs, a 10.6 percent increase.
The changes in Michigan’s economy present a problem for Mr. Trump. The Republican Party’s pursuit of whites without college degrees has been offering diminishing returns since it converted the Reagan Democrats — in 1980, they were 65 percent of the electorate, compared with 36 percent in 2012 — but Mr. Trump has tailored his politically incorrect alpha male persona and his protectionist message specifically to them.
The Fisher Body plant across the street from my school is long gone. Most of the jobs are gone, too. As Lansing’s mayor, Virg Bernero, has noted, G.M. can build the same number of cars with 5,000 workers as it did with 25,000 in the 1950s and ’60s.
The Trump conundrum is that his campaign is about loss. His appeal is strongest among people who feel their social, economic and political influence slipping away, but he appeals to them specifically because their numbers are dwindling, thus making them less effective as an electoral coalition.
A candidate of the past can’t win the present. As my physics teacher predicted, Michigan now has more college graduates and fewer autoworkers than it did in the 1980s. Mr. Trump is promising to restore a way of life that, even then, we knew was disappearing.