WASHINGTON — They arrived here by the thousands in rented buses and on foot, in wheelchairs and strollers, with church groups and college friends.
Multiple generations of African-Americans came to review the arc of history on stark and uplifting display at the National Museum of African American History and Culture, which was open for its first full day on Sunday.
People snapped selfies with Rosa Parks’s mug shot and studied artifacts like Harriet Tubman’s shawl. They lingered over verses by Langston Hughes and Maya Angelou inscribed on the walls. They read out text about the literal prices paid for families torn apart by slavery, tracing and celebrating their own complicated lineage.
The museum’s arrival in the last months of the Obama administration, as the nation grapples anew with racial inequality, resonated with many. “The timing is prophetic — you can’t visit here and not think about what’s going on today, and the sense of history and struggle,” said Bishop Paul L. Walker, 51, a pastor from Rockville, Md.
Timed, free tickets for entry were snapped up months in advance: Ms. Taylor used three devices to secure them the day they were offered, in August.
Over the weekend, entrance lines snaked up along the Mall. On Sunday, opening hours stretched from 7 a.m. to midnight. The building was packed throughout.
Still, the mood was largely jubilant. “The crowds, that’s part of the excitement,” Ms. Taylor said.
Decades in the making after a hard-fought Congressional battle for funding, the museum felt to many like a culmination. “It has brought everything together,” said Florence Claggett, 66, a retired federal employee, who has tracked its progress for years, sometimes from her office window across the street.
Ms. Claggett had attended the March on Washington in 1963.
Teachers and staff members from a Washington middle school took photos in preparation for a visit by their students later this week. “Some of these numbers really set in my head,” said Dhakkiyyah Lee, 30, as she studied a display that recounted how slaves routinely died during the ocean crossing. In 1730, a French ship carrying 170 slaves arrived with only one survivor.
People came primed for emotionally wrenching presentations. “What’s depressing is not so much that it happened, but that it’s still happening,” a woman said, as she stood by the coffin of Emmett Till, the 14-year-old viciously murdered by white men in Mississippi in 1955.
In the consolation room, a quiet, artifact-free spot in the center of the building, where an orb of rain continuously falls from the ceiling, Marie Scruggs and her family were brought to tears. Ms. Scruggs, 80, a retired educator from Missouri, came with her son and daughter-in-law, partly to memorialize her husband, Donald. Both had been active in the civil rights movement. “Fairness, justice, equality,” Ms. Scruggs, who is white, said, about what motivated them to join the demonstrations.
On the museum’s top floors, at exhibitions dedicated to culture, community and sports, people danced to Tina Turner videos and hummed Donna Summer disco hits. But the specter of this year’s polarizing election was never far off. “Black Girls Vote” read one woman’s T-shirt. Black Lives Matter shirts were also common.
Bishop Walker said that for all the bleak truth on view, the museum gave him the sense of a culture and a people moving, relentlessly, forward. “Things are still progressing,” he said, a sentiment echoed by many visitors.
