JERUSALEM — The world awoke on Wednesday to an actuality it had never known before: a modern state of Israel without Shimon Peres. But in many respects Mr. Peres’s Israel began to disappear long ago.
During more than seven decades in public service, Mr. Peres, who died at 93 two weeks after suffering a stroke, accompanied Israel through startling transformations and constantly reinvented himself.
Transcending internal divisions in his last official post, as Israel’s president, Mr. Peres was ultimately embraced by most of the country as its elder statesman, even as chaos engulfed much of the region and the promise of peace with the Palestinians faded into popular skepticism and fatigue.
So for many Israelis, trying to untangle and define Mr. Peres’s legacy is like peering through a historical kaleidoscope where the lines between Israel’s longtime ideological rivalries are at once sharp and distinct, then dissolve into a dazzling blur.
Mr. Peres looked back with a mix of satisfaction and concern. In a 2013 interview on the occasion of his 90th birthday, he said the reality of Israel was “both different and greater than the dream.” He marveled that Israel’s population had grown to eight million people — but said he worried that they were becoming less grounded in moral values as they increasingly pursued material goals.
After years of violent shocks and political erosion on both sides, some Israeli Jews trace the collapse of Mr. Peres’s dream to the moment when a Palestinian suicide bomber ripped through a Passover Seder at the Park Hotel in the coastal city of Netanya.
It was March 22, 2002, and 250 guests had just sat down for the holiday meal. Thirty were killed. Days later, Israeli tanks invaded the Palestinian cities of the West Bank in the fiercest military operation there since Israel occupied the territory in the 1967 war.
The Oslo Accords, for which Mr. Peres shared a Nobel Peace Prize, were imploding. The Palestinian Authority they had created was under siege. And it was left to Mr. Peres, then foreign minister, to explain the Israeli offensive to the world.
This was clear vindication if ever there was any for those on the other side of Israel’s political spectrum who had opposed the accords.
Speaking as Mr. Peres lay mostly unconscious in the hospital after his stroke, Mr. Arens described him as “an inveterate optimist,” while articulating the apparent policy void that he was leaving behind.
Despite Mr. Peres’s own late-in-life attempts at unity among Israelis, perhaps it is only natural in a fractious country that his legacy is viewed through a prism of old divides.
Many Arabs still denounce him as a “criminal” for his early support of settlement-building, and as a warmonger because of his role in building Israel’s weapons arsenals and campaigns that led to civilian deaths.
Many Israelis and Jews from around the world remembered him in fatherly and grandfatherly terms — a veiled or not-so-veiled contrast with the current Israeli leadership.
Isaac Herzog, the current Labor leader and parliamentary opposition chief, said of Mr. Peres, “I don’t think his vision is gone,” noting that the aspiration for a two-state solution with the Palestinians has been accepted by most mainstream Israeli political figures, though its prospects have ebbed lately.
“The mission of my generation is to be that leadership,” she said.
Yet Micah Goodman, an American-Israeli philosopher, said the problem of the Israeli left was a dearth not of leadership, but of ideas. The founding ideology of Israel’s Labor movement, socialism, crumbled and morphed into the pursuit of peace. The vision of a new Middle East was a “messianic” one, Mr. Goodman said in an interview, and Mr. Peres was its prophet.
As that option receded, he said, Mr. Peres increasingly turned his attention to the boundless possibilities of technology and science and the pull of a secular, humanistic type of Judaism.
A few months ago, Mr. Peres reached out to Mr. Goodman to discuss Mr. Goodman’s Hebrew best-seller, “The Secrets of the Guide for the Perplexed,” about Moses Maimonides, the medieval Jewish sage also known as Rambam.
“I find myself in his apartment in Tel Aviv,” Mr. Goodman recalled. “He is wearing his jeans. He wants to understand Maimonides.
