214 pp. Dzanc Books. $26.95.
In The early chapters of his second novel, “Ark,” Julian Tepper introduces three generations of the once-wealthy Arkin family through a series of phone calls that shift perspective from one speaker to another to another. It’s an efficient and notably cinematic technique: One may recall the introduction of the grown-up children in Wes Anderson’s film “The Royal Tenenbaums,” which also uses correspondence to usher each character onscreen. (This could explain why the book jacket explicitly aligns “Ark” with Anderson’s work.) But in a novel, cinematic methods and the omniscient narration necessary to pull them off can lead to little hiccups of confusion, as when we first meet Rebecca Arkin, the nearest thing the book has to a protagonist: “Rebecca was in the middle of lunch. The man keeping her company was Randy Nobel, her colleague at the firm.” If this were a movie, the audience, having seen “the man keeping her company,” would of course implicitly understand to whom the narrator is referring — but a novel has no such visual cue, so when “the man” is mentioned here, I went back just to make sure he hadn’t been brought up previously.
Amid lawsuits and scuffles over inheritances, Rebecca’s brief meditation provides a much needed window onto a reasonable, less privileged perspective, and the letter surprises with its comparative depth. Rebecca is the mass around which the whole novel orbits, its plausible center, even though she and her family see things in precisely opposite ways.
Despite some early stumbles, “Ark” is an engaging and entertaining novel, and an insightful take on just how easy it can be to slip from the upper class. Its characters are funny, too, in that offensive way we seem to forgive mainly in the rich or elderly. The wealthy, of course, have long gotten away with everything — but now, the novel suggests, with money dwindling and economies struggling, they’ll finally get what they deserve: to be just like the rest of us. A tragic fate, indeed.