1 hr. and 10 min.
Ars Nova, 511 W. 54th St.
But “Underground Railroad Game” is different. For one thing, it is set in the present (though it is clear that the past is always present). For another, its tone, at least at first, would appear to be arch instead of earnest. That is not to say that it is frivolous. Created by Jennifer Kidwell and Scott Sheppard, who are also its entire cast, this production lures you into its seemingly sunny classroom with the snarky cheer of a hip comedy sketch.
But as its title promises, this play winds up taking you into subterranean territory. It is dark and treacherous down there, and cool comic posturing melts into a big hot mess. Ms. Kidwell and Mr. Sheppard, both in their 30s, find the lie in the flippant, “we know better” irony that often flavors interracial dialogue among the young and willfully liberal.
The trajectory of this underground railroad is from blithe, barbed self-consciousness to the subconscious, where land mines you pretended didn’t exist keep exploding. And as directed by Taibi Magar, with an exceptionally resourceful design team, the play conjures searing theatrical visuals to match its wayward words, the sort of images that used to send people to Freudian analysts when they cropped up in nightmares.
The play’s premise and structure come from childhood memories of Mr. Sheppard, who participated in a history-lesson game devised by teachers in his middle school. Students were divided into teams representing the Union and Confederate Armies, with the Yankees doing their best to smuggle slaves (embodied by dolls) past the Southerners.
But though they share a teaching plan, a tone of voice and a child-friendly vocabulary, it is clear from the outset that Caroline and Stuart aren’t always on the same page. The subject of American slavery is personal to her; to him, too, but in different ways. When they begin an off-duty romance, that gap widens into a chasm that sends Caroline and Stuart into free fall.
The production’s first scene, in which the teachers act out a hokey vignette as a benevolent Quaker abolitionist and a runaway slave, is but a prelude to more elaborate offstage costume dramas in which Caroline and Stuart work out their feelings for each other. Or do I mean Ms. Kidwell and Mr. Sheppard?
The blurring of lines within the performances also dissolves the comfortable distance we feel between us and them. Many layers of artifice are at work in “Underground Railroad Game,” and no sooner do we find our footing on one of them than it shifts to another. It could be argued, I suppose, that the play repeats the same points a tad too often. Yet it has such vivid diversity of presentation that it never seems monotonous.
I’ve tried to avoid too much specific description. (Maybe I shouldn’t have mentioned the Mammy scene.) But I do feel a need to warn unsuspecting audience members that “Underground Railroad Game” manages to be, in the year 2016, shocking in ways that “Dutchman,” LeRoi Jones’s surreal 1964 play about a black man’s encounter with a white woman on a subway, must have been 50-some years ago.
A half-century later, you wouldn’t expect that to be possible. After all, much of what’s explored here is the stuff of television and screen comedy. We’ve turned stale and nasty old stereotypes into something to joke about, right?
Well, no. “Underground Railroad” insists that there is still no easy way to talk about the legacy of slavery. The smug and familiar humor with which this play hooks us winds up exploding in our faces, like a poisonous prank cigar.