Hillary Clinton announced her new higher education plan this summer with a burst of fanfare, promising to invest $500 billion to eliminate tuition for millions of students at public colleges and universities across the country. The move was an expansion of an earlier, less ambitious proposal, and was seen as a conciliatory gesture to her left-leaning primary opponent, Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, and his supporters ahead of the Democratic Party’s convention.
But while the liberal wing of the party has cheered the idea as a needed antidote to soaring tuition and student loan debt, many in education have questioned how such a plan would work. More government influence in the sector could lead to unintended consequences, they fear, and some details of Mrs. Clinton’s proposal remain murky.
The Clinton campaign first unveiled an extensive “new college compact” a year ago with the intention of improving affordability and allowing students to earn degrees without taking on loans.
Pushed to the left by Mr. Sanders’s promises of free college for all, Mrs. Clinton expanded on that plan in July with a proposal that, when fully put in place, would let students with families earning less than $125,000 a year attend public universities free. The campaign estimates this will cost $500 billion over a decade, paid for by closing tax loopholes that benefit the rich.
Although the prospect of free public college sounds enticing for many, private institutions — which account for about a quarter of the higher education landscape in America — are starting to fret. Vast subsidies to public universities would probably lure students away, forcing private colleges to alter their business models to survive.
A study produced last month by the Georgetown University Center on Education and the Workforce projected that under Mrs. Clinton’s plan, enrollment at public universities and colleges could climb by as much as 22 percent, while enrollment at private institutions could fall by as much as 15 percent.
Big private universities such as Harvard and Yale have robust endowments and reputations to help weather such disruptions. But that would not be the case for small, independent colleges that cater to religious groups, women, low-income students and rural areas. The Georgetown study, which the Clinton campaign believes is misguided, predicted that flagship state universities would become more selective in the face of rising demand, while second-tier private schools would probably become less diverse as they looked for wealthier students who could pay full tuition.
At Trinity Washington University, a small Catholic school in Washington, D.C., about half the students currently pay no tuition because they are covered by scholarships or other subsidies to accommodate people from low-income families. Patricia McGuire, the president of Trinity, says it is not right for a relatively rich state school, like the nearby University of Virginia, to receive an infusion of government money while its low-income students struggle to pay for books and living expenses.
Other potential consequences of Mrs. Clinton’s proposal include public universities’ increasing their tuition fees at the expense of taxpayers, stalled migration among states as students are incentivized to stay home and a shortage of classroom space to accommodate the larger enrollments at state schools.
The need for new construction could be urgent and expensive, depending on how many new students enter the public university system.
“In the short run, you could imagine there would be a lot of people who just wouldn’t be able to find a seat at a public college,” said Beth Akers, an education policy specialist at the Brookings Institution.
The variation of funding levels for higher education among states, along with the sizes of their universities, would require the development of a new formula for allocating government funding fairly while ensuring that quality standards are maintained. This could be especially challenging if states with Republican governors resist the program, as many of them did with President Obama’s Affordable Care Act.
F. King Alexander, the president of Louisiana State University, says he is encouraged by Mrs. Clinton’s plan but wants her to emphasize the need for the federal government to work with states to ensure that they do not continue to defund their universities. He fears that universities will increase tuition to take advantage of the federal government’s generosity.
“You can’t have a free-tuition plan without stabilizing state investment in higher education,” Mr. Alexander said.
The prospect of well-to-do students having a free ride is also a concern. The income threshold, which would be $85,000 in the first year of the program and increase gradually to $125,000, is a subject of debate among experts.
Ms. Akers argues that the Clinton campaign’s plan will end up subsidizing people who can already afford to pay for college and that government money should be more squarely focused on the poor and cover all of their costs.
Clinton campaign officials are aware that some details still need to be worked out, but they insist that private institutions and schools that cater to minorities would not be left out. Mrs. Clinton has said that she wants to give more funding to them, too, and to restore year-round Pell grants so students can graduate more quickly by doing summer coursework.
Lower interest rates on student debt would also ease the burden across the board, and Mrs. Clinton wants students to be able to refinance their existing loans at lower rates.
She also intends to simplify income-based repayment of loans so more graduates will take advantage of that option.
The campaign is still trying to create ways to deal with states that do not carry their weight in funding their universities, but those states would be unlikely to receive federal money. Federal support is expected to be weighted toward low-income students to prevent them from being left behind.
As for handling the influx of students to public universities, the campaign has said that the federal government will work with states to increase capacity as long as they do their part.
Politics could be the biggest obstacle to Mrs. Clinton’s proposal if she wins the presidency. Republicans are likely to resist a new large government program that they see as an intrusion in the higher education system that would require higher taxes and significant spending. Large majorities in the House and the Senate would probably be needed to pass such sweeping legislation.