For an artist obsessed for nearly half a century with the concepts of maintenance and sanitation, Mierle Laderman Ukeles keeps an office in desperate need of a cleaning. Or maybe an intervention by a department of doctoral students.
“This stuff needs to go into an archive, because it’s getting insane,” she said one August morning, surveying shelves groaning with piles of paper, file boxes, photographs, videotapes, rolls of film and other testaments to one of the more unlikely, and underappreciated, careers in the postwar New York art world.
The office, on Beaver Street in Lower Manhattan, deep within the headquarters of the New York Department of Sanitation — where she has been an unsalaried artist in residence since not long after she proposed the idea to the city agency in 1976 — was the site that morning of feverish preparations for the first comprehensive retrospective of Ms. Ukeles’s work, which has just opened at the Queens Museum.
Such a show has been a long time coming, but Ms. Ukeles, at 77, is nothing if not patient. She understood many years ago, she said, that the highly idiosyncratic art she was making — about so-called menial labor, about scrubbing and picking up and about the existential meaning of garbage itself, pieces that confused many of her peers and unsettled fellow feminists — was not sexy and might never get the recognition it deserved.
“People stopped asking me questions, stopped thinking of me as anything other than a mother,” she said. “I was in a crisis because I had worked years to be an artist, and I didn’t want to be two people. It seemed like I could be an artist only by being two people.” And so she sat down and in a single session typed a cri de coeur — “Manifesto for Maintenance Art 1969!” — that became a touchstone of conceptual and performance art, questioning not only gender and class in the art world but the foundations of the avant-garde itself.
This led to several performance pieces in and around museums and galleries, in which Ms. Ukeles (pronounced YOU-kal-ees) took on the tasks of cleaner or maintenance worker.
And then, in 1976, after she staged a collaborative performance with the help of more than 300 cleaners, maintenance workers and security guards at a downtown Manhattan building, an art critic’s tongue-in-cheek response — that maybe the financially beleaguered Sanitation Department could call its work art and qualify for a National Endowment for the Arts grant — set off a bell in her head.
To earn the respect of the department’s workers and to learn its byzantine system for vanquishing millions of tons of garbage per year, she conducted what became one of the most ambitious performance pieces in the city’s history — “Touch Sanitation Performance” — in which she spent a year visiting each of the department’s districts and shaking the hand of every one of the 8,500 workers who would accept the gesture.
Photos from the performance show her, with her shock of blond hair — it’s now mostly white but still cascades around her head — surrounded by crews of beefy men, each of them looking at her as if she was the first person who ever deigned to give them so much as the time of day.
As you might expect from someone who has bent a city bureaucracy to her benevolent will for almost 40 years, Ms. Ukeles doesn’t often take no for an answer.
She and her husband, Jack, now live in Tel Aviv, to be closer to their three adult children and seven grandchildren there. But Ms. Ukeles is back at her Beaver Street office often enough that workers still greet her in the halls like an old friend. And she still knows the department’s inner mechanisms almost as well as any of the eight commissioners who have run it during her time as its artistic soul.
