It was a lovely evening for a drink and a dog on the front patio of a Park Slope bar one recent Thursday.
It has been a great summer for bar-going dogs, thanks to a new state law that allows them into some outdoor areas of bars or restaurants.
Already, though, the nights grow cool. Soon the outdoor tables will be abandoned, and the dogs and their best friends will have to part ways at the saloon door.
For there is still a place in this city where a permanent fur coat is no obstacle to entry: the speakeasy underworld of the dog bar.
The imminent demise of New York City’s venerable dog bars was heralded several years ago, after the city began letter-grading restaurants and bars and subjecting them to much closer scrutiny. By all accounts, dog bars have grown less common. But more than a few persist, through resourcefulness or audacity, paying the odd $350 fine and soldiering on.
Two recent evenings spent sniffing out leads and following the scent from one spot to the next turned up no fewer than nine establishments with at least a winking attitude toward canine patrons. Almost all were in Park Slope or Williamsburg, Brooklyn, or among the unrepentant dives of the East Village in Manhattan, but presumably a wider search would unearth more.
They run from quiet watering holes where dogs are welcome as long as they are discreet, to a few rowdier establishments where the dogs do everything but play poker.
At one of those brazen places, a canine circus was in full effect that same Thursday night. A burly pit bull and a big tan mutt wrestled on the floor as the music blared. A dachshund named Leroy stood in his owner’s lap with his front paws up on the bar, barking loudly. “He wants another drink,” his owner said. When Leroy went to the back yard for a bathroom break, a schnauzery-looking dame named Mia took his place on the bar stool.
In the East Village, there is a bar, cramped and narrow but filled with laughter and easy friendship, that has a mascot named Spitfire, a red-spotted Australian cattle dog with a grudge against skateboarders. His owner, Frank, brings him in twice a day.
Often, Mr. Mosley and Winston will decamp to a tonier bar several blocks away. The walls are unblemished, the floors are slate and the chalk-drawn menu touts coconut martinis and chipotle mules. But the hospitality is the same.
“We allow any dog in here, any size,” Morgan Green, the bartender, said.
At a dive between Avenues A and B, the policy was stated less explicitly.
“Officially,” said the bartender, “we don’t allow dogs.” Seconds later, Linda Devitt came out of the bathroom leading her aged pug, Rain.
At some dog bars, inevitably, there are service interruptions.
But even the health inspector can be outwitted. On a Friday, this reporter, posing as a civilian, placed a call to another noted dog-friendly bar in Park Slope.
Ah, the service-animal ruse. If it can get an alpaca into a drugstore, as a New Yorker reporter demonstrated a couple of years ago, why not a dog into a bar?
According to the Americans With Disabilities Act, neither barkeep nor government agent may ask you to furnish proof that your dog is a service animal.
“If someone says it’s a service dog, that’s the end of it,” said a bartender at Mission Dolores.
At one of those Park Slope bars one recent evening, Captain William Trigger of Ludlow, a 9-year-old yellow Labrador, was sprawled comfortably on the concrete back patio — a no-no because he had to walk through the bar to get there. His owner, Simon Noble, 50, wistfully recalled Trigger’s puppyhood, when he took Trigger and his 6-week-old littermates to a bar that has since shut its doors to dogs.
“We used to go around to different dog bars, but there’s none around anymore,” said Mr. Noble, a research scientist.
Mr. Noble went into the bar to get another beer. Trigger went in with him, and waited patiently at his feet.