From left, Elmer L. Cook and his wife, Mary Lee; Namon O’Neal Hoggle; and Stanley Hoggle and his wife, Minnie, before the three men’s trial in the 1965 killing of the Rev. James J. Reeb.
Namon O’Neal Hoggle, the last surviving defendant accused of bludgeoning a minister to death in Selma, Ala., in 1965 — a killing that galvanized the civil rights movement in the South and helped embolden Congress to ban racial discrimination in voting — died on Aug. 30 in Selma. He was 81.

Mr. Hoggle was remembered in a paid obituary submitted to The Montgomery Advertiser by his family only as “one of the oldest car dealers in Selma.” A list of honorary pallbearers included the county sheriff and a judge.
But history recalls him as one of three white men, including his brother, who were acquitted by an all-white jury in the beating of the Rev. James J. Reeb, a white Unitarian Universalist minister from Boston.
Mr. Reeb, a 38-year-old father of four, had traveled to Selma after being unsettled while watching television images of Alabama state troopers beating scores of black people participating in a voting rights march there on March 7, 1965 — what would become known as Bloody Sunday.
The march, led by the John Lewis and Hosea Williams, was trying to cross the Edmund Pettus Bridge in Selma and continue on to the state capital, Montgomery, about 50 miles west.
Heeding Dr. King’s call for support, Mr. Reeb joined a second march, held that Tuesday. It, too, was stopped by state troopers.
Mr. Reeb was struck with a club, pipe or bat, which fractured his skull. He was driven three hours to a Birmingham hospital, where he died two days later.
That night, President Lyndon B. Johnson invoked the attack in appealing to a joint session of Congress to approve a voting rights act.
The day after Mr. Reeb was attacked, William S. Hoggle, 36, a car salesman, and Elmer L. Cook, 41, who managed a novelty company, were arrested. Namon Hoggle, a 30-year-old auto mechanic at the time, surrendered the next day.
Namon O’Neal Hoggle was born on Oct. 15, 1934, in Greensboro, Ala., the son of Oscar and Pearl Hoggle. He moved to Selma in 1953. He was known as Duck.
His wife, the former Ann Barnett, died in 2007. He is survived by his daughters, Anita Posey, Wanda Lolley and Kim Cosby; a stepdaughter, Michele Sudduth; seven grandchildren; two great-grandchildren; a sister, Bettie Elmore; a brother, Bobby; and Susie Burnside, who was described in the family obituary as a longtime friend.
When he was arrested in 1965, Mr. Hoggle had never had a serious run-in with the law.
Mr. Reeb’s companions during the attack — the Rev. Clark Olsen, 32, of Berkeley, Calif., and the Rev. Orloff Miller, 33, of Hingham, Mass. — identified Mr. Cook, but said only that the Hoggle brothers “resembled” their assailants.
A waitress said Namon Hoggle had been nearby with the other two men. Another witness said he had been at a different coffee shop. The defense argued that Mr. Reeb had died of injuries suffered on his way to the hospital, or of neglect, so he would become a civil rights martyr.
One potential witness, who was also charged in the attack but not tried, refused to testify. Another witness was declared mentally incompetent, and two others had left the state.
After his acquittal, Namon Hoggle operated Bama Motors. Its location, Jefferson Davis Avenue, was later renamed J. L. Chestnut Jr. Boulevard to honor Selma’s first black lawyer, who laid the groundwork for the Selma-to-Montgomery march in 1965. Civil rights groups have unsuccessfully sought to organize boycotts of the dealership, which is run by Mr. Hoggle’s grandson and has its share of black customers.
The F.B.I. reopened the case but closed it again in 2011 without pursuing charges, saying that “the man whom we believe is responsible, Elmer Cook, is deceased” and that Namon Hoggle, the only survivor implicated, had been tried and acquitted in state court. William Hoggle apparently died in 1996.
Mr. Olsen, accompanied by his daughter, a television producer, made a return visit to Selma in 1998 and there tried to interview Mr. Hoggle, but he slammed the door on them, Mr. Olsen said.
“I hope they found something in their soul that said what they did was wrong, and that they found some way to make some amends for it,” Mr. Olsen said of the defendants in an interview with CNN.
 Ms. Reeb is now active in Sojourn to the Past, which acquaints students with the civil rights movement, and returned to Selma in 1990 for the 25th anniversary of the march. She did not seek out Mr. Hoggle.
