The New York area is home to the Yankees and the Knicks, the Belmont Stakes and the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show. But the city that is the capital for so many sports has hardly been a center for auto racing.
In July, that will change, when the Formula E circuit comes to the city for two races.
The twist is that while the cars look like the open-wheel speedsters you would see in Indianapolis or Monaco, they run 100 percent on electricity, making Formula E something of a green racing series.
Of course, the races will be held in Brooklyn.
The city and Formula E announced the races at a news conference on Wednesday afternoon. The races will be held on a Saturday and Sunday to be determined in late July as part of the circuit’s third season. The course will be laid out at the Brooklyn Cruise Terminal in Red Hook.
The cars do not look like the Volt or Prius you were stuck behind yesterday on the freeway. They are single-seaters that to an untrained eye could pass for the rides of Marco Andretti or Lewis Hamilton.
The cars race like that, too. In a straight, they can reach 180 miles an hour, Agag said, but in a race over a twisty road-style course, they top out around 150 m.p.h.
There are expected be 20 drivers in the races, but 40 cars. The cars cannot finish the race on one battery, and charging them midrace would be less than riveting for the spectators. So each driver has two cars and executes a switch midrace. By Season 5, Agag said, batteries are expected to have improved so much that the switch will no longer be needed.
Organizers said they believed the site in Red Hook would join the pantheon of picturesque racecourses.
Formula E has raced in Beijing, Buenos Aires, Mexico City and Paris, among other places. Season 3 kicks off in Hong Kong in October and is scheduled to conclude in Brooklyn.
City officials emphasized the tourism the race would bring, but they were clear that a commitment to renewable energy was also a crucial attraction.
It is not easy to stage an auto race in the urban Northeast. Formula One has made several attempts to race in Weehawken, N.J., and an IndyCar race scheduled to be held in Boston this year was scrapped, in part because of objections from neighbors and conflicts with city officials.
Formula E and New York officials are eager to ensure that these races minimize disruption.
Grandstands will also be assembled for paying customers.
The cars are far quieter than the earsplitting Formula One racers.
He said the cars produced about 80 decibels, a little more than a standard car.
The race will be contained within the cruise terminal and will not involve public streets.
The race will be shown on Fox Sports 1.
Though Formula E is eager to gain the respect held by venerable circuits like Formula One, it is not above adding quirky elements to draw attention. During the race, fans vote for their favorite drivers. The three who receive the most votes are awarded a Fan Boost — 50 extra horsepower for three seconds to be used in the last six minutes of the race.
The boost could be enough to overtake a car in front. In Mexico City last season, the boost made the difference when fans lifted Lucas di Grassi to a win, although he was later disqualified for unrelated reasons.
And if electric cars are not green enough, Agag said the electricity comes from generators fueled by glycerin from sea algae.