ROME — Another day, another Italian landmark restored by an Italian luxury brand. Or so it often seems.
It also happens to offer tired tourists a place to sit and catch their breath, even though several mayors have tried to dissuade visitors from getting too comfortable on the steps, banning snacking or loitering, but the ordinances have not been enforced and the staircase succumbed to the wear and tear of modern mass tourism.
At 1.5 million euros, or $1.7 million, the project involved more than 80 restorers and craftspeople, who took what Claudio Parisi Presicce, the municipal superintendent for Rome’s cultural heritage, described as a “surgical, very detailed approach” to cleaning and repairing almost 32,300 square feet of travertine stone, as well as plaster, brick and marble.
Bulgari is one of several Italian luxury brands that have recently stepped in to help rescue ailing Roman monuments. Fendi spent €2.2 million to restore the Trevi Fountain, and Tod’s has donated about €25 million for a multiyear cleanup of the Colosseum.
The cultural support is not entirely altruistic, however, as Bulgari’s Rome flagship is on a street at the base of the steps. Perhaps that is why Paolo Bulgari, chairman of the company, which was bought by LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton in 2011, suggested to Italian news outlets this month that the staircase should be fenced off at night if the city couldn’t safeguard it against unruly tourists and Romans — an idea that immediately became the subject of some controversy.
For Mr. Parisi Presicce, limiting access to the steps, was “not a solution, either at night or in general, because I don’t think it will solve the problem of neglect and abuses.” Instead, he continued, alongside regular maintenance, the city should work to “raise awareness among citizens and tourists” that they should play an active part in preserving Rome’s monuments.
Luxury, it seems, can be expected to support the mink-trimmed cloak of heritage on its own for only so long.