New York State is extending the period for workers and volunteers to seek medical benefits and lost wages resulting from their involvement in the rescue and recovery operations in Lower Manhattan after the attack on Sept. 11, 2001.
Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, at a ceremony on Sunday for the 15th anniversary of the attack, signed legislation reopening the window for people to file claims with the state, for two years after the previous deadline elapsed.
The law extends the filing deadline to Sept. 11, 2018.
The attacks at the World Trade Center, the Pentagon and elsewhere that day killed 2,977 people. Thousands more have developed illnesses stemming from exposure to the toxins at ground zero.
On Friday, the New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene released a report documenting those continuing long-term physical and mental health impacts.
The report, published in a special 9/11 issue of The American Journal of Industrial Medicine and based on the World Trade Center Health Registry, which has assembled data from 71,000 people, found higher rates of cancer between 2007 and 2011 among Sept. 11 rescue workers and civilian survivors compared with the general New York State population.
The head of the Environmental Protection Agency at the time of the attacks, Christie Whitman, recently told The Guardian she was sorry for the agency’s assertion in the aftermath of the attacks that the air around ground zero was safe to breathe.
“Whatever we got wrong, we should acknowledge and people should be helped,” she said, adding that she still “feels awful” about the tragedy and its aftermath.
There are a number of programs available to assist those suffering illness related to recovery work, the best known being the federally funded James Zadroga 9/11 Health and Compensation Act, which was renewed in 2015.
In late 2015, Congress voted to make permanent the World Trade Center Health Program, which provides monitoring and treatment for dozens of illnesses, including acute traumatic injuries; airway, breathing and swallowing disorders; mental health conditions; and cancers.