THE discus thrower was missing his head and hands. The horse was blackened with grime and had a chipped ear. And poor St. Francis of Assisi — he was little more than a pile of rubble.
But these and dozens of other plaster casts made in the 19th century from original works dating to antiquity have been pieced together, cleaned and, now, put on display in a newly created cast hall at the headquarters of the Institute of Classical Architecture & Art on West 44th Street in Manhattan. They’ve made a long and circuitous journey there from their original home at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, where they once stood in for the real thing.
In the institute’s light-filled hall, completed this summer, artists, architects and students can draw, paint or model in clay while studying casts of Greek and Roman art. The hall is not only a showcase for the nonprofit institute, which relied on a plaster artisan, an architectural designer and a contractor who donated time and expertise, but it is also the latest effort in the once-fusty institute’s push to make classicism relevant today under its new president, Peter Lyden.
It’s extraordinary that the casts — easily broken and never meant to be moved from place to place — survived at all. When the Met opened in 1872, it did not possess the renowned collection of ancient art it has today. Fortunately, there was no stigma attached to copies. A booming reproduction business in Europe churned out plaster casts that people on grand tours could take home as souvenirs. Museums in the United States, where curators never dreamed of ever owning their own original Classical art in marble, gobbled them up, too, giving their visitors a taste of the glories of Greece and Rome.
From 1883 to 1895, the Met assembled a plaster collection that went well beyond run-of-the-mill copies. It acquired casts of architectural elements from the Parthenon and the Erechtheion and scale models of the Pantheon and the Cathedral of Notre Dame. Under the eye of a committee that included Augustus Saint-Gaudens, Louis Comfort Tiffany and Stanford White, the Met obtained permission from museums in Europe to take the first-ever castings of figural works by Donatello and other Renaissance sculptors. The collection, installed in what is now the Medieval Hall and its adjacent wings, eventually numbered over 2,600 pieces.
The casts remained on display long after the museum had begun to acquire original works — their very own marbles. But by the 1950s, nearly all the casts had been removed from public view. They ended up stored under the West Side Highway in Upper Manhattan, where the drip-drip-drip from a leaky roof and vibrations from traffic took their toll. In 1985 the casts were moved again, to a warehouse on Gerard Avenue in the Mott Haven section of the Bronx.
It was there in 2004 that Peter Pennoyer, a New York architect who works in the classical vein and was then board chairman of the Institute of Classical Architecture & Art, first laid eyes on them. Around that time a revival of interest in plaster casts was underway, and the Met was lending the works to museums and universities across the country. The institute, too, was offered a loan.
Accompanied by an architectural historian and a designer who is an expert in classicism, Mr. Pennoyer visited the Bronx warehouse and shined a flashlight on the dusty storage room.
Some items were already labeled with the names of institutions that had gotten there first. But the institute selected 120 items that the Met ultimately gave to the organization for keeps, trucking them to the group’s offices in the splendid 1890 building of the General Society of Mechanics and Tradesmen on West 44th Street.
The institute knew it had chosen well when, a couple months after the transfer, the Met asked to borrow one of the items back temporarily.
Mr. Reeve said that some of the casts simply needed cleaning; others, much more. The work depicting St. Francis, for instance — taken from one of Benedetto da Maiano’s 15th-century decorative relief panels for the pulpit of the Florentine church where Michelangelo is buried — had been dropped at some point in its travels and the pieces swept into a black garbage bag. Mr. Reeve and members of his firm painstakingly pieced together the puzzle and filled in the cracks.
After Mr. Lyden arrived to head the institute in 2014, he made displaying such treasures a priority. There was a 720-square-foot room at the top of the General Society building that had served as an art studio — its pine floor was splattered with paint, its skylight blackened, its walls pocked with holes. Mr. Lyden enlisted the architectural designer Seth Joseph Weine, an institute fellow, and John Flower, general manager of Flower Construction and an institute board member, to help turn the space into the casts’ new home.
Today, with the skylight cleaned, the floors refinished and the walls smoothed over and painted a soft apricot, the space glows. Plaster casts — some weighing a couple of hundred pounds — are arrayed on and under a white counter that borders the room. Many hang on the walls from custom steel brackets running all the way up to the 13-foot-high ceiling.
The gallery will be open to the public on Oct. 15, when the institute participates in Open House New York. But New York University students and high school students from the Ursuline School in New Rochelle, N.Y., have visited. And the institute has started using the space in its own programs; college students from around the country who took part in its summer studio in classical architecture learned techniques in measured drawing in the cast hall. Members of the public can make an appointment to visit the hall by emailing |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| On a recent afternoon, a handful of artists and architects were at work there during a weekly open-studio session.  (The original stands in a square in Padua, Italy.) Wielding a wooden spatula, Mr. Mostow was making a quarter-size model out of clay — and enjoying the ability to work at his own pace in the company of others who were as delighted as he was to be in proximity to so much beauty.
