SAN DIEGO — As he was walking off the field at Qualcomm Stadium, Colin Kaepernick’s ears perked up and his head swiveled just before he reached the tunnel leading to the visitor’s locker room. He planted like he was trying to avoid a linebacker, made a hard right turn and raced to the edge of the stands.
For the next 15 minutes, Kaepernick signed jerseys, T-shirts, caps and even a woman’s forearm. He posed for one selfie after another, beaming along with children and grown-ups alike. He also listened to what they had to say — be it a heckler who told him he won’t have football to interfere with his activism much longer or a supporter who encouraged him to keep speaking out.
“You’re the voice for us,” he shouted.
While Kaepernick, at ease and engaged, worked his way among a couple hundred fans, it was clear that he was among his people — and not just because so many were wearing San Francisco 49ers gear. They were mostly Latino, Asian and black.
“A lot of those people are people that I want to give equal opportunities to,” Kaepernick said.
It was not the only hard pivot Kaepernick had hoped to effect Thursday night. He also wanted to redirect the narrative stemming from his recent refusal to stand for the national anthem. What began as a gesture to protest police brutality and social injustice had careened into a national debate on everything but that.
Instead, the question being asked was whether Kaepernick was disparaging the sacrifices made by the military.
So, on Thursday night, in his team’s final exhibition game before the start of the N.F.L. season, Kaepernick, along with his teammate Eric Reid, took a knee instead of a seat during “The Star-Spangled Banner,” all with the blessing of Kaepernick’s invited guest, Nate Boyer, a former member of the Army’s Green Berets.
Also, Kaepernick announced afterward that he would donate the first million of his $11.9 million salary for this season to charitable organizations and that he was open to speaking to students at the San Francisco Police Department academy.
Kaepernick said at one point during a lengthy postgame news conference that his stance had been portrayed out of context by the media. Nevertheless, Kaepernick was also cleaning up a mess of his own making on Thursday when photos surfaced of him wearing socks to practice this summer that featured cartoon pigs wearing policeman’s caps.
As it happened, the 49ers were playing in a city with a sizable military presence, thanks to nearby Camp Pendleton, and the Chargers were also celebrating their 28th “Salute to the Military” night, replete with a local Marine band, sky divers and a large flag that was unveiled before the national anthem. The anthem was sung by Petty Officer First Class Steven Powell, who also sang “God Bless America” between the third and fourth quarters, which Kaepernick applauded.
Reid, who was in a sweatshirt and pants, knelt beside Kaepernick at Thursday’s game.
Still, Kaepernick was booed at every turn on Thursday — when he entered the field to warm up, when he took a knee, and virtually every time the 49ers offense broke its huddle. It did not seem to impact his performance. He directed the 49ers to two scoring drives in the first half of their eventual 31-21 victory.
Kaepernick’s decision to sit for the anthem brought widespread attention to a game that would have been all but ignored. The N.F.L.’s final exhibition games come after more than a month of practice, rarely feature any starters and are seen by coaches as exercises to get through unscathed before the start of the regular season.
But it was important to Les and Jackie Cohen, who were each cradling one of their newborn twins — Daytona and Matthew, who were born on the Fourth of July — after driving two hours from the desert town of Victorville, Calif., to deliver a message to Kaepernick.
Kaepernick is the latest professional athlete to speak out on social issues in recent years, something that many — most notably Michael Jordan — had refused to do for decades for fear of losing endorsements. The basketball players LeBron James and Carmelo Anthony, and the tennis player Serena Williams are among stars who have used their considerable platform to address social injustice.
But using the flag or anthem to make a point can be sticky.
For two seasons, Carlos Delgado, then a first baseman for the Toronto Blue Jays, stayed in the dugout when “God Bless America” was played during the seventh-inning stretch as a way of protesting the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. But when he signed with the Mets in 2005, he acquiesced to the team’s wishes and joined his teammates on the field when it was played.
Twenty years ago, the N.B.A. suspended Mahmoud Abdul-Rauf for two days without pay when he refused to stand during the national anthem.
Kaepernick seemed to have grasped this late Thursday night when he detoured to interact with fans. His hair, cropped short when he entered the league, has grown out into a bushy Afro. He seemed to let it down, in a figurative sense, with fans.
Kaepernick appreciated that they cheered for him at a time when it is not popular to do so. He also seemed to have struck the right note with them.
