In fact, no one has a definitive count of gay married couples in the United States.
By linking the tax returns of same-sex couples who filed jointly in 2014 with their Social Security records, researchers are able to give us the most accurate picture of same-sex marriages to date. And their estimate is this: In 2014 there were 183,280 same-sex marriages in America, roughly a third of 1 percent of all marriages.
Of course, implicit in this estimate is the assumption that all married couples file their returns jointly. But as a proxy for that, it’s pretty good. The Treasury Department estimates that 97.5 percent of married couples who file taxes file them jointly.
There is one group whose incomes are far above the rest: same-sex married men with children. Their income is roughly $275,000, more than double the pretax income for heterosexual couples and same-sex married female couples with children. This is a select group of people for whom the cost of children is particularly high. Using a surrogate can cost $250,000, and adoptions can cost upward of $30,000.
Women gravitated toward commitment more than men. Among the same-sex marriages, 55 percent involved same-sex women and 45 percent same-sex men.
Those in same-sex marriages tend to be a little younger than those in straight marriages. The average age of same-sex filers is 47, while the average age for those in straight couples is 51.
The Treasury’s tally of same-sex marriages is very different from that of the census — roughly half what the census estimates. It doesn’t rely on samples as the census does, but uses all the tax records in America.
This difference is particularly important when it comes to counting gay and lesbian populations. For detailed records of American life, the Census Bureau usually employs surveys of a small but statistically representative sample of Americans. Normally that is sufficient for most kinds of estimates such as average family sizes, car ownership or other measures. The problem with estimating gay and lesbian populations is that they represent such a small fraction of the total population; any mistakes in how people answered their census forms are likely to push the number of gay couples and, in particular, gay married couples wildly out of focus.
And in fact, this is what happened in the 2000 census and again in 2010. One of the more interesting problems was that many straight couples were being classified as gay because of incorrectly checked boxes on a census form. This resulted, according to some estimates, in as much as a 25 percent overcount of gay couples.
How did the Census Bureau try to control for this error? Simple. By taking names. It turns out that, even today, most first names are strongly associated with one gender. Using a database of gender probabilities for each given name, the bureau was able go back and correct the misreporting. But Gary Gates, former research director at the Williams Institute, notes it’s likely that some errors persist. The Census Bureau has been pretty upfront about its problems and even produced a delightfully nerdy video about its mistakes.
Which is why the Treasury’s use of administrative data is so important. The joint tax returns were matched with the Social Security Administration’s data, so there’s less chance that gender is misreported.
To be fair, tax records can give an incomplete picture, but the problem is more political than methodological. After the Windsor case was decided by the Supreme Court in 2013, same-sex marriage was still not recognized in every state. So gay couples who crossed state borders to marry, but lived in states that did not recognize gay marriage, were not allowed to file jointly on their state tax returns. Instead of trying to file a joint return for federal taxes and separate returns for state taxes, many couples opted to file separately on both their state and federal return.
This changed after Obergefell v. Hodges, the 2015 Supreme Court decision that recognized gay marriage in all states. But the Treasury’s data ends in 2014. So the Treasury data is most likely undercounting same-sex marriages in more than a dozen states that did not recognize such marriages before the Obergefell decision.
Maybe the best way to think about these Treasury numbers is as a floor, lower than the hypothetically perfect count of gay marriage but the closest we’ve ever come to one. And if the Treasury researchers produce similar reports for 2015 and 2016, we will be even closer.