Senator Ted Cruz said on Friday that he would vote for Donald J. Trump for president, two months after Mr. Cruz pointedly declined to endorse his former rival in a speech at the Republican National Convention.
“After many months of careful consideration, of prayer and searching my own conscience, I have decided that on Election Day, I will vote for the Republican nominee, Donald Trump,” Mr. Cruz wrote in a statement on Facebook.
For Mr. Cruz, who has fashioned himself as the unbending conscience of modern conservatism, the decision to endorse Mr. Trump is the latest remarkable gamble in a career defined by them, placing him in the corner of an ideologically elastic candidate who savaged Mr. Cruz — and, often, the senator’s family — at every turn during the nominating contest.
But Mr. Trump’s rise in the polls, combined with a handful of political overtures from Mr. Trump and his team in recent days, left Mr. Cruz effectively boxed in, raising the possibility that a narrow Trump defeat could be laid at his feet.
In his statement, Mr. Cruz said he had based his decision on two factors: a prior pledge to support the Republican nominee — which Mr. Cruz said in July had been “abrogated” by Mr. Trump’s personal attacks on him — and his desire to defeat Hillary Clinton, the Democratic nominee.
Mr. Cruz did not address the personal attacks that Mr. Trump had leveled — always without hesitation, often without evidence — against the Texas senator and his family during the nominating fight.
Among other slights, Mr. Trump questioned Mr. Cruz’s eligibility for the presidency, citing his birth in Canada; seemed to disparage the appearance of Mr. Cruz’s wife, Heidi, in a Twitter post; and insinuated that Mr. Cruz’s father, Rafael, was involved in the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.
In recent weeks, several former aides and allies to Mr. Cruz had urged him not to publicly back Mr. Trump, on both principled and pragmatic grounds.
Such support could be seen as jeopardizing Mr. Cruz’s professed reputation for conservative ideological purity, given Mr. Trump’s shape-shifting political views, which Mr. Cruz delighted in highlighting during his presidential campaign. And by voicing his support so late in the campaign, the senator also risks feeding a perception, rampant among Senate colleagues, that he is a cynical political operator, mindful only of his own interests.
At his convention speech in July, Mr. Cruz urged Republicans to “vote your conscience,” leaving the stage in Cleveland to cascading boos.
The next morning, as delegates from his home state jeered him at a breakfast, Mr. Cruz said he refused to fall in line like a “servile puppy dog.” Mr. Trump, for his part, said this summer that he would not accept Mr. Cruz’s endorsement anyway.
As news of Mr. Cruz’s plans surfaced, first on Politico, some Cruz allies wasted no time registering their displeasure.
Voters’ responses were often no kinder.
“I am ashamed to have supported you,” one man wrote.
“Conservatism is dead,” said another.
While Mr. Cruz is widely expected to pursue the presidency again, he faces a 2018 Senate re-election campaign first.
In recent days, signs of a tentative peace between the Cruz and Trump camps had begun to surface.
On Wednesday, Mr. Trump’s campaign issued a news release that was supportive of Mr. Cruz’s latest Senate venture: his opposition to the federal government’s plan to end its oversight of the internet’s master directory of website addresses.
Mr. Trump also included a close Cruz ally, Senator Mike Lee of Utah, on a list of prospective Supreme Court nominees, which Mr. Cruz praised in his statement.
Mr. Trump also now employs some members of the Cruz orbit: Jason Miller, who was a top adviser to the senator’s campaign, and Kellyanne Conway, who ran a pro-Cruz “super PAC” before becoming Mr. Trump’s campaign manager.
Longtime Cruz supporters could be forgiven for experiencing whiplash.
On Friday, Mr. Cruz cheered Mr. Trump’s vow to nominate justices “in the mold” of Justice Antonin Scalia, who died in February. In the primaries, he regularly disparaged Mr. Trump’s judgment on judicial matters, holding forth on a “radical pro-abortion extremist” federal judge who happens to be Mr. Trump’s sister, Maryanne Trump Barry.
On Friday, Mr. Cruz cited “national security” as a reason to to back Mr. Trump. In the primaries, the senator described Mr. Trump as so unsteady that he might even use nuclear weapons against a friendly country like Denmark on a whim.
Though Mr. Cruz spoke warmly of Mr. Trump early in the primary season, telling donors he planned to “bearhug” him in the hopes of winning his supporters if Mr. Trump faded, he let fly a blistering critique of Mr. Trump’s personal and political integrity just before leaving the race.
