Book Review|Why Do Debut Novels Command So Much Attention?
Why Do Debut Novels Command So Much Attention?
In Bookends, two writers take on questions about the world of books. This week, Leslie Jamison and Ayana Mathis discuss the hype behind first novels.
Gossiping about the overhyped debut novelist has become its own kind of contact sport.
Every year the N.B.A. draft offers the pageantry of promise, with a gleaming stage and a stadium audience — the whole affair charged by the tension of communal induction. Young players in snazzy suits hug their mothers. Talent and labor have been transfigured into pomp and ceremony. The vessel of ritual has been placed around the invisible threshold of childhood dreams coming true. The shimmering fact of money — huge amounts of money — glows under everything.
But the entire premise is haunted by the spectral presence of everyone who hasn’t made it, all the young players who weren’t quite good enough, or burned out. And the production is electrified by uncertainty: It’s impossible to know for certain whether the top picks will become huge stars or disappointments who never fulfill their extraordinary promise — whether a draft pick will turn into Kevin Durant, second pick in 2007, who became one of the great stars of the game; or Greg Oden, first pick from that same year, who was sidelined because he blew out his knees, got a felony domestic violence charge and eventually, after years of scarce game minutes and lackluster play, left to play in China.
Part of the thrill of watching the draft is the possibility of watching the future before it happens, which is also the thrill of the debut novelist: the chance to read an author before she has become a legacy, before she has become part of the canon. It’s a chance to imagine yourself, as a reader, inside the greater wingspan of literary history: Witnessing the ascendance of a debut novelist means witnessing a career when it’s just beginning, being part of a moment that will ultimately matter.
Debut novelists can prove intoxicating in shallow ways — by virtue of their youth and precocity, their big advances, their buzz and hype. Hyped debut novelists are the writers who most resemble actual celebrities — actresses or singers. The snowball effects of publicity can operate with a logic like Don DeLillo’s most-photographed barn in America: The barn is a tourist attraction because of all the tourists who have been attracted to it. And all this attraction, in turn, deepens the pleasure of its counterforce: the satisfaction of participating in the backlash against the debut novelist, pushing back against her hype. It’s the shadow-fixation embedded in the fixation itself: Gossiping about the overhyped debut novelist has become its own kind of contact sport.
Of course, most debut novelists don’t find themselves greeted by seven-figure advances and photo shoots in Vogue, and many people who write beautiful first novels never get to be “debut novelists” at all. They never even get published. American publishing isn’t a pure meritocracy any more than America itself is.
When I think about being a debut novelist, I remember reading to a crowd of three people in a bookstore in Orange County: my friend, his wife and my mom. (Thank you, Jim and Cailin! Thank you, Mom!) When a stranger finally joined us, I felt some fraction of my shame dissolve, but it turned out the stranger was actually just one of my mom’s friends. It also turned out that my novel and its portrayal of alcoholism had resonated with her, and she was generous enough to tell me so. The book had meant something to her, which in turn meant something to me. That was the excitement of being a debut novelist — realizing that a story had actually traveled in some meaningful way from my imagination to her life.
Ultimately, the most exciting part of reading a debut novelist isn’t wondering whether she deserved her seven-figure deal, or the rubbernecking pleasure of imagining how she probably won’t earn it back. It doesn’t have to do with hype or youth. It has to do with the possibility of imagining how a certain luminous talent will keep developing over the years, how this talent might expand beyond the horizon of our vision. It’s like hearing an overture at the beginning of a symphony, the introduction of themes and preoccupations that will keep unfolding. It’s the suggestion of future variations and deepening explorations, the embryonic blueprint of what we can’t yet imagine.
Leslie Jamison is the author of an essay collection, “The Empathy Exams,” winner of the Graywolf Press Nonfiction Prize. Her first novel, “The Gin Closet,” was a finalist for the Los Angeles Times Art Seidenbaum Award for First Fiction; and her essays and stories have been published in numerous publications, including Harper’s, The Oxford American, A Public Space and The Believer.
A debut novel is a piece of the writer’s soul in a way that subsequent books can’t ever be.
Debuts are a novelty! We like fresh voices! We are enamored with potential! These things are true, relatively obvious though they are. It’s also the case that we like debuts so much because we want to believe there may be something new under the sun after all. Debuts make us hopeful in that regard, and even offer some satisfaction. A good novel explores the well-trodden terrain of our pains and joys and confusions in some new way. In that sense debut novels are a bit like the best poems — strange creations attempting to articulate the inarticulable; unique, if not in content, in configuration of language and thought, and in the distinct singularity of the mind that makes them.
A debut novel is a piece of the writer’s soul in a way that subsequent books can’t ever quite be. This isn’t to say a debut is a writer’s best novel, God forbid; only that the movement from a single blank page to 300 written pages is a psychic and creative feat rendered that much more arduous because it has been undertaken for the first time.  And so we devour news about other debuts. To which publishing house? How much was the advance? Were there prizes involved? We obsess about these bits of information with a certain desperation, as though they were tea leaves through which we might divine our own futures.
Much is expected of a debut these days. The arts have succumbed to the more pernicious aspects of novelty culture; we are increasingly less mindful of the fact that Rome wasn’t built in a day. Great novels sometimes come roaring out of the mind of a first-timer, but more often greatness is the product of years of striving. The most reasonable and realistic conception of a writer’s trajectory focuses on her artistic development. Her career shouldn’t be a one-shot, winner-take-all enterprise in which her debut has to succeed, or else. I don’t mean to imply that publishing doesn’t invest in careers anymore; it certainly does, but it is also the case that early-career writers don’t have as much room to fail as they used to.
We must be able to fail. Writing is mostly failing — stabs in the dark, attempts that don’t quite work but from which much is learned. Sometimes it is the case that a novelist, debut or otherwise, writes a great book that doesn’t reach the right readership and fails by sales standards, which makes her less appealing to publishers next time around. That’s a dangerous model. We are all, writers and readers alike, intellectually and artistically enriched by a marketplace full of all different sorts of books, written by writers at various stages of their careers and abilities. I myself am still a debut novelist, having written only one book. Perhaps all of this is a mode of airing my own fears about Book 2, when I no longer have the debut factor on my side to swell the sails.
Ayana Mathis is a graduate of the Iowa Writers’ Workshop and a recipient of the 2014-15 New York Public Library’s Cullman Center Fellowship. “The Twelve Tribes of Hattie,” her first novel, was a New York Times Bestseller, a New York Times Notable Book of the Year, one of NPR’s Best Books of 2013 and was chosen by Oprah Winfrey as the second selection for Oprah’s Book Club 2.0. Ayana taught Creative Writing at The Writer’s Foundry MFA Program at St. Joseph’s College, Brooklyn. She is an Assistant Professor of English and Creative Writing at the Iowa Writers’ Workshop.