W.P. Kinsella, who wrote “Shoeless Joe,” the novel that became the basis for the 1989 movie “Field of Dreams,” and the author of numerous baseball short stories, poetry collections and several works of nonfiction, died on Friday in Hope, British Columbia. He was 81.
His literary agent, Carolyn Swayze, confirmed his death on her website. He had a doctor-assisted death, The Associated Press reported, citing Ms. Swayze’s agency. The agency did not provide details about Mr. Kinsella’s illness.
Mr. Kinsella’s works were known for their affection for baseball, with characters and plots frequently set around the sport. They also were infused with a magical realism.
He told The Vancouver Sun in 2011 that he loved taking stories in directions readers did not expect. “I just think magically, I always have,” he said.
“Field of Dreams” starred Kevin Costner, James Earl Jones, Burt Lancaster and Ray Liotta. Mr. Costner played a corn farmer in Iowa who hears a voice that he interprets as a directive to build a baseball diamond in his fields, which he does.
Mr. Kinsella had originally called the novel “Dream Field,” a choice that was overruled by his editor, according to the author’s website.
The signature line from the movie — “If you build it, he will come” — is a reference to Shoeless Joe Jackson, a dead professional baseball player who appears and asks if he and some of his fellow ballplayers can use the field.
In 1997, Mr. Kinsella suffered a head injury after he was struck by a car. Three years later, The Canadian Press reported, he said he had no interest in writing fiction and spent his time playing Scrabble on the internet.
His biographer, Willie Steele, said it took years for Mr. Kinsella to regain his “creative impulse to write,” contributing to a 13-year break between his published novels before “Butterfly Winter” was released in 2011, The Canadian Press reported.
Mr. Kinsella published almost 30 books of fiction, nonfiction and poetry. Ms. Swayze said in her statement that his final work of fiction, “Russian Dolls,” would be published next year by Coteau Books.
“He has a fondness for baseball, freckled women and his own brand of magic realism, which involves a comic sense sometimes unabashedly sentimental and sometimes edgy,” she wrote in The New York Times.
William Patrick Kinsella was born in Edmonton, Alberta, on May 25, 1935. He had been writing since he was a child, according to his website, and won a Y.M.C.A. contest when he was 14.
He received his bachelor of arts in creative writing at the University of Victoria in 1974 and earned a master of fine arts degree in English at the University of Iowa in 1978. He was a professor of English at the University of Calgary before he became a professional author.
“Shoeless Joe” won the Canadian Authors Association Prize, the Alberta Achievement Award, the Books in Canada First Novel Award and the Houghton Mifflin Literary Fellowship. Mr. Kinsella was made an Officer of the Order of Canada in 1993. In 2005, he was awarded the Order of British Columbia, and in 2009 he was awarded the George Woodcock Lifetime Achievement Award.
Mr. Kinsella is survived by two daughters, Erin Kinsella and Shannon Kinsella; three stepchildren, Scarlet and Aaron Gaffney and Lyn Calendar; and four grandchildren.
Ms. Swayze said in a separate statement that Mr. Kinsella persuaded her to become a literary agent in 1994 to represent his work.
“He was a dedicated storyteller, performer, curmudgeon and irascible and difficult man,” her statement said.