Many restaurants host an evening for friends and family before a formal opening as a dress rehearsal for the real thing. Such was the case on Sept. 16 at the Brooklyn bistro 21 Greenpoint, formerly known as River Styx. It was reopening, under the same owners, with a new menu and a new look.
Most friends-and-family nights are intimate affairs. Not this one. There were camera crews on the sidewalk and a line of people stretching from Greenpoint Avenue nearly to the East River.
The restaurant’s co-owner, Homer Murray, had let it be known that there would be a special guest bartender on duty that night: his father, the actor and urban folk hero Bill Murray. But at 7:15 the 65-year-old star of “Ghostbusters,” “Groundhog Day” and “Lost in Translation” had yet to arrive for a shift scheduled to begin at 7.
The throng seemed to press against the doors shortly before 7:30, and the owner decided to open for business, although the main attraction had yet to appear.
At 8:05, Bill Murray stepped in at last. The place lit up with smartphone flashes as he moved toward the bar. Those not occupied with capturing his likeness for their Instagram accounts gave him a round of applause.
His first order of business was to grab a bottle of Slovenia Vodka from behind the bar. He twisted off the square black cap, poured a shot into it, drank it and placed the cap on his head to big cheers. Then he got to work.
People who shouted the names of complicated cocktails got nowhere fast. But when someone said, “Mezcal, rocks,” the guest bartender served it up chop chop. Mr. Murray was equally quick with tequila shots, for himself and for anyone who asked.
One man asked him if he knew how to make a Bellini.
“I know people who do,” Mr. Murray said.
He refused another man’s order until, at Mr. Murray’s request, the guest removed his hat.
When a fellow bartender was in the middle of making a cocktail, Mr. Murray swiped the jigger and drank its contents.
A group of firefighters entered the place, hoping for a photo with the special guest. Mr. Murray took a pineapple from the bar and cradled it like a baby as he posed with them.
As the evening wore on, he left his station briefly and nearly bumped into a young woman. As if to make up for his lapse, he put his hands on her shoulders, kissed her on the nose and told her she was beautiful.
Around 10, the music cut off, and Mr. Murray gestured toward the co-owner with the drink he held in his hand.
More cheers from the crowd.
Pour the vodka, Amaro and lemon juice into a shaker with ice. Shake vigorously, and strain into a highball glass.
Top with ice, soda water and garnish with dried rosebuds. Serve with a straw.