Wilmer Flores, who is from Venezuela, loves the Backstreet Boys, the popular American boy band that burst onto the music scene in the 1990s. Listening to them while growing up, he said, helped him learn English, his second language.
Noah Syndergaard, a Texas native, now has Latin music on his cellphone.
But in the crossover of musical tastes in the Mets’ locker room, which is a testament to the melting pot that baseball can be, nothing can probably match the fact that Yoenis Cespedes, who defected from Cuba, is now obsessed with country music.
Ask Cespedes about it and he can show you his long playlists of artists like Tim McGraw (son of the former Met Tug McGraw) and Stoney LaRue. Country music is his soundtrack when he works out, when he hits in the batting cage before a game or even before he goes to sleep.
Cespedes, who left Cuba in 2011 and made his major league debut a year later, was first turned on to country music when he was with the Detroit Tigers in the first half of the 2015 season. One of the team’s trainers played the music, and he was hooked.
Cespedes owns horses and has a ranch in Florida, so his taste for country tunes fits in with the cowboy persona he has more or less taken on.
A detail of a playlist by the Mets’ Kelly Johnson, who was born in Texas.
Still, it remains a moment very much out of the ordinary when Cespedes breaks out in song — country music songs, mind you — on team buses and planes.
“That’s the best English you’ll hear him speak,” said Kelly Johnson, one of the Mets’ utility players and, like Syndergaard, a Texas native.
“It’s pretty cool that someone from Cuba listens to that music, and it’s music I listened to back home,” Syndergaard said.
And if it’s true that Cespedes might not have encountered country music if not for baseball, it’s also the case that Johnson and Syndergaard might not have otherwise taken a liking to reggaeton.
Nicky Jam is a popular Boston-born reggaeton artist of Puerto Rican and Dominican descent. Johnson said he makes sure to keep at least three or four songs available that he likes and that will also appeal to his Latino teammates.
It is, in some respects, the theme of the Mets’ clubhouse. Neil Walker, who was born in 1985, grew up in Pittsburgh and has seen his musical tastes evolve from hip-hop to alternative rock. He is now a budding connoisseur of Latin music, too.
This summer, Walker was in the visitors’ locker room at Citizens Bank Park in Philadelphia as the team prepared to play the Phillies, and he took note of the reggaeton music blasting from the nearby weight room, where some other Mets were working out.
“It sounds like a Latin club in here,” he said, laughing.
Walker, who is expected to be sidelined for the remainder of the season after surgery for a herniated disk, pointed to Jose Reyes as one of the players most likely to put on Latin music in the clubhouse or weight room. It makes perfect sense; Reyes has produced his own music and released a reggaeton video. He has also gained a love for hip-hop, and counts Drake and Tory Lanez among his favorite artists.
Reyes is Dominican, as is Jeurys Familia, the team’s closer. Familia has helped make Don Omar, a Puerto Rican reggaeton star, the most popular Latin music artist among the Mets born in the United States.
Familia, who listens daily to bachata and merengue, uses Omar’s “Danza Kuduro” as his entrance song when he takes the mound at Citi Field, which, in turn, has made an impression on other Mets.
Familia, who said he liked all of the music played in the Mets clubhouse, said he was proud to share a slice of Latin culture to teammates whose backgrounds are not like his.
Blevins said he gained an appreciation for norteño, a style of Mexican music, as a minor leaguer with the Chicago Cubs after a teammate, Jesse Estrada, often played songs by Los Tigres del Norte. Blevins said he was exposed to other musical styles when he played winter league ball in Colombia in 2006.
Now he is a resident of a Mets clubhouse that is also home to various speakers. A four-foot one sits next to Cespedes’s locker at Citi Field and often booms music after games. Reyes carries a portable speaker on trips. And the pregame D.J. duties sometimes go to Curtis Granderson, a Chicago-area native, who has been fulfilling that role since he was in high school nearly 20 years ago.
Each day has a theme, one or two of them irreverent, including Michael Jackson Monday; White People Wednesday, which often features Flores’s beloved Backstreet Boys (“I didn’t know what they were saying, but I sang it,’’ he said); Throwback Thursday; Feel Good Friday (“A mix of happy music,” Granderson said); and Slowdown Sunday, which could range from classic Motown to modern rhythm and blues.
As Granderson cues up music before games, Latin music may be playing in other outposts of the clubhouse. And these days, it generally makes for a winning sound, as the Mets try to defy their numerous injuries and continue a late-season run for a postseason berth.
Even the quietest of Mets has taken part this year. Lucas Duda, a reserved first baseman and Southern California native, is a reggaeton fan, too. He’s injured now, but when he is healthy enough, he plays golf and sometimes drives to a course with Cespedes.
And when they’re in the car, Cespedes said, Duda will ask that he play Don Omar.
“And he sings along to it,’’ Cespedes said.