Family|When Should Children Take Part in Medical Decisions?
When Should Children Take Part in Medical Decisions?
Pediatricians sometimes find ourselves holding small children down and treating them against their will. When cleaning the wax out of a toddler’s ear, for example, to see if there’s an infection, we don’t ask the child’s opinion.
But as children grow up, how can they, and how should they, begin to participate in making medical decisions? What if they disagree with their parents, or with their doctors? When do they get to decide whether to have elective surgery, whether to go on medication for attention deficit disorder, whether to undergo medical tests or treatments or just wait to see whether their symptoms clear up on their own?
Dr. Aviva Katz, a pediatric surgeon who is the director of the Ethics Consultation Service at the Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh, and was first author on both, said that these new reports were guided in part by an understanding of neurodevelopment and the evolving decision-making abilities of adolescents.
The goal of pediatric assent, from a neurodevelopmental point of view, is to promote good decision making skills and build that growing sense of autonomy as a child gets older, so that by the time children reach adult autonomy, they understand the complexity of medical decision making and feel somewhat prepared to take it on.
Many of the high-profile cases around pediatric consent and assent have involved children with life-threatening illnesses, where refusing treatment may have fatal consequences. When the stakes are high, and a child is not going to be allowed to refuse treatment, it’s important to make that clear.
Adults, of course, are allowed to refuse lifesaving treatments or surgeries and to ignore their doctors’ advice. But they aren’t generally allowed to do that on behalf of their children, and there is plenty of legal precedent for overruling religious preferences and mandating blood transfusions or medications for children even if parents would be able to refuse for themselves.
Clearly, a medication strategy is much more likely to be successful if an adolescent buys in and cooperates. Including the patient in the discussion and the decision can help with the treatment. “If somebody understands what is happening to them, they’re more likely to be adherent,” Dr. Ross said. She pointed to studies that show that many pediatricians talk directly to the parent and don’t involve the child at all. If we make a practice of including children in the medical conversation, she said, young adults will have more experience and be more ready to take part in decisions.
The new policy statement recognizes several situations in which adolescents are legally able to make medical decisions for themselves, including consenting to treatment for matters related to sexual health, contraception and prenatal care, and also to mental health and substance abuse treatment. The rationale for giving adolescents this additional medical autonomy is based on the concern that they won’t get treatment if they have to have parental consent.
But when the parent does have the decision making power, it’s still important to involve the pediatric patient. “Giving kids a little more freedom than we’ve gotten used to, that can be difficult and scary as a parent,” Dr. Katz said. “If I see someone with hernias, I’ll talk to the child, what’s your schedule, are you on a sports team, let’s work around a schedule that’s good for you.” Sometimes the parents are troubled that she’s talking directly to the child, she said, but not as often as they were 10 or 15 years ago.
