The storm over bans on burkinis in more than 30 French beach towns has all but drowned out the voices of Muslim women, for whom the full-body swimsuits were designed. The New York Times solicited their perspective, and the responses — more than 1,000 comments from France, Belgium and beyond — went much deeper than the question of swimwear.
What emerged was a portrait of life as a Muslim woman, veiled or not, in parts of Europe where terrorism has put people on edge. One French term was used dozens of times: “un combat,” or “a struggle,” to live day to day. Many who were born and raised in France described confusion at being told to go home.
Courts have struck down some of the bans on burkinis — the one in Nice, the site of a horrific terror attack on Bastille Day, was overturned on Thursday — but the debate is far from over.
“For years, we have had to put up with dirty looks and threatening remarks,” wrote Taslima Amar, 30, a teacher in Pantin, a suburb of Paris. “I’ve been asked to go back home (even though I am home).” Now, Ms. Amar said, she and her husband were looking to leave France.
Laurie Abouzeir, 32, said she was considering starting a business caring for children in her home in Toulouse, southern France, because that would allow her to wear a head scarf, frowned upon and even banned in some workplaces.
Many women wrote that anti-Muslim bias had intensified after the attacks on Charlie Hebdo in Paris in January 2015, and in Brussels, Paris and Nice more recently. Halima Djalab Bouguerra, a 21-year-old student in Bourg-en-Bresse, France, dated the change further back, to the killings by Mohammed Merah in the southwest of the country in 2012.
Here are some excerpts from the comments we received. They have been condensed and edited for clarity, and translated for those who wrote in French.
Hajer Zennou, 27, Lyon, France. Designer. She was referring to a woman who was surrounded by police officers on a beach in Nice.
“I am insulted, spat on (literally) every day in the subway, on the bus, at school. Yet I have never insulted or hit someone. No, I am just Muslim. I am seriously thinking of going to live elsewhere, where other people’s looks won’t make me cry every night in my bed.
Charlotte Monnier, 23, Toulouse, France. Architecture student.
Samia Fekih, 36, Paris. Digital project manager.
Souad el Bouchihati, 26, Gouda, the Netherlands. Social worker.
Hadjira Skoundri, 22, Toulouse, France. Administrative agent in the local government.
“Even if we make every effort and try to be ‘integrated,’ we are constantly reminded that to be properly and completely integrated, we must give up our principles and our religion. In our homes, at work, or among our friends, there is a kind of pressure. We don’t dare accept invitations from friends because we’re sick of having to say no to alcohol and to politely justify ourselves, walking on eggshells while making sure we don’t say anything that could be taken the wrong way. At work, there have been little jokes along the lines of ‘Did you help your cousins?’ after the terrorist attacks. 
Mira Hassine, 27, Orléans, France. Administrator at a construction company and a practicing Muslim who does not wear a veil.
Karima Mondon, 37. French teacher who recently moved to Casablanca, Morocco, from Lyon, France.
Linda Alem, 27, Paris. Nurse at a dialysis center.
Nora Mahboub, 21, Paris. Engineering student.
Assia Boukhelifa, 22, Lille. Political science student.
Saadia Akessour, 31, Liège, Belgium. Stay-at-home mother who had to remove her veil during a midwifery internship and has since abandoned her studies.
Fadoua Hachimi, 41, Les Lilas, France. Purchasing assistant.
Nadia Lamarti, 35, Zellik, Belgium. Mother of four daughters who has trained as a social worker.
Siam Ferhat-Basset, 29, Drancy, France. Former receptionist.
Ennaji Loubna, 30, Perpignan, France. Studying for a master’s in sociology.
Khadija Manouach, 29, Brussels. Teacher in an elementary school.
Sarah Nahal, 24, Grenoble, France. Student in economics and management.
Nadia Benabdelkader, 25, Roubaix, France. Student.