MANILA — Military cooperation between the Philippines and the United States appeared to be undisturbed on Tuesday, as the Southeast Asian country sought to temper comments by its president suggesting American troops should leave Mindanao, where they have been helping to fight an insurgency.
“Pursuant to the same statement, he desires that our American counterparts should be eased from harm’s way,” General Padilla said.
Mr. Duterte said on Monday that the American Special Forces in Mindanao should withdraw.
General Padilla said that the areas where Americans were at risk included western Mindanao, the Zamboanga Peninsula and the islands of Basilan and Sulu, regions where the Islamist militant group Abu Sayyaf is known to operate.
Abu Sayyaf is holding at least 23 hostages, including a Dutch bird-watcher seized in 2012 and a Norwegian taken last year from a beach resort he helped manage near Davao City, where Mr. Duterte was formerly mayor.
General Padilla said the military had yet to “receive any specific directives as to how this pronouncement will be effected,” and that any changes would “affect only a token number of American servicemen who are confined mainly in Zamboanga City,” on Mindanao. Those affected, he said, provided technical assistance and training to their Filipino counterparts.
The general also emphasized that the alliance remained “rock solid” and that activities scheduled for the rest of 2016 were expected to continue. Plans for next year and beyond are also unchanged, he said.
Mr. Abella emphasized that the government was not preparing to cut economic or military ties with the United States, but that it was seeking to create an independent policy in the south.
He also portrayed Mr. Duterte’s comments as part of an attempt to highlight an aspect of American history on Mindanao that could hinder the government’s efforts to gain the trust of rebels on the islands.
In his appearance on Monday, Mr. Duterte showed photographs and cited accounts of American atrocities against Muslims during its occupation of the country more than a century ago.
“The lack of acknowledgment by the Americans of their shortcomings, and our continued collaboration with them, is the true origin of the ethnic conflict in Mindanao,” Mr. Abella said.
The latest controversy comes just a week after remarks by Mr. Duterte cast a shadow over President Obama’s visit to Laos for a meeting of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Those remarks, including an angry rebuke to Mr. Obama for warning Mr. Duterte to observe human rights and the rule of law in his campaign against drug-related crime, led to the cancellation of a formal meeting between the two. Mr. Duterte is hugely popular at home as a result of the crackdown, which has claimed many hundreds of lives since he took office this year.
At the peak of a joint campaign against Abu Sayyaf in Mindanao, the United States had 1,200 special forces in the area providing technical and logistical support to the Philippine military. That program was discontinued in 2015, but small numbers of advisers remain.
The Philippine Senate voted to end the lease on two vast American bases in 1991. But Manila later ratified an agreement that provided the legal basis for the resumption of large-scale joint military exercises. American troops subsequently returned to train Philippine forces to fight Abu Sayyaf.
