SEATTLE — A federal judge in Tacoma, Wash., has found a county in the southwestern part of the state liable for clearing out homeless encampments and seizing the residents’ belongings.
Judge Robert J. Bryan ruled on Friday that Clark County’s work crews had violated the constitutional rights of at least a half-dozen homeless residents by throwing out their tents, stoves, medication, documents and photographs during sweeps from 2012 to 2014. A trial will determine how much the county must pay in damages.
“The only evidence in the record is that the county’s employees took all unattended property and then immediately destroyed the property, regardless of whether the property was abandoned,” the judge wrote. He declined to immediately rule on the merits of claims by two other campers, saying it was not clear who had taken their property.
Encampment sweeps have become increasingly controversial as officials have struggled with rising rates of homelessness around the country. The American Civil Liberties Union and other advocates for homeless people have filed recent lawsuits over sweeps in Denver, Honolulu, Los Angeles and other cities.
In March 2012, the Department of Corrections adopted a policy that work crews should clean up camps immediately if they had been abandoned. If they had not been abandoned, the department said, workers were to give one-hour notice that the residents had to vacate the area and take their belongings with them.
In practice, the crews acted regardless of whether the property had been abandoned. One crew supervisor testified in a deposition that even if his workers said that a campsite appeared to be recently occupied, he ordered them to clean up anyway.
A lawyer for the county did not immediately return an email seeking comment on Friday.
Some campers had left to eat meals at a local shelter, then returned to find the work crews seizing their property and refusing to give it back.
One homeless person, Terry Ellis, left a backpack at a bus stop while he offered to help a woman whose car had broken down. Even though he was within sight when the work crew arrived, the crew took it, ignoring his explanation for why he had left it there, Mr. Ellis said in court filings.
Inside the backpack, he said, were new clothes he had been given so he could apply for a job.