BEIRUT, Lebanon — Russia escalated its anti-American invective Thursday in the deadlocked diplomacy over the Syrian war, dismissing a threat by Secretary of State John Kerry to halt talks and accusing his spokesman of abetting global terrorism — including against Russian military personnel in Syria.
The Russian response came as United Nations officials warned that 600 wounded civilians in the rebel-held districts of the divided northern city of Aleppo must be evacuated and that food is nearly exhausted for the 275,000 residents trapped there.
The Russians, the main military allies of President Bashar al-Assad, offered 48-hour pauses in Aleppo to permit humanitarian access, an idea that Western diplomats and United Nations officials have rejected as impractical and meaningless. Mr. Kerry has demanded a return to the cessation of hostilities agreement he negotiated with Foreign Minister Sergey V. Lavrov on Sept. 9, which collapsed a week later.
In some of his strongest criticism of Russia over the Syria conflict, Mr. Kerry said Wednesday that unless the Syrians and Russians quit their barrage of Aleppo and restored the Sept. 9 agreement, the United States would suspend talks and scrap a plan to collaborate with Russia on targeting jihadist fighters in Syria that both powers regard as terrorist threats.
Civilians in these areas have limited or no access to food, medicine and basic necessities.
Maj. Gen. Igor Konashenkov, a spokesman for Russia’s Defense Ministry, said in a statement that Mr. Kirby’s comments were “the most frank confession by the U.S. side so far that the whole ‘opposition’ ostensibly fighting a ‘civil war’ in Syria is a U.S.-controlled terrorist international,” a Soviet-era term for a global organization.
Aleppo residents and rescue workers have reported the use of heavy-duty penetrating “bunker buster” bombs and incendiary cluster munitions in the rebel-held eastern section of the city, where children are almost half the population.
Save the Children, the international charity, said Thursday that more than 300 children had been killed or wounded there over the past five days.
Bombs hit two hospitals in eastern Aleppo and a bakery where people were lining up for bread on Wednesday, residents said, and two bakeries outside the city were struck on Thursday. There were unconfirmed reports on Thursday that Syrian soldiers and pro-government militia members were massing for a ground invasion of east Aleppo.
Analysts say that Russia and Syria may be targeting civilians in Aleppo to erode the rebels’ legitimacy by driving them into the hands of extremists. Such a move could give Russia more leverage in diplomatic talks and perhaps persuade civilians to stop supporting the rebels.
Witnesses reached by phone in eastern Aleppo described harrowing assaults on the two hospitals.
Around 4 a.m. on Wednesday, artillery shells hit a hospital known as M2. One struck an ambulance area, killing two patients and wounding three staff members. Other patients were evacuated on foot. About 10 minutes later, another hospital, known as M10, was hit by what witnesses described as an airstrike.
Both hospitals stopped treating patients because their generators were knocked out, but employees remained to bandage the wounded and direct them to other hospitals.
Muhammad al-Ahmad, a radiology nurse at M10, said he had been awakened from a short nap by explosions and had rushed to evacuate 15 patients when the ventilators and other equipment stopped. One patient, a child, died.
The bakery attacked on Wednesday was hit by a projectile that killed six customers. Photographs showed bodies in the street, covered in gray dust like the rubble around them.
“My house was destroyed today,” said Zaher al-Zaher, an activist and citizen journalist in the city. At 7 a.m. on Wednesday, he said, his mother woke him warning that an incendiary bomb, which can burn concrete, had fallen on the balcony and set the house afire.
On Thursday, activists reported that Zilal Ibrahim al-Salhani, a 23-year-old university student, had been sentenced to death by a military court. The human rights group Amnesty International had reported her detention in 2012 and expressed fear that she would be subjected to torture and other mistreatment.