At last, Bill Clinton could not help himself.
He paced the stage during a speech on Tuesday in North Carolina, holding his microphone close. He raised his left index finger. And at once, the meandering address turned sharply, and without prompting, to his charitable foundation, a magnet for criticism in recent weeks.
“We live in a Snapchat-Twitter world,” Mr. Clinton lamented, tilting his head theatrically — a septuagenarian embracing his age, decades after reveling in saxophone cool.
For Mr. Clinton and his extended circle, this election has at times felt like a campaign devised to discredit the former president and call him names.
And after more than a year of uncharacteristic restraint — a notable shift from eight years ago, when his simmering instincts often burdened Hillary Clinton’s first presidential run — Mr. Clinton seems to have had enough.
In the Democratic primary race, he mostly held his tongue as Senator Bernie Sanders disavowed his administration’s approach to trade, criminal justice, gay rights and the deregulation of Wall Street, in part because Mrs. Clinton had been compelled to second-guess much of his record herself.
Yet if the primary race doubled as a re-litigation of Mr. Clinton’s policies, which his advisers believe history will judge kindly, the general election has touched a different nerve, taking a black light to Mr. Clinton’s post-presidential legacy.
Friends of Mr. Clinton’s say he has grown impervious to most criticisms, particularly swipes at his personal indiscretions, which could proliferate in the weeks before the election. Donald J. Trump has made winking allusions to Mr. Clinton’s infidelities and other controversies from the 1990s.
But the focus on the Clinton Foundation, which has come under escalating scrutiny over potential conflicts of interest and foreign donations, has rankled him far more, according to those close to the former president, because of his deep personal investment in the foundation’s charitable work over the past 15 years.
In a series of swing-state appearances this week, Mr. Clinton unleashed an impassioned self-defense, by turns sarcastic and almost pleading.
“All we’ve done is save lives,” he told voters on Monday in Detroit.
“I got tickled the other day when Mr. Trump called my foundation a criminal enterprise,” he said on Tuesday in Durham, N.C., noting that Mr. Trump had paid a fine for making a political donation using funds from his own foundation.
Moments later, he wondered aloud how much money Mr. Trump had spent to help the people of Haiti.
Angel Urena, a spokesman for Mr. Clinton, said that the foundation’s mission and those who rely on it “have been President Clinton’s life” since he left office.
The irritation seemed to have been building for weeks. Mr. Clinton had scarcely appeared on the campaign trail since the Democratic National Convention in July. His most public task in the interim appeared to be clapping behind Mrs. Clinton in several cities on a Rust Belt bus tour.
Allies said Mr. Clinton deserved credit for largely holding his fire so far this year, despite persistent bipartisan criticism, avoiding a repeat of 2008, when he seethed over the rise of Barack Obama, then a senator. Most memorably, he appeared to diminish Mr. Obama’s campaign by invoking the Rev. Jesse Jackson’s more quixotic bids in the 1980s.
An exception came this summer, when Mr. Clinton attracted criticism by chatting at the Phoenix airport with Attorney General Loretta Lynch amid a federal investigation into Mrs. Clinton’s email practices.
Still, the Clintons and many in their orbit have long believed they are held to a double standard on questions of transparency, and friends say they consider the tumult surrounding the family foundation to be among the most egregious examples.
They point to the lifesaving work the group has done, particularly in its focus on AIDS and malaria drugs, and they suggest that Mr. Clinton is more deserving of a Nobel Prize than of accusations of impropriety.
As Mrs. Clinton slogs through a stretch of middling polls, with voters still sharply questioning her honesty and trustworthiness, the family has already bowed at least somewhat to election-year pressures: Mr. Clinton told foundation employees last month that the organization would stop accepting foreign or corporate donations if Mrs. Clinton is elected and that he would resign from its board.
The foundation has accepted tens of millions of dollars from countries that the State Department has criticized for their records on sex discrimination and other human rights issues. Mr. Trump has also seized on the release of emails from Mrs. Clinton’s tenure as secretary of state that include references to foundation donors, accusing her of favoritism.
Speaking to reporters on her campaign plane this week, Mrs. Clinton noted that several watchdog groups had given the charity the highest possible marks.
“A lot of what’s been said is not founded in fact,” she said.
The coming weeks are unlikely to be kinder to Mr. Clinton.
Mr. Trump has said he may bring up Mr. Clinton’s sexual affairs on the debate stage beside Mrs. Clinton, a prospect that some Democrats welcome, hoping it will backfire.
Other former aides have found less occasion for whimsy, cringing through an election that has felt interminable and ugly.
The family name will be fine, they say, as long as Mrs. Clinton can return it to the White House. For some, that cannot happen quickly enough.
