HEMPSTEAD, N.Y. — As Monday night’s presidential debate neared its end, Donald J. Trump alluded to an attack line against Hillary Clinton that he was refraining from using.
But after the debate, Mr. Trump and his surrogates were a bit more forthcoming on how directly he could have gone after Mrs. Clinton and her husband, suggesting that Bill Clinton’s relationship with Monica Lewinsky was fair game.
Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former mayor of New York City, one of Mr. Trump’s most ardent supporters and a constant presence on the campaign trail, elaborated on the line of attack that wasn’t used.
He accused Mrs. Clinton of attacking Ms. Lewinsky after she first claimed to be in a relationship with Mr. Clinton, and then said she was “too stupid to be president” because she did not initially believe the former intern. His remarks were recorded on video by a writer for the website Elite Daily and posted to Twitter.
Earlier that evening in the “spin room,” Mr. Giuliani said Mr. Trump did not mention the former president’s relationship with Ms. Lewinsky during the debate because Chelsea Clinton was in the audience. The former mayor also praised Mr. Trump as a feminist.
He added another common attack made by the Trump campaign, claiming that Mrs. Clinton took money from “at least six countries in which women can’t drive, in which women are stoned, in which women are killed for adultery,” ostensibly a reference to the Clinton Foundation and not Mrs. Clinton’s campaign, although Mr. Giuliani did not differentiate.
The use of Mr. Giuliani as a surrogate on this front could be problematic given the former mayor’s own history.
Mr. Giuliani married Judith Nathan after separating and later divorcing his second wife, Donna Hanover, who said at the time of their separation in 2000 that the couple’s troubles began years before because of a previous relationship the mayor had with a member of his staff.
Mr. Trump himself echoed Mr. Giuliani’s remarks after the debate, but was less direct.
“I didn’t want to do my final attack, which was to attack her husband on what took place with respect to him and his life and all of the things that took place because Chelsea, who I happen to think is a wonderful young lady, was in the room, and I didn’t think it would be appropriate,” Mr. Trump said.