Auto Racing|Where Are the Female Drivers in Formula One?
Where Are the Female Drivers in Formula One?
When Formula One returned from its summer break for the Belgian Grand Prix on Aug. 28, a series that used to separate the boys from the men suddenly found itself with two teenagers on the grid.
One of them, Max Verstappen, who will be 19 on Sept. 30 and who started in the series last year at age 17, has already won a Grand Prix. The other, Esteban Ocon, will be 20 on Sept. 17, and joined the series at the Belgian race.
But while the series is now integrating teenagers, it is still not including women drivers, even though the traditional physical challenge of man against machine is no longer what it used to be. In recent years, the machines — the cars — have been so transformed that the more experienced drivers say they are physically the easiest they have driven.
The Singapore Grand Prix this weekend is still considered the most excruciating physical challenge of the season, as it is run under floodlights at night in extreme heat and humidity, around a long, sinuous city circuit.
But the Formula One cars of the past required great body strength to cope with G-forces similar to those encountered by jet pilots. The tire grip was huge, steering was heavy and braking was muscular. Since new regulations introduced in 2014, however, with downsized hybrid engines the cars have been so less physical to drive that the racing has become, if not quite child’s play, at least accessible for teenagers like Verstappen and Ocon.
And yet, there are still no women driving in the world’s elite racing series.
To date, only two women, both Italians, have qualified and raced in the series: Maria Teresa de Filippis, who entered five races in 1958 and 1959 and qualified for three of them, with a highest finish of 10th; and Lella Lombardi, who entered 17 races over three seasons from 1974 to 1976, and qualified for 12. She is the only woman to score points in Formula One, when she finished sixth at the 1975 Spanish Grand Prix and scored half a point after the race was cut short.
The most recent woman to take to the track was Susie Wolff of Scotland, who took part in Formula One practice sessions while she was a test driver for the Williams team from 2012 until last year. Also in 2012, María de Villota, a Spanish test driver at the Marussia team, had a freak, low-speed accident that caused a serious head injury. She died a year later after a heart attack.
Before her, there was Giovanna Amati, another Italian, who unsuccessfully tried to qualify for three races in 1992. Replacing Amati in the Brabham car that year was Damon Hill, who also failed to qualify the car — though Hill went on to become world champion at the Williams team in 1996.
The fact is that women have never been given a chance to compete at a top team. So without the physical challenge of driving the cars since 2014, the question remains: Why?
But Jolyon Palmer, a driver at the Renault team, said it was a question of numbers, going all the way back to when drivers take up motor racing as children.
Wolff, 33, has started a program called Dare to be Different, which is designed to encourage young women to go racing. The group takes school girls to karting tracks to discover go-karting and involves them in competitions and other racing projects.
Nevertheless, she emphasized that it was not just numbers that count, but the quality of the racer.
Ocon, though, entered the series in the middle of the season at the Manor team to replace a driver whose sponsorship had dried up.
Simona de Silvestro, 28, a Swiss driver who has raced in the United States-based Indy-style series — and who won five races in Formula Atlantic — is now racing in the Formula E series. She was hired by the Sauber Formula One team as an “affiliated driver” in 2014, with a view to racing for the team in 2015. But Sauber then had financial problems and sought drivers who pay for their seat.
For female drivers, finding sponsorships and building a career are more difficult than for men because of perceptions that racing is not for women.
Claire Williams, the deputy team principal of the Williams team, where Wolff test drove, said that such prejudice was one of the biggest obstacles for women.
Because the stigma is so strong, women are treated entirely differently than men. “I only ever did one interview in my whole career where I wasn’t asked about my gender,” Wolff said.
Verstappen, the youngest driver ever to race in Formula One, is the son of Jos Verstappen, who raced in Formula One, and Sophie Kumpen, who was a top international kart racer.
Wolff said she was against such segregation, noting that in the main sports where both genders take part together — sailing, horse riding and motorsport — there is an external means of propulsion.
