At the top of a classic Art Deco building on the Upper East Side, the contradictions of the designer Billy Cotton shine through.
When Billy Cotton was studying Russian history at Hunter College in New York City, he could peer from his classrooms into the Classic Sixes across the way — those storied prewar apartments of stately, self-­contained rooms. “I would fantasize about what it would be like to have these rambling warrens,” he says.
It was, to that Vermont-raised young man, the epitome of urban elegance. Soon the history of objects had replaced the history of Russia (“I realized I was never going into the foreign service,” he says), and Cotton had moved over to Pratt Institute and earned his degree in industrial design. Some dozen years later, his impressive skill set includes furniture, lighting, interior design and architecture. It was inevitable that he would get his hands on one of those coveted Upper East Side apartments — a commission in an Art Deco building by Emery Roth, one of the city’s definitive, early-­20th-century architects.
Though not technically a Classic Six, the result is Cotton’s homage to those throwbacks, as well as something entirely his own, a harmonious confluence of opposites: tough and soft, industrial and refined, modern and old-fashioned. Yes, old-fashioned, and unapologetically, even aggressively so. Consider the beds with shirred skirts and matching coverlets pulled up over the pillows, a sight unseen since my grandmother taught me how to make a bed. Within the otherwise spare rooms, the effect is almost avant-garde.
He was aided in that by the building itself. The paradox of these prewar structures is that, as ornate as they can be outside, the rooms within, with their plaster walls, are quite stark, with minimal embellishment, which provides a certain freedom. “It allowed me to go much grander with decoration. The furniture, and particularly the colors, became the flourishes,” Cotton says. The parents of one of the clients were Japanese, he continues, “so there is a note of Orientalism, but that worked within their other obsession, Italy, and particularly Venice.” To provide a powerful frame for the resulting jewel boxes, he further emphasized the geometry of the architecture by adding jib doors and lining the two passageways that now connect the living and dining rooms with blunt-edged black granite.
The penthouse was formerly two pieds-à-terre, built circa 1930, and merged, rather cursorily, by a previous tenant. Each had a bedroom, and Cotton convinced his clients to turn one of them into two — the study and the guest room — creating a facsimile of those warrens he loved, and a sense of rambling in an apartment that is relatively small. Still, it’s a choice that would be anathema to most New Yorkers, who tend to pull down rather than put up walls. “It’s so un-American at this point to go smaller,” he says.
The penthouse, a project begun three years ago, was the first step in his less-is-more philosophy, with noted help from the owners. Cotton points to the ornate gold mirror, original to the apartment, that hangs over the golden-­brown velvet sofa. (Cotton’s take on the fully upholstered Tuxedo, an homage to a master of simple elegance, Billy Baldwin, who popularized the sofa style in the ’30s.) “I’m pretty sure the whole room was paneled with mirrors,” Cotton says. His first impulse was to redo the boiserie of the whole place. “My clients pulled me back from that edge,” he says with a small smile.
Such scrappy inventiveness is visible everywhere. The utilitarian, Cotton-­designed shelving that brackets and restrains the pomp of a Verdure tapestry in the master bedroom, for example, includes corded glass at bed level, a nod to Maison de Verre in Paris. They are meant to hide life’s detritus, but on this day a box of tissues sits on the wrong side. “They haven’t followed my instructions,” Cotton says, moving it behind the glass. He rolls his eyes in mock frustration.
The rooms include tips of the hat to many of Cotton’s lodestars, such as the gray of the living and dining room walls, inspired by Wedgwood drabware, or the tassel that hangs from the Noguchi pendant in the style of Italian designer Carlo Mollino, or the cloth-covered block feet of the monochromatic beds, first spied in a room decorated by Renzo Mongiardino. You can feel the ergonomic blueprint of industrial designer and fellow architectural autodidact Jean Prouvé in the graceful lines and comfort of his teal leather dining chairs.
