A bitter pill.
The first major issue on the congressional plate is how to deal with the increasing spread of Zika. Money allocated to fight the mosquito-borne disease is rapidly running out. On Tuesday, Senate Democrats blocked a measure that would have allocated more than $1 billion to fight the virus, but was loaded with provisions Democrats consider unacceptable.
Congress has again failed to pay for government operations through the appropriations process, and is headed back toward a short-term spending bill, known as a continuing resolution. This is going to be a fight, possibly nasty, against the backdrop of the race for the White House. Expect the Zika fight to be resolved in this course.
Water Resources Development Act, lots of minerals.
A very bipartisan bill would authorize water infrastructure projects in 17 states. The bill would also provide money to fix the lead-poisoned water system in Flint, Mich. Expect this to hit the Senate floor as soon as this week.
Members of the conservative House Freedom Caucus want to impeach John A. Koskinen, the Internal Revenue Service commissioner, for what they claim was unfair scrutiny of Tea Party groups seeking tax-exempt status, even though he wasn’t yet commissioner. (Republicans also charge that he was complicit in the destruction of I.R.S. emails pertinent to the alleged targeting, and that he lied about the emails in testimony to Congress.) But Speaker Paul D. Ryan is not keen on the idea of impeachment, so it is possible the kitchen will 86 this item.
A bill that would allow the Saudi Arabian government to be held responsible in American courts for any role in the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks passed the Senate before the recess. Because the Obama administration and many Republicans don’t like this bill, expect this order not to be filled, even though there will be pressure from victims’ families.
House Republicans will offer legislation to address the Obama administration’s $400 million payment to Iran after a broad nuclear agreement was reached by requiring the Treasury secretary to submit a report to some congressional committees. Republicans say the payment was basically ransom. The administration differs.
The House is likely to consider a host of bills that support its conservative agenda, including one that would modernize the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management’s offshore leasing process and remove some regulations and tax burdens from various businesses.
Whiskey and water, optional.
Congress could pass a final version of the annual National Defense Authorization Act, but it is more likely to go into the lame duck session, as has been the case for a few years now.