Jean Grae, born Tsidi Ibrahim, made a name for herself as an underground M.C. alongside friends and fellow hip-hop artists like Talib Kweli in the 1990s. She later produced and starred in the comedic online series “Life With Jeannie.” On Oct. 2, she will host the Golden Probes, a satirical ceremony that will pay tribute to “outstanding achievements in the fields of sexism and anti-abortion extremism.” The show will also feature the comedians Sarah Silverman and Abbi Jacobson and Ilana Glazer from the TV series “Broad City.” Ms. Grae, 39, lives in Bushwick, Brooklyn, with Quelle Chris, a musician and producer. The two recently broke up, and Mr. Chris is looking for a new apartment.
MORNING JOLT Coffee has to happen as soon as I get up. I make extremely strong coffee. Café Bustelo. I go through a can a week. It’s coffee syrup. I recently started doing cinnamon and sea salt with just black coffee, which is delicious. And also vodka. So yeah: It’s coffee with vodka. And a cigarette. And while I’m having that I’m going through all my emails and making a mental list of what needs to be done.
LIGHT A CANDLE There’s always brunch on Sundays. Usually I cook. While cooking, it’s a must that there’s a candle. And that WBGO stays on. I like all the senses doing things at once. I’ll do eggs with herbs, like rosemary, chives and tarragon. And I think you should be O.K. with dietary rules being broken during brunch, so I’m like: “There’s butter in your eggs. It’s going to be O.K.” And there’s always bottomless mimosas — grapefruit juice and prosecco with fresh lemons and grapefruits. Lately I’ve been trying to stay away from carbs, but I feel like I might start making biscuits. Because of the breakup.
JUST SIFT … I really enjoy thrifting. It’s something I got from my mom. She had an amazing eye, and she did a lot of Salvation Army a lot of days of the week. My friends and I will make some to-go beverages, and there’s this great spot, Busura World Fashion, which I feel like the hipsters haven’t overrun, which is very weird because it’s right smack-dab in the middle of Bushwick where all of them live. There’s this great guy who plays African music super loud in there, and I just sift. I’ve refreshed an entire seasonal wardrobe in there for like $80. With bags, shoes, dresses, whatever.
… AND HAUL And then we go to Green Village, my favorite vintage fun store. The aisles are so narrow, and things are just piled to the ceiling. It’s run by Hasidic Jews who are amazing and so helpful. As soon as you find something, you’ve got to start yelling for them to come help you, but then once you find something it’s like, how do you get that home?
WORDS WITH FRIENDS Peter Oasis, who has been my friend for more than 20 years and is actually a very interesting New Yorker — he’s a promoter — is getting married. I’m doing the ceremony. I’m an online minister, which is something I decided to do just randomly, like, five years ago. So I’ll meet with him as a pre-dinner thing and work on what they want me to say.
ALONE, TOGETHER Quelle and I could be a promotion for good, healthy breakups. Because I’ll go home and make dinner for us both, and then we’ll watch “Fear the Walking Dead” and discuss it while cleaning up. Then, by about 10:30, it’s time to work. We might stay in the same room and work on our computers, or separate. But I have to start handling all the things I didn’t do while I was drinking and thrift shopping. I’m in bed probably by 2:30 or 3. I’ve been trying to keep it before 4, because my age is making me. I used to go days without sleep. But now it’s like, no.