With the first exhibition games of the N.B.A. season less than a week away, the players find themselves in deep preparation for what had been the least taxing part of the game: the playing of the national anthem.
When Colin Kaepernick of the San Francisco 49ers chose not to stand during the national anthem before his N.F.L. games last month, he touched off a national debate by protesting what he described as racial injustice. The anthem itself soon spread as a popular platform for other athletes, including several in the N.F.L. and the W.N.B.A., to make similar statements amid a series of recent fatal shootings of black men by the police.
Now, the N.B.A. — a league that is largely black and has been vocal on social issues like gun violence and gender equality in recent months — is navigating its way back into the conversation as the season nears.
In its rule book, the N.B.A. requires players, coaches and trainers “to stand and line up in a dignified posture along the sidelines or on the foul line” during the national anthem. But it is unlikely that the league would discipline any players who engage in a silent protest. Last week, every player on the W.N.B.A.’s Indiana Fever took a knee — as Kaepernick did — and linked arms during the anthem before a playoff game against the Phoenix Mercury. No players were punished.
Like several other players around the league, Carmelo Anthony of the Knicks said Monday that he expected to talk with his teammates in the coming days about how to approach the anthem and, more important, how to help effect meaningful change. Some athletes said that sitting or kneeling during the anthem would feel like more of the same rather than provoke discussion or action.
That sentiment was shared by the Nets’ Jeremy Lin, who said that his friends had been asking him whether he would do anything during the anthem.
“I haven’t completely figured it out,” Lin said.
But Lin did say that he would not do something on his own. If the Nets were to choose to send a message, he said, he would want them to do it in a unified way.
N.B.A. Commissioner Adam Silver and Michele Roberts, the executive director of the players’ union, sent a joint letter to the league’s players last week in which they vowed to find ways in which to take “meaningful action” as the country continues to cope with social unrest over police-related shootings. The letter did not mention the league’s policy on the anthem.
Anthony was particularly vocal during the off-season, helping to organize a forum in Los Angeles that was attended by civic leaders, police officers, dozens of children and members of the United States Olympic men’s and women’s basketball teams. Anthony also joined LeBron James, Chris Paul and Dwyane Wade at the ESPY Awards in June to advocate gun-violence awareness and make a plea for greater unity.
On Monday, Anthony said that he had been saddened by the arc of events in recent weeks: more police shootings recorded on video, more unrest in cities like Charlotte, N.C.
At the same time, Anthony said the message had to transcend “one gesture.” James told reporters that he supported Kaepernick but would continue to stand for the anthem. Similarly, the Warriors’ Draymond Green said that he respected Kaepernick for giving momentum to what they both view as an important cause. But where that fledging movement goes from here is less certain.
