Illustrated. 346 pp. W.W. Norton & Company. $27.95.
More than half a century after A.J. Liebling declared that freedom of the press “is guaranteed only to those who own one,” the quip seems doubly out of date. For one thing, anyone with access to the internet can now be said to “own one” and to enjoy the freedoms of the First Amendment with abandon. At the same time, the people Liebling had in mind, owners of the press in the more institutional sense, find their guarantee of freedom less than ironclad.
The enemies of unfettered journalism in the United States these days include prosecutors crying “national security” in hot pursuit of leakers; a presidential candidate who vows, if elected, to “open up” the libel laws so that when journalists offend “we can sue them and win lots of money”; and, in one bizarre case, a vengeful Silicon Valley billionaire bankrolling lawsuits aimed at driving an impertinent website out of business.
Many of the questions at the heart of the matter are the same ones that have been asked since before there was a First Amendment: Are opinions protected no matter how obnoxious? Are public figures fairer game than private citizens? Is it a crime to publish material that undermines the authority of government? Is a statement libel if it’s true?
So Richard Kluger decided this was an apt time to revisit the story of John Peter Zenger’s New-York Weekly Journal, culminating in an August 1735 courtroom drama that put those questions to the test.
Kluger’s last venture into the history of American journalism was “The Paper,” his monumental 1986 autopsy of The New York Herald Tribune, and he brings the same gifts to this more modest book: vivid storytelling built on exacting research, a knack for animating the context and an exquisite sense of balance that honors this country’s essential press freedom without romanticizing its champions.
The champions of “Indelible Ink” are Lewis Morris and James Alexander, two colonial lawyers and power brokers whose motives are anything but pure. The context is a colonial America ruled, or more often misruled, by crown-appointed governors and swayed by mighty factions — the land barons who farm vast estates versus the merchant princes who control trade.
Morris, a calculating but intemperate attorney, is a holder of large estates, and also large grudges, mostly against powerful figures who seek to thwart his ambitions. Alexander is “probably the foremost and perhaps wealthiest lawyer in New York,” a longtime political adviser to Morris and a prolific wordsmith.
As the central drama begins, Morris has already helped engineer the ouster of two royal governors and has locked horns with a third, William Cosby. When Cosby proves tenacious, Morris and Alexander decide to wheel in a novel piece of artillery: a newspaper.
Somehow Morris and Alexander persuade Peter Zenger, a German-American printer, to risk everything by pushing the limits of official tolerance. Whether Zenger was moved by profit, idealism or something else is unknown, as is almost everything else about the man. Kluger resorts to a lot of “was probably” and “we can only imagine” and “might well have” to sketch a speculative portrait of a young immigrant from the German Palatinate who takes up an apprenticeship with a printer and eventually sets up his own shop, producing religious tracts and works in German and Dutch. There is nothing in the record to suggest that he would publish “America’s first printed expression of overt political dissent.” The reason Zenger became the sole defendant and languished in jail when authorities ultimately cracked down on his little weekly is that while writers — first and foremost James Alexander, who supplied most of Zenger’s content — hid behind pen names, printers were obliged by law to sign their work.
The New-York Weekly Journal debuted on Nov. 5, 1733, four compact pages of gray type. The first sign that this publication was different appeared on Page 2, a lively report on an assembly election “that modern journalists would recognize as creditable reportage.” Subsequent issues contained little eyewitness reporting, but increasingly bold satire and polemic aimed (though the target was not named) at Governor Cosby. The newspaper’s complaints against the governor’s corruption and abuse of power were often vague, undocumented and hyperbolic, including the assertion that Cosby was “but one degree removed from an idiot.” Kluger makes no attempt to defend the newspaper as an ancestor of modern journalism, although you can trace a line of descent from ­Zenger’s weekly to the Gawker school.
The chief justice has instructed the jurors that their role is solely to rule on the facts of the case, leaving to him the question of whether the facts add up to a crime. But the jury goes rogue and after the briefest of deliberations declares ­Zenger not guilty.
In an epilogue, Kluger flashes forward to the case of Edward Snowden, the intelligence insider who exposed the government’s invasion of our phones and emails, to demonstrate that “free expression remains nearly as imperiled” today as in the 18th century. Whatever you think of Snowden, that’s a stretch. No journalist has been indicted — or silenced — for publishing Snowden’s secrets. A more immediate menace to a robust press is the insatiable appetite of Google and Facebook, sucking away what’s left of the advertising revenues that support aggressive reporting. But that’s another book.