Alice Tan Ridley, the mother of the Oscar-nominated actress Gabourey Sidibe, has been singing in the subway system for 30 years. She will soon perform at the Highline Ballroom in Chelsea, in connection with the release of her debut album.
On this sweltering day, she was getting ready for a lower-profile gig, one that she has played for 30 years: the Herald Square subway station in Midtown Manhattan.
She took one last look in the mirror and started packing her gear. She put her amplifier, a folding chair, a pillow, her new CDs and a set list of more than 100 songs into a blue valise. Then she headed toward the subway to be at her spot by 4:30 p.m.
It was cool on the A train downtown. Ms. Ridley tucked her MetroCard into her bra and leaned against the subway door, flipping through baby pictures of her famous daughter, Gabourey Sidibe, an actress nominated for an Academy Award for her role in “Precious.” Then she glanced up, smiling. “Oh, look, we got a busker,” she said. At the far end of the train, a heavyset young man rapped for the car; nobody dropped money into his cap. He jumped out at the next stop.
It has been difficult coming up with the rent, which she splits with her 34-year-old son, Ahmed Sidibe, a cabdriver. “Maybe things will change,” Ms. Ridley said.
She has reason to be optimistic. Not many singers — particularly those who have worked anonymously for years — get a shot at a broader audience. Ms. Ridley already had one, coming out on national television at 57. It didn’t keep her out of the subways, but she is hoping her next move will. On Sept. 24, she has a show at the Highline Ballroom in Chelsea, in connection with the release of her first album, “Never Lost My Way.” It is a collection of standards from her subway set (like Al Green’s “Love and Happiness”) as well as a few originals in the classic soul vein.
This is a big leap for Ms. Ridley, but it’s clear that she doesn’t want to leave the underground completely.
One morning, when Ms. Ridley was about 10, she belted out an Aretha Franklin song.
“Are you singing that type of music in my house?” her mother asked.

“I said yes,” she recounted. “I wanted the school to have all of us — not one color here, one color there.” Word got around, she said.
After graduating from high school in 1971, Ms. Ridley moved to New York City, working in day care with her sister. She had been visiting Dorothy’s apartment in Manhattan in the summer since she was 12. “I liked that it wasn’t Charles Junction,” she said. “It was cars, lights and people.” In 1976, she began working as a teacher’s aide with handicapped children at a public elementary school. And in 1979, she married Ibnou Sidibe, a 28-year-old cabdriver from Senegal.
The couple settled into their life in New York. Ahmed was born in 1982, and Gabourey arrived 11 months later. But strong cultural differences remained in the marriage, Ms. Ridley said.
In the mid-80s, she discovered busking. Under the Washington Square Arch, she sang with her brother Roger and their cousin Jimmy McMillan, a political activist who founded the Rent Is Too Damn High Party. Soon she was singing solo outside Zabar’s on the Upper West Side, and then in the subways. To help support her family, she often napped after her job at school and then busked until 9 p.m.
In 1992, her marriage shattered. Returning from Morocco, where she had been performing at a resort, Ms. Ridley said, she discovered that her husband had taken a second wife six years before: the cousin she had met in Senegal. Ms. Ridley left with the children and moved in with her sister. Gabourey was 8 years old.
And she appreciates her mother’s sacrifices. “My mom didn’t have her own room” for 15 years, she said. Ms. Ridley slept in the living room so her children could have their own bedrooms.
After the marriage ended, Ms. Ridley established herself underground. She became affiliated with the Metropolitan Transportation Authority’s Music Under New York, a program under which selected musicians perform in the transit system. She appeared twice a week at a designated spot. She said that no money was ever stolen from her and she was never assaulted.
And she developed her act, learning to work an audience that wasn’t inclined to stand still. She figures that thousands of commuters over the years have sung duets with her.
Ms. Ridley relishes these connections: “We’re face to face,” she said, describing the appeal of busking.
In 2009, a young Israeli named Dvir Assouline, then attending the New York Film Academy, saw her perform at Union Square station.
Ms. Ridley is Mr. Assouline’s only client. (He has a day job in communications with a nonprofit group.) Over the past six years, they have been on a kind of roller coaster. The highs include “America’s Got Talent” and B. B. King’s, then touring, with stints in Canada and the Netherlands.
They are close. “I’m his American mama,” Ms. Ridley said, laughing. They talk most days and often meet for Thai or Israeli food. Mr. Assouline took her to Israel, where they stayed with his family.
“Just being on the show was a thrill,” Ms. Ridley said. But during her two weeks in Los Angeles for the show, she said, she was lonely. She missed New York, and also Ms. Sidibe, who was unable to be with her.
Ms. Ridley was the last contestant in the semifinals to be sent home. “I felt awful —like, oh, Lord,” she said. But she took the loss in stride.
Mr. Assouline was less sanguine. “It was heartbreaking,” he said. There was a hope that one of the show’s producers might offer a record deal, but none did. Mr. Assouline reached out to labels but had no luck.
So over the next four years, Ms. Ridley was on the road. Mr. Assouline had put together a touring band with a rotating cast of nine musicians. Ms. Ridley performed with them in more than 20 states and did stints with the Cab Calloway Orchestra. She sang on a Buick commercial.
Ms. Ridley said she loved touring but found it grueling. “I didn’t make a lot of money,” she said. “It’s never-ending — you’ve got to eat, pay gas. The musicians had to be paid.” By 2014, there were fewer performing dates.
That summer, she returned to the subway.
Four years ago, Mr. Assouline started working on Ms. Ridley’s CD. He raised $35,000, partly through Kickstarter. The album is a mix of old soul songs and new tunes, written by Ms. Ridley and Jay Stolar, a singer and songwriter. Though it was completed a year and a half ago, its release was delayed. Ms. Ridley was hospitalized after going on a crash diet; she went from 263 to 163 pounds. “We waited until Alice was completely better,” Mr. Assouline said.
Ms. Ridley is hoping to reach new listeners, especially young people. “I can’t keep up with this younger generation, but I want them to love me,” she said, laughing.
Mr. Assouline was joined by Roy Wol, the video’s director, and a few crew members. Appropriately, the video would be shot underground, in the building’s basement. Mr. Assouline had already warned that it would be hot.
 “Y’all ready to do this thing?” she asked.
As everybody trooped out, she and Mr. Assouline shot each other a look. “It’s been a long time coming,” she said.
In the basement, they passed cans filled with garbage. Then they went down a ramp — and were hit by a blast of heat. A boiler made a sound like a plane taking off.
“It doesn’t have to be all in one take,” Mr. Wol reassured her. But she went back upstairs to write the lyrics on a piece of cardboard, then returned.
Somebody brought in a fan. The room got quiet.
