WASHINGTON — President Obama on Thursday created the Atlantic Ocean’s first United States marine monument, preserving an expanse of sea canyons and underwater mountains off the New England coast as he races to use his executive power to protect vast stretches of land and water before he leaves office.
Mr. Obama announced the designation of the Northeast Canyons and Seamounts Marine National Monument at an ocean conservation meeting in Washington, shortly after issuing a proclamation protecting an area roughly the size of Connecticut that sits 130 miles off the coast of Cape Cod.
“If we’re going to leave our children with oceans like the ones that were left to us, then we’re going to have to act, and we’re going to have to act boldly,” Mr. Obama said at the State Department, recalling his childhood spent in Hawaii, bodysurfing in the Pacific Ocean and gazing out at its waters.
The new monument lies in an area of the Atlantic where ocean temperatures are projected to warm as much as three times as fast as the global average, and is home to endangered whales and turtles, ancient deep-sea coral and species of fish unique to the region. Mr. Obama said protecting it was a vital step to counteract increasingly grave trends taking hold as the planet warms.
“Dangerous changes in our climate caused mainly by human activity; dead zones in our ocean caused mainly by pollution that we create here on land; unsustainable fishing practices; unprotected marine areas in which rare species and entire ecosystems are at risk — all those things are happening now,” Mr. Obama said.
While the fishing industry strenuously opposed the proposal for the monument, Brad Sewell, who oversees work on fisheries and Atlantic Coast issues at the Natural Resources Defense Council, called the designation “an incredible victory” in the fight against climate change.
“It is this spectacular ocean wilderness that has plummeting canyons deeper than the Grand Canyon, undersea mountains taller than anything east of the Rockies, and sublimely beautiful deep-sea corals that blossom out of the depths and are as ancient as the redwoods,” he said, adding that the president had increased by 20 times the amount of protected ocean habitat off the continental United States.
The move will immediately ban oil and gas exploration and drilling as well as most commercial fishing within the monument’s boundaries, giving fishermen 60 days to cease their operations there. But in a nod to local industry concerns, the preserve is smaller than one proposed last month by Connecticut’s congressional delegation. And Mr. Obama will allow lobster and red crab fisheries to continue operating there for seven years.
Still, the president’s designation was likely to draw opposition from Republicans who have criticized his use of executive power to shield public space and argued that the moves harm local businesses. New England’s seafood industry voiced its objections as it is already contending with declining fish stocks, warming waters and increasingly strict regulations.
Administration officials said the monument was conceived to minimize the effect on local fisheries. A White House fact sheet outlined an array of programs that the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration would use to help New England fishermen who have “faced hardships” because of falling fish stocks, including low-interest loans to fix or repair their boats and federal grants for coming up with ways to avoid the unintended capture of sea creatures.
The designation comes two weeks after Mr. Obama expanded an ocean monument in the Pacific surrounding the northwestern Hawaiian Islands, creating the world’s largest marine protected area. The president, who is looking to burnish his environmental legacy, also visited remote Midway Atoll — a pristine spit of land within the marine preserve that is home to rare species of sea birds and marine life — in what he described as an effort to provide a powerful visual for Americans who may not grasp the stakes of the climate change challenge.
On Thursday, Mr. Obama said his trip to Midway, where he snorkeled amid purple and orange coral and near endangered Hawaiian monk seals, had confirmed his belief that it was possible to slow the harmful effects of the planet’s warming.
“It reminded us that nature’s actually resilient, if we take care to just stop actively destroying it,” he said.