As the refrain continued, onlookers became participants.
The event, presented by Black Women Artists for Black Lives Matter, served as a balm at a time when the country is confronting painful questions about racial bias and police practices. The organizers said the aim was to provide a template for fellow artists looking for their own ways to respond and inspire others.
In a roundabout way, the event was a sort of extension of Simone Leigh’s summer residency and exhibition, “Simone Leigh: The Waiting Room,” at the museum. Her show, continuing through Sept. 18, explores and expands concepts of medicine and self-care.
Ms. Leigh’s exhibition draws inspiration from apothecaries, among other entities promoting health. A reimagining of her 2014 project organized by Creative Time, “The Waiting Room” features ancillary programs called care sessions. Those include a guided meditation this Saturday, a nod to Ms. Leigh’s artistic mission of exploring black subjectivity, with a focus on black women.
“It’s always been taboo to announce my audience is black women,” she said. “People were slow to recognize the work because of my insistence on the black subject being a core of the work.
Although Thursday’s program and Black Women Artists for Black Lives Matter are unrelated to “The Waiting Room,” Ms. Leigh called them “an appropriate next step” in initiating conversations about social justice.
Among the special works on display at the museum on Thursday night was “Tamir Rice Photo Project,” from Shellyne Rodriguez’s archive, which showed photographs of 12-year-olds. The installation, intended to prompt visitors to remember their childhood selves, is also a commemoration for Tamir, 12, who was playing with a toy gun in 2014 when he was fatally shot by a Cleveland police officer.
The event had “a proactive spirit, and we intend on continuing this work in some iteration, so that it’s not reactive,” said Kameelah Janan Rasheed, an interdisciplinary artist who contributed to part of the installation “Pedestals That Speak,” featuring images, found at flea markets and estate sales, of black women, among other things.
After the police shooting of Philando Castile, whose girlfriend broadcast the aftermath of his death on Facebook Live, Ms. Leigh took to Facebook. She posted a message in Bad News Women, a private group made up of black female artists, and suggested meeting to discuss police brutality and the response from visual artists. Ms. Leigh’s New Museum connection provided the physical space, and the initial gathering gave members a chance to exhale collectively.
The intent of the newly formed group is to foster a sharper discourse and cultivate strategies for the Black Lives Matter movement. (The proceeds from the sale of T-shirts on Thursday went to the movement.) Equally important for the group is highlighting the impact of the current situation with law enforcement on black women facing violent interactions with police officers.
