Carl Hiaasen’s irresistible “Razor Girl” meets his usual sky-high standards for elegance, craziness and mike-drop humor. But this election-year novel is exceptionally timely, too. It illustrates the dog-whistle effects of bigotry that take the form of entertainment, with a plot that revolves around a “Duck Dynasty”-type reality show, the sermons delivered by one of its stars and a crazed fan who decides to follow what he thinks are the star’s teachings. Mr. Hiaasen — and probably only Mr. Hiaasen — could weave this into a book that’s still so funny.
In the past, the author’s native Florida has provided him more than enough to work with. “Razor Girl” illustrates that it’s still a gold mine. The title comes from at least one real-life incident in which a woman busily shaving her pubic hair while driving managed (not surprisingly) to get into a traffic accident. It was not an amusing story until Mr. Hiaasen had his way with it.
Now the woman is Merry Mansfield, a con artist, who rear-ends cars for kidnappers for a living. As the book begins, she has crashed into a rental car driven by Lane Coolman, a Hollywood agent on his way to Key West. Lane is so dazzled by Merry in midshave that he will follow her anywhere, which is the point. Except that Lane’s car looked like someone else’s car, and she accidentally got the wrong guy.
Lane came to Florida to babysit Buck Nance, the star of the cable show “Bayou Brethren.” It’s a running joke throughout the book that none of the main characters have ever heard of it, but it’s hugely popular just the same. And it’s said to be “the next ‘Duck Dynasty’” even though the Nance brothers are complete phonies. Buck, Clee Roy, Buddy and Junior Nance are actually Matthew, Todd, Henry and Bradley Romberg. They’re not from the bayou; they’re from a tony Milwaukee suburb, and they needed a dialogue coach to sound like Cajuns. Buck and his wife, Krystal, have two sons who are private equity managers, so “Bayou Brethren” has never mentioned them.
Anyway, the one authentic thing about Buck is his prejudice. That’s why he needs to be kept on a short leash. But without Lane at his side, he tells a homophobic joke in Key West, then wonders if the audience didn’t laugh because he used the wrong slur. He doesn’t have much time to think about that. He’s forced to go into hiding, which means shaving off his beloved beard and skulking around Key West entirely on his own.
Yancy is a strong, cagey, smart-talking character who may well appear in another Hiaasen book, since this one doesn’t close the door on him. And Merry — not her real name, and we never find out what is — could be back again, too. Yancy’s significant other, a former coroner named Rosa, has decided that the cure for Miami’s craziness is Oslo. Meanwhile, Merry turns out to be an ever more gifted con artist, who decides Yancy needs help when the book’s prime lunatic comes along.
Because Buck turns out to have an unhinged fan lurking nearby: a guy whose nickname is Blister (for reasons revealed late in the book and well worth waiting for) and who has taken every word Buck ever said to heart. These include the “sermons” Buck has given at an ersatz church created especially for the show: the “First Chickapaw Tabernacle of Hope and Holiness,” a place where Buck can be really ugly. His sermons aren’t officially part of “Bayou Brethren,” but they can be watched on YouTube — and Blister has watched them religiously.
It is in these diatribes that Buck has inveighed against Muslims, Jews, blacks, gays and anyone else who is not a white Christian. Mr.  It’s what he imagines his hero would have done. And even if Blister is the only crazed fan turned abductor with a shot at having his own role on a hit reality show, the book makes it clear that he is not alone in his delusions.
Believe it or not, this is only a small sampling of what Mr. Hiaasen has packed into this wonderfully overstocked book. The Mafia is here. So is the schemer behind Sedimental Journeys, “a leading provider of beach-renourishment services” that is none too honest about where it gets its sand. And so are the amoral show-business types who don’t care what they put on TV as long as the ratings are good. Buck’s agent isn’t sure whether it will help or hurt “Bayou Brethren” if Buck is jailed because he attacked a Muslim for no reason.
Finally, Mr. Hiaasen’s dialogue is too good to go unmentioned. Here are Yancy and Merry at a famous seafood restaurant for which Yancy had issued “reams of gag-inducing citations.” The owner hides in the kitchen when he sees them come in.
