Remember the debate over the Obama administration’s contraception mandate, the requirement for employer-provided health benefit plans to include free birth control coverage? You’d be forgiven if memory is hazy, because the controversy has seemed to sink beneath the waves following the Supreme Court’s unexpected, unsigned and unanimous seven-paragraph opinion on May 16 that essentially told the contending parties to go back and work it out themselves.
A short-handed court threw up its hands and put the best minimalist face it could on a dispute evidently beyond its institutional capacity to resolve. Although the outcome was ambiguous to say the least, the religious organizations that had sued for an exemption from the mandate were quick to declare victory. “Supreme Court rules unanimously in favor of Little Sisters,” proclaimed the website of Little Sisters of the Poor, an order of nuns who run nursing homes and were among dozens of religious groups that had joined the litigation campaign.
Not quite so fast — maybe. It’s just possible that the Supreme Court’s post-Scalia deadlock has given the administration the opportunity it needs to lift the verbal fog. What kind of compromise, if any, will these employers accept? The plaintiffs, nonprofit religious-oriented charities and religious colleges, argue that even notifying the government that they want the opt-out accommodation the administration has offered makes them complicit in the evil of birth control. Is there any area of workable compromise — a “least restrictive means,” in the words of the Religious Freedom Restoration Act — by which women who work for these organizations can receive the same breadth of insurance coverage as all other women in the work force, while also enabling the employers to salve their consciences when their employees make use of the birth control benefit?
Despite voluminous briefing in this case (actually a consolidation of seven separate cases under the name Zubik v. Burwell), both in advance of the oral argument in March and in response to the justices’ unusual post-argument request for additional briefs, the answer to that fundamental question remains unclear. The briefs talked past each other without directly engaging. The actual distance between the two sides remained in the eye of the beholder — and of the Supreme Court, which chose optimistically, after the second round of briefing, to see the distance as promisingly small. We may soon see.
On July 22, the administration published in the Federal Register a “request for information” about “coverage for contraceptive services.” The notice seeks “information on whether there are alternative ways (other than those offered in current regulations) for eligible organizations that object to providing coverage for contraceptive services on religious grounds to obtain an accommodation, while still ensuring that women enrolled in the organizations’ health plans have access to seamless coverage of the full range of Food and Drug Administration-approved contraceptives without cost sharing.” Interested members of the public were invited to submit comments, and thousands have. The comment period closes at 11:59 p.m. next Tuesday, Sept. 20. Sometime after that, the administration will provide a status report to the four federal appeals courts to which the justices returned the various cases, proposing a timeline for the next steps.
My quick perusal of the government’s public comment site suggests that most of the comments oppose any version of the mandate, some quite vigorously. One, for example, called the mandate “abhorrent” and “the most egregious violation of religious liberty in the history of our nation.” But many commenters, both men and women, pasted into their comments the Catholics for Choice template, concluding: “As Catholic, I ask you to represent the employees and students who work for these institutions and not accommodate the objections of a few powerful voices.” Clearly, the comment period is giving ordinary people the chance to mobilize and, for some, to vent.
All questions, in other words, are open. Based on the extreme deference with which the Supreme Court in other cases has treated claims that a challenged policy is substantially burdensome, it’s probably safe to assume that the court will eventually accept the religious employers’ plaintiffs’ say-so on the burden question. But that’s only the initial inquiry. The court may well conclude, or at least be willing to assume, that the governmental interest in providing the same health care benefit to all female employees is indeed compelling. So the question comes down to the least-restrictive-means test. Under the current regulations, the religious employers can simply notify the government that they have religious objections to providing insurance coverage for birth control, in which case the insurer provides the coverage itself without the employer’s further involvement. Is that acceptable to the plaintiffs? If not, is further accommodation possible while still achieving the government’s goal?
This is where the fine print of the “request for information” matters. The request asks whether there are alternative ways to provide “seamless coverage” of all approved contraceptives. As is clear from the administration’s earlier briefs and argument, “seamless” has a precise meaning in this context. It means that women get their contraceptives covered through their existing insurance plan, without having to seek out a separate insurer or apply for a separate policy. Metaphorically, seamless indicates that in the eyes of the federal government, birth control is not separate and apart, not an anomalous choice, but an ordinary and essential part of women’s lives.
It’s this deeper meaning of seamless, beyond the technicalities of who has to sign what kind of document, that really separates the two sides, it seems to me. The religious employers, most but not all of them Catholic, desperately want to keep the government from normalizing birth control. Of course, birth control is normal (used at some point by 99 percent of sexually active Catholic women, as the Catholics for Choice comment points out) and ever since Griswold v. Connecticut 51 years ago, it has also been a constitutional right. The religious employers can’t fight those facts, but their position is that women shouldn’t have contraception handed to them by government policy; they should have to hunt it down in the jungle that passes for the health care marketplace.
The eight-member court did the Obama administration few favors during the past term. Recall the tie vote that upheld the egregious nationwide injunction against the administration’s deportation-deferral program. But maybe this time, the court has stumbled its way into the administration’s corner. The contraception mandate has been widely misunderstood from the beginning, demonized by its opponents as a way for a heavy-handed government to smuggle abortion into the workplace, as some of the more ignorant comments on the government’s website claim. It is, of course, nothing like that.
It’s about respecting women as they choose their life course and make crucial decisions about work and family. By punting, stalling for time, taking a breather — whatever the justices thought they were doing back in May — the court gave the administration a chance to hit reset, a chance it was smart enough to take by asking its opponents finally to put their cards on the table and by inviting ordinary people to tell the world why the case matters.