Updated, 10:56 a.m.
Good morning on this gloomy Thursday.
The intersection of Houston Street and Bowery is now one of New York City’s most crowded corners.
There are about 150 people there at all times — New Yorkers of every age, race, shape and size.
Made out of stencils, these people appear on the Houston Bowery Wall, a mural finished last month by the artist Logan Hicks.
“Story of My Life” is just one of a countless number of murals — including privately commissioned works and publicly funded pieces — that you might discover if you look around.
“I would hope that people see the quintessential New York,” he said.
The larger-than-life, 70-foot-by-20-foot piece of art — which contains 1,050 stencils weighing a hefty total of about 800 pounds — is expected to be on display through December.
The Graffiti Hall of Fame in East Harlem — which has ties to the city’s hip-hop movement.
New York magazine’s Fall Preview mural in Williamsburg.
Also in Brooklyn: The Bushwick Collective, which has featured the colorful creations of, among others, Dasic Fernández and Eelco van den Berg.
What are your favorites? Let us know in the comments.
And if you’re interested in creating your own street art, here’s one way to get started.
The mural painted in the sky looks moody.
It will be entirely gray this morning, and leaky, too.
Showers are likely during your commute, and throughout the day.
But with temperatures hovering in the upper 70s, we must say, at least this dreary weather feels nice.
• Scoreboard: Mets sear Marlins, 5-2. Yankees topple Royals, 5-4 (in 13 innings).
• New York City F.C. hosts D.C. United, 7 p.m. (YES). Indiana Fever host New York Liberty, 7 p.m. (MSG+). Mets host Marlins, 7:10 p.m. (SNY).
A trains are running with delays.
New Jersey Transit bus service to the Port Authority Bus Terminal is running with delays due to an accident in the Lincoln Tunnel.
New Jersey Transit trains into and out of New York are running with 15 minute delays.
• Alternate-side parking: in effect until Labor Day.
If you think you’ve been waking up to a muffled power tool that won’t shut off, there’s a good chance you’ve been hearing cicadas.
Annual cicadas — not to be confused with periodical cicadas that descend upon us in broods every 13 or 17 years — typically turn up once a year during the warmer summer weather.
When they emerge, the shrill noise they emit is their mating call.
Around the city, you’re most likely hearing species including the dog-day cicada, the swamp or morning cicada in the early hours, and the Linne’s cicada before dusk, said Dan Mozgai, a cicada expert.
And when you begin to hear them croaking in September, he added, you’ll know they’re dying.
Huh. That’s kind of sad.
We asked Louis Sorkin, an entomologist at the American Museum of Natural History, what was on the agenda for New York as far as these insects go.
The next major cicada waves to watch out for in the area will occur in 2021, 2025 and 2030, Mr. Sorkin said.
