A small crowd amassed recently at the corner of East Houston and Ludlow Streets, with people squinting in the evening sun, snapping photographs and maneuvering for the best angle. The center of attention was the street artist L’Amour Supreme, who was complementing the brick-and-red-neon exterior of Katz’s Delicatessen with shades of aqua, gleaming pink and gravel gray.
As he worked, a multicolored cat with bulging eyeballs took shape. The cat spans two of the restaurant’s six metal security gates, and the objects of the cat’s desire — a pickle and a stick of salami — were to be added to the other panels, with the final one to be completed on Wednesday during a private event at Katz.
L’Amour Supreme also created a work for Katz’s 125th anniversary pop-up art show in 2013, and his latest piece is associated with another milestone: the 100 Gates Project, which over the last year has slowly been transforming the Lower East Side by enlisting artists to paint the metal roll-down security gates of area businesses. Katz’s is the 100th storefront to benefit from the program.
The idea for the 100 Gates Project originated with Billy Rohan, an artist who says he had noticed that the Lower East Side looked like a “ghost town” when the businesses were closed and metal gates were down. He offered to paint gates for business owners willing to cover the supply costs.
Soon Mr. Rohan was conferring with Natalie Raben, senior vice president for partnerships and public affairs at the Lower East Side Partnership, about how “25 gates on each street would transform the neighborhood,” he said. The project grew organically to focus on an area running north to south from Delancey Street to Canal Street and west to east from Allen Street to Essex Street.
Eventually two city agencies, the department of Small Business Services and the Economic Development Corporation, provided a $30,000 grant for the project, with the project allotting $300 a gate to cover supplies and a stipend for each artist. Ms. Raben played matchmaker, matching business owners with artists based on their compatibility and aesthetic visions.
“I really just wanted to do something for the community,” said Stanley George of Stanley’s Pharmacy on Ludlow Street. His storefront became the project’s first gate, decorated by Jessica Blowers with orange blossoms. “I wanted even when I was closed for people to look at my gates and become affected by it in a positive way,” he said.
Illustrators, graffiti artists, graphic designers, muralists and others have worked with the owners, whose businesses include restaurants, shops and clothing boutiques.
The storefronts’ metal gates make for unconventional canvases, posing some artistic challenges.
As the project continues with the help of additional financial support from Tiger Beer (that Singaporean brewery has ties to the neighborhood), Mr. Rohan said it is also helping to close a gap among artists.
