This downtown performer is hellbent on making us look at the hidden history of our favorite songs. In platform heels. For 24 hours.
BREWSTER, N.Y. — A baby was crying in a makeshift concert hall here, a wooden barn that felt like a Swedish sauna in the August heat. Already ringed in purple glitter, the eyes of the entertainer Taylor Mac lit up further, with opportunity.
His outfit gave his words extra force: white platform pumps, an asymmetrical bodysuit made of clashing patterned fabric strips, a hooded black coat appliquéd with cassette tapes, a headdress of three cantilevered Styrofoam skulls whose eye sockets dripped with tinsel (meant to symbolize the tears caused by the AIDS epidemic) and a faceful of melting makeup.
Though his performances are not generally recommended for minors, Mr. Mac has a penchant for welcoming — nay, demanding — audience participation. Soon he was instructing several strangers to improvise a group interpretive dance in a hayloft. They complied with surprising gusto, arms waving, one pair of legs cycling in the air above the bales. Over the course of three hours, he also sang a mash-up of Robert Palmer’s “Addicted to Love” and Diamanda Galás’s “Let’s Not Chat About Despair”; accompanied ballads of his own composition on a cigar-box ukulele; and described the dream, involving Pegasus and the actress Maggie Smith, that supposedly provoked his first nocturnal emission.
By any conventional measure, this would be a long night in the theater, but Mr. Mac, who is 43 but has the stamina of a man half his age, is not only defying conventional measures but also breaking the yardstick over his knee — and then, perhaps, upcycling its fragments for an outlandish costume.
He is both a throwback to an era when artists prided themselves on being outsiders challenging the establishment, and an ideal avatar of current cut-and-paste aesthetics. Queer in pretty much every sense of the word, he has emerged as a high priest of nonconformity with a devoted congregation of the disenfranchised, as well as a circus ringleader who wants everyone, even the frat boy, to find the freak within.
Time-lapse video of Mr. Mac getting into costume for the 1836-1866 portion of his "24-Decade History of Popular Music," a look he calls a "re-imagining of a classic American delicacy, a product of its time."
“This is what I hope to be: a bridge between the insane and the normative,” he said.
Supersizing performances has become something of a fad among downtown theater artists and other experimentalists. But Mr. Mac’s latest project makes recent examples of cultural endurance, like Marina Abramovic’s sit-fest at the Museum of Modern Art, or the six-and-a-half-hour “Gatz” production, seem like a hike in the park.
For five years, Mr. Mac has been preparing “A 24-Decade History of Popular Music,” alloting an hour to each decade, from the American Revolution to the present day. It has been touring in three-hour segments, which will begin playing at St. Ann’s Warehouse starting on Thursday, Sept. 15. On Oct. 8, beginning at noon, the ticket buyer paying $400 and pledging not to leave will be treated to an all-day, all-night extravaganza of acrobats, burlesque performers, puppets, a choir, a marching band and 24 back-up musicians drifting away, one per decade, till Mr. Mac stands alone. (There will also be vegetarian meals, bathrooms, a medical tent, and a smattering of cots and hammocks).
She, he, or they — Mr. Mac prefers the pronoun “judy,” as in Garland, though that gets awkward fast — will be pressured into activities that might include, more mildly, leaning your head on the shoulder of the person one seat over; playing beer pong with a stranger across the aisle; or (during a segment about white flight after World War II) rearranging seats to simulate racial segregation.
It is all part of a rigorous interrogation of who and what determines what is “popular,” from “Yankee Doodle” to Tin Pan Alley to Top 40 and beyond.
He calls the “24-Decade History” a “radical faerie realness ritual,” drawing elements from the countercultural movement known for its “heart circles” conducted in natural settings.
That the community is likely to be exhausted, or even to break down, during the St. Ann’s marathon is part of the point, Mr. Mac said.
Mr. Mac’s flamboyance — his plumage — and his fierce political convictions sometimes threaten to overshadow his more conventional talents.
He has a recurring act with Mandy Patinkin, to whom he has taught the Queen song “Bohemian Rhapsody.” (Directed by Susan Stroman, “The Last Two People on Earth: An Apocalyptic Vaudeville” will play at the Kennedy Center in the spring.) He is a classically trained actor who has logged starring roles in productions of Brecht and Shakespeare. And he is a prolific playwright who wrote one of the most acclaimed Off Broadway works of last season: “Hir,” a kitchen-sink piece about a nuclear suburban family confronting the sudden plasticity of gender in modern culture (one character vomits into a kitchen sink). Judy, Judy, Judy!
Pigeonhole Mr. Mac at your peril. After a writer called him “Ziggy Stardust meets Tiny Tim,” Mr. Mac responded with a 2010 cabaret show, “Comparison Is Violence,” in which he played only their songs.
Mr. Mac’s bald head, blue eyes and ready smile can call to mind Mr. Clean. His work, though, is essentially, intentionally dirty, in both senses of the word: frank about sex in all its manifestations and preoccupied with the discarded and disordered. “There’s always an element of chaos,” he said at the Armory. Around him, suitcases spilled over with various materials and props required for the “24-Decade History,” which in various configurations has visited cities including Dublin; Melbourne, Australia; Hanover, N.H.; and Charleston, S.C., where there was some heckling.
Rainbow-colored tulle was piled onto the head of an otherwise naked mannequin, feather boas were slung over a rolling rack, and a lace collar awaited its fate near a Singer sewing machine.
Mr. Mac described with some reluctance his upbringing as a Christian Scientist in Stockton, Calif., a city better known as the birthplace of tank tread than creative professionals (though the 1990s indie-rock band Pavement originated there).
His mother, Joy Aldrich, remarried, but according to both children, their relationship with the now ex-stepfather was unhappy. “He was struggling; he was doing the best he could at the time, and he wasn’t very good at it,” Mr. Mac said.
Mr. Mac attended San Francisco State University for about a year, then dropped out and joined a group of activists whose long protest march would become the basis for his 2011 play, “The Walk Across America for Mother Earth.” After eight months singing “Runaround Sue” in a poodle costume for the long-running revue “Beach Blanket Babylon,” he applied and was accepted to the American Academy of Dramatic Arts in New York.
Arriving the day before his 21st birthday, he proceeded straight to Times Square and got a half-price ticket to see Stephen Sondheim’s “Passion.” It was the start of a long remedial binge on the city’s theater offerings, from La MaMa to Lincoln Center.
He’d been discovering New York’s drag scene at places like the Pyramid Club, guided by the Mother Flawless Sabrina, star of the 1968 documentary “The Queen.” Seeing John Cameron Mitchell’s “Hedwig and the Angry Inch” — which combined furious glam rock and a poignant coming-of-age story — was another aha moment. “I was kind of sobbing because I thought ‘Oh, this is my calling,’” Mr. Mac said.
Elizabeth Swados cast him in a musical called “Jabu” and helped him get his first grant, for $7,000. “It changed everything in my life,” he said. Festivals followed — Edinburgh, Under the Radar— and before long Mr. Mac was commanding the microphone at fancy wingdings rather than hoisting a tray.
Along with Mr. Smith and Matt Ray, his music director, arranger and patient “straight man,” Mr. Mac’s main professional sidekick is the costume designer Matthew Flower, a.k.a. Machine Dazzle, who first worked with him on a play called “The Lily’s Revenge” (2009), a consideration of gay marriage, nostalgia and mourning with a comparatively brisk running time of five hours.
Arriving at the Armory, Mr. Flower opened some windows and showed off some telling details of his creations for the coming St. Ann’s show. The “white flight” costume somehow incorporated Mr. Potato Head, long strips of paper 3-D glasses and bumblebees affixed to a picket fence.
Is anything ever too outré?
The two men said they were only concerned with that hot-button term of the moment, “appropriation.” A friend had expressed concern about a flapper costume whose feathers and silhouette seemed Native American.
Though he seems to champion an anything-goes sexuality, Mr. Mac is in a committed relationship with Patt Scarlett, an architect with whom he shares a one-bedroom apartment near Gramercy Park. He cares little for possessions — “I always say, you can make a living in the theater if you’re willing to fall in love with verbs more than nouns,” he said — and doesn’t have a credit card.
He is not too Spartan, however, to request a massage, as he did the morning after the barn performance in Brewster. He had hurt his back while doing squats to build up cardiovascular endurance for a 12-hour warm-up concert in Poughkeepsie, N.Y., spent a night in the hospital, gotten a walker and then done two shows from a bed on the stage.
And for those lacking the patience to hear what he has to say?
