Mr. Davis died at 85 on Sept. 18 at his home in Las Vegas. His death was confirmed by Mathew Goolsby, a longtime friend and business associate, who said the cause was complications of prostate cancer.
Tiger Oil filed for bankruptcy in the 1980s, but decades later it made news again when Mr. Davis’s memos started showing up on the internet, notably on the website Letters of Note. The site’s founder, Shaun Usher, declined to identify the oil industry source who made him aware of the memos in 2010 or so, but with Mr. Davis’s permission he has included them in a new book, “Letters of Note: Volume 2” (2016).
After Mr. Davis saw a copy of that book (“Letters of Note,” 2013), which included correspondence by the likes of Katharine Hepburn, Mick Jagger and Galileo, he reconsidered. He wrote a letter, asking “Are the same kinds of celebrities going to be in your second book?” Mr. Usher responded by mentioning a few: Winston Churchill, Beatrix Potter, Richard Burton. And that was enough to persuade Mr. Davis; he even volunteered to send a photo.
“He wasn’t embarrassed” by the contents of the memos, Mr. Usher recalled.

Their marriage lasted until 1971, and according to “Papa’s Girl,” a 2007 biography of Ms. Bonfils by Eva Hodges Watt, the couple were happier than some people had predicted. “She loved the fact that Mike had enough guts to behave outrageously,” a family friend was quoted as saying.
Mr. Davis’s most recent moment in the business spotlight was in 2012, when the billionaire Kirk Kerkorian and his Tracinda Corporation settled (for undisclosed terms) a lawsuit against him for fraud. It was reported that Mr. Davis had deceived Mr. Kerkorian into investing in Delta Petroleum Company, which soon failed, and that Mr. Davis had received a $5 million finder’s fee in Delta stock for arranging the deal.
Edward Michael Davis (everyone called him Mike) was born on March 1, 1931, although exactly where and to whom has been a matter of speculation. The Las Vegas Review-Journal reported that his birthplace was the Rosebud (Sioux) reservation in South Dakota, that he had served in the Army, and that both his parents and all six of his siblings had died.
He was the longtime partner of Phyllis McGuire, the youngest of the McGuire Sisters, the midcentury pop-singing trio. Last month he talked to The Las Vegas Sun about helping her put her Las Vegas mansion, complete with an indoor Eiffel Tower replica, on the market.
