Darlene Miller, 32, guidance counselor, High School for Public Service, East Flatbush, N.Y.
I’m always surrounded by 12th graders. As soon as September hits, 80 percent of my day is dealing with college applications and talking with colleges. College debt and affordability is the first thing that comes up — the majority of my students are from low-income neighborhoods, and I don’t want them to graduate with a lot of debt, so that they can go on to medical school or graduate schools. They don’t think about saving debt for later. I try and suggest in-state schools because they’re more affordable. But sometimes students are really set on an out-of-state school, which is more expensive — they can be adamant about it and sometimes have their parents take out a loan for $20,000 or more. A lot of those students will come back after a year and go to CUNY.
Colleges are getting more and more expensive, and we’re getting less and less financial aid. We have fewer opportunities for kids that are needs-based. I absolutely hate it; it makes it 10 times more difficult to do my job and for those kids to succeed. Their needs may amount to about $7,000, but to a single parent who has five other kids, that’s a lot, and the colleges are not as helpful as I would like them to be.
The high-achieving students think they’re perfect for every college, but I have to remind them that they’re competing with the valedictorian of every other high school in New York State. It’s really stressful for them; they get very anxious. I get a lot of midnight emails and phone calls; they’re worried about not hearing from a school or whether or not they should do an interview or how they think it went. They stay in the building until 6 o’clock, and I stay in there with them. They don’t want to submit a college application until I’ve seen it, because they’re so anxious about it. Sometimes they want me to press the submit button, and sometimes they’re so nervous they break down in tears.
Miguel Iriarte, 40, custodian, Glenbrook South High School, Glenview, Ill.
This will be my fifth year here. When I started working, there were always two or three kids who would talk to me and ask me about my day and my weekend. In this school, the students are so respectful, and I think they are like this because the parents are working class. They aren’t really the rich ones, so they respect us more. Here, every day I get a smile from them, and they’ll say thank you for doing this or doing that.
My day usually starts in the athletics area. I have to do the volleyball courts, the badminton setup. Then I try to get done sweeping the floor, cleaning the windows, getting up the dirt. It will take me until 7 or 8 p.m., and then we start the deep cleaning. We look for dust everywhere. We replace light bulbs, and we have a Zamboni for the hallways — it scrubs the floor and picks up the dirty water. We make sure all the hallways are clear and the doors are locked, and we go home at 11 p.m. Sometimes kids are still around until 9:30 or 10.
This is an interesting job because to some people, once you put on the uniform, we are invisible. I don’t know why, but nobody sees us. The kids are happy, and they have everything, and the cafeteria is beautiful, too, and they want to come back the next day. But I have seen some sadness — students in the hallway crying. I saw one girl who wanted her parents to be at home more, and she wanted more quality time with them, and that was very sad to witness. She had two friends around, and I didn’t want to go and give advice because it’s too personal.
I graduated from this high school in 1996. I came from my small town in Mexico, just south of Mexico City, to this big high school. When I was here as a student, there were less than 20 Latinos, native speakers, and now the community is so big I don’t know who speaks Spanish or English. There’s maybe 200 here now. The students are mixed — it’s something that’s unique about this school. Now everybody seems to get along, at least in this school. We are very safe, and they seem to have everything. This school is 600,000 square feet. It’s a very rich village.
Kids all ask the same questions. They all have the same concerns. My style is to make it fun.  When I teach sex, the students have just come from math or chemistry, and I need to give them time to change gears. There’s a lot of excitement.
High-school kids are really desperate for this information. There is nervousness, curiosity and apprehension. For a lot of them, when they hear “sex,” their first feeling is shame or judgment. So many of the messages they hear about their bodies conflict with what is actually happening.
A sex educator’s best tool is the anonymous-question box. We get a lot of really honest questions that way. I wish sex education was taught the way math is — incrementally, over time, simple concepts first and then more complex concepts next. Unfortunately, we don’t do that. We go from 0 to 60. We never talk about this subject, and then we shove it at them all at once.
Every adult generation looks at the teenagers and says, “Kids these days.” There tends to be an accepted idea that this generation is very sexually active. But the C.D.C.’s National Youth Risk Behavior Survey released this year indicated that fewer high-schoolers are having sex, and those who are having sex are doing so with fewer partners. And when they do have sex, they’re likely to use contraception.
Not long ago, there was a big comprehensive high school called Montbello. They shut it down and gradually built six boutique schools — we’re one of those schools. The students choose us, and we specialize in college prep.
We’re just over 50 percent Latino, a third black and about 10 percent other ethnicities. The black community is made up of Sudanese refugees; kids from Ethiopia, Kenya and the Caribbean; and Americans who are black.
There are a lot of nuances with the people we serve. We have a lot of first-generation families. I have kids from Cuba, Nepal, East Asia. So the narratives about higher education haven’t been part of their lives, which is not to say that education isn’t a priority. We try to expand their perception of what they can attain. The No. 1 effort is to build rapport and trust with families. We have eight languages that our families speak, and we have translators available for all of the languages at all of our community events.
It seems to me that our kids are really allowed to have their own identity way more than they had previously. Girls will dye their hair purple; more kids are trying to be unique and standing out rather than fitting in. I don’t see as much fronting or attitude as I’ve seen in the past. This generation is not shocked or concerned by gender issues, and more kids identify on the gender spectrum or as transgender than I have ever seen before. I really see more community building.
I think about our school from the perspective of a parent. I think about whether this classroom would be a good fit for my child’s learning — then I think, If it’s not good enough for my son, why is it good enough for any other child? I’m being trusted with these kids’ lives, careers, their future, and we really have to show up hard for them.