IndyCar racing returned to Watkins Glen International in upstate New York after a six-year hiatus as teams practiced in earnest for the first time.
This weekend’s race replaced a street event in Boston that was canceled.
In morning practice around the 3.37-mile, 11-turn layout, all 22 drivers eclipsed Ryan Briscoe’s track record of 1 minute 28.1322 seconds at 137.657 miles per hour, set in 2009. Scott Dixon, a three-time winner at Watkins Glen, topped the charts in the No. 9 Target Chevrolet in both sessions, turning a fast lap of 1:22.8740 at 146.391 m.p.h. in the two-hour afternoon session.
Watkins Glen was the birthplace of road racing in America after World War II. A 6.6-mile course using mostly paved roads with a short dirt and gravel stretch served as the layout for the first race at Watkins Glen in 1948. In 1961, Formula One arrived, and the race became a fall tradition, remaining through 1980, when financial difficulties intervened. The last open-wheel race of that era was the Watkins Glen 200, a CART event in 1981. Mario Andretti started on the pole, and Rick Mears won the race.
In 1983, Corning Enterprises, a subsidiary of Corning Glass, joined with International Speedway Corporation to buy the track and rename it Watkins Glen International. Nascar has raced each year at Watkins Glen since 1986, and IndyCar began a five-year run in September 2005 before the track parted ways with the series for financial reasons.
Jon Lester (15-4) pitched no-hit ball until two were out in the seventh inning and settled for his second complete game of the season, and the host Chicago Cubs beat the San Francisco Giants, 2-1, on Friday to move a season-high 40 games over .500.
Hunter Pence ended Lester’s bid for a second no-hitter with a homer to left. Lester (15-4) allowed three hits and walked two. The Cubs have won five straight to improve to 87-47.
The Giants are 15-29 since the All-Star break, the worst record in the majors. Until Pence’s home run, they had no hits in 40 at-bats over two games.
PUIG IS BACK Yasiel Puig returned to the Los Angeles Dodgers, seemingly chastened by a monthlong demotion to the minors. Puig started in right field against the visiting San Diego Padres after being called up from Class AAA Oklahoma City, where he hit .358 in 24 games. “They made the right choice sending me down there, but now I was doing the correct things to come back,” Puig said through a translator.
Marina Alex eagled her final hole for an eight-under-par 64 and the second-round lead in the L.P.G.A. Manulife Classic in Cambridge, Ontario. Alex played the final five holes in five under for the lowest score in her L.P.G.A. Tour career.
Alex, a 26-year-old from Wayne, N.J., who played at Vanderbilt, had a 10-under 134 total at Whistle Bear for a one-stroke lead over P. K. Kongkraphan of Thailand and Hyo Joo Kim of South Korea.
Syracuse inaugurated the Dino Babers era of racetrack football by sprinting away from visiting Colgate, 33-7, in the season-opener for both teams. Coach Babers’s brand of no-huddle, push-the-pace mayhem, which he brought over from his two seasons as head coach at Bowling Green, translated well to the Carrier Dome turf. Eric Dungey completed 34 of 40 passes for 355 yards and two touchdowns, and Ervin Phillips caught 14 passes to tie the program single-game record set by Art Monk in 1977. Amba Etta-Tawo had 12 receptions for 210 yards.
The Orange zipped off 33 straight points after Colgate, a Football Championship Subdivision team that is the defending Patriot League champion, scored on a 19-yard touchdown pass from Jake Melville to Owen Rockett with nine minutes left in the first. Dungey tied the game on a 43-yard strike to Etta-Tawo less than two minutes later, and the freshman running back Moe Neal ignited the rout early in the second quarter, taking his first college carry 49 yards for a touchdown.
U.S.C. PLAYERS INVESTIGATED The University of Southern California has sent linebacker Don Hill home from Dallas, where the No. 20 Trojans are set to open the season Saturday against No. 1 Alabama. The team said only that Hill had violated team rules, but a search warrant and an affidavit from Los Angeles County Superior Court obtained by media outlets say he is under investigation, along with another U.S.C. linebacker, Osa Masina, on suspicion of sexual assault of a woman at Hill’s off-campus apartment in July. Masina did not make the trip to Texas. Neither player has been arrested or charged.
New England Patriots defensive end Rob Ninkovich has been suspended for the first four games of the regular season for violating the N.F.L.’s policy on performance-enhancing substances, the league announced.
Ninkovich, 32, has not played this preseason after sustaining a reported triceps injury during a practice on Aug. 9. Ninkovich was a defensive captain in 2015 and had 52 tackles and six and a half sacks. He has played in 102 consecutive regular-season games, third among active players.