Ben Sinclair and Katja Blichfeld were wedged into the bedroom belonging to their friend Russell Gregory on a cold and rainy February day, shooting a scene for the television series “High Maintenance.” Mr. Gregory’s railroad apartment was crawling with people — sound guys, assistant directors, camera operators — and the atmosphere was as tense as the working conditions (and schedule) were tight.
It wasn’t the first time that Mr. Sinclair and Ms. Blichfeld had commandeered the home of Mr. Gregory, an executive producer of the show. An early episode of “High Maintenance,” which debuted as a web series in October 2012 on the video-sharing website Vimeo, was also set in the Chelsea apartment, back when the show was simply the creation of a group of friends eager to collaborate.
Things are different now. The once proudly D.I.Y. operation is an HBO series (new episodes begin Friday, Sept. 16), with a bigger budget, cast and crew — and the additional pressures that come with the higher profile of premium cable. The show’s creators worried that, while working with and on behalf of strangers, the sense of intimacy and trust that had informed the web series might slip from their grasp.
But even as Ms. Blichfeld and Mr. Sinclair, who were married on New Year’s Eve 2010, insisted on doing many things the same way they always had, they recognized that they couldn’t be quite as self-reliant as before.
Where there were only five people in Mr. Gregory’s apartment when it was used as a set in 2012, that number had swollen to 16 in February. Dimitri Kouri, a sound mixer who has worked on “High Maintenance” since the early days, called that increase “a perfect metaphor for the growing pains of the show.” There were 20 nonunion crew members in the Vimeo days, according to Mr. Gregory; with HBO, there is a 75-person union crew.
The six new episodes feature many familiar characters and plenty of new ones. But the episodes are longer than the crisp vignettes that were uploaded to Vimeo, a majority of which were under 15 minutes. Most of the new episodes combine multiple stories and characters, and all of them run about a half-hour each.
Mr. Sinclair and Ms. Blichfeld continue to rely on storytelling techniques that deliver a large amount of information in a short amount of time — including montages and intricate, detail-obsessed set designs. But their character sketches have blossomed into full-blown portraits. A once-loathsome, smack-talking thief engenders some sympathy; a heavily medicated woman previously defined by her work deals with trouble at home.
The creators of “High Maintenance” stretched to meet what they saw as the high standards of their new network, while remaining “as small as they would let us be,” Ms. Blichfeld said.
Some of the new episodes are more ambitious than anything that Ms. Blichfeld and Mr. Sinclair have tried before. One features a dog named Bowdie as its protagonist and treats his emotional life as seriously as those of any of its human characters. (Bowdie’s walker is a customer of Mr. Sinclair’s character.) Another focuses on a Pakistani family living next to a pair of middle-aged swingers and manages to touch on religion, sex and, of course, drugs, in telling the story of a Muslim teenager trespassing across cultural boundaries.
Though the show is not explicitly political, Ms. Blichfeld and Mr. Sinclair take pains to acknowledge current events when padding out the lives of their characters. In the new season, they obliquely address the presidential election — the Guy despairs at the prospect of a Trump presidency — as well as issues of race, class and privilege and, as always, the evolving role of marijuana in the lives of everyday people.
“High Maintenance” has been almost anthropologically obsessive in its portrayal of New York’s bohemian class, and the new season is attentive when it comes to the signifiers of contemporary Brooklyn. Elena Ferrante, Marie Kondo and adult coloring books make cameos; the flavored sparkling water LaCroix is ubiquitous.
The six new episodes took about a year to make, and the extra time allowed the couple to continue to play with episodes that, in the old days, would already have been on the web. Ms. Blichfeld worries that the lag time between the episodes’ conception and their release might make the stories feel dated; one episode, featuring a character who is a heavy Instagram user, was even reshot to include Snapchat as that platform became more popular.
Mr. Gregory, the executive producer, has known Ms. Blichfeld for about a decade, and met Mr. Sinclair around the time that she did. He says that all three have been able to collaborate on successively bigger stages thanks to the levelheadedness that each brings to their working relationship, as well as an ability to separate work and friendship.
But even while Mr. Sinclair and Ms. Blichfeld were professional on the set — “We don’t fight in front of the kids,” she joked — they say that making the new episodes strained them personally before eventually bringing them closer together.
“I think you can track our feelings about each other through all of the episodes,” Mr. Sinclair said.
Continuing the thought, Mr. Sinclair said that the unfamiliar faces who took over much of the miscellaneous work on set allowed them more time to focus on the creative aspects of the show and their own relationship. And they realized that as much as they were struggling to keep “High Maintenance” the same as it always had been, it was bound to change given how it had transformed their lives.
