He was Bobby Breen, and in a torrid run of seven more films over the next three years, he melted maternal hearts and emerged as a major star, in the same league as Mickey Rooney, Jane Withers and Freddie Bartholomew, earning $50,000 a year — a huge sum then — from testimonials alone.
Mr. Breen died on Monday in Pompano Beach, Fla., said his son Paul Howard. He was 87.
Most of the Bobby Breen films followed a formula: separation, reunion, tears and song. Lots of song.
And so it remained, guaranteeing him stardom, until it began to deepen as the decade drew to a close, drawing the curtain on his film career. In 1942, he made his last film, “Johnny Doughboy,” playing one of a group of has-been child stars — Carl Switzer (“Alfalfa”) and George McFarland (“Spanky”) of the “Our Gang” comedies among them — trying to organize a U.S.O. troupe.
Bobby Breen was born Isadore Borsuk on Nov. 4, 1928, in Montreal. His parents, Hyman and Rebecca, had been brought to Canada from Kiev, in what is now Ukraine, by their parents. After moving to Toronto, the family ran a candy store. His older sister, Sally, began entering Isadore in local talent contests when he was 4. Within a few years, he was singing regularly at the Silver Slipper Club and the Savarin restaurant.
Determined to make her little brother a star, Sally, who died in 1999, took him to Chicago, where he appeared in a variety revue at the Oriental Theater with Milton Berle and, later, Gloria Swanson.
In New York, his next stop, he enrolled in the New York Professional Children’s School and landed the part of Bob Hope’s newsboy son in the Broadway musical confection “Say When” in 1934.
A move to Hollywood followed. Sol Lesser, a producer at RKO known for handling the careers of Jackie Coogan, Baby Peggy and Jackie Cooper, heard him singing in a class with Mario Marafioti, a renowned vocal coach. Renaming him Bobby Breen, Mr. Lesser signed him to a long-term contract.
For good measure, Eddie Cantor, who heard Bobby perform at a local concert, hired him to sing “Santa, Bring My Mommy Back to Me” on his Christmas show for NBC radio. Audience enthusiasm led Cantor to hire him as a regular, and with the release of “Let’s Sing Again,” in which he sang “Lullaby,” “Farmer in the Dell” and the Verdi aria “La donna è mobile,” Bobby found himself an overnight sensation, splashed on the covers of fan magazines and cooed over by newspaper interviewers.
After making “Hawaii Calls” and “Breaking the Ice” in 1938, Bobby turned out three films in 1939: “Fisherman’s Wharf,” “Way Down South” and “Escape to Paradise.” By this time, his voice changing, he had been dropped from the Cantor show.
He studied music and drama at the University of California, Los Angeles, and, with Red Buttons and Mickey Rooney, entertained troops in England and the European theater at the end of World War II.
In the early 1960s, he signed a contract with Motown after the label’s founder, Berry Gordy, heard him sing in Windsor, Ontario. He made several records that were never released. “I think he realized that my singing was not compatible with the Motown sound,” Mr. Breen told Charles Foster, the author of “Once Upon a Time in Paradise: Canadians in the Golden Age of Hollywood” (2003).
In the 1980s, Mr. Breen and his wife, the former Audre Scharf, created a talent agency, Bobby Breen Enterprises, to book older entertainers in Florida retirement villages. Ms. Breen died three days before her husband, whose first marriage had ended in divorce. In addition to his son Paul, he is survived by another son, Ron Howard (no relation to the director); three grandchildren; and a great-granddaughter.
Long after his film career had ended, Mr. Breen managed an unexpected cameo when he appeared on the cover of the Beatles album “Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band.” In the front row, his eager, smiling face can be seen wedged between George Harrison and Marlene Dietrich.
