The first time I tried to intubate a patient who had stopped breathing, my supervisor snatched the tube from me at the last minute. “What are you going to do after you place the tube?” she asked. Her intuition was right: I was completely unprepared for the next step. It was an important reminder that no matter how dire the situation, it is inappropriate to act unless you’re ready for what comes next.
After the release of the video of the shooting this month of Terence Crutcher by a police officer in Tulsa, Okla., many questions remain. One thing is clear, however: In the immediate aftermath of the shooting, there was no attempt to provide medical assistance to Mr. Crutcher. At one point in the video, officers appear to put on medical gloves. But rather than use them to perform CPR or apply pressure to stop any active bleeding, they use them to search Mr. Crutcher as he lies on the ground.
Sadly, something similar is on display in the videos of the police shootings this summer of Paul O’Neal in Chicago, Philando Castile in a suburb of Minneapolis-St. Paul and Alton Sterling in Baton Rouge, La. Officers ostensibly trained in both firearms and first aid appear to focus on the former and ignore the latter.
Perhaps the most vivid recent example of an officer’s first-aid unpreparedness was in 2014, when Peter Liang of the New York City Police Department fired a shot in a Brooklyn housing project. The bullet ricocheted down a stairwell and hit a man named Akai Gurley. While Mr. Gurley lay on the floor dying, Mr. Liang stood by as Mr. Gurley’s girlfriend dialed 911 and was coached to perform CPR over the phone.
Asked in court why he didn’t assist with the resuscitation, Mr. Liang testified, “I thought she was more qualified than me.” Evidence later emerged that during training, Mr. Liang and his classmates received poor CPR instruction.
In such cases, I leave determinations of guilt and non-guilt to the courts and to people with more legal expertise than I have. I will, however, argue that if we are going to give our police officers guns (and this is indeed an “if” — officers in many developed countries do not carry guns on patrol), the officers must be properly trained to deal with the consequences of firing them. As a physician, I am expected to know how to use an array of powerful medications — and how to act when those medications result in dangerous side effects or allergic reactions. The same ought to be true of our police officers: They must be able to serve and protect not only when things go according to plan but also when things go awry.
But time is precisely what matters. Police work regularly places officers in urgent situations with critically injured people. If a person isn’t getting oxygen to his brain, permanent brain damage occurs after about four minutes and death occurs within about six minutes. Given that the average response time for an ambulance in New York City is about seven minutes, immediate first aid can be critical to keeping oxygen flowing until professional medical personnel are able to take more definitive action. First aid — including the use of CPR, defibrillators and tourniquets — is a set of simple skills that anyone can learn.
Like emergency medicine, policing is hard. It is stressful. But the good news is that policing, like emergency medicine, is predictably hard and predictably stressful. This allows practitioners to train for their challenges.
Emergency medical situations will arise again and again when officers discharge their guns. We should expect that next time they do, the officers will know exactly what to do next.