Hours after the United States Soccer Federation announced that the popular midfielder Megan Rapinoe would not be punished for kneeling during the national anthem at a women’s national team game, she did it again.
Rapinoe knelt Sunday night in Atlanta before a friendly match against the Netherlands, repeating her actions of Thursday, when the Americans defeated Thailand in Columbus, Ohio. That night, U.S. Soccer had said, “As part of the privilege to represent your country, we have an expectation that our players and coaches will stand and honor our flag while the national anthem is played.” But it eventually elected to take no disciplinary action against Rapinoe.
Rapinoe has joined San Francisco 49ers quarterback Colin Kaepernick and a number of other professional, college and high school athletes who have knelt during the anthem in recent weeks to draw attention to what they say is racial inequality and police brutality in the United States.
On Thursday, Rapinoe spoke of her First Amendment right to protest peacefully, and expressed concern that many Americans were not as protected as others.
Rapinoe entered Sunday’s game as a substitute in the 64th minute to cheers and boos that were loud enough to be heard on Fox Sports 1’s television broadcast of the game. Rapinoe, 31, has missed most of 2016 with a knee injury, but she is still a key offensive catalyst on the wing. Her play has made her one of the most recognizable faces on the team, at one point even inspiring a corn maze in Northern California.
But her decision to kneel for the anthem has been polarizing for fans of the national team. Many have argued that her protest, which she first did during a National Women’s Soccer League match, is disrespectful while she wears a national team uniform. Others vigorously defended her right to protest, as they have with Kaepernick and other professional athletes. Within seconds of Rapinoe’s taking a knee Sunday night, Twitter users were ready with their opinions.
There also was plenty of disappointment with television coverage of the controversy on Fox Sports 1. Fox’s studio team of Rob Stone and Aly Wagner criticized Rapinoe’s approach during and after the game, and the broadcasters calling the match itself — which included the former national team coach Tony DiCicco — focused mostly on her protest as a distraction to the team.
The United States captain Carli Lloyd, who scored in the Americans’ 3-1 victory over the Netherlands, said in an interview before the game that Rapinoe’s kneeling was a “distraction” for the team, but she was not directly critical of it. The former national team star Michelle Akers, writing on Facebook, suggested Rapinoe would bring more attention to issues by declining to play for her country.
In a way, the controversy comes at a convenient time for the team. After the Women’s World Cup in 2015 and the Olympics in August, the women’s national team is entering a low-profile cycle. (The next Women’s World Cup is in 2019, in France.) In the meantime, the team’s games will be friendlies for the most part, not all of them as competitive as Sunday’s win over the Netherlands, a rising European national team. Thursday’s United States game against Thailand, for example, wound up being a 9-0 rout.
The team’s next games are two friendlies against Switzerland and Sweden in October.