Monday was in many ways typical for the late-night comedy shows, with network hosts like CBS’s Stephen Colbert and NBC’s Seth Meyers performing pointed satirical monologues about Donald J. Trump, the Republican presidential nominee, and his many years spent propagating lies about President Obama’s birthplace.
But Samantha Bee, on her TBS cable series, “Full Frontal,” took aim at a different target, condemning the NBC network and its late-night host Jimmy Fallon for putting Mr. Trump on “The Tonight Show.” She faulted Mr. Fallon for conducting a genial, hair-mussing interview on Thursday, even as Mr. Trump had refused that day in other interviews to acknowledge that Mr. Obama was born in the United States.
“Network execs, and a lot of their audience, can ignore how very dangerous Trump is because to them, he isn’t,” Ms. Bee said on her show. “They’re not going to be deported. They’re not going to live under a president who thinks of them as a collection of sex toys.
It’s another to criticize a network or Mr. Fallon, who is typically not held up to such scrutiny, partly because of his amiable on-air personality and the perception that his “Tonight Show” (which draws more than three million viewers a night, the most in its category) is a place for nonpartisan diversions. He and rival hosts like Mr. Colbert and Jimmy Kimmel try to avoid criticizing one another in public.
But Mr. Fallon took plenty of criticism for the Thursday interview, and Ms. Bee’s monologue was perhaps the bluntest denunciation of it so far.
On a day in which Mr. Trump continued to give ambiguous answers on whether he still supported his false birtherist theory, Mr. Fallon asked him mostly uncontroversial questions and playfully ran his fingers through Mr. Trump’s hair.
“If he thinks that a race-baiting demagogue is O.K., that gives permission to millions of Americans to also think that,” she continued.
The text from Mr. Free included a picture of Mr. Fallon caressing Mr. Trump’s coiffure, and an urgent, slightly vulgar message exhorting Ms. Miller and Ms. Bee to address the subject on their show.
Ms. Miller pointed out that there is still an awkward relationship between Mr. Trump and NBC, where the “Today” show host Matt Lauer was criticized for going too easy on him in a prime-time presidential forum, and Mr. Trump has expressed pre-emptive skepticism of the NBC “Nightly News” anchor Lester Holt, who will moderate the first presidential debate.
She drew a distinction between the broader categories of political satire programs like “Full Frontal” and late-night talk shows that can only engage their guests in harmless banter.
“To me, this is just about decency,” she said.
On Monday night, meanwhile, Mr. Fallon’s “Tonight Show” guests included Hillary Clinton, the Democratic presidential nominee. Going through items that they said belonged to Mr. Trump, Ms. Clinton offered Mr. Fallon something that she said Mr. Trump had left behind for him: a bag of softballs.
