With their two sons grown and out of the house, Ruvin and Polina Itskovich found their neighborhood in Bergen Beach, Brooklyn, too calm for their liking.
The couple, who met in their native Ukraine, immigrated to the United States in 1979, first stopping in Baltimore, where they had relatives.
They then moved to an apartment in Kensington, Brooklyn, and later to a detached single-family house in Bergen Beach. Mr. Itskovich, who started as a cabdriver, became a landlord, owning and managing apartment houses. Both sons are now lawyers in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
The Itskoviches loved visiting Manhattan, driving in on many weekends.
A little more than two years ago, they started hunting for an apartment there. Mr. Itskovich, who is 61, contacted Lilia Berzon, a saleswoman at Bond New York, through a listing on the website Trulia. “She was very helpful and very patient,” Mr. Itskovich said.
The couple didn’t mind a one-bedroom but did want more than one bathroom.
Their price was up to $1.5 million, though they also visited apartments listed for more, intending to negotiate.
At the twin-towered Century condominium on Central Park West, completed in 1931, they saw several one-bedrooms priced from $1.265 million to $1.55 million. All overlooked the back courtyard.
The couple decided against prewar apartment houses. “They’re too old for us, those buildings,” Mr. Itskovich said.
On the Upper East Side, they visited a one-bedroom two-bathroom apartment with more than 900 square feet and a balcony at the Royale, a 1987 condominium tower on 64th Street near Third Avenue. It was listed at $1.59 million, with monthly maintenance charges of $1,760.
The place was perfectly fine, though they weren’t interested in its balcony.
But the neighborhood was too family-oriented for their taste. “That’s not what we were looking for,” Mr. Itskovich said. “We didn’t even mind Times Square with all the craziness around.” The place in the Royale sold for $1.375 million.
On the East Side, their preferred housing stock didn’t match up with their preferred area, close to Central Park. “All the newer buildings are farther east on the East Side,” Ms. Berzon said.
The couple liked the 78-story Metropolitan Tower, built in 1986, on West 57th Street, with its central location on a busy crosstown thoroughfare.
They returned several times to see apartments there. A one-bedroom of 1,050 square feet with one and a half bathrooms was fully renovated and on one of the highest floors, with a helicopter view of Central Park. At $1.925 million, with monthly charges of more than $2,407, it was far too pricey.
Another, just a few floors down, was smaller, just over 800 square feet. It had one bedroom and one and a half bathrooms. The price was $1.22 million, with monthly charges of nearly $2,000.
It was advertised as having city views facing southwest, but those city views were partly of the windows of a nearby tower. That one sold for $1.1 million.
They continued hunting. At last they came to a glassy 2007 tower on West 48th Street, just south of Rockefeller Center, within easy walking distance of Central Park.
There they saw a one-bedroom apartment of around 950 square feet, with high ceilings, floor-to-ceiling windows, a walk-in closet and even a washer-dryer. The kitchen was hidden behind folding metal doors. The place had one and a half bathrooms, but the full bathroom included two sinks plus a tub and a separate shower. The asking price was $1.195 million, with monthly charges of a little less than $2,200.
They offered the asking price, and then learned an offer had already been accepted. But the seller was interested in backup offers, so they raised their bid to $1.235 million. The seller agreed on the condition that they sign the contract immediately.
They did, and then learned the apartment was an estate sale. The executor lived in Ireland. “Probate court can take forever,” Ms. Berzon said.
Forever, in this case, was a year and a half. The Itskoviches finally closed this summer. The good news, Ms. Berzon said, is that in the interim, values rose.
Now, “we are doing decoration, adding some spice to the apartment,” Mrs. Itskovich said — including, in the entry hall, a mural of Rockefeller Center. That’s what they see right outside. Their floor is low enough to permit a good view of the “Today” show crowds. Mrs. Itskovich is eager to do her morning power walk in Central Park.
They plan to sell the Bergen Beach house at some point after they move in.
