What Should I Do With My Dead Husband’s Journals?
For 15 years I was happily married to a man who, sadly, died several years ago. It was a second marriage for both of us. He was survived by his former wife and two adult children, and I maintain a cordial relationship with all of them. I know that my husband loved his children, but also that he had difficulties with them.
Among his belongings were several journals marked either “private” or “confidential.” They were maintained over a period of years, ending within a year or so of our becoming involved and getting married. There is also considerable paperwork relating to the annulment of his first marriage. I have stolen quick glances at some of this, and I believe that there is intimate material here that was not intended for anyone else’s eyes.
I see three options: dispose of everything, pass it along to my stepchildren or keep it and let it be discovered upon my death. As to the third option, although one never knows, I have no reason to think that my death is imminent, and I do not wish to hold onto these items anymore.
I think that my husband’s wishes would probably best be honored by my disposing of everything, and I am prepared to do so. I have wondered, however, whether this is a decision that is better left to his children. They might, for example, find something that would be of help to them, perhaps in dealing with unresolved issues about their father or with the dissolution of their parents’ marriage. But they might also discover something that is painful or shocking.
Your husband’s papers were his to dispose of, and are now yours, assuming they were left to you. If he had given you clear instructions, it would be your obligation to comply with them. But he didn’t. So you should aim to do what you think he would have wanted you to do.
People keep journals for a variety of reasons. In Oscar Wilde’s “The Importance of Being Earnest,” a character describes hers as “simply a very young girl’s record of her own thoughts and impressions, and consequently meant for publication.” Tony Benn, the British politician and man of (many) letters, thought that journals gave you “three bites at educating yourself” — as something happens, as you write it down and, later, as you reread what you wrote and reckon with your errors. He was happy to share the last of those experiences with a wider audience. But many journals really are meant as a record for the person keeping it, and for nobody else.
You plainly think that your husband falls in the last category and wouldn’t have wanted his children to know what is in these documents. If you’re sure of that, you don’t have to take into account what the children would like or what they would gain or lose from reading them. He had the right to keep these documents private. You inherited that right with them. You can destroy them. And you don’t need to tell the children you’ve done so. That, too, is protected by his right to privacy.
I live in a small apartment complex, and we form a relatively tight little community. In October 2015, one of the two elderly gentlemen who lived next door failed to extinguish his cigarette and started a fire that affected all three units in our building (mine included). Sadly, both men died.
I recently moved back into my renovated unit; new neighbors moved into the unit on the other side of the apartment where the fire started. So far, no one has moved into that apartment, but we do see people come by to take a look at it.
If someone asks us what happened to the former tenants, should we let them know? My landlord offered me that unit, with all-new appliances, hardwood floors and such, because I waited for seven months for my old unit to be renovated. I passed because, frankly, I didn’t want to live in a place where my neighbors died. I was home when it happened and escaped just in time, but saw my neighbors carried out, and it was a very sad experience.
We have talked about it here at the complex, and some think we should be completely truthful (if asked); some think we should just say they were elderly and died (with no details); and others that we should make something up (like that they went into an assisted-care facility). None of us think we should offer any details voluntarily, but what should we say if we’re asked? Tracee L., Portland, Ore.
Tell the truth. If you were moving in, you’d want to be told. Why not extend your potential neighbors that courtesy? Nothing you have said is a good reason not to do so.
My wife has dementia. When she wakes up in the morning I generally tell her where she is and who I am; sometimes I have to remind her what her own name is. It’s hard to tell how much she understands of the world around her. A while ago, her mother, who lived in another state, fell ill and was taken to the hospital. I told my wife what had happened. Later, her mother died, and I decided I should tell her. She may have understood. This was a difficult decision, and I spent hours wondering whether I should do it.
There are those who think that the point of truth-telling is to preserve their own moral purity. But the really compelling reason to volunteer a truth is so that other people have, and can act on, a proper understanding of the world. Other things being equal, we’re better off when we know how things really are. If telling the truth has no chance of achieving this end, I don’t see the point of it.
The issue in this case isn’t your wife’s right to know; it’s her capacity to understand and to act on her understanding. That capacity seems now to be gone. So there’s no moral reason to keep telling her things. And notice that failing to volunteer a truth isn’t the same as lying. If your wife were to ask you directly about her mother, how­ever, you’d have a hard choice to make. I said we were better off knowing how things are, other things being equal. Are they?
Even if she could make full sense of what you told her, the value of being in touch with reality might not be worth the pain of bearing the truth. We crave a formula here that will resolve these sometimes-clashing ideals. In your case, kindness surely does trump candor. But both matter, and we’re always in rocky terri­tory, finding our footing only with care.