Times Insider shares historic insights from The New York Times. In this piece, David Dunlap, a Metro reporter, looks back at some of The Times’s brushes with brevity.
The cover of a 1953 Times brochure was pithy.
What may well be the shortest article ever to appear in The Times — “No,” it said, in its entirety — has inspired what my colleague Tom Feyer, who is in charge of such things, described as the shortest letter to the editor he has ever published.
“!” Aharon Shifron-Ronnie of Concord, Calif., responded.
The writer seemed to be channeling the spirit either of Oscar Wilde’s publisher or Victor Hugo’s (depending on which version of the story you believe), who replied with a single exclamation point to a telegram from the author concerning the sales of his latest book. The inquiry had taken the form of a lone question mark.
Even The Times has borrowed from that long-ago publisher, in the title of a promotional brochure — most likely designed by Louis Silverstein — that described the newspaper’s appeal for apparel advertisers.
“!” was the only character on the 13-by-6-inch cover. “Again, in 1953, The New York Times led all New York newspapers combined in both men’s and women’s national wearing apparel advertising,” the brochure said inside. Behind a double gatefold printed the color of raspberry sherbet was a list of 308 apparel makers and their ad agencies, including Her Majesty Underwear Company, His Nibs Shirt Corporation, Rite-Form Corset Company, Slack-Ees Corporation, Snag-Pruf Zipper Corporation, Surprise Brassiere Company and Tish-U-Knit. Since this was the era of better living through chemistry, it’s not surprising to find E. I. DuPont de Nemours among the textile makers, along with the Carbide and Carbon Chemicals Company.
All things considered, the brochure seems to describe a world that has almost completely disappeared.
At least, until you turn to the back cover, which reproduces a Times front page — turmoil in Iran, Korea and China — and a cover of The New York Times Magazine with a picture on it of the queen of England.
Yes, that queen.
One thing that hasn’t changed in 63 years: the queen of England.