Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how news, features and opinion come together at The New York Times. In this piece, T Magazine articles editor Nicholas Haramis, who spearheaded the Perfect Strangers series — bringing together for a chat two people who’ve never met — shares what happened when, for the first time, he let a subject suggest the pairing.
But in truth, there was magic in the absurdity. Interviews with famous people can often feel like publicist-monitored pas de deux, but you knew you were getting something fresh, something unexpectedly intimate, when, instead of asking Michael Moore about European socialism, you asked him to describe a purse shaped like Lebanese flatbread.
In May, after some deliberation, my boss and I decided we were missing an opportunity, that maybe the odd couples featured in each installment of the column should be talking to each other, not just next to each other on the page. And so Take Two evolved into Perfect Strangers, a funny — but less silly — bringing together of two people who’ve never met. If they got along, great. If not, maybe that was better.
The conversation between Dick Cavett and “S.N.L.” alum Seth Meyers began in a similar way when I attempted to kick it off with a likely bland question. With mock-derision, Mr. Cavett said, “Nick, please. We’re trying to do an interview here.” But the circumstances leading up to that moment were new to me. This was the first time I agreed to let a subject suggest the pairing, wary as I am that it will devolve into so many other celebrity-on-celebrity conversations: “Craft services on that project was surprisingly tasty”; “The director was so collaborative”; “Isn’t she just the loveliest? So real, so present.” But Mr. Meyers, a longtime fan of Mr. Cavett’s late-night work, had asked for him, and while it made me anxious — though not much doesn’t — I liked thinking about it as a passing of the torch from one generation to the next.
With these two, I needn’t have been worried. From the minute they arrived at the studio where their photos were taken and where the interview happened, they were like two reunited friends eager to gossip and share horror stories about live television. It was 8 a.m., but you wouldn’t have known from the energy in the room. It was like observing two junkies recounting their first high.
It was thrilling to see them together, trading anecdotes and barbs at such a frenetic pace. Not surprisingly, Mr. Meyers asked most of the questions, and Mr. Cavett, extremely affable through the sarcasm, responded with the precision and glee of a seasoned storyteller. The expression on Mr. Meyers’s face contained a mix of curiosity and joy, and it reminded me of asking the mall Santa how he could possibly travel around the whole world in just one night. While having their portraits taken, they shot darts at an imaginary target, and the video that accompanied the magazine piece was an exercise in word association. Everything and everyone in the room was a distraction; they could, and probably should, have been alone.
But they weren’t, and about two hours into things, Mr. Meyers’s publicist alerted us that he had to run because he would be taping a live episode of “Late Night with Seth Meyers” later that day. Mr. Cavett hung around to take advantage of the catering, and, between bites, kept sharing stories about everyone from David Bowie to Richard Nixon to Groucho Marx. When I walked him outside to his car, he was still talking, and he didn’t stop even when he got inside. With the door open, he kept right on going — I think about Woody Allen at that point. We were melting from the sun, surrounded by people and bathing in the smells of Chinatown in the summer, but the randomness of it all kept us there. When the car eventually pulled away, I waited a minute, hoping that it might turn around.