PORTLAND, Ore. — Ammon and Ryan Bundy, who led an armed occupation to protest federal control of Western lands — much of which was captured on video and streamed online — began their defense in court this week.
The trial, which began Sept. 7, revolves around the question of whether the Bundy brothers and five co-defendants conspired to impede federal workers at a wildlife refuge from doing their jobs by using intimidation or threats. Over several days, the prosecution has shared videos of occupiers putting “closed permanently” signs on federal buildings; showed jurors 34 guns and 18,331 pieces of ammunition found at the refuge; and shared Facebook exchanges in which Ammon Bundy discussed plans for the protest that led to the takeover.
In the defense portion, the occupiers and their lawyers have tried to paint the group as peaceful protesters who treated the wildlife sanctuary with respect and feared the federal agents who had arrived in the area to investigate their actions.
Jeff Banta, 47, one of the defendants, testified that he did not know his presence at the refuge was illegal. “The whole reason I went there was to stand up and let these people have a voice,” he said, speaking of ranchers living in the area.
The occupation in January of the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge in eastern Oregon began as a protest of the imprisonment of two local ranchers and grew into a stand against federal control of land in the West. The protest was viewed widely as the sequel to a 2014 stand against federal power in Nevada. That confrontation was led by the men’s father, Cliven Bundy, a rancher.
The Oregon occupation was billed by its leaders as a political protest and a rallying point for frustrated ranchers who wanted to reclaim land under federal control. But it drew all sorts of people, all with their own grievances. The occupiers ultimately failed to achieve their goal of forcing Washington to hand the sanctuary over to the county.
Eleven people have already pleaded guilty. One participant, LaVoy Finicum, was killed by the authorities during the standoff.
The occupation was led by Ammon Bundy, now 41, and his brother Ryan Bundy, now 43. During the occupation, at the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge, it often felt as if Ammon Bundy was in charge. The two were often spotted around the compound, dressed in flannel shirts and cowboy hats, pledging fealty to the Constitution and evoking the Bible to justify their cause.
Neither is a full-time cowboy. Ammon Bundy started a company that provides repairs for car fleets in Arizona before moving to Idaho shortly before the occupation, and Ryan Bundy has run a construction company in Utah. They both head large families: Ammon has five children, and Ryan has eight. The brothers are two of Cliven Bundy’s 14 children, and both were active participants in the 2014 standoff in Nevada between Cliven’s supporters and the federal authorities.
Ms. Cox has a long history of protesting federal involvement on Western lands, including President Bill Clinton’s decision in the 1990s to turn a vast area of Utah into a national monument called Grand Staircase-Escalante. She has become a close friend of the Bundys, and in 2014 she published a book about the first standoff, “Last Rancher Standing: The Cliven Bundy Saga, a Close-Up View.” In her writings, she has said she believes that the environmental movement and the nation’s federal lands policy are controlled by the Chinese. She has 12 children.
Jeff Banta | Yerington, Nev.
Mr. Banta was one of the last holdouts at the refuge. His father told The Associated Press that his son’s distrust of the government came from him.
Kenneth Medenbach | Crescent, Ore.
Mr. Medenbach has been protesting federal power for at least two decades. He is a woodworker by profession.
At the refuge, Mr. Fry seemed out a place in the band of older Westerners. He was a skinny, longhaired 27-year-old from Ohio who had connected with leaders over the internet. Back at home, he had worked at a dental practice with his parents. During the takeover, he became increasingly erratic, and he was among the last participants to leave the refuge. In a tense negotiation with the authorities that was streamed live on YouTube, he threatened to kill himself before giving up his freedom. “I will not go another day as a slave to this system,” he said. “I’m a free man.  He has been jailed since the occupation. While in custody, he has said that he has gender dysphoria and is concerned about alien visits.
Neil Wampler | Los Osos, Calif.
Mr. Wampler was a familiar face at the refuge, and in an interview with Oregon Public Broadcasting during the occupation, he called himself a 68-year-old hippie. “Here I am, out doing this marvelous, fantastic stuff,” he told reporters. “It’s just fantastic.” Mr. Wampler is also a felon, having killed his father with a steel rod in 1977 while the man slept. He was convicted of second-degree murder and spent four years in prison.
Sean and Sandra Anderson of Riggins, Idaho; Dylan Anderson of Provo, Utah; Duane Ehmer of Irrigon, Ore.; Jason Patrick of Bonaire, Ga.; Darryl Thorn of Marysville, Wash.; Jake Ryan of Plains, Mont.
Blaine Cooper of Dewey-Humboldt, Ariz.; Eric Flores of Tulalip, Wash.; Wesley Kjar of Manti, Utah; Corey Lequieu of Fallon, Nev.; Joseph O’Shaughnessy of Cottonwood, Ariz.; Ryan Payne of Anaconda, Mont.; Jon Ritzheimer of Peoria, Ariz.; Geoffrey Stanek of Lafayette, Ore.; Travis Cox of Bend, Ore.; Brian Cavalier of Bunkerville, Nev.; Jason Blomgren of Murphy, N.C.
Mr. Santilli, an internet radio host, broadcast live from the refuge during the standoff, making frequent calls for people around the country to join the occupation. He was known to harass journalists and other onlookers during his show.
Cliven Bundy | Bunkerville, Nev.
Mr. Bundy was not involved in the Oregon occupation. He is jailed on separate charges stemming from the 2014 Nevada standoff. In that case, federal prosecutors accuse Mr. Bundy of participating in a “massive armed assault” on federal officials after the authorities tried to confiscate his cattle. Hundreds came to Mr. Bundy’s aid, and the authorities eventually backed off. That trial is scheduled for 2017.