The New England Patriots’ latest starting quarterback, the rookie Jacoby Brissett, could miss several weeks with a torn right thumb ligament sustained in Thursday’s 27-0 win over the Houston Texans.
WEEI radio in Boston reported that Brissett, a third-round draft pick making his first career start because of Jimmy Garoppolo’s shoulder injury, would require surgery. The timetable for his return makes it possible the Patriots would place Brissett, a third-stringer who was awarded Thursday’s game ball by Coach Bill Belichick, on injured reserve.
Garoppolo was playing because quarterback Tom Bradys serving a four-game suspension over the Deflategate fallout; Brady is eligible to return in Week 5 against the Cleveland Browns. The status of Garoppolo, who was inactive in Week 3 after winning his first two N.F.L. starts, will determine the course of action the Patriots (3-0) take for Week 4 against the Buffalo Bills.
Brissett was the only active quarterback on the roster Thursday. Wide receiver Julian Edelman, a quarterback in college at Kent State, was prepared to fill in if Brissett went down. But taking the same course with Garoppolo at less than 100 percent — he is said to have sustained a sprain in his throwing shoulder — could be riskier.
11 PLAYERS FINED The N.F.L. announced fines for 11 players, including a $12,154 penalty for the Vikings’ Stefon Diggs for coming off the sideline to join an altercation in Sunday’s win over Green Bay. The biggest fines were $18,231 for the Raiders’ Marquette King (horse-collar tackle), the Bears’ Akiem Hicks (hit to quarterback’s head) and the Packers’ Mike Daniels (roughing the passer). Also fined $9,115 each were three players from the Jets’ win over Buffalo: the Jets’ Sheldon Richardson and Eric Decker, both for taunting, and the Bills’ Stephon Gilmore, for a face-mask tackle that injured receiver Brandon Marshall. Other fines were to Houston’s Kevin Johnson and Carolina’s Devin Funchess for excessive celebration, Kansas City’s Marcus Peters for taunting and Denver’s Darian Stewart for a forearm shot to the quarterback.
Jake Arrieta struck out 10 in seven innings and the Chicago Cubs beat the St. Louis Cardinals, 5-0, on Friday for their 98th victory, the most since 1945, the last year Cubs played in the World Series.
Arrieta (18-7) allowed five hits and walked one, Anthony Rizzo had three hits and Ben Zobrist drove in two runs as the Cubs tied a team record with their 56th home win. They moved one victory or one Washington loss from clinching home-field advantage throughout the National League playoffs. The Cubs (98-55), who scored four runs in the first inning off Mike Leake, dropped the Cardinals (80-73) a game behind the Mets and the Giants for the two N.L. wild-card berths pending the outcome of night games.
Sloppy play hurt the Cardinals. Leake (9-11) allowed a run on one of his two wild pitches, Kolten Wong face-planted into the turf chasing Rizzo’s first-inning double, and Matt Adams was picked off first base.
The fight was to be held on Oct. 29 in Manchester, England, having originally been postponed in July when Fury suffered an ankle injury.
Klitschko had ruled the heavyweight division for a decade. Fury won the title in an upset in November, in a unanimous decision.
Fury, who is unbeaten, was charged with violations by United Kingdom Anti-Doping, or UKAD, in June because a urine sample taken months before he beat Klitschko showed traces of the banned substance nandrolone. Fury’s legal team said the result of tests on the samples in March and May 2015 were contradictory and started court proceedings against UKAD. A provisional suspension was lifted pending the result of an independent hearing.
Penn State has settled a court fight with its insurer over payments to victims of the Jerry Sandusky child sexual abuse scandal, a case that revealed new details about how long ago Penn State Coach Joe Paterno knew of accusations against his assistant coach.
A one-page document filed with a Philadelphia court stated that the action against the Pennsylvania Manufacturers’ Association Insurance Company was settled. Terms of the deal and the amount of payment are confidential by mutual consent, a Penn State spokeswoman said.
As part of the legal fight over whether the insurer would have to cover Sandusky-related claims, both sides obtained sworn depositions from key witnesses and other documents that had not previously become public. The presiding judge released some of that material in July. Among the notable new revelations were allegations Paterno fielded a complaint about Sandusky in 1976. In a deposition in 2014, an accuser said Paterno, when told that a boy had been molested, responded that he did not want to hear about it and had “a football season to worry about.” A Paterno family lawyer has said the allegations are untrue and impossible to prove.
Sandusky was convicted of sexually abusing 10 boys. He is serving a prison sentence of 30 to 60 years.