ATLANTA — Midway through his postround news conference Saturday, Dustin Johnson peered out at the room as a journalist questioned him about his trainer, Joey Diovisalvi, a fitness coach who is known for highlighting biomechanics. The journalist asked if Diovisalvi often used science in communication with Johnson, and Johnson cocked his head.
The line got plenty of laughs, and even Johnson cracked a smile. His preference for simplicity fits nicely here at the Tour Championship as a complicated calculus of situations — who needs to finish in what position at this tournament to ensure a certain result in the lucrative four-tournament FedEx Cup standings — is about as uncomplicated as it gets when it comes to Johnson: If he wins the tournament on Sunday, he takes home the trophy, about $1.5 million in prize money and a $10 million bonus for winning the FedEx Cup, not to mention (most likely) the Player of the Year Award.
There are plenty of other circumstances under which Johnson, who was tied for the lead with Kevin Chappell at eight under par through three rounds, will win the FedEx Cup anyway. From his perspective, he would rather skip the hypotheticals.
His one-under-par 69 on Saturday was not as crisp as he would have liked. Johnson has frequently been a dominant force on the PGA Tour this year, winning a major (the United States Open), a World Golf Tour event and, last weekend, the third event of the FedEx Cup playoffs.
When he made three birdies in a row on the front nine on Saturday, it felt as if he might run away from the rest of the field. Chappell, who was playing alongside him and is seeking his first victory on tour, had been treading water and saw Johnson pull three shots clear.
But Chappell chipped in for a birdie on the 12th hole and watched Johnson struggle to control his drives on the way into the clubhouse. Johnson’s strength off the tee can be intimidating — Chappell said playing with Johnson required that “you walk to your ball really quickly because you’re hitting first” all the time. Yet even Johnson’s power could not overwhelm the thick Bermuda grass rough at East Lake.
On the 17th hole, Johnson put his drive into the right rough, hacked his ball out and saw it deflect off a tree branch into the left rough, and then chunked his approach into the front bunker, ultimately making a double bogey. Chappell, who has made only one bogey the entire tournament, birdied the hole to temporarily take the lead before Johnson drove his ball into the rough on the par-5 18th, ripped an approach from 200 yards out into a greenside bunker and got up and down for birdie, bringing the players level.
Johnson and Chappell have a two-shot cushion on the rest of the field and will play together again on Sunday, but stiff competition is chasing them. Rory McIlroy and Ryan Moore each shot a four-under 66 to get to six under for the tournament, and Hideki Matsuyama was a shot behind them.
McIlroy is an admitted leaderboard-watcher — “you have to pass your time some way between shots,” he said — so there is no question that he will know exactly what his chances are as he goes through his final round.
McIlroy’s confidence was understandable. Beyond the Europeans’ recent success in the Ryder Cup, the Americans’ performance at the Tour Championship has not been particularly inspiring. Eight of the 11 players named to the American team are playing at East Lake — the final Ryder Cup player will be selected by Love on Sunday night — and other than Johnson’s, the scores from the Americans are mostly unsavory.
How bad is it? J. B. Holmes, Matt Kuchar, Phil Mickelson, Patrick Reed, Brandt Snedeker, Jordan Spieth and Jimmy Walker will all be representing the United States at Hazeltine National Golf Club outside Minneapolis this week. Through three rounds, they were a combined 26 over par.