Shimon Peres, who died in Tel Aviv on Wednesday at age 93, was a man of contradictions. Admired in much of the world for his eloquence, wisdom and dedication to peacemaking, within Israel he lacked the popularity and charisma of other leaders of his generation, military heroes like Yitzhak Rabin or Ariel Sharon in whose shadow he spent much of his long public service.
Though instrumental in Israel’s first years in building its defense establishment and later in securing its nuclear potential, he emerged in time as a champion of making peace with Palestinians. He shared the Nobel Peace Prize with Mr. Rabin and the Palestinian leader, Yasir Arafat, for the 1993 Oslo peace agreement — arguably the closest Israel and the Palestinians have ever come to a real deal — and the Peres Center for Peace he founded has become a major center for promoting a lasting peace.
He spent much of his long life in the rough-and-tumble of Israeli politics, serving as a minister in 12 cabinets. He never succeeded in his quest to be elected prime minister, though he filled the office three times either through political arrangement or on an interim basis. He was humiliatingly defeated once for the largely ceremonial post of Israeli president, though, as always, he rebounded and held the office until his retirement in 2014.
An immigrant from Poland 14 years before the state of Israel was established, raised on a kibbutz and a protégé of David Ben-Gurion, Israel’s first prime minister, Mr. Peres was a charter member of the generation that created the Jewish nation. Yet he was often perceived — and sometimes derided — by Israelis as different, an old-world gentleman sensitive about his image, a poet and master of the bon mot in a raucous land.
I first encountered Mr. Peres in 1995, that most difficult year in which Mr. Rabin was assassinated and he took over as interim prime minister with the halo of Oslo still glowing and the mantle of the fallen leader making him seemingly undefeatable. Yet he lost the election seven months later to a newcomer named Benjamin Netanyahu.
But what stands out in my memory is a conversation in which he told me how he had begun watching Palestinian soap operas in order to better understand the people with whom he hoped soon to live in peace.
Perhaps that is why Israel came to admire this man deeply in his last years, seeing in him the last of a generation that toiled to create and defend Israel. Equally courageous was his evolution into an ardent seeker of peace, which endowed him with a moral authority that a new generation of leaders too often seems to lack.