250 pp. Atria Books. $26.
Recently, a raft of books inspired by Black Lives Matter — that most recent incarnation of the civil rights movement — has attempted to explain the many ways black life is devalued in America. Each book seems to share a similar function: to encourage a sense of recognition among black readers, and to encourage empathy among white readers who may not have considered their own unconscious contributions to the maintenance of white supremacy. Broadly speaking, these books — which include Ta-Nehisi Coates’s “Between the World and Me”; Mychal Denzel Smith’s “Invisible Man, Got the Whole World Watching”; and “The Fire This Time,” an anthology edited by Jesmyn Ward, to name a few — mostly address the experience of anyone with black or brown skin, though they occasionally mention the indigent and those fleeing persecution elsewhere in the world. The vulnerable, in other words, whom the state recognizes in name only.
With each death — from the vigilante George Zimmerman’s killing of Martin to Sandra Bland’s death in state custody — Hill delves beyond the specifics of the situation and into the long histories that led to it. The effect is horrifying and spellbinding, as when Hill addresses Michael Brown’s death in Ferguson, Mo., in 2014. Hill lays out the project of his book here. The death of Michael Brown, he writes, “is not only the repeat of an age-old racial divide but also a statement of a relatively new public chasm that has been growing for years.” The reasons Hill cites for this chasm are many, and they are connected: rampant privatization, mass incarceration, the demolition of the welfare state, consumer culture, money’s corruption of the democratic process, a failed judicial branch, police militarization, global inequality, loss of faith in community and the disappearance of radical voices.
Much of this could read like a list of liberal shibboleths, but Hill’s firm grasp of history ensures each piece of his argument is seen for the evidence it is. After recounting the grand jury testimony of Darren Wilson, the officer who killed Brown and spoke of him as though he were an animal (“I shot it,” Wilson said), Hill takes us back to the 1939 World’s Fair and Le Corbusier’s lofty ideas about urban renewal. He then brings us forward again, to the development of the Pruitt-Igoe public housing projects in St. Louis, completed in 1955 and razed less than two decades later. Many of those displaced residents moved to Ferguson, having been failed by poorly conceived legislation that “doomed most projects to permanent disrepair.” “Nobody” culminates in the sad story of Flint, Mich., where Hill shows what kind of atrocity can result from government neglect: an entire American city, men and women and children, poisoned by lead in the water.
Despite this, he ends hopefully. “The People have asserted that they are, in fact, Somebody,” Hill writes. “In doing so, they offer hope that another world is indeed possible, that empires eventually fall, and that freedom is closer than we think.” Going by his argument, though, it’s impossible to think this can happen in this lifetime. A few weeks ago, all charges brought against the Baltimore police officers awaiting trial for Freddie Gray’s death — which the medical examiner ruled a homicide — were dropped, after three officers had been acquitted. In “Nobody,” Hill can act as prosecutor, judge and jury; he reaches the guilty verdict Baltimore’s courts could not. And this is why Hill’s book is a worthy and necessary addition to the contemporary canon of civil rights literature. He delivers what feels like a dispatch from a war. “Nobody” is a cleareyed look at the actors on both sides of the battlefield, and explains how we came to this.