BEIJING — They may be the most reviled public servants in China. A Chinese Academy of Social Sciences report on the popularity of government officials two years ago ranked the chengguan, or urban management officers, dead last. Unarmed but charged with enforcing order on city streets, they have been scorned as bullies who brutalize beggars, smash unlicensed fruit vendors’ carts, kill unregistered pets and assist in the forced demolition of people’s homes. Scuffles are common, sometimes ending in injury or even death.
Needless to say, it is a high-stress job.
In recognition of the pressures, China’s first Psychological Crisis Intervention Center for Chengguan opened in Nanjing this week, offering counseling and other support services for chengguan. And perhaps not too soon. The opening came just days after a chengguan in Nanjing was stabbed to death by a street vendor he was trying to discipline.
Zhang Chun, one of 18 psychologists at the center, said that it would not only provide counseling for individual chengguan, but that it was conducting a survey of about 2,000 such officials to assess their needs. The center plans to issue a handbook of legal and safety guidelines for their work.
The chengguan system was established in 1997 as a supplement to the police, in part to cope with the millions of rural migrants who were streaming into the cities seeking work, sometimes in a legal gray zone. According to China National Radio, at the beginning of 2016 there were more than a million chengguan.
Still, it was not until late last year that the government released a document clarifying the chengguan’s work and responsibilities. This year, the government invited public comment on draft legislation that would further define, and possibly expand, their range of duties.
As of Thursday, the Nanjing center said that about 30 chengguan had visited or telephoned requesting assistance. In interviews, other chengguan talked about the difficulties they face and where they need help.
Mr. Yu, who became a chengguan when he left the army in 2005, said he had occasionally considered quitting but never followed through.
Fang Jun, 38, a chengguan in the Qinhuai district, also complained of a lack of guidance for their work, and for dealing with people’s hostility.
