SATURDAY PUZZLE — So does everyone agree that puzzles keep the mind young? Accepting that an “old” mind goes brittle and slow, develops holes in one’s memory, settles into its ruts of ruminative repetition... and so on. I ask this (rhetorically, I hope) because I fell off the game wagon this summer for various reasons and I’m finding it a challenge to get my focus back, like exercising out-of-shape muscles.
There’s a plyometric resistance to aging. People spend billions of dollars not to — even though it’s inevitable and, as they say, definitely beats the alternative. And the more years you’re on the Earth paying attention, the more information you accrue, but the more you’ve got, the deeper it gets squirreled away. I was fortunate that several of the trivia clues were right in my generational wheelhouse, and there were quite a few other references that had a few years on ‘em. Puzzles favor the wise, and power to them for that!
I had more than one moment of hopelessness while working this straightforward Saturday grid, cruised for a bit, then had to tough out the last few letters to complete the solve. But I got a little crossword CRED back — and now a heartfelt resolution to get back to puzzling. We’ll see how long it lasts.
15A: “When repeated, singer of the 1987 #1 hit “Head to Toe’”; as a child of the ’80s I knew this immediately. But I don’t think LISA LISA is in the current cultural zeitgeist, and for that I am sorry.
22A: The Wonderful World of Doritos! Or Mundo Maravilloso of Little Golden Things. Everything has a story — I did not know this one. Yet another delicious, crispy gift from our neighbors to the south.
37A: I did not know about this magical place, FARMERS ONLY, a “website for people interested in ‘cultivating’ a relationship”. I now live with someone who thinks potatoes ripen above ground, hanging from potato bushes. And claims to have seen this. Then again, an early frost means nothing to me, tucked in my climate-controlled cubicle. I needed several crosses to get this and some self-discipline to avoid signing up there, just to take a look.
50A: “McCarthy in Hollywood” once meant Andrew or blacklister Joe. MELISSA appears here for the first time, as far as I could tell from Jeff Chen’s records. Congratulations!
56A: “Some kitchen utensils” led me astray with no crosses and a predilection for wood(en) spoons. I thought ENAMELWARE was actually kind of a gratuitous misdirection until I looked up all the pretty things you can get.
8D: “One who works a lot?” Yeah, I fell for that. I didn’t get too stuck because by the time I got to the two long downs I had a fair amount of crosses, but I “didn’t get it” for a bit, and when I did there was something of an old chestnut feel to the joke (maybe because I always picture a USED CAR SALESMAN in a wide-lapelled polyester suit?). But this looks like a first, too, in the puzzles.
12D: “Cry before rage-quitting” seemed a bit oddly worded and I’M SO MAD seemed a bit forced but I’ll accept it. I can imagine it coming out of the mouth of certain tantrum-throwers, throwing in their towels.
25D: I imagined this as another tip to the 1980s — “Tickets, in slang” — since DUCATS are used so frequently in that old school music we liked back in the day, but the usage apparently goes back to the Middle Ages and there is even a Supreme Court case from the 1870s that stems from the use of the term by someone dealing with a man with the actual last name “Ducat”.
35D: Oh yes, people. Accept your EMO, it is in all of us. I just think that “Angst-ridden and moody” sounds so negative.