By upping its design but not its prices, the Swedish giant is making its ephemeral furnishings more pervasive than ever.
“To whom does design address itself: to the greatest number, to the specialists or the enlightened amateur, to a privileged social class?” an interviewer once asked Charles Eames, who answered, “Design addresses itself to the need.” The reason Ikea furniture is so popular, one could argue, is that, with its combination of astonishingly low prices and streamlined Scandinavian design, it addresses the needs of almost everyone. Ikea does an enormous amount of research into these needs, sending employees, and sometimes even anthropologists, to study how people exist and interact with the objects in their homes. For the past three years, the company has published a “Life at Home” report, wherein they survey up to 12,000 people in 12 cities. Of course, Ikea is also a corporate behemoth that aims to turn a profit, but its appealing, affordable, flat-packed furniture and accessories really do make it possible to create a home for yourself when you are young, impecunious or without the time to scour thrift stores for castoff gems.
Though there’s a tacit but widely held belief that one eventually graduates from Ikea to “real” furniture, just as one moves on from tossing back Jell-O shots or hanging posters as art, design aficionados have long known that this isn’t necessarily true. A few low notes are thought to anchor a space, keeping it warm and realistic. Peppered among antiques and custom-­made furniture, one routinely sees certain mass-market favorites. Restoration Hardware’s Chesterfield-­style sofa, or West Elm’s Parsons table, or a handful of usual suspects from Ikea: those pleasingly plain kitchen cabinets; those rattan chairs; that Malm bed, whose austere low-slung minimalism conjures the ghost of Donald Judd. (There’s a quiz: “Donald Judd, or cheap furniture?”) The majority of the pieces are so innocuous, so elemental, that they blend easily with everything else in a room. Only the design literate will notice the difference. And who cares if they do? Conspicuous consumption, like that dreadful word “luxury,” feels dated: as ’80s as Nan Kempner and leveraged buyouts, as ’90s as the Miller sisters and tiny Prada backpacks.
Ikea furnishings are part of our everyday lives, as ubiquitous as air, and just as invisible. But if the brand has been snagging your attention lately, popping up in high-end magazine spreads, on design websites (“4 Ikea Designers You Should be Following on Instagram”) and in Kanye West interviews, it’s thanks to one man, the company’s head of design, Marcus Engman. Hired in 2012, Engman is fulfilling an ambitious mandate, to elevate Ikea’s design without raising prices. Since 1995, the company has released a special “PS” collection every few years: These are the chicer-than-usual pieces that those with a great eye seem to have a knack for alighting on — the aesthetically original, higher-end things you can’t quite believe are Ikea, like David Wahl’s “exploding” pendant lamp, whose panels expand with the pull of a drawstring; or the plant tables unveiled at Milan’s Salone del Mobile in 2012, with holes for potted greenery. Each PS collection has been animated by an idea: updating designs from the Ikea archives to suit today’s smaller spaces, say, or creating mobile, multi­functional furniture for an urban, itinerant, apartment-­renting crowd.
Since late 2013, Engman has doubled down on this effort, quietly but steadily putting out a spate of limited-edition “Vitality” collections: “We’re raising the bar and the speed,” he says. There have been 17 of these collections available in the U.S. so far, with more to come this fall and next spring, and plans to produce at least 10 a year. Many involve partnerships with well-known designers and artists — Ilse Crawford, Katie Eary, Ingegerd Raman — but Engman is quick to emphasize that Ikea is not merely slapping an illustrious name on an inferior product, or making shoddy versions of a designer’s signature pieces. These collections are actual collaborations, intended to investigate a particular concept or technique.
The corporate literature accompanying the Vitality collections makes a point of noting that these are pieces that will “age well over time” or “stand the test of time” or be “pass[ed] ... onto the next generation.” If Ikea can somehow manage to offer inexpensive furniture we are also dying to keep, that would be truly novel. But part of the company’s appeal — and a driving factor in its popularity — is that its products feel to some degree disposable, or at least ephemeral, offering us all the freedom and mobility that goes with that. Even when Ikea furniture is beautifully designed, we are not tethered to it, as we are with family heirlooms or things so pricey we can’t bear to get rid of them. We don’t have to repair, insure or maintain it. Given all the stressors of modern life, it’s a relief to be able to take our Ikea stuff for granted.