When the Jones brothers, Joshua and John Q., built 93 Reade Street in 1857, it was one of the first cast-iron buildings in downtown New York. The brothers decided to show off a little — after all, they came from the very same family whose uptown house had inspired the phrase “keeping up with the Joneses.” The facade was a veritable wedding cake, incorporating just about every molding, capital and dentilled cornice they could get out of the D.D. Badger ironworks catalog, and when it was all bolted together, the brothers capped it off with a big arched pediment.
While its dark color, picked up a generation ago with a coat of charcoal-gray paint, makes Obsidian House, as it is called, an outlier on a block of cream-to-buff-to-red-brick buildings, it is thanks to a recent renovation that the building has one-upped the neighbors again. Its owners hired the small, design-forward firm WORKac, run by the married architects Dan Wood and Amale Andraos, to develop the former factory and warehouse into modern apartments, and to design a new penthouse on the roof. (Andraos is also the dean of Columbia University’s architecture school.) The 13-year-old firm has gained attention for innovative alternatives to complicated problems — if anything, the duo seems to thrive on constraints — and the proposed penthouse provided such an opportunity. Because much of TriBeCa is a landmark historic district, any addition has to be low enough to not be visible from the street.
The Jones brothers unintentionally helped matters with the maximalist pediment they had installed when the building was new, but even at four feet high it was not enough to hide a penthouse entirely. Andraos and Wood began playing with computer models, ending up with a sketch of a strange wedge shape, short at the front of the building, much taller toward the back of the roof. That solved one problem, but it left them with a low ceiling at the top of the duplex apartment, so they dropped the floor a couple of feet into the story below. As a literal crowning touch, they added an irregular saw-toothed roof line, jagged like a piece of obsidian, which created the apartment’s defining design feature, a sharply creased, origami-like ceiling.
