It begins with a body, a woman lying curled and motionless onstage, possibly asleep. There’s a suggestion of story in the sparkly dress she wears. When she stirs, she moves languorously, and when, still reclining, she strikes an over-the-shoulder pose, you think of the odalisques of art history.
The association is far from random. “Remains,” the latest work by the veteran choreographer John Jasperse, which had its debut at the Harvey Theater of the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Wednesday, is stocked with images from canonical paintings. The woman (the always excellent Maggie Cloud) is soon joined by two others, who draw her into human daisy chains that instantly recall Botticellian Graces. A turn of the head, and they’re having a quick lunch on the grass with Manet.
This rummaging through remains is a meditation on collective memory, a dryly sophisticated and cerebral work. The visual design, by Mr. Jasperse and Lenore Doxsee, is highly elegant, with asymmetrical framing lines and reflective flooring that can glow like gold leaf under Ms. Doxsee’s lights. The music, by John King and others, colors the choreography with suspenseful drama and does its own sampling of the past, crossfading into more up-to-date beats.
Mr. Jasperse’s collaging of past masters is itself masterly, alive with piquant detail (pointing fingers, thudding feet). Never less than intelligent, the work is, however, more intriguing than engrossing. Its devices and developments — the guys returning as Graces, a periodic freezing under a work light to rearrange bodies like museum pieces — are static or recursive, perhaps intentionally frustrating. The images — the enduring, recognizable ones and the new and fragile ones alike — are fleeting.
It’s Baille Younkman’s costumes that leap for transcendence. Everybody sparkles at the end. And it’s in the final moments that Mr. Jasperse reveals his most potent metaphor. As a voice on the soundtrack gives instructions (“forward,” “back”), the dancers follow them, moving forward and back or rotating in slow motion. It looks as if someone were watching a video of the dance, rewinding over and over, trying to transfer it to memory. It looks, a little poignantly, like what “Remains” has been doing all along.