Donald J. Trump. the Republican presidential nominee, said he would improve the nation’s military capabilities and approach overseas, with greater support from allies.
PHILADELPHIA — Donald J. Trump on Wednesday called for a vast expansion of the military, including 90,000 new soldiers for the Army and nearly 75 new ships for the Navy, requiring up to $90 billion a year in additional spending.
But Mr. Trump did not match those numbers with details about how the country would raise the money, other than a promise to take steps like reducing wasteful spending, which military budget analysts said would be insufficient.
Mr. Trump, in a speech at the Union League of Philadelphia, also vowed to order the military to devise a new plan to defeat the Islamic State “immediately upon taking office.” The plan would come within 30 days from “my generals,” he added, without mentioning that those generals are the same ones who came up with the current strategy, which they believe is working.
The speech was the latest effort by Mr. Trump’s campaign to demonstrate to voters that he can lay out detailed policy prescriptions to problems confronting the nation. It also seemed to be directed at the conservative foreign policy establishment, coming a day after Mr. Trump released a letter from about 90 retired military officials endorsing his campaign.
With the speech, Mr. Trump also moved to refocus his campaign on critiques of Hillary Clinton, his Democratic rival. Espousing a foreign policy “tempered by realism,” Mr. Trump portrayed Mrs. Clinton, the former secretary of state, as unsuited to lead the nation’s armed forces.
It wasn’t the first debate, but at least Ms. Clinton and Mr. Trump were on the same stage on Wednesday, though not at the same time. Here’s how we analyzed tonight’s forum live.
But it was the size of the military, and the amount that the United States spends on its defense, that lay at the heart of Mr. Trump’s speech. In addition to increasing the Army to 540,000 soldiers and adding the Navy ships, Mr. Trump proposed buying dozens of new fighter aircraft for the Air Force.
To pay for the expansion, Mr. Trump said he would call on Congress to reverse the cuts to military spending made as part of the budget sequester in 2013, which was the result of a compromise reached between Democrats and Republicans.
The new spending, Mr. Trump said, would not cost taxpayers an additional penny. He said he would eliminate wasteful government spending, increase energy production and trim the federal work force, including the military bureaucracy. He also suggested that he would collect unpaid taxes, which he said amounted to $385 billion.
Although Mr. Trump said little about how much his plan would cost, the new military spending would probably amount to $80 billion to $90 billion a year, experts said. The additional soldiers alone would cost around $9 billion.
Have You Done Something to Support or Oppose Trump’s Brands?
Have you registered your disapproval or approval for Donald J. Trump’s candidacy by, say, discarding or returning Trump-brand clothes — or by booking a night at a Trump hotel? We want to hear your stories.
Mr. Trump’s call for ending the sequester on military spending is unlikely to gain traction in Washington. Republicans have long pushed for lifting these limits — a proposal Democrats will consider only with comparable relief on domestic spending.
And on Tuesday night, in a sign of the likely stalemate, Senate Democrats filibustered a military appropriations bill because it would have allowed for bursting through the caps on military spending without also doing the same for domestic spending.
Mr. Trump’s remarks came before he was to appear Wednesday night at a Commander in Chief Forum televised from the Intrepid Sea, Air and Space Museum in New York and focused on security and veterans issues. Mr. Trump was questioned after Mrs. Clinton.
Mr. Trump was turning the tables on a frequent line of attack from Mrs. Clinton and trying to lay the blame for the bloodshed in the Middle East at her feet, a critique that most experts have said is grossly oversimplified and misleading.
In a foreign policy speech in April, Mr. Trump offered much the same thrust as in Wednesday’s address — presenting an at times paradoxical approach of using fiery oratory to promise a military buildup and the immediate destruction of the Islamic State, while also rejecting the nation-building and interventionist instincts of George W. Bush’s administration.
Mr. Trump also echoed other themes that he has used during his campaign, calling on allies to pay more for American military protection.
He also accused the Obama administration of agreeing to bad deals with Iran.
But Mr. Trump’s fiercest criticism was saved for Mrs. Clinton. He accused her of being complicit in an array of foreign policy stumbles, and of deleting her emails as secretary of state to hide her participation in a “pay for play” scandal in which Clinton Foundation donors were granted special access.
Damning his rival with false praise, Mr. Trump — in one of his speech’s biggest applause lines — also said that maybe Mrs. Clinton did have some wisdom to impart.
