185 pp. Little, Brown & Company. $26.
BANG!!!!! CRACKKKKKKKK!!!!!! It’s . . . Charles Darwin smarting over an unsigned review in The Athenaeum? What are we doing here, and why is Tom Wolfe in here with us? The Pop Art cover of his new, book-length essay screams its promising title in electric Kool-Aid blue and lysergic yellow: “The Kingdom of Speech.” The reader can be forgiven for hoping that the master has called on a muse of fire and dashed off several thousand scorching words about the tenured radicals, moral entrepreneurs and political opportunists who patrol even the private utterances of the nonfamous for instances of impolitic speech. In fact, however, what we have is the inspiration of a lower-watt muse, a muse of prickly heat, a muse of stuffy classrooms and busted thermostats. The book does not concern the culture wars, but rather the essential nature of language itself and its origins as — ZZZZZZZZZZZZ!!!!!!!!! — an academic field of study.
We are dealing with a short book by a big writer on a dull topic, further complicated — as it turns out — by an old man’s willingness to digress (surely the Spanish Civil War could have been left out of all this?), and the result is a qualified success. The scope is far too vast for such brief treatment, and the author’s lifelong commitment to carbonating even the most esoteric subjects leads him to get caught up in so many gossipy side notes — the scientist whose wife and daughter were stricken with volcanic diarrhea during his fieldwork in the Amazon; the class anxiety of a 19th-century visitor to the ­Lin­nean Society — that the reader is left to wonder what, exactly, is Wolfe’s point.
His point, as it turns out, is twofold: to report on the findings of the Great Men of Science who have studied language through the ages, and to shank Noam Chomsky. Regarding the former, the story is slight. Regarding the second, he’s hardly the first person to rise to the challenge, but he does so with characteristic wit and savage precision. Anyway, here goes.
Evolution doesn’t account for the development of speech, and the best that Darwin and his followers could offer was a guess: Perhaps humans developed language by imitating the sounds of animals? Scholars embedded themselves among various “tribes” and “ethnic enclaves,” studying their languages, but learning little about the origin of speech itself. And then . . . Chomsky. He is exactly the kind of New Left figure whom Wolfe is uniquely poised to fillet, but given the ostensible scope of this project his politics might seem at most a footnote. Hardly.
Much that is distasteful — and, at worst, fraudulent — about the American university system can be traced, ultimately, to “The Responsibility of Intellectuals.” It allowed every plodding English department adjunct and uninspired life sciences prof to imagine themselves not as instructors but as “intellectuals,” people whose opinions on American foreign policy were inherently more valuable than those of the common men and women whom, ironically, they claimed to champion. Merely by avowing — loudly — ­every doctrinaire opinion of the left, such a person could transform him- or herself into a modern-day Zola, vitally needed as the conscience of the nation. Set aside the onerous task of grading 55 lackluster essays on “Huck Finn.” Grinding out a ­virtue-signaling HuffPo piece is much more important — to your career, ­Amerika and (oh yeah, them) your ­students.
Wolfe’s attack on Chomsky — whom he calls “Noam Charisma” — is precise, scathing and not undeserved. But what, Lord, does this have to do with the topic of language? Precious little. Thank God. But soon enough we’re back on the long march, learning about a Chomskyan principle called — ZZZZZZZZZZZ!!!!!!!! — “recursion” and how the language of a Brazilian tribe called the Pirahã presents a significant challenge to that principle. This section is heavily dependent on a wonderful New Yorker profile of the linguist Daniel Everett by John Colapinto that, quite frankly, sums up the relevant Chomsky theories more clearly than anything in “The Kingdom of Speech,” but no matter, because consistent reading of this bewildering little book is rewarded by the fact that it does eventually end.
Wolfe has much in common with “Noam Charisma.” Both men so deeply reshaped their fields that no one entering either profession can do so without being aware of the long shadow. One senses that Wolfe is as irritated by his omission from the roster of immortals as by Chomsky’s inclusion in it. But one also knows that a hundred years from now, the one whose work will still be read — whose work will remain imperishable in the face of any new discoveries — is Wolfe. In the long game, the kingdom belongs to him.