CLEVELAND — Continuing his efforts to attract minority voters, Donald J. Trump visited an inner-city charter school on Thursday, where he promised to direct $20 billion in federal grants for poor children to attend a school of their family’s choice.
Mr. Trump offered his most detailed education proposal to date, embracing principles that appeal to school reformers on the right as well as to many poor African-American and Hispanic parents, who have helped drive the charter school movement.
Mr. Trump’s release of his education plan marked the second consecutive day that he laid out concrete policies along traditional conservative lines, after calling for expanded military spending on Wednesday.
It also reflected a new push by Mr. Trump, the Republican nominee, to broaden his appeal outside his traditional base of support. On Saturday, he visited a black church in Detroit. Critics say his outreach is aimed less at black voters than at attracting whites who may have been turned off to his candidacy by the racially tinged remarks he has made in the past.
“You’re going to like the job I do, folks, I’m going to do such a great job,” Mr. Trump told a largely black audience at the Cleveland Arts and Social Sciences Academy, a charter school with about 350 students in kindergarten through the eighth grade.
Speaking in a subdued, almost hushed tone, Mr. Trump also devoted some time to attacking Mrs. Clinton’s vote as a senator to support the invasion of Iraq, and to defending his own frequent assertions that he had always opposed the Iraq War, despite comments he made in 2002 to Howard Stern in support of the invasion.
Returning to education, Mr. Trump echoed a common Republican refrain about the importance of school choice, saying students should be able to attend a magnet school, a charter school, or a public or a private school.
On Thursday, adding a bit of policy meat to this rhetorical skeleton, Mr. Trump said the $20 billion in grants for poor students would come from existing federal spending.
Rather than sending federal education dollars to schools, as the existing system does, Mr. Trump proposed giving block grants to states, which would have the option of letting the dollars follow students to whichever school they choose, including a charter, private or online school.
Funding schools this way, known in education circles as portability, is popular with Republicans as a way to broaden school choice. More choice, reformers believe, introduces competition to the marketplace of schools and raises student learning.
Critics fear that portability, which Congress rejected in its latest overhaul of the nation’s chief education law last year, will bleed dollars from traditional public schools. Critics also oppose channeling taxpayer money to private religious schools and schools run for profit — like the charter Mr. Trump visited.
Mr. Trump did not explain where in the federal budget he would find the $20 billion. In the past, he has threatened to eliminate or drastically cut the Education Department. He has also criticized the Obama administration for using federal education spending to force states to adopt its policies. But Mr. Trump proposed something similar. “Distribution of this grant will favor states that have private school choice and charter laws,” he said.
His campaign reportedly drafted his proposal with the advice of an aide to Representative Luke Messer of Indiana, a Republican member of the House Education Committee.
Enacting full portability would be a heavy lift if Mr. Trump wins the presidency. A years-in-the-making overhaul of the 2001 No Child Left Behind Act that passed last year rejected portability.
Not everyone was persuaded by Mr. Trump’s visit here. In an email blast before he spoke, Melissa Cropper, the president of the Ohio Federation of Teachers, criticized his decision to visit a for-profit charter school.
Emmalena Alexander, 38, whose son is a fifth grader at the school, was also skeptical. She said she liked Mr. Trump’s message about school choice, but left still unwilling to support him for president.

