I live in a condominium with beautiful landscaping, trees — and lots of birds. The air-conditioning and heating units in the apartments are vented outdoors through louvers built into the building’s brick facade. Birds nest in the spaces between the louvers and the cooling-and-heating units, leaving behind droppings and nesting material. It is messy and a health hazard, but does not damage the appliances. The board says condo owners are responsible for cleaning and removing the nests. But shouldn’t this be the board’s responsibility, since the nests are in the facade and not in the appliances?
In “The Best Nest,” a children’s book by P. D. Eastman, Mr. and Mrs. Bird explore all sorts of terrible ideas for places to build a nest — in a shoe, a mailbox, a church bell — only to be promptly evicted each time. The birds that have settled in your building have found an equally logical place to call home, albeit one that is inconvenient for you.
A bird’s nest is dirty, attracts bugs and could pose a health hazard if spores from the droppings get sucked into the ventilation system, Mr. Brady said. He suggested using bird netting or mesh cloth to keep the birds out of the louvers. A handyman could reach the louvers from inside your apartment to install the netting.
As for who should foot the bill, check your governing documents. In most cases, unless a building has central air, HVAC equipment is considered part of the individual apartments rather than the building. So repairs and maintenance would be the unit owners’ responsibility, said Lisa A. Smith, a partner at the law firm Smith, Gambrell & Russell who is based in New York.
“Although in this case the louver is separate and apart from the cooling-heating unit, it will most likely be considered part of the assembly as it is necessary in order to operate the equipment,” Ms. Smith said.
If the problem affects multiple apartments, the board could hire someone to address the issue for the entire building. Individual owners would still be billed for the work, but the cost might be lower if the building can negotiate a bulk rate for everyone.
I know that buildings of more than six stories are required by law to have their facades inspected every five years. But what about buildings that are less than six stories high? If there isn’t a legal requirement regarding inspection, what would be best practice? I live in a five-story building that is more than 100 years old, and wonder how frequently — and by whom — we should have the exterior inspected.
The city requires tall buildings to have their facades inspected every five years to protect the public from falling debris that could harm or even kill pedestrians.
While the risk to public safety might be lessened should a piece of concrete or brick tumble to the sidewalk from a lesser height, it still poses a potentially grave threat. Property owners are responsible for maintaining their buildings regardless of the height.
All building owners, including co-op and condo boards, should regularly inspect and maintain their facades to make sure they are in safe working order. An architect or engineer who specializes in facade inspections and repairs could examine the property and provide the building with an assessment of its condition, and also suggest how often it should be inspected.
“While it is not required by code, maintaining facade safety should still be part of a building’s maintenance protocol,” said Leni Morrison Cummins, a real estate lawyer in the New York office of Cozen O’Connor.
My father-in-law needs to use a cane to steady himself when he walks. He has fallen several times on a two-step staircase in a common area of his condo, essentially his only path out of his apartment. I’ve written to the condo board advising them of this and asking them to install some sort of railing. The board has neither approved nor declined the request, and I fear it may be stalling. Do we have any rights here? What’s the best way to proceed?
Your father-in-law’s condo association cannot simply ignore this problem until it goes away. By giving him the silent treatment, the condo board may be failing to make what is known as a reasonable accommodation for his disability, a potential violation of the Westchester County Human Rights Law and federal statutes, said Antony Gemmell, a staff lawyer in the disability justice program at New York Lawyers for the Public Interest.
But while your father may have a right to a handrail, if it is installed, the condo association could send him the bill for it. If he lived in New York City, which has stronger protection for people with disabilities, the condo association would be responsible for the cost.
Write another letter to the condo association, explaining that in light of your father-in-law’s condition, the building is inaccessible to him, and that a railing would alleviate this problem, Mr. Gemmell said. Bruce A. Cholst, a real estate lawyer in the New York office of Anderson Kill, suggested that your father-in-law sign the letter himself, if possible. It would also bolster his claim to include a letter from his physician, Mr. Cholst said.
Include a deadline for a written response. If the board does not meet the deadline, file a complaint with the Westchester County Human Rights Commission, which could advocate for the railing on your father-in-law’s behalf.