Why are many financial news releases and publicly filed documents written so poorly?
How many times in reading a deal, initial public offering or financial news release have you seen phrases like “pursuant to which,” “whereby” or a document that starts out with a disclaimer in BOLDFACED ALL CAPS that often seems as if it requires a Ph.D. to comprehend?
We — one of us is a communications adviser (and former Wall Street Journal reporter) and the other is a general counsel — have come together to raise the torch for good writing. The investing public deserves better.
As insiders, we need to stop writing solely for lawyers and professional investors (many of whom do not understand this stuff, either) and start writing so that anyone with an interest in the topic will understand the news or information.
The S.E.C. is often blamed for all the legalese that gums up these documents, but it shouldn’t be. The S.E.C. (note, we did not write “hereinafter the ‘S.E.C.’ or ‘the Commission’) has actually tried hard to improve the clarity of writing. In 1998, it issued its white paper on plain English writing under the leadership of Arthur Levitt Jr., then the S.E.C.’s chairman. This document has stood well the test of time and would make Strunk and White proud.
Congress got into the act and passed the Plain Writing Act of 2010 to make it easier for the general public to understand government documents. Of course, read an actual piece of legislation and you realize Congress may be violating its own laws.
So how can we start writing better?
1) Start by deleting the hereins, heretos, hereunders and herebys, as well as the occasional aforementioned or witnesseth. Another gem: “Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein.” Huh?
3) Avoid long, confusing parenthetical phrases. Lawyers love to be specific, but it gets in the way of clean writing and reading. Break your sentences in two. And no footnotes.
5) Remember Mr. Buffett’s sisters. We know the legal disclaimers may be required and some of the issues are highly technical. But if the writing is straightforward and to the point, it enhances a company’s credibility and will not require doubling back with definitions and footnotes.
Whether Shakespeare would ever consider a news release good writing is an open question, but we can all at least try to do better.