Set in a Bedouin village in southern Israel, “Sand Storm” is framed by two weddings, events that don’t as much bookend this movie as seal it closed. That’s because despite the raucous celebrations, the clapping and trilling cries, neither marriage is especially joyous, at least for the brides. Here, in this rundown desert hamlet, tradition is passed from generation to generation, from mother to daughter. Daughters, in turn, are passed from family to family.
There are complications and contradictions, though, as well as unruly girls and women. Written and directed by Elite Zexer, an Israeli making a solid, sensitive feature debut, “Sand Storm” is a story about the perils of unruliness set against a family of women. When the movie opens, the forces of modernity — signaled by the images of young and older girls running free and sometimes boldly straying — have already begun scratching at the stronghold of tradition, producing cracks that (scratch, scratch) threaten to become gateways.
It opens on the 18-year-old Layla (Lamis Ammar), who — far from their remote village — is driving the family’s truck under the eagle-eyed supervision of her father, Suliman (Haitham Omari). She’s a daddy’s girl, at least outwardly, a favoritism that she uses to her advantage and against her mother, Jalila (Ruba Blal-Asfour). A frowner who moves with the sharply impatient, no-nonsense gestures and stride of the permanently exasperated (get out of my way, her elbows suggest), Jalila may be the dutiful wife but she’s also in obvious, unmistakable revolt.
The reasons for her rebellion emerge piecemeal, starting with the first wedding, and imply a greater, more destabilizing insurrection is in process. Suliman has taken a second, much younger wife and all the daughters that he’s had with Jalila intimate the reason for his new bride. The ceremony itself is nicely handled, with a throng of women celebrating separately from the men (some of the women wear fake mustaches), and it’s only a little later that it becomes clear that the wedding is entirely sex-segregated. Yet it’s also not altogether evident if Suliman has wed again because convention demands that he start producing sons or if the pressure for progeny is wholly self-generated.
As a director, Ms. Zexer has a fine eye for the texture of daily life, which she fills in with resonant physical details and sweeping, scene-setting views. The peeling walls of Jalila and her daughters’ austere, underloved house convey volumes about their struggles, as do the jerry-built fences — barriers made of wooden pallets and corrugated metal — that seem to almost reluctantly meander through this village of Bedouins. If anything, Ms. Zexer is at her best when she daubs in color and minutiae, as in an almost interstitial scene in which Jalila bakes bread on top of an oven, an action that says something about both this specific woman and the world she inhabits.
Much of “Sand Storm” hangs on Layla, who’s carefully, at times recklessly, navigating between radically different worlds. Some of this negotiation involves a romance with a student from her university, a forbidden, not especially engaging, liaison that generates friction and melodrama. Ms. Ammar’s performance relies too heavily on her doe eyes and pout, so it’s a good thing when the narrative center of gravity shifts to Ms. Blal-Asfour. A smoldering force, this is an actress who can express the entire history (and mystery) of a marriage and the complexities of people with a drag on a cigarette and a dark, unbearable look at the man who’s at once her lover and her betrayer.
“Sand Storm” is unrated. Running time: 1 hour 27 minutes.