Don’t be confused by the days of mixed messaging from Donald Trump’s campaign, or the head-feint trip to Mexico, where he was polite to the president. Speaking on Wednesday in Phoenix, Mr. Trump did not retreat from, or in any way soften, his promise to make 11 million unauthorized immigrants targets for deportation. His speech — in 10 points, embellished with statistics, ad-libbed asides and audience hollering and chanting — was as clear a statement of hard-core restrictionism as any he has given.
This isn’t the full list, but it’s enough to show how drastically Mr. Trump wants to remake the country.
Nos. 1 and 2 are a plan to add many tens of thousands, or hundreds of thousands, of new prison beds, while also filling local jails to bursting. They’re a gift to the private, for-profit prison industry and will ensure that any arrests, even false ones, can be springboards to deportation.
No. 3 is a discarded page from President Obama’s playbook. Mr. Obama vastly expanded Secure Communities, a national dragnet that enlisted state and local law-enforcement officials to check the immigration status of everyone arrested. Many communities resisted it, calling it a tool for racial profiling that wasted resources, traumatized innocent people and got in the way of deterring crime before Mr. Obama abandoned it. Under the similarly toxic 287(g) program, local departments — like that of the infamous Sheriff Joe Arpaio of Arizona — became partners of ICE on street patrols and in jails.
No. 4 is a gift to an ICE union that endorsed Mr. Trump, and a plan to make the most bloated federal law-enforcement bureaucracy, Homeland Security, even bigger.
And No. 5 tells millions of immigrants — who were brought here as children, or have citizen children, and pose no threat — to be very afraid, because we will hunt you down and expel you, and we already know where you live.
The entire speech, in fact, imagines that government at all levels will be used to hunt down and remove immigrants from their homes, families and jobs. Mr. Trump was describing a world of lockups and surveillance and fugitive-hunting squads, a vast system of indiscriminate catch-and-punish that works as hard to catch hotel maids and landscapers as it does gang members and terrorists.
