Public art is a difficult genre because you’re exhibiting work to a public in which everyone’s a critic. Harlem — and particularly Marcus Garvey Park — has been achieving the delicate balance of exhibiting challenging, innovative art and serving a neighborhood in transition.
Spread across four Harlem parks, the “inHarlem” outdoor installation was organized by Amanda Hunt of the Studio Museum in Harlem, along with the New York City Department of Parks & Recreation and the Marcus Garvey Park Alliance. It includes Simone Leigh’s beautiful re-creations of rotunda kitchen houses from rural Zimbabwe — except, Ms. Leigh recasts them as closed-up structures, painted black and left vacant by Africans who’ve migrated elsewhere.
Kevin Beasley’s round, concave “acoustic mirrors” in Morningside Park, made with T-shirts cast in resin, borrow a form used by governments during wars to capture sound. Titled “Who’s Afraid to Listen to Red, Black and Green?” (2016), they pay homage both to Barnett Newman’s series of monochrome paintings, “Who’s Afraid of Red, Yellow and Blue” (1966-70), and the voices and music of the African diaspora.
Kori Newkirk’s reflective curtains, hung over the steps in St. Nicholas Park, resemble Christo and Jeanne-Claude’s “The Gates” (2005) in Central Park. Meanwhile, in Jackie Robinson Park, Rudy Shepherd has created a giant “Black Rock Negative Energy Absorber” (2016) out of wood, metal and concrete — a quasi-abstract sculpture designed to exude positive energy and cast out bad mojo in a society in which black bodies are still under siege, and in a rapidly gentrifying Harlem.
Tragedy has always inspired art and literature, and the continuing saga of racism and violence against African-Americans provides another depressingly fertile chapter. “Off White” at the Museum of Contemporary African Diasporan Arts, organized by Akintola Hanif, offers what an introductory wall text calls a “counternarrative”: Black artists depicting racial bias and challenging viewers to think about their own responsibilities within the system.
Jamel Shabazz, a prison corrections officer who sees his job as a calling to help incarcerated African-Americans, offers a black-and-white photograph taken in 1995 that shows a handcuffed prisoner holding Bruce Wright’s 1987 book, “Black Robes, White Justice,” which details prejudice within the justice system. Color photographs by Khalik Allah and Nema Etebar depict individuals cast off by society, while Shawn Theodore’s and Mr. Allah’s videos focus on neighborhoods affected by racial bias. Mr. Hanif’s color photograph “Taxi” (2009) looks like a traditional female-nude image, but the morose expressions on the young women’s faces imply the sexual exploitation of African-American women.
Adrian A. Franks’s “10 Shots for Help” is a deadpan target-image of an unarmed man shot by police officers while begging for help after a car crash. Next to it is Asif Farooq’s paper sculpture of a machine gun and Fletcher Williams III’s miniature house facades that recall the American South and the legacy of slavery.
Some of the work here is overly literal, but that points to the difficulties of creating nuanced art in the middle of a calamity. It’s a reminder that violence against African-Americans is continuing and not a historical episode whose dates can be neatly bracketed, like a war that has ended.
Since the 1990s, Andrea Zittel has been creating inventive and subtly satirical art about modern design and lifestyle in the form of objects that resemble high-end designer ware. A piquant example was her line of “Escape Vehicles,” one-person pods styled like miniature mobile homes, within which the occupant may escape public reality into private, mental worlds.
Not explained in the exhibition is that the cabins were built under the Small Tract Act of 1938, by which the federal government granted five acres to homesteaders who agreed to build houses with a footprint of at least 12 feet by 16 feet. Many have been abandoned or razed, but recently a thriving business has had entrepreneurs buying, fixing up and renting the remaining cabins. Piggybacking on this, Ms. Zittel frames her project as a kind of participatory, social practice art. But how her cottages differ substantively from those offered simply as desert getaways is hard to say. Testimony from people who have experienced “experimental living,” whatever that may be, could be clarifying.
With their runelike markings and their strange lumps and bumps, Yevgeniya Baras’s paintings claim a right to privacy. Naturally, this cloistered quality — echoed in the title of her latest solo — makes them deeply intriguing.
Ms. Baras, who is also a founder of the Lower East Side gallery Regina Rex, seems to align herself with early-20th-century American visionaries — in particular, Forrest Bess, with whom she shares an interest in small-scale canvases and intensely personal symbolism, and Arthur Dove, whose mystical landscapes and deep, jewel-toned palette come to mind. Some of the works in this show (her first at this gallery) experiment with a slightly bigger scale but continue to use a Bess-like vocabulary of amoebic splotches and short parallel marks, given added interest by Ms. Baras’s stuffed, dented and punctured surfaces and by the little talismanic objects glued to them (slivers of wood, scatterings of pebbles).
In one work (untitled, like the rest), a deep-blue double spiral on the lower right portion of a celery-hued canvas balances out a large spherical hole on the upper left. The exposed section of stretcher bar, painted viridian, becomes part of the composition. On the bottom left are neat columns of tiny, stabbing brush strokes, which make up one of many evocations of ancient writing systems.
Enhancing the work’s hermetic, coded sensibility is its resistance to the camera, which may pick up the strong colors and graphic lines but passes over the subtle topographical shifts and embedded treasures (which include human hair and family bedsheets, according to a news release). Ms. Baras reveals a lot about her inspirations and her process while still holding something back.