She insists that the Trump plan will cause a bigger deficit and a recession, but she is basing that on her party’s view that tax rates don’t matter much to growth and investment; Mr. Trump knows they do. The Moody’s study Mrs. Clinton cites so often says Mr. Trump’s plan would cause higher fiscal deficits but would also create faster growth and a surge in new jobs. It assumes that the Fed would raise interest rates to over 6 percent, causing a recession it attributes to Mr. Trump. A much more likely outcome is faster growth without the spike in interest rates or a recession.
Mr. Trump agrees with those who are concerned about the national debt. He wants to help the private sector to grow faster and to create a debt limit that would rein in our debt-to-G.D.P. ratio, which has skyrocketed under President Obama.
Mr. Trump would immediately halt the crush of new federal regulations on business. In 2015 alone, the Obama administration unilaterally issued more than 2,000 new regulations — hidden taxes that add a lead weight on our businesses. To grow faster, the economy has to have relief from this central planning and regulatory overreach. And Mr. Trump would seek consumer choice in education and health care and a repeal of Obamacare.
Mr. Trump is proposing to overturn that stagnant, corrupt system. An important part of his transformation is a new trade policy that encourages American jobs rather than undercuts them. His position has been demonized by the press as protectionism, but the reality is that our trade system is broken. Bad deals harmed American workers and gave access to United States markets without achieving vital conditions like intellectual property protection in China.
The North American Free Trade Agreement, for example, grew to 1,700 pages, yet still allowed Mexico to enforce its value-added tax on American products while exporting goods to the United States duty-free. The even more complicated Trans-Pacific Partnership would allow foreign companies to challenge United States laws in an international court, but it would do nothing to guarantee that countries couldn’t use currency manipulation to benefit their exporters over ours.
