Franco Zeffirelli’s production of Puccini’s “La Bohème” at the Metropolitan Opera undoubtedly had years added to its life in 2012, when Peter Gelb, the Met’s general manager, scrapped the widely beloved Zeffirelli “Tosca” in favor of a new staging by Luc Bondy. Public and critical uproar was immediate and lasting.
The Zeffirelli “Bohème” has been a favorite with audiences, if not necessarily critics, from the day it was born in 1981, despite — or because of — its excesses, which include, literally, a horse-and-pony show amid the population explosion in the brief second act. It returned to the Met on Wednesday evening and once again showed that, momentary bloat notwithstanding, it can work well enough with a talented and energetic cast.
The Ukrainian tenor Dmytro Popov, in his Met debut, was especially impressive as the young poet Rodolfo, bluff in horseplay with his bohemian fellows; tender in his unsettling, bumbling encounter with the seamstress Mimi; powerful in his impassioned outbursts of love and despair, showing real metal in the voice.
Ailyn Pérez, an American soprano who previously sang the flighty Musetta in this production, proved a worthy foil as the ailing Mimi, effectively veering between vulnerability and surging strength. The Musetta here was another American, Susanna Phillips, beautiful of voice and mien if not yet a seasoned coquette.
The company of bohemians — the Serbian David Bizic as Marcello, a painter; the American Ryan Speedo Green as Colline, a philosopher; and the Russian Rodion Pogossov as Schaunard, a musician — were particularly satisfying in the individuality of their characterizations as well as in their work as an ensemble. Mr. Bizic had excellent moments trying to stem Rodolfo’s despondency over Mimi, whether because of her supposed flirtatiousness or her illness, while coping with his own frustrations at the hands of the genuinely flirtatious Musetta.
But the real showstopper was Mr. Green, immensely touching in his aria lamenting the loss of his overcoat, which he is about to sell for the communal good. He also showed athleticism in a mock swordfight with Mr. Pogossov on the set’s angular Parisian rooftops.
The rest of the musical elements were mostly fine, including the choruses (adult and children’s) and the onstage band in the mob scene. And of course, the wonderful Met orchestra: It must be a temptation for any conductor to give this ensemble free rein, perhaps without at times due consideration for the voices. Carlo Rizzi here, though an experienced hand, succumbed.
Puccini’s orchestration is skilled, suited to supporting the voices, but “La Bohème” is no orchestral showpiece, as Mr. Rizzi seemed determined to make it. Subsidiary tunes seldom heard, and not meant to be heard prominently, were everywhere.
The singers, meanwhile, seemed even less present than the distant placement of their garret already makes them seem. You have to hope that Mr. Rizzi and his troops settle back a bit as the run progresses.