On a clear February morning, executives from Union Square Hospitality Group and several architects sipped hot coffee and milled around a table in the partly demolished remains of a shuttered restaurant, waiting for Danny Meyer.
Winter light through immense, half-papered-over windows cast a pall on the stained, brown-and-yellow-tiled walls. A sculpture of a red crab dangled above the front door. Architectural drawings were spread across the table. Mr. Meyer arrived and everybody turned toward them like physicians attending to a critical patient.
When Union Square Cafe reboots next month in its new location at 19th Street and Park Avenue South — the bygone home of City Crab & Seafood Company — Mr. Meyer’s first, signature restaurant will be engaged in a quasiscientific enterprise. Take one of the most cherished high-end establishments in the city, a longtime regular atop the Zagat most-popular list. Keep the chef, the staff, even the old favorites from the menu, but (isolating the variable) move three blocks.
Then determine: Precisely how much, in a business built on food and service, does “place” (more specifically, architecture) matter? And is it possible to uproot a classic without destroying its essence?
It’s hard to think of many attempts that have worked. The man in charge of this experiment is the architect and restaurant whisperer David Rockwell, whose design credits include a Tony for the musical “She Loves Me,” hotels from the W in Paris to the Cosmopolitan in Las Vegas, and restaurants like Nobu Fifty Seven in Midtown Manhattan and Gato downtown.
For the last year or so, Mr. Rockwell and his colleagues at Rockwell Group have been laboring to extract the ambient DNA of the old Union Square Cafe and implant it into a new, very different body.
A look at the new restaurants, bars and markets opening in New York this season.
Part of the experiment has involved mixing two detail-crazy, yet dissimilar auteurs.
“David is allergic to the status quo, while Danny arrives at a project with about 15 design elements he already wants, which come from places he’s been, things he’s found,” said Richard Coraine, Union Square’s chief development officer, who has worked with both of them for years.
That exchange produced the wine room at Maialino, Mr. Meyer’s Italian restaurant on Gramercy Park.
For Union Square Cafe, Mr. Meyer didn’t want “another Rockwell,” as he put it to me last fall, when I started dropping in from time to time on planning sessions, where the two men sometimes approximated an old married couple.
Mr. Rockwell would propose some floor tile or light fixture. Then he would nod and purse his lips without actually agreeing while Mr. Meyer would make a countersuggestion, claiming to defer to Mr. Rockwell’s expertise but expecting to get what he wanted.
What he wanted was Union Square Cafe, only different.
So did meetings, where Mr. Meyer’s team, including Sam Lipp, Union Square Cafe’s director of operations, and Carmen Quagliata, the restaurant’s executive chef, would suddenly deliver a dissertation on the turning radius a barista needs behind the coffee station, or the effects of citrus on different types of wood.
Mr. Rockwell elaborated: “The best restaurant designs are made up of large decisions and lots of tiny details. But ultimately, what comes from long experience, Danny’s and mine, involves what I’d call ‘in between’ things: Designing for when a restaurant isn’t full. Ensuring there’s easy eye contact from every table with the waiters’ stations, so diners feel they’re always in control, never swallowed up in a big space. Designing spaces so people want to explore the room, because a restaurant shouldn’t be a one-liner.
The original occupied a side street that dead-ends into Union Square Park. It was what Mr. Rockwell calls a “slow” locale. The new address, Park Avenue South, is almost the reverse, choked with traffic and lined with singles bars. Mr. Meyer and Mr. Rockwell agreed from the start that the new entrance should be on 19th Street, not Park.
That was the easy move. At 10,000 square feet, the new place is as cavernous as the original, 6,300-square-foot Union Square Cafe was a deteriorating rabbit warren. Faucets leaked, the wiring dated back to the Truman administration. Repairs would cost a fortune.
His team started scouring for a new home not more than a six-minute hand-truck ride (not seven or eight minutes — six) from the Union Square Greenmarket, whose fresh food provided the restaurant’s lifeblood from Day 1.
Three decades ago, Union Square was a derelict magnet for drug dealers and crime, and the newly opened cafe was a pioneer. It became a victim of the very prosperity it helped bring to the neighborhood — and today it is following the northward creep of restaurants from the square that it also set off.
Usefully, Mr. Rockwell, 60, had been a regular at the original. He knew its pluses and minuses, including the narrow corridors and terrible circulation, the back room that was Siberia, the kitchen that was a dungeon.
And yet almost despite itself, the restaurant achieved what Mr. Meyer, now 58 and then a 27-year-old novice, and Larry Bogdanow, the original architect, set out to accomplish in 1985: to blur the line between going out and coming home. The architecture, or really the apparent lack of any, reinforced the cafe’s laid-back, service-first, vaguely Midwestern mood. The fuzzy aesthetic blending Italian trattoria, San Francisco bistro and Shaker Meeting House echoed the borderless cuisine.
The layout’s flaws only amplified loyalists’ affection, as did the strategically selected hand-me-down furniture and art collection; the umbrella stand in the vestibule; the long mahogany bar, with its shelves of wine bottles and ample room to eat, and the jazzy Judy Rifka murals of gamboling figures, “Satyricon” lite.
The new layout looks airy, sunny, logical. It doesn’t make any big statements or break any new architectural ground, because that wasn’t the assignment. The design manages to bring a lofty space with immense windows down to human scale by breaking it up. Not counting the addition of a private dining room (it has its own staff), the restaurant will grow by only about eight seats, to 138.
As in the old place, a vestibule directs diners past a few cafe tables toward the bar. The main room is lined with wainscoting, its dark-green color custom-tweaked to update the original green wainscoting. A big staircase becomes the main architectural focus and spatial divider, implying a separation of rooms.
A scrim of lights, at nine feet, aligned with the mezzanine, creates a layer of intimacy, slicing the restaurant’s lofty height in half. Discreet spotlights in the ceiling focus pools of light around clusters of tables. On the mezzanine, booths look down onto the main floor; like opera boxes, these may well become the best seats in the house.
There’s a second bar upstairs for a half-dozen or so guests, a remnant salvaged from the original cafe, illuminated by some of Mr. Bogdanow’s old glass fixtures. Wide-plank cherry wood floors, like the ones on 16th Street but now variously patterned, demarcate spaces to underscore the episodic layout.
It’s a kind of homage, the same but not, updated and, for a celebrity designer, self-effacing, with nods that may register only subliminally, like the main bar, which is the exact same length as the old bar (27 feet 1 inch); the concrete floor tiles next to it, which are the same width as the terra-cotta ones at 16th Street; the brass light fixtures over the bar, hung at the same height.
“Union Square Cafe had its own community,” Mr. Rockwell said. “It was where many other people came to celebrate. It’s near and dear to me. Restaurants were my introduction to New York, places like Schrafft’s. I know this sounds kind of heavy, but having lost my dad when I was 3, moving a lot, then my mom passing away when I was 15, places that marked celebration and connection, they’ve made a big impact on me.
