WASHINGTON — What is striking about Donald J. Trump’s latest effusion of admiration for Russia’s stony-faced leader, Vladimir V. Putin, is how similar it is to the way Mr. Putin is portrayed in Russia: as a necessary foil for an aggressive and flawed American leadership.
Interviewed at an NBC candidates forum Wednesday night, Mr. Trump offered no account of Mr. Putin’s achievements, except perhaps for noting an 82 percent approval rating from a polling agency now under legal threat as a “foreign agent.” Nor did Mr. Trump outline much of a vision for working with him if he became president, beyond pondering how wonderful it would be if Russia and the United States could join forces against the Islamic State.
Instead he recited a litany of perceived slights or disrespect that President Obama has endured on the world stage, including the awkward arrival ceremony on his most recent visit to China for the Group of 20 gathering. The message, Mr. Trump said, is that Mr. Putin earns more respect now than Mr. Obama.
Not surprisingly, Hillary Clinton, campaigning to be Mr. Obama’s Democratic successor, sharply criticized the remarks on Thursday. So did some fellow Republicans, including the House speaker, Paul D. Ryan, who listed many of the reasons Mr. Putin amounts to an adversary of the United States, not a potential ally.
But Mr. Trump’s view of the Russian president is not uncommon among those who have used him as a measure of Mr. Obama’s standing in the world — or more generally the United States’ standing as the world’s dominant superpower.
In Russia, it is at the heart of the depiction of Mr. Putin as the bulwark against a conspiring United States. It underlies Mr. Putin’s attractiveness to nationalist parties in Europe dismayed by what they view as feckless leadership in the face of economic difficulties and the challenge of immigration. And it is shared by those in the Middle East who see Russia’s intervention in Syria on behalf of its embattled president, Bashar al-Assad as decisive, and not hesitant and convoluted, as American policy has been.
In 2013, when Mr. Putin brokered an agreement to collect and destroy most of Syria’s chemical weapons, thus averting American-led airstrikes that Mr. Obama had threatened, Matt Drudge of the conservative Drudge Report called Mr. Putin, perhaps archly, the “leader of the free world.” The editors of Forbes magazine ranked him as the most influential world leader, a purely symbolic honorific he has lost and regained since — but one that is trumpeted inside Russia.
“I think he genuinely admires Putin as a strongman who gets things done,” said Angela E. Stent, a professor at Georgetown University, referring to Mr. Trump.
What achievements of Mr. Putin’s does Mr. Trump admire? “Everybody pays attention to him,” Ms. Stent said, adding that Russia’s military operations in Syria since last year have put him back in the center of international diplomacy.
Russia’s critics — and certainly the White House — would dispute Mr. Putin’s accomplishments, noting the corrupted, kleptocratic economy and a stunted political system that has marginalized genuine opposition, at times violently. There is also the 2014 annexation of Crimea, which, while popular in Russia, has led to international sanctions and diplomatic isolation that has eroded Russia’s economy and reputation.
Ms. Stent, author of “The Limits of Partnership,” a history of the downward slide in relations between Russia and the United States, noted that at the Group of 20 gathering in Australia two years ago, Mr. Putin had to sit alone at lunch — and left early.
Mr. Trump emphasized in his interview with NBC’s Matt Lauer that he did not necessarily endorse the political system Mr. Putin has erected, but again used the line of questioning to talk about the United States being a divided country because of comparatively weak leadership.
Nina Khrushcheva, a professor of international studies and associate dean at the New School, noted a shared characteristic in the two men: that of a tough authoritarian leader, or put another way, a schoolyard tough refusing to back down from a fight (an image Mr. Putin himself has used to describe his childhood).
Mr. Trump on Wednesday noted a widely circulated photograph of Mr. Obama and Mr. Putin at the latest Group of 20 meeting, locked in what clearly seems to be an icy stare.
“Wanting to be a firm and powerful leader who can stare people down like Putin is clearly something Trump aspires to,” Ms. Khrushcheva said.
Mr. Trump, as before, ignored the many issues that divide the United States and Russia, and it is far from clear that a Trump presidency, pleasantries aside, would augur a significant warming of relations between the two countries.
Mr. Trump instead repeated an offhand comment the Russian had for Mr. Trump. In unscripted remarks in December Mr. Putin used a Russian adjective — “yarki” — that Mr. Trump has said means brilliant, though it can also mean colorful or flamboyant. “If he says great things about me, I’m going to say great things about him,” he said.
After referring to the photograph of the staring match, Mr. Trump noted that Russia wanted to defeat the Islamic State as badly as the United States does. “If we have a relationship with Russia, wouldn’t it be wonderful if we could work together on it and knock the hell out of ISIS,” he said.
Mr. Putin would certainly welcome a more agreeable administration in Washington, though he has offered no concessions that might encourage a change in policy in Syria or anywhere else. But his views of the American election and the two main candidates seem more nuanced than the favorable treatment Mr. Trump receives in the Kremlin-controlled news media.
In an interview with Bloomberg ahead of the Group of 20 meetings, Mr. Putin derided the “shock tactics” of Mr. Trump and Mrs. Clinton. “I don’t think they are setting the best example,” he said.