In 2014, the renegade performance artist Deborah de Robertis shocked audiences at the Musée d’Orsay by exposing her genitals in front of Gustave Courbet’s “The Origin of the World.” In January, she was arrested after staging a similar re-enactment of Manet’s “Olympia,” also at the Orsay. This month, she invited herself into two major Paris exhibitions. At the Musée Guimet, she recast herself as the model in an iconic photograph by Nobuyoshi Araki, dressing as a geisha and gorging on a watermelon placed between her legs. Then, at the Musée des Arts Décoratifs, she was arrested after crashing an exhibition devoted to “Barbie,” appearing in a plastic costume that reimagined the classic doll as a symbol of 21st-century feminism, with articulated nipples, pubic hair, a nose ring and Go-Pro camera strapped to her head. While some dismiss these unsanctioned appearances as shameless provocations, the Luxembourg-born Ms. De Robertis, 32, sees her work in the tradition of guerrilla performance artists like Valie Export and Andrea Fraser. In the following edited interview, she discusses the heady ideas behind her bold acts, and the very diverse reactions they elicit — from ferocious criticism to rapturous applause.
How does it feel to walk into a famous museum and suddenly disrobe in front of a masterpiece to the shock of visitors?
In 2014, when I first took a seat at the museum under “The Origin of the World,” I was giving the illusion of posing, yet my gesture was closer to that of a painter than that of a model. I was reconceiving, or redrawing, the contemporary nude model from my own point of view. Traditionally the body of the model is objectified to serve the message of the artist. My work suggests the opposite —the viewer is subjugated by the gaze of the model. The performance points a finger at a flaw that may seem trivial but I read as a sign that we’ve become conditioned to gazing at the naked female body.
During your recent performance at the Musée Guimet’s Araki exhibition, the building was evacuated. The Guimet ultimately decided not to file charges against you, but the police cordoned off the gallery and, you said, left your prop watermelon untouched “as if it were evidence in a crime scene.” Did this reaction surprise you?
No. I never know what reaction awaits me. Also, the silence of an institution which does not press charges can be interpreted as a negation, a denial of the reality which the performance suggests, a strategic kind of silence intended to discredit. The response, the reaction of the institutions, has nothing to do with my performances, but with the image they wish to spread of themselves for their own public and financial interests.
Tell me a little bit about your upbringing. What was your childhood like ? How did you discover art and performance art?
I was born in Luxembourg. My father is Italian and my mother is French. In terms of my private life, I would say that it is more important to talk about what I do instead of who I am. I must have been 16 when, one day at school, I got up in the middle of class and abandoned my things and left. I called my mother and said, “I want to make art,” and I found a school that allowed me to pursue that path.
How do you choose your targets? The works of Manet and Courbet belong to a completely different tradition and style than that of Araki. Is there a link for you?
It is important to specify that they are not targets. I am not attacking the works themselves — through my performances I criticize the interpretation imposed by the institutions which present them. In the case of Courbet and Manet, I appreciate them enormously as artists. But instead I am making a necessary commentary on the history of these works and how we view them. When I inhabit the role of the models — whether it’s Olympia or Barbie — it’s not about reproducing them but reconceiving them. When I invite myself into an exhibition, this exhibition becomes mine. The viewers, the guards, the walls, and the names of the great cultural institutions become the decor of my performances and the tools that I use.
Usually, months elapse between your performances, but in the past few weeks you’ve appeared at the Guimet and at the Musée des Arts Décoratifs. Why have you increased the frequency?
I refuse to wait on the sidewalk for an institution to recognize my work. I am trying to break into the story. All my performances come from the same impulse, a driving force that today I feel stronger than ever.