An improbable reunion took place at the High Court in Kuala Lumpur this week, offering a snapshot of Malaysia’s fractious yet incestuous politics.
Anwar Ibrahim, the imprisoned opposition leader, was briefly allowed out of his cell to challenge a new security law. In court on Monday, in a show of support, was the man who first put him away: Mahathir Mohamad, the former prime minister.
Mr. Mahathir, Mr. Anwar’s mentor turned nemesis, now wants Mr. Anwar to join forces with him against another ex-protégé: the current prime minister, Najib Razak.
Mr. Anwar has been trying to block the implementation of the National Security Council Act, a new law that gives the prime minister the authority to declare something like a state of emergency.
“I endorse his actions,” Mr. Mahathir said Monday, referring to Mr. Anwar’s efforts.
Mr. Mahathir and Mr. Anwar had not appeared together since 1998, when Mr. Mahathir, then the prime minister, fired Mr. Anwar from his post as deputy prime minister and later accused him of sodomy, which is a crime in Malaysia. Mr. Anwar was sentenced to prison on that first charge, which was later overturned. He was then convicted on a new sodomy charge, for which he is now serving time.
Mr. Mahathir, 91, has fiercely criticized Mr. Najib and the scandals in the current administration, notably concerning a state investment fund called 1Malaysia Development Berhad, or 1MDB. Mr. Mahathir has called for the prime minister’s resignation. He also tried to stage a mutiny at their political alma mater, United Malays National Organization, or UMNO. This summer, he announced that he was creating a new party.
The next general election is expected to take place before mid-2018.
“Institutional reform, the strengthening of the democratic space, revoking the National Security Council Act and other arbitrary laws — these are prerequisites for any agreement or cooperation,” she said.
Others said Mr. Mahathir’s concern about the prime minister goes beyond the man. “Najib is bad news for Malay political supremacy,” said Jahabar Sadiq, the last editor of Malaysia Insider, an online news portal that closed a few months ago after being blocked by the government. And Malay supremacy is Mr. Mahathir’s cause.
Malaysian politics toes ethnic and religious lines, with most parties roughly catering to Malay (and mostly Muslim), Chinese or Indian groups. This has led to uneasy marriages of fortune, especially on the opposition side.
The most successful opposition bloc was Pakatan Rakyat, which won 51 percent of the popular vote in the last general election, in 2013. But seat allocation rules nonetheless gave the UMNO-led coalition a majority in Parliament. Pakatan Rakyat comprised Mr. Anwar’s party, another of social democrats popular with the Chinese middle-class and the main Islamist party, known as Pas.
But without the pull of Mr. Anwar’s charisma, the coalition was vulnerable to ideological differences, notably over the so-called hudud bill, Pas’s contentious proposal to intensify some Shariah punishments in the two states it controls. UMNO played on those tensions, and last year managed to break the opposition coalition apart.
Could this change? Mr. Anwar’s base is urban, while Mr. Mahathir is popular among traditional UMNO voters in rural areas, said Ibrahim Suffian, an analyst at Merdeka Center, an independent polling group. “Partnering with Mahathir could enable the existing opposition to get more votes from Malay voters than they have been able to in the past 60 years,” he said.
The National Security Council Act that Mr. Anwar is challenging gives the prime minister — not the government — vast powers to declare special security zones if he determines that national security is threatened.
Mr. Anwar is challenging the National Security Council Act because it was passed without the king’s approval. He claims that royal assent is required under the Constitution, despite a subsequent amendment allowing laws passed by Parliament to automatically take effect after 30 days, with or without the consent. The amendment was passed at Mr. Mahathir’s instigation.
