U.S.|Demonstrators Protest Fatal Police Shooting of a Black Man in El Cajon, Calif.
Demonstrators Protest Fatal Police Shooting of a Black Man in El Cajon, Calif.
Demonstrators gathered outside the Police Department in El Cajon, Calif., on Wednesday morning calling for a federal investigation into the fatal police shooting of a black man a day earlier, the latest in a string of such killings that have provoked protests nationwide.
Agnes Hasan, a close friend of Mr. Olango’s family and one of many who spoke outside the police station Wednesday, said that Mr. Olango was from Uganda and that his family and hers had been together in a refugee camp.
The demonstrators called for a federal investigation, citing distrust of San Diego County’s district attorney, Bonnie Dumanis, and demanding the release of video footage of the shooting.
The leaders of several county law enforcement departments and agencies, including Chief Jeff Davis of the El Cajon police, signed an agreement in August generally supporting the release of video in officer-involved shootings.
The Tuesday episode began after the police received several reports of an African-American man in his 30s “walking in traffic, not only endangering himself but also motorists,” Chief Davis said at a Tuesday night news conference.
At least one of the reports came from a woman who identified herself as Mr. Olango’s sister, Chief Davis said, though he added that the police could not immediately confirm her identity because she was not cooperating. The man was mentally ill and unarmed, she told the police.
An officer arrived near the Broadway Village Shopping Center in the north-central section of the city shortly after 2 p.m., confronting Mr. Olango, who was wearing jeans and a black tank top, behind a restaurant. Mr. Olango put his hand in his pants pocket and refused to comply with police orders, leading the officer to draw a gun, Chief Davis said. A second officer arrived and prepared to use a Taser against Mr. Olango, who continued to be uncooperative.
Soon after, Chief Davis said, the man quickly pulled an object from his pocket and took “what appeared to be a shooting stance,” leading the two officers to act simultaneously: One discharged his Taser, the other his gun, the chief said.
Officers provided first aid at the scene, but Mr. Olango died of his injuries, according to a police statement. The officers involved were placed on administrative leave, which is standard policy after such encounters. The authorities did not officially release Mr. Olango’s name.
A live video posted to Facebook on Tuesday by the user Rumbie Mubaiwa purported to show the scene’s aftermath.
 A female officer approaches the grieving woman and asks for the victim’s name. Distraught, the woman identifies Mr. Olango before walking away.
“I can’t think.  I can’t think,” she says through tears. He was 30, she said.
The shooting in El Cajon, a city of more than 100,000 about 15 miles from San Diego, came after recent fatal police shootings of black men in Tulsa, Okla., and Charlotte, N.C., that heightened tensions across the nation.
“He’s jerking, he’s confused, he runs this way, and as soon as he runs this way, they discharge,” Mr. Rodriguez said.
But Chief Davis and Lt. Rob Ransweiler, a spokesman for the El Cajon Police Department, denied those reports, saying that a phone that contained a video had been volunteered by a witness, and that no phones had been confiscated.
“I’m sure at some point in time, that video will become public,” Lieutenant Ransweiler said.