Donald J. Trump’s presidential campaign released a new note from his doctor on Thursday declaring that he was in “excellent physical health,” citing various tests over the last three years but releasing nothing beyond cursory details.
The note was accompanied by a boastful news release and distributed just hours before the airing of a taped episode of “The Dr. Oz Show,” where Mr. Trump spoke glowingly of his own health, but got little by way of questions or pushback from the daytime television celebrity Dr. Mehmet Oz.
Mr. Trump’s newest letter came as he has been criticized for declining to release in-depth records related to his health, taxes and personal fortune, as well as his businesses.
Until now, Mr. Trump had released only a short note from his doctor, Harold N. Bornstein, that was filled with superlatives but offered no window into his fitness to serve.
The slightly longer note that the campaign released Thursday said that Mr. Trump was examined on Sept. 9 by Dr. Bornstein, who wrote that the candidate was examined annually every spring.
The doctor’s note put Mr. Trump’s height at 6 feet 3 inches, and his weight at 236 pounds. It said that Mr. Trump was hospitalized once as a child, for an appendectomy at age 11 (the doctor’s note in December said Mr. Trump was 10 at the time), and that Mr. Trump’s blood pressure was 116/70 with a blood sugar level of 99, which is at the higher end of the normal range. He had a calcium score of 98 as of 2013. That was also the year of his last colonoscopy, the doctor wrote. The note put his cholesterol level within normal range, with HDL cholesterol at 63, LDL at 94 and triglycerides at 61.
Donald J. Trump taped an episode of “The Dr. Oz Show” on Wednesday and handed over a one-page summary of his recent physical examination.
Mr. Trump’s last transthoracic echocardiogram was in December 2014. He had a normal EKG and chest X-ray on April 14, although his campaign declined to answer follow-up questions as to the circumstances of the two tests. He takes a low dose of aspirin and a statin, rosuvastatin, also known as Crestor, which lowers cholesterol.
Dr. Louis Philipson, director of the Kovler Diabetes Center at the University of Chicago — who has not treated Mr. Trump — said that Mr. Trump’s blood sugar level of 99 was in the normal range, but “quite close” to being considered prediabetes. The campaign did not respond to questions as to the circumstances of the blood sugar test.
Dr. Bornstein declared Mr. Trump in “excellent physical health,” and noted that his parents, Mary and Fred, lived into their 80s and 90s. The doctor did not note that the elder Mr. Trump had Alzheimer’s disease.
“We are pleased to disclose all of the test results which show that Mr. Trump is in excellent health, and has the stamina to endure — uninterrupted — the rigors of a punishing and unprecedented presidential campaign and, more importantly, the singularly demanding job of president of the United States,” the news release said, in an apparent veiled reference to Hillary Clinton, the Democratic nominee, who returned to the campaign trail on Thursday following a three-day absence after a bout of pneumonia and a near-collapse on Sunday.
Until the appearance on “The Dr. Oz Show” and the release of the letter, little was known about Mr. Trump’s health.
Dr. Oz asked why Mr. Trump had not released his glowing medical report publicly; Mr. Trump, who has questioned Mrs. Clinton’s health for months, said that he considered these issues “private” but then said that it was important to know that a president would be healthy.
Mr. Trump has bragged of his strength and endurance on the campaign trail, but the only information available until this week was the unusual letter released in December by Dr. Bornstein, who declared that the candidate would be the healthiest person ever to serve in the White House.
The Clinton campaign criticized Mr. Trump’s disclosures, noting in a set of talking points sent to supporters that Mrs. Clinton had released much more information about her medical condition, while suggesting that Mr. Trump might be trying to conceal something.
There are no laws or rules governing how much candidates need to disclose about their health. At 70, Mr. Trump would be the oldest candidate ever elected to the White House if he wins in November. Mrs. Clinton, 68, would be close behind. Their ages, along with Mrs. Clinton’s concussion in 2012, have prompted calls for much more extensive medical disclosures from both.
On Sunday, Mrs. Clinton struggled while walking at the World Trade Center memorial in Lower Manhattan at observances for the 15th anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks. Hours after videos were posted on television and online showing her struggling to enter her van while being assisted by aides, her campaign revealed that she learned two days earlier that she had pneumonia.
While Mrs. Clinton has released more information about her health than Mr. Trump, neither has provided actual medical records or made their doctors available to the news media, although Dr. Bornstein was interviewed by NBC recently. The doctor said that he wrote the earlier note for Mr. Trump in about five minutes as a car waited outside his office, and that he used some of the candidate’s own words and synthesized them into the note.