“Deepwater Horizon” is a swift and suspenseful action movie, full of noise, peril, muck and fire. It’s also a true-crime story, the highly detailed procedural chronicle of how, on April 20, 2010, 11 people were killed and a vast marine ecosystem was despoiled because of negligence and greed. Like “The Big Short,” this film, directed by Peter Berg, dramatizes a broadly familiar story and stands as a work of popular narrative for an age of corporate impunity. 
There are no big speeches or rhetorical flourishes. That’s not really Mr. Berg’s style. As a director, he favors speed, impact, clipped dialogue and specialized technical information. At his best — or let’s just say in everything except “Battleship” — he combines blockbuster-flavored effects with fine-grained, sinewy naturalism. His heroes (the football coach in “Friday Night Lights,” the counterterrorism agents in “The Kingdom,” the soldiers in “Lone Survivor”) are unsentimental troubleshooters dealing with unpredictable problems in less than ideal circumstances.
The three main good guys in “Deepwater Horizon” — Mike Williams (Mark Wahlberg), Andrea Fleytas (Gina Rodriguez) and Jimmy Harrell (Kurt Russell) — are cut from similar cloth. They are disciplined, clearsighted professionals, and the pressing issues they face are not moral, political or philosophical, but practical. Can the rig be stabilized? Can the damage be contained? Can as many people as possible be rescued?
“Deepwater Horizon” is based on the true story of the explosion of an oil rig off the Louisiana coast that killed eleven people and damaged a vast marine ecosystem. In his review A.O. Scott writes: “Deepwater Horizon” is a swift and suspenseful action movie, full of noise, peril, muck and fire. The film itself is as much a feat of engineering as a work of art, an efficient machine for delivering intricate data and blunt emotions. There are no big speeches or rhetorical flourishes, instead the director Peter Berg favors speed, impact, clipped dialogue and specialized technical information. Above all, the movie is a study in the mechanics of hubris and Mr. Berg’s commitment to craft — the meticulousness with which he manages time, space , and the skills of his excellent cast — becomes a form of tribute.
The Times critic A.O. Scott reviews “Deepwater Horizon.”CreditCredit...David Lee/Summit, via Associated Press..
This insistence on specific, concrete concerns is part of what gives the film its power as an indictment of BP and its managers. A few of those are on hand as the crisis unfolds on board the Deepwater Horizon, a drilling rig that floats over an oil deposit off the Louisiana coast. The film’s designated villains are Donald Vidrine, played by John Malkovich as a smiling buzzard with a gumbo-thick accent, and Robert Kaluza, played by the “Friday Night Lights” stalwart Brad Leland. Vidrine, Kaluza and their colleagues, aware that they are behind schedule and potentially squandering profit, push workers and their supervisors to ignore signs of trouble.
The accident that results — a horrific sequence of jolts, explosions and murderous jets of mud, seawater and oil — occupies most of “Deepwater Horizon,” which stakes its credibility on close attention to detail. The film itself is as much a feat of engineering as a work of art, an efficient machine for delivering intricate data and blunt emotions. We start the day at home with Williams and his wife (Kate Hudson) and daughter. Once he choppers out to the Horizon, where he works as an electronics technician, we stay on board for the duration, and we come to know the corridors and chambers of the rig intimately.
Or at least Mr. Berg — working from a script, by Matthew Michael Carnahan and Matthew Sand, based on an article in The New York Times — creates an effective illusion of knowledge. Since Williams, Fleytas and Harrell (known to all as Mr. Jimmy) clearly know what they’re talking about, the viewer absorbs some of their confidence, and gains at least a rudimentary insight into how this enormous, complex piece of machinery works. And even as the film provokes outrage at the sloppiness and corner-cutting of the oil company functionaries, it also induces a sense of awe. The ambition and ingenuity required to bring petroleum up from beneath the ocean floor is pretty remarkable. The Horizon is at once a grand accomplishment and a catastrophic folly, and “Deepwater Horizon” is above all a study in the mechanics of hubris.
And also a celebration of the unassuming, lifesaving skill that resists it. Mr. Berg’s commitment to craft — the meticulousness with which he manages time, space and the skills of his excellent cast — becomes a form of tribute. The people who lost their lives on the Horizon, and those who prevented more lives from being lost, were doing their jobs, and the movie’s achievement is to insist upon and honor that fact.
“Deepwater Horizon” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Catastrophe and profanity. Running time: 1 hour 47 minutes.