Just before a Sunday morning service in the early 1990s, two women walked into one of Manhattan’s most venerable sanctuaries, Marble Collegiate Church, on Fifth Avenue. The usher who seated them, sizing them up as first-time worshipers, asked what had brought them to Marble, as the church is known.
For all that has been written about Mr. Trump’s high-profile careers — as a real estate developer, a casino owner and a reality-television personality — relatively little attention has been focused on the role religion played in shaping his personality. Overlooked amid tabloid accounts of his romances or financial-page articles about his ups and downs are the periods in his life when he was going to church, first as a regular at a Presbyterian church in Queens, where he grew up, and later, as a less frequent worshiper at Marble, one of America’s oldest and most famous churches.
Mr. Trump, now the Republican nominee for president, had an intriguing relationship with Marble. He attended its Sunday services for almost 50 years, but says he does not know if he ever formally joined the church. He describes himself as a Presbyterian, but Marble is not a Presbyterian church — it is part of the Reformed Church in America, a separate denomination that traces its beginnings to 1628 and the first ordained minister in New Amsterdam, as New York was then known.
Mr. Trump married his first wife, Ivana, at Marble, in a ceremony performed by one of America’s most famous ministers, the Rev. Norman Vincent Peale. His marriage to Ms. Maples was performed by Dr. Peale’s successor, the Rev. Arthur Caliandro, who, like Mr. Trump, was married three times.
After Mr. Trump mentioned Marble on the campaign trail, the church took the unusual step last year of issuing a statement that he was not “an active member.” The current minister says it released the statement not to dissociate itself from someone whose connection was to some members awkward, even embarrassing, but “to share accurate information.” Mr. Trump said the statement did not upset him because, he said, it was correct: “I haven’t been back since Dr. Caliandro passed away,” three years ago at age 79.
In the 1950s — when Mr. Trump’s father, Fred C. Trump, was building a middle-class apartment dynasty in Brooklyn and Queens — the Trumps were prominent parishioners at a church close to their home, First Presbyterian Church in Jamaica, Queens. Like Marble, it is a church with a history: It describes itself as the oldest continuously worshiping Presbyterian congregation in the country. Mr. Trump was confirmed there in 1959, around the time he turned 13.
“He sang the songs and did the works,” said John Walter, a cousin of Donald Trump who is the family historian.
But in the 1960s, the Trumps gravitated to Marble. The lure was Dr. Peale, a household name since the publication of the 1952 best seller that transformed “the power of positive thinking” into a national catchphrase. Today he is remembered for preaching optimism and personal fulfillment, asserting that it was possible to achieve spiritual and material success in life. He himself became a wealthy man who lived on Fifth Avenue opposite the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Mr. Walter said Fred Trump maintained that “nobody else was Peale.” That idea was echoed by Donald Trump, who in an interview described Dr. Peale as “a great preacher and a great public speaker” but said nothing about any religious beliefs he had imparted.
Still, Dr. Peale’s presence made Marble a favorite of business leaders, and he helped influence the way Mr. Trump takes on the world.
But Dr. Peale’s son John, 79, told The Washington Post in January that he was not pleased when Mr. Trump referred to his father.
In a brief telephone conversation last month, however, John Peale said that he no longer winced at the mention of Mr. Trump. But he would not elaborate. “I’ve said all I need or want to say,” he said.
Dr. Peale stopped preaching at Marble in 1984, when he was 86; Mr. Trump said that he attended Dr. Peale’s last service. His successor, Dr. Caliandro, presided over a campaign to remodel the church’s Fifth Avenue home, built in the 1850s with marble from the same quarry as City Hall and the arch in Washington Square Park.
Dr. Caliandro’s son Paul said his father told of trying to get Mr. Trump to contribute to a new roof.
By the early 1990s, some in the congregation wondered if he was paying attention to more than the sermons.
“I had a particular pew I had to sit in, and one Sunday, the usher said, ‘Would you please move over?’” recalled Gloria Hegy, Dr. Caliandro’s first wife. The woman who squeezed in apparently liked the view from that pew.
Mr. Trump said that contrary to what the two women had told the usher — and contrary to a famous tabloid headline, “They Met in Church” — his first encounter with Ms. Maples was not at Marble. But as the relationship developed, so did the awkwardness for some at the church.
