What attributes make for a successful trader? Is it comprehensive knowledge of an industry? The ability to read the markets? Luck?
Or might it be something subtler and seemingly unrelated — namely, an awareness of one’s own heartbeat?
In a study published on Monday in the journal Scientific Reports, a group of researchers suggest that high-frequency traders who were more sensitive to their own bodies routinely made more profitable trades, and had longer careers in a notoriously unforgiving profession.
The team, which included professors from universities in Britain and Australia, was investigating a theory developed by John Coates, a former trader who until recently was a researcher at Cambridge University.
Mr. Coates set out to try to identify whether “gut feelings” were merely the stuff of myth, or something real and measurable.
Mr. Coates moved on from Wall Street to become a researcher and author. In a previous study, he demonstrated that traders demonstrated physiological signs of stress during market volatility, even when they did not rationally believe they were at risk of losing much money.
Building off that work, Mr. Coates wondered whether traders who were more sensitive to their own bodies might perform better at their jobs.
To investigate his hypothesis, Mr. Coates and his colleagues worked with 18 traders at a hedge fund in London in 2012. The subjects, all men, were high-frequency traders, buying and selling bond futures and other products.
Using heart rate monitoring equipment, Mr. Coates and his colleagues assessed the traders’ ability to silently count their own heartbeats without touching their chest or any pulse point. A control group of 48 men who were not traders was also tested for their ability to monitor their heart rates.
Over all, the hedge fund employees were substantially more accurate than the control group, suggesting that on balance, the high-frequency traders were more attuned to their own bodies than the general public.
The hedge fund, which was not identified, gave Mr. Coates and his colleagues access to the traders’ employment history, including their profits and losses, and tenure in the industry.
And among the traders, more accurate heartbeat awareness was correlated with profitability. That is, the better a trader was at sensing his own heart rate, the more successful he was at high-frequency trading.
What is more, the longer an employee of the hedge fund had been working as a trader, the more accurate he was at counting his heart rate.
In the paper, Mr. Coates and his colleagues suggest that acute awareness of heart rate might somehow contribute to traders’ profitability.
Yet the researchers stop short of establishing any direct causal link between heart rate awareness and trader profitability. “Our study, being field work, could not establish causation,” they wrote.
For example, it might be the case that working in a high-stress job like trading somehow makes people more sensitive to their heart rates. Mr. Coates and his colleagues also found that people with lower body mass index and lower heart rate variability had better heart rate awareness.
In an interview, Mr. Coates acknowledged that the results did not prove any direct correlation. “It’s a starting point for more controlled science,” he said.
Yet he remained intrigued by the possibility that when traders and other employees in high-stress professions were able to listen to their bodies, they made better decisions. He said that in addition to the pulse, other signals from the body such as muscle tension, colon distention, stomach distention and immune reactions might be picking up on things that the rational mind was missing.
