AUBURN, N.Y. — Like a lot of new homeowners, Eric Johnson II had ambitious plans when he moved into his tidy beige house this summer. He envisioned a swing set in back for his 2-year-old son, and a detached garage.
These were not the bones of a stray animal that could have been dumped there by a previous homeowner in this community in the Finger Lakes region. Instead, they were clearly human: partial skeletons with femurs and skulls, vertebrae and rib bones.
The unearthing of the bones set off a flurry of activity by the local police, the coroner and state officials. Police tape was stretched across the backyard, while the largest of the bones were carted away. Officials soon zeroed in on an explanation — the plot of land once belonged to a nearby state prison. The mystery was solved.
It turned out that Mr. Johnson’s backyard was once part of a small burial plot run by Auburn Correctional Facility. The bones were the earthly remains of more than 300 prisoners whose unclaimed bodies were buried more than a century ago, beginning in the 1870s. Among those laid to rest here was Leon Czolgosz, the American anarchist who in 1901 assassinated President William McKinley.
The maximum-security prison relocated its burial ground in 1909 and sold the land. Contemporary records and newspaper clippings revealed that on at least two occasions, prison employees exhumed remains from the plot on Fitch Avenue where Mr. Johnson’s home sits. The plot bordered a large cemetery that still runs behind his property; evidently, some remains were left behind.
But if the enigma of the skeleton-spewing soil has been cleared up, a permanent solution is not yet in sight. The State Department of Corrections and Community Supervision quickly took away what appeared to be the remains of three individuals. On Sept. 9, the state agency buried them on the grounds of a state prison in Marcy, N.Y.; a chaplain conducted a graveside service for the reinterment.
But that still leaves plenty of bones sprinkled across the upturned earth in Mr. Johnson’s yard. On a recent weekday, teeth and ribs lay in the dried mud. “That’s a vertebra, maybe,” said Mr. Johnson wearily. He recently tore down the yellow tape placed around the area where the bones were uncovered. “I got tired of looking at it,” he said.
Last week the Corrections Department sent a funeral director to visit his property, along with an anthropologist. They will soon try to determine the extent of the remaining bones, possibly using ground-penetrating radar.
Since detailed records of the burials were not kept, officials do not know how many bodies remain on the land.
A spokesman for the Corrections Department said that the agency would continue to work with Mr. Johnson and the city to identify, remove and appropriately rebury any remains found on his property.
Mr. Johnson, a 28-year-old contractor, suspects that there may well be entire skeletons still buried in his yard. He and his father stopped digging immediately upon making the grisly discovery on July 23.
For his part, Mr. Johnson sees three possible options. The state can dig up and move every last bone or it can leave them on his property and allow Mr. Johnson to continue with his landscaping work. In either case, he believes he should be compensated for the ordeal and the potential loss of his property’s value.
Alternatively, Mr. Johnson said, the state can purchase the strip of his property that formed the old burial ground.
In the meantime, the discovery has prompted local historians to look into the circumstances surrounding the prison burial plot.
Eileen McHugh, the Auburn city historian and executive director of the Cayuga Museum of History and Art, relied on a detailed history of Auburn prison burials written by John N. Miskell, a retired deputy superintendent at the local prison.
“The bodies were buried with no ceremony and a detail of four convicts dug the graves by hand,” said Ms. McHugh, pointing out that no markers were used to denote individual graves.
“To think of people buried in your backyard — it’s like the movie ‘Poltergeist,’” she added, referring to the 1982 horror film about a real estate executive whose family’s haunted house was built atop a cemetery.
It turned out the Johnsons were not the first residents to realize there were bones in the backyards. In the 1950s, Joseph Crawford, now a retired truck driver who lives next to the Johnsons, found human bones while playing Army with friends.
Some neighbors of the Johnsons wondered just how far the former prison cemetery extended. An old map shows that the plot reached nearly to the property of Leo Shaw, 84, who has lived on Fitch Avenue since the 1930s. “Maybe that’s why my vegetables taste funny,” he said.