Jon Forrest Dohlin has been at the New York Aquarium for so long that when he walks past the Sea Cliffs display, he greets the harbor seals by name. They pop their heads up and silently greet him back. But Mr. Dohlin knows more than just their names. He also knows what their new home will look like.
Since 2004, Mr. Dohlin and a crew of hundreds have been designing and building the new aquarium in Coney Island, a $151.7 million, 57,000-square-foot project that was stalled in 2012 when Hurricane Sandy hit. The groundbreaking was set for Nov. 2; the storm hit Oct. 29, sending the staff into emergency mode and delaying construction.
Afterward, the old aquarium — a rundown institution from 1957 in dire need of rehabilitation before the storm — was closed for seven months while the wildlife was tended to, the power restored and the buildings secured and cleaned. Part of it reopened and has stayed open since new construction began in January 2014. You can still visit the outdoor Sea Cliffs, the remodeled Aquatheater and the indoor Conservation Hall, though some work will be done on those areas as well.
Rising in what looks like a huge gray ship stranded on the boardwalk, the new part of the aquarium — called Ocean Wonders: Sharks — is set to open next summer.
On a recent sunny afternoon, families pushed strollers past the penguins, sea lions and otters on the Sea Cliffs as construction continued all around. A new world was being built, exhibit by exhibit, incorporating the actual ocean — just 200 yards away — for the first time.
The aquarium will be more integrated into the boardwalk than it was before, and ocean views — from Jamaica Bay to the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge — will be made part of the presentation. Though most visitors will come to see the sharks and marine mammals, Mr. Dohlin said he wanted people to leave with a sense of how they could effect environmental change. Displays on the shark-fin trade; a giant fishing net filled with species, like sea turtles, not meant for consumption; and a wall full of plastic and other ocean-polluting garbage will be used as teaching tools, intended to get visitors to pledge how they will make a difference.
Mr. Dohlin has been at the aquarium for 10 years but before that worked in design and construction at the W.C.S. headquarters at the Bronx Zoo for a decade. He studied biology as an undergraduate and architecture in graduate school, and seems perfectly suited to the job at hand.
“This is my favorite part,” Mr. Dohlin said repeatedly as he took a visitor through the winding new corridors and past a crew of 65 workers in hard hats, who were drilling holes in black walls and hammering at ceilings on motorized lifts. He was like an excited child revising his “favorite part” again and again, from the coral reef display — now just a long acrylic tunnel that will eventually hold 120,000 gallons of seawater pulled from 1,500 feet offshore — to the still-unfinished interactive displays, to the empty shark tank still covered in protective cardboard.
He walked past the crawl space that children will be able to climb through under the tank as fish swim above them, past the shark-tagging display, through a tilted room that would soon become a shipwreck, past a representation of the underwater Hudson Canyon, up to a curving eco-walk and a touch tank on the roof, into the plush classroom that overlooked the ocean, and out to five old buildings still waiting to be rebuilt.
The buildings were devastated by the storm, and it will take even longer to rehabilitate and open them as the city and state await funding from the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Construction, along with upgrades to the Sea Cliffs exhibit, is estimated at another $80 million and has not even begun. The administrative offices were part of the five buildings, so Mr. Dohlin and his staff have been working out of three trailers behind the aquarium. They’re not the only ones who have been displaced.
About two dozen of the 45 sharks that will be on exhibit are in a temporary display tank, and the others are kept off site. A walrus, Kulu, has been lent to the Point Defiance Zoo & Aquarium in Tacoma, Wash.
“This building is jammed like a submarine with infrastructure,” he added, nearly hitting his hard hat on a low-hanging pipe.
