BEIJING — President Xi Jinping of China spoke by phone on Wednesday with the president of the Philippines, Rodrigo Duterte, in what Chinese news media described as a friendly call that came just a few days after President Trump’s amicable conversation with the authoritarian Filipino leader.
Mr. Xi’s outreach to Mr. Duterte appeared to be part of efforts by the Chinese to woo a longtime American ally and strengthen their sovereignty claims in the South China Sea.
Chinese news media said North Korea and other issues were discussed in the phone call. On Saturday, Mr. Trump, surprising his own staff, telephoned Mr. Duterte and invited him to visit the White House.
Mr. Trump’s gesture was widely condemned over concerns about human rights abuses in the Philippines carried out under Mr. Duterte’s auspices. In a sign of lingering tensions between the two countries, Mr. Duterte later said he might be too busy to make the trip.
In Mr. Xi’s follow-up to Mr. Trump’s overture, he pledged to deepen ties with the Philippines and called the country a “friendly neighbor,” according to Chinese news media reports. Mr. Xi also said Manila would be an “important partner” in his plan to invest in infrastructure overseas.
The remarks were in line with China’s recent attempts to capitalize on tensions between the United States and the Philippines and draw Mr. Duterte’s government closer with promises of economic aid. But they also appeared to be a way of thanking the Philippines for not provoking China over disputed South China Sea islands claimed by both countries.
“There is a scramble to win over the heart and mind of President Duterte,” said Patrick M. Cronin, a senior adviser at the Center for a New American Security, a Washington-based policy research group.
The two leaders also discussed tensions in North Korea, with Mr. Xi reiterating China’s call for restraint and dialogue. Mr. Trump and Mr. Duterte also spoke about North Korea in their call on Saturday, White House officials said.
The phone call between Mr. Xi and Mr. Duterte came against the backdrop of warming ties between Mr. Xi and Mr. Trump, who is increasingly reliant on China to help contain the crisis over North Korea. The North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un, has threatened the United States and its Asian allies with nuclear war and repeatedly tested missiles in defiance of international sanctions.
The North Korea crisis has minimized or at least obscured trade disputes and other problems between the United States and China, including China’s territorial claims over most of the South China Sea.
In what appears to be a remarkable deference to China by the Trump administration, no American Navy ship has gone within 12 miles of any disputed island in the South China Sea claimed by China since Mr. Trump took office, Defense Department officials say.
That is a major turnabout by Mr. Trump and his aides, who once vowed to challenge China’s control of disputed reefs that it has turned into artificial islands, replete with military equipment and runways. Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson had said during his confirmation hearings that China should be denied access to the islands.
Since taking office last year, Mr. Duterte has upset the balance of power in Asia by vowing to cut some military and economic ties with the United States. At the same time, he has embraced China as an economic and security ally and acquiesced to Chinese demands to resolve territorial disputes in the South China Sea through direct talks rather than international arbitration.
This week, Mr. Duterte welcomed Chinese Navy ships to Davao City, where he had served as mayor for many years. It was the first visit by the Chinese Navy in several years.
In the phone call, Mr. Duterte thanked Mr. Xi for allowing him to tour a Chinese missile destroyer during the visit, according to a statement on Wednesday from the presidential palace in Manila.
Relations between China and the Philippines were once seriously frayed over disputed territory in the South China Sea, a major waterway for international shipping. But under Mr. Duterte, the tensions have eased.
In a possible sign of Mr. Duterte’s efforts to appease Beijing, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, which Mr. Duterte presided over this year, did not criticize China’s actions in the South China Sea in an official statement following a meeting in Manila last week.
Bonnie S. Glaser, a senior adviser for Asia at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, said Mr. Xi might have been showing approval for Mr. Duterte’s position by agreeing to speak with him.
“China has benefited greatly from the shift in Manila’s policy toward the South China Sea and Duterte’s friendly approach to Beijing,” she said.