There is no English equivalent for the Portuguese word “saudade.” Mystifying to Brazilian poets and bossa nova artists alike, it is often thought to mean a longing for something lost; a wistful memory of what once was, or an aching desire for what may never come.
But Luiza Otreba, who left São Paulo for New York more than 18 years ago, may have found a cure.
Stretching along 36th Avenue in a pocket of Queens known as Little Brazil, Rio Market acts as an unofficial community center for Brazilians in New York: a Copacabana-style supermarket just off the N and W trains.
Within its 4,000-square-foot space is a gift shop and a money transfer counter, where customers can send earnings back home. Rival soccer team jerseys line the walls up above, as unsold cups leftover from the Rio Olympics ($1.99) gather dust on the shelves below. Freezers are stocked with the pulp of açaí (the purple-berried superfruit) and pão de queijo (cheese bread). The TV is tuned to Brazilian news reports.
On a recent afternoon, a grandmother waited to wire money to her family in the city of Belo Horizonte. A baker from Stamford, Conn., scoured the chocolate aisle. One family helped an American man decode a Portuguese recipe in preparation for his mother-in-law’s impending visit.
This sort of home away from home for Brazilians is what Ricardo Bastos, 49, had in mind when he opened the place in 1994 as a tiny bodega. Over time, as more of his compatriots arrived, Mr. Bastos, who hails from Rio de Janeiro, moved his business across the street. “A lot of them come here just to speak Portuguese,” he said.
On Saturdays, the Portuguese chatter grows noticeably louder, as regulars gather for feijoada, the country’s carnivorous answer to comfort food. The pork- and beef-laden black bean stew is available once a week in the cafeteria, and customers wait in line to order from the counter attached to the kitchen. Rosa Morakis, 51, recently traveled from New Hyde Park, on Long Island, to partake in the weekly ritual with friends.
It is now the job of resident butcher Airton de Carvalho, 58, to answer those questions. “If you come to me and say: ‘I want to do a churrasco. What would you recommend?’ — this would be it,” he said. For a true churrasco, the classic Brazilian barbecue, he gestured to a line of sausage, skirt steak, chicken hearts, pork loin and the coveted picanha, a fatty cut of top sirloin.
