In the 1960s, my aunt Annalena kept a small tin in the kitchen cupboard of her Glasgow flat and would bring it out to dispense treats to visiting children — not candies but dulse (Palmaria palmata), red shards of dried seaweed that we would place on our tongues, savoring the mysterious sweet-bacon tang, until they melted away like communion wafers.
To many urban westerners, seaweed is Asian fare, a staple of the sushi bar, but it has long been regarded as a delicacy in the western highlands and islands of Scotland. Because of tidal conditions, constant sea temperatures and unpolluted shores, the region is particularly rich in seaweed varieties, which were used for fertilizer as well as food. A sixth-century Gaelic poem, sometimes attributed to St. Columba, who lived on the Hebridean island of Iona, asks God to assist the monk’s daily routine: “Let me do my daily work/Gathering dulse/Catching fish/Giving food to the poor.” The early travel writer Martin Martin, visiting the Hebrides in the 18th century, noted that seaweed was eaten by “vulgar natives,” and it was widely regarded as famine food.
Today, the vulgar natives have been vindicated. Seaweed is recognized as a mineral-rich superfood, and its harvesting for culinary use is big business. One award-winning company, based in Edinburgh, Mara Seaweed, now exports to outlets like Blue Apron in the U.S.A. The female founders, Fiona Houston and Xa Milne, along with their team, harvest their seaweed on the coastline around the charming fishing villages of the East Neuk of Fife, north of Edinburgh.
Mara’s seaweed manager — or “seaweed guru,” as he styles himself — Rory MacPhee, a former lecturer in marine law, favors the west coast, in particular the rocky shores of the Inner Hebridean island of Easdale. “A stunning location, with beautiful views of other islands,” he says.
The Outer Hebrides is the collective name for a remote archipelago of more than 100 islands, scattered like a broken string of beads off the far northwest coast of Scotland. Only 15 of the islands are inhabited and the physical character of each — from the mountains of Harris to the low-lying grass-fringed beaches of South Uist and Barra — is as distinctive as its culture. All, though, boast some of the most remarkable coastal landscapes in the world.
This is the last redoubt of Gaelic, the beautiful ancient language, a treasure house of song and folklore, now spoken by fewer than 2 percent of Scots. Its rich vocabulary reflects the islanders’ preoccupation with land and family, soil and soul, weather and ocean. There are more than 40 words relating to seaweed; one, “ortha-fheamainn,” means “seaweed charm,” for conjuring abundance and happiness.
Her rapturous tone would have resonated with Victorian women swept up by the seaweed craze. Given access to the coast by newly built railways, genteel women from the cities would roam beaches, foraging, picking and identifying (though there is no record of them eating), then pressing and labeling samples of “ocean flowers” in elaborately bound albums that were part sentimental keepsake, part scientific record. Queen Victoria was said to have made an album, and the political economist and abolitionist Harriet Martineau was also an enthusiast. In 1856, after visiting the tidal pools of Ilfracombe in North Devon, the novelist George Eliot wrote that she was “quite in love with sea-weeds.” William Henry Goss, the renowned ceramist, capitalized on the cult, using images of seaweed to decorate his prized glazed heraldic porcelain.
The craze offered women, constrained by educational limitations as well as by restrictive garments, freedom — license to wander unchaperoned in comparatively wild places, lost in romantic contemplation of nature’s splendors and “God’s handiwork,” pursuing the intellectual disciplines of taxonomy, hitching their petticoats and briefly abandoning the strict dress codes which forbade the most fleeting glimpse of an ankle.
Gatty, the wife of a North of England vicar, was a writer of morally improving books for children. She discovered the pleasures of seaweed foraging when she was sent to convalesce by the English seaside town of Hastings in 1848 following the birth of her seventh child. Wandering the shore at low tide, she became entranced by the variety of forms and color in Neptune’s garden. “It is the consolation of consolations,” she wrote to a friend, and it was the start of a lifelong passion for beachcombing that would result in her definitive two-volume study, “British Sea-weeds.” Though her gender excluded her from membership of the prestigious Royal Society and the Linnean Society, she was respected by male natural scientists, and her name was given to an Australian seaweed (Gattya pinella).
An 1875 issue of the American children’s magazine St. Nicholas featured a didactic story called “The Sea-Weed Album,” which instructed readers in the gentle art of algology.
Though the fashion faded at the start of the 20th century, Gatty’s scholarly book was still used for reference as late as 1946 at the former Scottish Marine Biological Association’s station on the west coast Isle of Cumbrae (an island she had visited in 1852 and 1853). Her seaweed collection is kept in St. Andrew’s Botanical Garden, less than 20 miles from the East Neuk of Fife, where today Fiona Houston and Xa Milne can be found, petticoat-less, pursuing the 21st-century seaweed craze.
My aunt Annalena, now 97, lives in residential care outside Glasgow. Her mind, once a trove of poetry, history and song, has faded. Mostly, she sits in contented silence. But if memories of distant times are summoned, her eyes shine and she smiles beatifically. When I visit her next month, along with the usual bunch of flowers, I’ll be bringing her my own ortha-fheamainn — a tin of Mara’s dried dulse.
Here, the author — whose second novel, “Hame,” takes place on a fictitious island in the Hebrides — shares some of her favorite spots on the wild shores of the remote archipelago.
Credit...From left: Outer Hebrides Tourism/Mick Blunt; Ollie Grove 2016.
It follows the Young Pretender’s route through the islands of Eriskay, North and South Uist, Scalpay and Lewis.
Eleven miles of the section A trek from the small island of Vatersay across the causeway to Barra, where you might see a scheduled Twin Otter plane landing on the island’s unique runway: a tidal white-shell beach.
One of the U.K.’s most glorious beaches ... miles of white sand with stunning views of mountains rising out of the sea.