In the years since the 2008 financial crisis, Maurice R. Greenberg, the former chieftain of American International Group, has ferociously fought back at the government, winning moral victories here and losing other battles there.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit in Washington turned back one of those victories on Tuesday, throwing out a lower court’s ruling that the government’s huge bailout of A.I.G. in 2008 was illegal.
The appeals court also ruled that the lower court had not erred in denying A.I.G.’s shareholders up to $40 billion in damages they had sought as a result of the government’s takeover.
Starr International, the Greenberg company that made the appeal as one of the largest shareholders of A.I.G. stock, did not have the legal standing to pursue the claims, the appeals court said.
The fight is over the government’s decision to take a 79.9 percent stake in A.I.G. as a condition of giving it an $85 billion emergency loan nearly nine years ago, under terms that Mr. Greenberg’s lawyers argued were meant to punish the company.
Mr. Greenberg’s legal team, led by David Boies, argued the government did not compensate A.I.G. shareholders enough for the stake it took, which prevented the collapse of their company.
In June 2015, the United States Court of Federal Claims ruled that the Federal Reserve had overstepped its authority in taking the stake in A.I.G. but said no damages were warranted.
In arguing their appeal last fall, the government’s lawyers said doing nothing would have punished A.I.G. shareholders more by erasing the value of their stock in a bankruptcy filing. The lower court ruled that the bailout helped shareholders avoid this fate.
Mr. Boies said he would ask the Supreme Court to review the decision.
A spokesman for the Federal Reserve Board said “we are pleased” that the appeals court vacated the lower court’s decision.
The government’s loan to A.I.G. was the largest ever made, according to the opinion on Tuesday. The company repaid the loan and $6.7 billion in interest and fees, but the bailout ultimately cost more than $180 billion in taxpayers’ money.
Starr International’s attempt to recover more money for shareholders struck many critics at the time as tone-deaf. It came amid public anger that financial institutions were not being held accountable enough for their years of risk-taking.
Dennis M. Kelleher, the president and chief executive of the Wall Street watchdog group Better Markets, said in a statement on Tuesday, “If there were damages for brazen ingratitude, the court would have ordered A.I.G.’s former C.E.O. to pay the government the entire value of his A.I.G. stockholdings because that is the windfall he has received as a direct result of the government bailout.” The group had filed a brief in support of the government.
Mr. Greenberg had been gone from the helm of A.I.G. for three years when the financial crisis erupted. As Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy, A.I.G. teetered on the brink because of toxic mortgage-backed securities that it had insured through credit-default swaps.
Mr. Greenberg, who turned 92 last week, has fought the government on multiple fronts since resigning from A.I.G. in 2005 amid investigations by Eliot Spitzer, the New York attorney general at the time, and the Securities and Exchange Commission.
In February, Mr. Greenberg settled the New York case for $9.9 million after pushing it to trial. Even then, Mr. Greenberg lashed out against the news media coverage of the settlement.