Hollywood often cites box office results to explain the lack of diversity on screen, but take a closer look. The numbers argue in favor of diversity.
We’re heading into blockbuster season, long designed to part young men with their money using male heroics, computerized wizardry and the requisite side babes. But in a sign that slow-to-react movie studios are betting there’s lucre in catering to a wider array of audiences — something television has known for a while — the summer of 2017 is bringing alternates to tried and tired formulas, with the likes of “Wonder Woman,” starring Gal Gadot; “Atomic Blonde,” with Charlize Theron; and the Tupac Shakur biopic, “All Eyez on Me,” with Demetrius Shipp Jr. in the lead.
Here are a few box-office myths that could stand to be updated, if not done away with outright.
performers don’t sell overseas.
have a weaker box-office haul.
Given that women now make up 52 percent of moviegoers, according to the M.P.A.A., it should come as no surprise that there’s an audience for films with strong female leads. Blockbuster female-led franchises include the “Hunger Games” films, which brought in nearly $3 billion globally, and the two most recent “Star Wars” entries, which together have also earned $3 billion and counting. “Pitch Perfect,” with its ensemble female cast, was a surprise smash in 2012, earning $115 million and plaudits from, of all people, Howard Stern; its sequel took in more than twice that. Yet women accounted for just 30 percent of lead roles in the top domestic films of 2016 — and that was a recent historic high.
focus on older characters.
It’s a mystery why Hollywood won’t cater more to baby boomers, especially given the success of the two “Best Exotic Marigold Hotel” films, which had seasoned casts and a combined $222 million in sales. But research from the University of Southern California found that of the 100 top-grossing films of 2015, just 11 percent of speaking parts went to actors 60 and older. This despite a recent study by AARP that found that nearly a third of all moviegoers were 50 and older and that they accounted for three-quarters of art-house visits. And many of last year’s top indie films had older leads who also happened to be, gasp, women. Think of “Eye in the Sky,” starring Helen Mirren, “Hello, My Name Is Doris,” with Sally Field, and “The Lady in the Van,” with Maggie Smith.
An R-rating is box-office poison.
While PG-13 movies can be a safer box-office bet — according to the M.P.A.A., in 2016 they accounted for 14 of the top 25 films at the box office — recent R-rated smashes show there’s an audience for racier fare. The blood-drenched “Wolverine” sequel “Logan” pulled in more than $600 million in fewer than two months. “Get Out,” a thriller deconstructing racism made for $4.5 million, topped the box office its opening weekend and has since earned $193 million worldwide. And with a global take of $783 million, “Deadpool” (2016) has become the highest-grossing R-rated movie of all time.
are risky bets.
