The city’s high school admissions process was supposed to give every student a real chance to attend a good school. But 14 years in, it has not delivered.
It was a warm Sunday morning, the breeze sweeping aside the last wisps of summer, and 31 students from Pelham Gardens Middle School in the Bronx had signed up to spend the day indoors, at a showcase for New York City’s public high schools.
The annual fair kicks off the city’s high school application season in September, and Jayda Walker, 13, arrived with a plan.
An eager young woman with an easy smile, Jayda wants to be a divorce lawyer, and at the fair, held at Brooklyn Technical High School, she planned to focus on schools with a legal theme, located in Manhattan. She had already looked through the high school directory, an intimidating tome the size of an old-fashioned phone book, and thought Manhattan offered more variety. Besides, she said, she wanted to get out of the Bronx.
She and her classmates arrived early and were at the front of the line, with hundreds of people behind them eager to get inside.
But for many of the students from Pelham Gardens, and others like them, it was already too late. The sorting of students to top schools — by race, by class, by opportunity — begins years earlier, and these children were planted at the back of the line.
Under a system created during Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg’s administration, eighth graders can apply anywhere in the city, in theory unshackling themselves from failing, segregated neighborhood schools. Students select up to 12 schools and get matched to one by a special algorithm. This process was part of a package of Bloomberg-era reforms intended to improve education in the city and diminish entrenched inequities.
There is no doubt that the changes yielded meaningful improvements. The high school graduation rate is up more than 20 points since 2005, as the administration of Mayor Bill de Blasio has built on Mr. Bloomberg’s gains. The graduation gap between white and black or Hispanic students, while still significant and troubling, has narrowed.
But school choice has not delivered on a central promise: to give every student a real chance to attend a good school.
Fourteen years into the system, black and Hispanic students are just as isolated in segregated high schools as they are in elementary schools — a situation that school choice was supposed to ease.
Within the system, there is a hierarchy of schools, each with different admissions requirements — a one-day high-stakes test, auditions, open houses. And getting into the best schools, where almost all students graduate and are ready to attend college, often requires top scores on the state’s annual math and English tests and a high grade point average.
Those admitted to these most successful schools remain disproportionately middle class and white or Asian, according to an in-depth analysis of acceptance data and graduation rates conducted for The New York Times by Measure of America, an arm of the Social Science Research Council. At the same time, low-income black or Hispanic children like the ones at Pelham Gardens are routinely shunted into schools with graduation rates 20 or more percentage points lower.
While top middle schools in a handful of districts groom children for competitive high schools that send graduates to the Ivy League, most middle schools, especially in the Bronx, funnel children to high schools that do not prepare them for college.
The roots of these divisions are tangled and complex. Students in competitive middle schools and gifted programs carry advantages into the application season, with better academic preparation and stronger test scores. Living in certain areas still comes with access to sought-after schools. And children across the city compete directly against one another regardless of their circumstances, without controls for factors like socioeconomic status.
Ultimately, there just are not enough good schools to go around. And so it is a system in which some children win and others lose because of factors beyond their control — like where they live and how much money their families have.
The Times spent months following the high school application process at Pelham Gardens, where families do not have the advantages that routinely open doors to the city’s best schools. Many families are new to the country, and most are poor.
The school is new, and just its third graduating class will start high school in the fall. But its guidance counselor, Ayana Bryant, knows the application process as well as anybody. She has worked in middle school guidance for 16 years.
On the morning of the fair, she took Jayda and the other students to Brooklyn Tech on a yellow school bus in the hope that they would connect with the right schools. But that hope was tempered by her experience.
Founded in 2012, Pelham Gardens Middle School occupies a slice of the northeastern Bronx around the corner from a used-car dealership, and not far from the Co-op City housing development. The building, which looks like a giant cinder block painted the color of butter, contains two other schools and a rooftop field of solar panels. About 95 percent of the middle school’s students are black or Hispanic, many of them the children of Jamaican immigrants or immigrants themselves. Most of them come from poor families.
The closest subway line, the No. 5, is about a half-mile away, and traveling to other boroughs requires a significant investment of time. The No. 5 train can make more than a dozen stops before it reaches northern Manhattan.
Each year, about 160 children from Pelham Gardens join the flood of 80,000 eighth graders applying for the city’s public high schools. The field on which they compete is enormous: They have to choose from 439 schools that are further broken up into 775 programs. One program may admit students based on where they live, while another program at the same school may admit only those with strong grades.
Rare is a 13-year-old equipped to handle the selection process alone.
The process can become like a second job for some parents as they arm themselves with folders, spreadsheets and consultants who earn hundreds of dollars an hour to guide them. But most families in the public school system have neither the flexibility nor the resources to match that arsenal.
At a school like Pelham Gardens, much navigation falls to the guidance counselor, and Ms. Bryant is tireless in trying to help the children make the best decisions. She pulls groups of students into her office to explain the basics, trying to get each of them in front of her at least once. She takes them on visits to high schools. She writes tip sheets over the summer, and puts together curriculums so seventh-grade teachers can acquaint their students with the process. She warns students away from the lowest-performing schools.
Ms. Bryant grew up in the Soundview Houses, a public housing development in the eastern Bronx, an area where she still lives. In addition to being a guidance counselor, she has worked for years at a program that helps low-income students prepare for the specialized high school exam, which admits students to a group of top-performing schools like Stuyvesant High School and the Bronx High School of Science. Her daughter went to Beacon School, on the West Side of Manhattan, one of the highest-performing schools in the city.
In January, Ms. Bryant pulled some students into her office so they could practice for their interviews at University Heights Secondary School, a top school in the Bronx where there are 20 applicants for every spot. Two students, Darnell Donaldson and Samantha Suriel, were seated in front of her while the rest of the group observed. Ms. Bryant asked them to tell her about themselves.
“I like to stand out in class and participate a lot,” Darnell said.
“I like to study sometimes, or read books,” Samantha said quietly, her face pointed toward the floor.
“Why should I pick you over him?” Ms. Bryant asked Samantha. Flummoxed, she stammered for a moment before saying she had been on the honor roll since sixth grade.
Ms. Bryant asked if anyone had a comment or critique.
“When you walk in, you should introduce yourself, out of politeness,” a girl named Ivyana Rivas offered.
Ms. Bryant then asked the children whom they would accept.
After all the students had practiced interviewing, Ms. Bryant stood up from her chair. 
“Now I know some of us are germophobes, and Ms. Bryant is one,” she grinned, and her audience chuckled. “I will wash my hands later. But you’ve got to make sure your hand is in their palm,” she said, reaching out to shake a boy’s hand.
“Your hand is in their palm. Your hand is in their palm,” she repeated as she reached for them one by one.
Still, most of Ms. Bryant’s time is taken up by the mandated student meetings and accompanying paperwork for children in special education. She is also on the attendance and college committees, and acts as the child-abuse liaison. How much time can she squeeze out of the day to help children find the right high school?
The citywide graduation rate for all kinds of high schools is 72.6 percent, according to the Education Department. But that average masks sharp variations between schools based on their admissions methods. When Measure of America analyzed the rate for each method, it found that selectivity and graduation rates declined essentially in lock step, and that as graduation rates fell, the students were more likely to be poor and black or Hispanic.
Schools use a variety of methods to select the students they admit.
Graduation rates are not a perfect proxy for education quality. In many schools, students arrive far behind, and it is a major effort to help them graduate on time. Elsewhere, ninth graders show up on Day 1 doing work at grade level or above, so the steps required to get them diplomas are less onerous. And it is difficult to say how much of a school’s success is because of what happens within its walls — the curriculum, the teachers, the leadership — and how much is because of advantages children bring from home.
But graduation remains a meaningful measure of a school, and of the opportunities it provides. If parents felt they had another option, how many would be happy to send their children to a school where more than a quarter of students do not graduate?
For its analysis, Measure of America looked at how individual students were admitted to high school for the 2011-12 academic year, breaking data down by the children’s race, the borough in which they lived and whether they were poor enough to qualify for services like free lunch. Then it examined graduation rates for the different admissions methods four years later. The Education Department said the analysis contained “major methodological issues,” but it did not dispute the findings.
Kristen Lewis, one of the directors of Measure of America, said the data revealed, in essence, two separate public school systems operating in the city. There are some great options for the families best equipped to navigate the application process. But there are not enough good choices for everyone, so every year thousands of children, including some very good students, end up in mediocre high schools, or worse.
A common mantra among teachers, administrators and politicians is that a child’s ZIP code should not dictate the quality of his or her education. If the schools in a child’s neighborhood are failing, the system is supposed to let him or her attend a better school elsewhere.
But in practice, children who grow up in neighborhoods with low-performing elementary schools tend to go to low-performing middle schools, then on to high schools with low graduation rates and even lower college-readiness rates.
Middle school choice generally revolves around the city’s community school districts. In some districts, children tend to go to their assigned neighborhood schools, while in others there is competition to get into middle schools that require good grades or entrance exams. There are a few programs open to high achievers from all over the city, or to children from a particular borough. Some districts have a greater number of top-performing middle schools than others.
An analysis by the Center for New York City Affairs at the New School found that half of all students who got top scores on state tests came from just 45 middle schools out of more than 500. And 60 percent of students who went to specialized high schools came from those same 45 schools. None of those middle schools are in the Bronx.
These feeder schools, like NYC Lab Middle School in the Chelsea section of Manhattan or the Marie Curie Middle School in Bayside, Queens, have several advantages over a place like Pelham Gardens. For one thing, many have competitive admissions themselves, so students come in with strong academic records, and the school’s job is to keep them advancing. At schools like Pelham, most new students arrive behind grade level. Teachers there have the more difficult task of helping students catch up.
Last year, 146 seventh graders at Pelham Gardens took the state tests. On the English exam, 29 passed, which requires a score of at least 3 out of 4. Fifteen did that well in math. Only seven scored at least a 3 on both tests.
This means that a majority of the children had no real chance of getting into the most selective schools, like Manhattan/Hunter Science High School or Townsend Harris High School in Queens, where students must have a 3 or higher on the tests. The high school directory lists 29 programs in the city that did not accept anyone with a score lower than 3 on the math exam.
Advanced courses taught at many feeder schools also create an advantage. Laura Zingmond is a senior editor at the InsideSchools website, a project of the Center for New York City Affairs. Ms. Zingmond said that students from some middle schools had simply done more interesting work than their peers elsewhere.
By contrast, Ms. Turbides, who helps middle schoolers apply to high school in eastern Brooklyn, said the opposite was often true.
In the imposing Brooklyn Tech building, each of the city’s five boroughs had been given a floor or two, and the high schools had set up displays at slender tables. Students rushed from one to the next asking questions and printing their names on clipboards. Many tables were sheathed in school colors and littered with swag. There were branded pens, mints and lip balm. George Washington Carver High School, a school in Queens with a veterinary program, brought along a guinea pig called Mugsy, a turtle named Frankie and a rabbit who went by Marshmallow.
On the floor for Bronx schools, the halls were quieter, with fewer students exploring what they had to offer. Bronx schools find themselves on the wrong side of many important measures. They had the lowest graduation rate in the city last year, at just 65 percent. Of the students who should have graduated, more than one in 10 had dropped out.
By noon, the hallways were stuffy, and two dozen Pelham Gardens students sat against the walls of an empty corridor, resting their legs.
Jayda was among them, and though she had started the day aiming for Manhattan schools, she said that she had changed her mind. She preferred the schools on the fourth floor, the ones in the Bronx.
She said her favorite school she saw that day was DeWitt Clinton, a large Bronx high school that was represented at the fair by a passionate principal. But DeWitt Clinton is in trouble. It is part of Renewal Schools, a city program for struggling schools, and only 48 percent of its students graduated last year.
By Ms. Bryant’s estimate, there are only about 15 high schools in the Bronx doing a consistently solid job. The rest have disappointing records, with too few students graduating and even those who earn diplomas not possessing the skills they need for college.
But families at Pelham Gardens often choose schools in their home borough anyway. Getting to a school in Upper Manhattan, like the Manhattan Center for Science and Mathematics, a successful school in East Harlem, can take an hour. Plenty of parents do not want to sign up their 14-year-olds to leave the house before sunrise and spend three hours a day on the train.
So they choose more local options, like Herbert H. Lehman High School, in the Westchester Square neighborhood of the Bronx, just two miles away from Pelham Gardens. But there, only 52 percent of students graduated last year. Ms. Bryant has warned Pelham Gardens students about the school, but 15 students have matched there.
These improvements make real differences in the lives of students, but they leave plenty of room for children to fall through the cracks. And high schools remain exceedingly segregated. The isolation of black and Hispanic students in high schools is nearly as complete as in neighborhood schools.
Mr. Wallack said the de Blasio administration had tried to make information about high schools more accessible. In the fall, it started a mobile website called School Finder, which allows families to search the high school directory on their phones. It has also taken a range of steps to strengthen the school system over all, like expanding prekindergarten and offering more computer science and Advanced Placement courses. He described this as a holistic approach to improving all schools so that students were better prepared, no matter where they landed in high school.
But no matter how well the algorithm works or how much information families have, as long as there are low-performing schools, there will always be children assigned to attend them. And who are those children likely to be?
