FIELD GUIDE TO SPONSORED FILMS at the Alamo Drafthouse Downtown Brooklyn (May 9, 7 p.m.). The National Film Preservation Foundation makes a mission of saving films that aren’t necessarily obvious candidates for saving, or even made to be seen in theaters. The so-called sponsored films — shorts commissioned for educational or commercial purposes, or simply to raise public awareness — included in this survey belong in that category. Highlights include “Adventure in Telezonia,” a 1949 short in which marionettes explain how to use a telephone, and “Shake Hands With Danger,” a hilarious and terrifying 1975 safety reel made for employees of Caterpillar, the tractor manufacturer. After watching it, you’ll think twice about putting your hands where they don’t belong.
NEW YORK AFRICAN FILM FESTIVAL at the Film Society of Lincoln Center, Maysles Cinema and BAM Rose Cinemas (through May 29). This festival mostly focuses on contemporary African and African diasporic movies, but this year’s lineup includes a 1988 title, “Mapantsula” (Monday), billed as the first anti-apartheid feature to be made “by, for and about black South Africans.” It concerns the political awakening of a thief named Panic (Thomas Mogotlane), who begins to fight back against the injustice that surrounds him. Janet Maslin, writing in The New York Times, called it a “fine and caustic” film. The lineup also features “Ayiti Mon Amour” (Sunday), a magical-realist Haitian film centered on a young man, Orphée, who mourns his father’s death in the 2010 earthquake that devastated the country. The festival will be held at the Film Society of Lincoln Center through Tuesday before moving to Maysles Cinema on May 19 and the Brooklyn Academy of Music on May 26.
PANORAMA EUROPE FILM FESTIVAL at the Museum of the Moving Image and Bohemian National Hall (May 5-21). Contemporary European cinema doesn’t always reach the United States quickly, but this annual preview of recent work from the Continent is a sort of aperitif. The series opens with the comic fake documentary “King of the Belgians” (Friday and May 17). It also includes “Safari” (Sunday), in which the Austrian provocateur Ulrich Seidl tags along with vacationing hunters in Namibia, and “I, Olga Hepnarova” (Sunday and Tuesday), based on a real crime in Prague in 1973 and starring Michalina Olszanska (“The Lure”).
SON OF UNIVERSAL: MORE REDISCOVERED GEMS FROM THE LAEMMLE YEARS at the Museum of Modern Art (May 5-16). Last year MoMA hosted a retrospective on Carl Laemmle Jr., who assumed duties as the head of production at Universal when he was 21 and took risks on unusual projects. This sequel series pulls additional forgotten treasures from the Laemmle catalog, including “Outside the Law” (Friday and May 14), a gangster film with Edward G. Robinson, and “Sensation Seekers” (Saturday and Tuesday), a Jazz Age story directed by Lois Weber, a prolific and groundbreaking auteur in the silent era.