President Trump’s budget is here, and it contains serious cuts to the social safety net. One of the big changes is a plan to slash more than $800 billion over the next 10 years from Medicaid.
You may think of Medicaid as a program for the poor, but it also helps a variety of other vulnerable populations. Children with special health care needs rely on the program for services not typically covered by private health insurance, which helps them stay at home with their families. There are about five million children with special health care needs who receive benefits through public health insurance programs, including Medicaid. Proposed limits on a per-person basis are expected to disproportionately affect these children and their families, limiting access to costly but necessary services.
My sweet son is in this category. He had three different evaluations around the age of 2, to confirm the autism diagnosis I first suspected when he was 15 months old. There were many more evaluations after that, to assess the scope of his needs and strengths.
I was lucky to be able to switch to a part-time schedule at work. Moving to weekend shifts eliminated child-care costs, making the difference in my take-home pay negligible. I focused on my son’s progress in crucial areas: getting him talking, interacting and smiling; moving him out of diapers; teaching him to read.
Therapists did wonders. They also gave lots of advice. “Try to cut down on his arm flapping.” “Redirect him when he looks out of the corners of eyes.” “Don’t let him spin objects.” I drove myself to tears trying. At nap time I resorted to climbing into his crib to snuggle and sing because it was the only way I could get him to stop waving his hands in front of his eyes.
“I would cut off my arm to help him,” I told his developmental pediatrician on one visit. She said it wouldn’t work — and that I needed both those arms anyway, to care for him.
When he was 4 and attending a preschool for children with special needs, a lovely social worker was assigned to help us. In our first meeting, she encouraged me to apply for a Medicaid waiver, designed to help “medically needy” families, regardless of income, care for children who otherwise would need the type of services provided in a long-term care facility. Studies have shown that Medicaid waiver programs are cost-effective and often a preferred choice because they keep families together.
The social worker kept following up on the Medicaid waiver throughout the year. I reacted with fear. If she was recommending this, it meant she thought his autism was worse than I was willing to admit.
I was determined that he would make so much progress that we wouldn’t need the waiver. “Don’t sell him short!” I thought. But the social worker gently convinced me that my son would benefit from the services, and she did the heavy lifting to get the process started.
At a checkup when my son was almost 5, the developmental pediatrician was brutally honest: She said she did not expect a child like mine to ever be able to live independently. I suppressed fury and shock, and just listened. Both the social worker and the doctor were trying to prepare me for the future.
My son is almost 7 now, and adorable. More often than not, he is happy and affectionate. He loves to draw, go swimming, ride the subway and go out for ice cream. His father and I find him perceptive and sometimes brilliant, regardless of what any evaluations say.
We just began receiving services through the Medicaid waiver program, including “respite” child care to help reduce our family’s stress load.
Mr. Trump’s budget cuts, part of the continuing war on Medicaid, will likely mean cuts to the waiver program, adding to the burden for families like mine. It will also hurt adults with disabilities, poor children and the elderly in nursing homes, all covered through Medicaid, too.
Republicans and Democrats in Congress should reject this attack on Medicaid, a vital, often overlooked part of the safety net. They should take a stand for the people in our communities who are least able to stand up for themselves.