Bill Clinton and James Patterson’s “The President Is Missing” is to be published in June 2018 by Alfred A. Knopf and Little, Brown and Company.
As one of the country’s most prolific authors, James Patterson has maintained a constant presence on the best-seller list in part by relying on a stable of lesser known co-authors.
But for a new novel, Mr. Patterson is teaming up with a writer who is far more famous: former President Bill Clinton.
In June 2018, Alfred A. Knopf and Little, Brown and Company will jointly publish “The President Is Missing,” a novel written by Mr. Patterson and Mr. Clinton, which represents a rare foray into fiction for a former president.
The project came about late last year when Robert B. Barnett, a lawyer at Williams & Connolly who represents both Mr. Clinton and Mr. Patterson, had the idea of pairing them up on a novel, according to someone familiar with the project who did not want to speak publicly because the publishers were holding back details about the publication. Mr. Barnett, who also represents the Obamas, Hillary Clinton, George W. Bush, Laura Bush and other politicians, first approached Mr. Clinton to see if he was interested in collaborating on a novel with Mr. Patterson.
Mr. Clinton, a longtime reader of Mr. Patterson’s breathless thrillers, was game, so Mr. Barnett took the idea to Mr. Patterson. Mr. Patterson wrote an extensive outline. So far, they’ve written a few chapters into the novel, which will be edited by Sonny Mehta, chairman of the Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, and Michael Pietsch, chief executive of Hachette Book Group.
While writing a memoir has become standard for former presidents, few have published novels after leaving the Oval Office. (In 2003, Jimmy Carter did publish “The Hornet’s Nest,” a historical novel set during the Revolutionary War.) But some close observers of Mr. Clinton, who loves mysteries and thrillers, say they are not entirely surprised that he’s trying his hand at fiction.
“Clinton was always protean and a devoted mystery reader,” Joe Klein, the political columnist and author of the novel “Primary Colors” and “The Natural,” an account of Mr. Clinton’s presidency, said in an email.
Apart from the strange spectacle of a former president collaborating on a thriller with a celebrity author, the project is unusual in that two large publishing houses, which are normally competitors, are releasing the novel together, with both company’s logos displayed on all editions.
Mr. Clinton is already an established best-selling author: his 2004 memoir, “My Life,” which was published by Knopf, has sold more than two million copies in the United States.
In a statement, Mr., Clinton said he had long been a fan of Mr. Patterson’s novels. “Working on a book about a sitting president — drawing on what I know about the job, life in the White House and the way Washington works — has been a lot of fun,” he said.
For Mr. Patterson, whose books have sold more than 365 million copies worldwide, sharing a cover with an even more famous writer seems to have been a humbling experience.
