The Trump administration is asking Congress to give the federal government sweeping powers to track, hack and destroy any type of drone over domestic soil with a new exception to laws governing surveillance, computer privacy and aircraft protection, according to a document obtained by The New York Times.
The document is a 10-page draft and summary of legislation the executive branch circulated among several congressional committees on Tuesday, according to a congressional aide. The administration also scheduled a classified briefing on Wednesday for congressional staff members to discuss the topic, the aide said.
The government has expressed growing concern about the proliferation of small drones — including several that have flown over sporting events and one that crash-landed over the White House fence in 2015 — and the potential for terrorists to use them to carry bombs or other weapons into secure areas.
The draft bill’s language would authorize the government to summarily track, seize control of and use force to destroy any unmanned aircraft it determines may pose a security threat to an area designated for special protection.
The government would have to respect “privacy, civil rights and civil liberties” when exercising that power, the draft bill says. But courts would have no jurisdiction to hear lawsuits arising from such activity.
The Trump administration had no immediate comment about the draft bill language or the classified briefing.
The summary said the draft bill was part of the annual National Defense Authorization Act, which is being written by the armed services committees but has not yet been publicly disclosed. The summary also explained the government’s argument for making the change.
It warned that drones were “commercially available, challenging to detect and mitigate, and capable of carrying harmful payloads and performing surveillance while evading traditional ground security measures,” but promising techniques for detecting them and mitigating those risks “may be construed to be illegal under certain laws” passed before drone technology existed.
The proposed new rules, it added, would enable the government to develop and use “countermeasures that can address the unique public safety and homeland security threats” posed by drones.
Officials from many security agencies — the Defense, Homeland Security, Justice and Transportation Departments, along with the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the National Counterterrorism Center and the National Security Council — were scheduled to attend Wednesday’s closed-door briefing, according to a notice sent to Congress.