Alan Gilbert’s tenure as music director of the New York Philharmonic culminates next month with a “Concert for Unity” that will involve musicians from around the world, including Iran and Israel, China and Cuba. But the theme of unity, and its brutal opposite, also defined the first of Mr. Gilbert’s farewell programs on Wednesday night at David Geffen Hall.
Schoenberg’s piece, composed in 1947 and last played by the Philharmonic in 1974, lasts just under nine minutes, while Beethoven’s symphony is more than an hour. But in this pairing the works had comparable power, especially since they were performed without a break. That Schoenberg employs his 12-tone technique in this score is the least important thing to know about it. Sounding searing under Mr. Gilbert, the music is anguished, vehement and sometimes delicately poignant.
The narrator delivers the text, written by the composer in English and German, in Sprechstimme, halfway between speaking and singing, and the Tony-winning actor Gabriel Ebert gave a riveting account, enunciating the words with chilling crispness. A male chorus enters at the end, as the narrator describes Jewish prisoners singing a Hebrew prayer as they are marched to the gas chambers. In this performance, the men of the impressive Westminster Symphonic Choir marched down the aisles of the hall, then stood there, in the midst of the audience, to sing that prayer with stentorian fervor.
At the end, the hall went dark. When the lights came back on, Mr. Gilbert immediately began the Beethoven symphony.
For all his innovations at the Philharmonic, the most common complaint about Mr. Gilbert concerns a lack of excitement in his conducting of certain standard repertory works. His Ninth, for many, may well be a case in point. Other conductors have brought more intensity to the music. But I appreciated the clarity Mr. Gilbert drew from this fraught score. Inner details came through vividly, especially intricate tangles of counterpoint during teeming episodes of the first movement. The scherzo had lithe energy, if less mystery and suspense. The great adagio had flowing lyricism and breadth.
The excellent Westminster choir, directed by Joe Miller, sounded youthful and robust during the choral finale. And the performance had a strong quartet of vocal soloists: the soprano Camilla Tilling, the mezzo-soprano Daniela Mack, the tenor Joseph Kaiser and the bass-baritone Eric Owens.
