Canada|A Canadian Town Wanted a Transit System. It Hired Uber.
A Canadian Town Wanted a Transit System. It Hired Uber.
Uber, the global car-hailing service, has fought its way into resistant cities around the world, despite being hit by raw eggs and rush-hour roadblocks in Montreal and Toronto, fires in Paris and smashed windshields in Mexico City.
But in Innisfil, a small yet sprawling Canadian town north of Toronto, the company has met a somewhat different reception. Town leaders have embraced the service as an alternative to costly public transportation, causing local taxi companies to worry about the effect on their business.
Innisfil is a rural quadrilateral-shaped town of about 104 square miles, on the southwestern shore of Ontario’s Lake Simcoe. It has no public transportation other than stops on a regional bus line. This week, the town inaugurated a pilot program for what Uber says is its first full ridesharing-transit partnership, providing subsidized transportation for the town’s 36,000 people.
“It’s better value for money than a traditional transit system,” Tim Cane, Innisfil’s manager of land use planning, said in a telephone interview.
The town has set aside 100,000 Canadian dollars (about $74,000) for the pilot program, paying Uber that amount to subsidize rides. The money will cover the difference in the cost of a ride and a fixed rate paid by passengers, as well as a discount of 5 Canadian dollars per ride for rides at nonfixed rates.
Many municipalities have fought Uber as the company has defied regulations and slipped through legal loopholes to infiltrate markets. Uber has often faced violent protests from taxi and bus drivers subject to expensive and restrictive licensing and insurance rules.
Though many of Uber’s strategies have been criticized, the service has spread to more than 70 countries.
In the last two years, Uber has moved aggressively to sign transit agency partnerships around the world to embed itself in public transportation infrastructure. Those deals are generally complementary to existing municipal bus or subway service. Innisfil’s is unusual in that it is an alternative to establishing a traditional transit system for the town.
“It’s still a small part of our business, but it’s growing,” said Andrew Salzberg, Uber’s head of transportation policy and research. He said Uber had a “couple dozen” transit agreements so far using different models.
Critics, though, have voiced concern about Uber’s move into public transit, saying the service will sap systems of riders, create congestion during rush hours and ultimately take money away from improving transportation infrastructure in cities fully embracing the Uber model.
Another worry is that the reliance on smartphones and credit or debit cards in these arrangements excludes those who have neither. Innisfil’s plan mostly addresses that issue: Passengers can send texts if they do not own a smartphone with the Uber app, for example. And town leaders say they are working on solutions for people needing to pay cash.
Still, not everyone in Innisfil is happy about Uber’s arrival. Manjot Saini, the owner of the newest taxi company, Global Taxi Innisfil, said he had offered to beat Uber’s price by 50 cents a ride, but the town turned him down. “I’m providing the same service as Uber, but they said Uber’s technology is better,” he said.
Syed Hassan, a manager at Barrie Taxi Cab Services, based in a town nearby, said Uber might be good for large cities, “but for these remote areas like Innisfil, the drivers are surviving on a very few number of calls.” He said the Uber deal would have a serious impact on his company’s business, which collects about $150,000 in fares from Innisfil rides a year.
Johnny Keogh, Innisfil’s public affairs officer, said the town changed its taxi laws to allow drivers to charge less to compete with Uber and refunded fees paid by local taxi operators for the first year of the Uber deal.
Innisfil’s political leaders have long struggled with how to provide public transportation for a diffuse population. They priced the cost of running two bus routes through town — one north-south and the other east-west — at more than 600,000 Canadian dollars ($442,000) in the first year. The service would have cost about 300,000 Canadian dollars annually to operate after that. Those options, they decided, were not financially feasible.
Then one day last summer, Innisfil’s chief administrative officer, Jason Reynar, noticed a woman in a No-Frills supermarket shirt walking along the road. Since he drives past the store on his way to work, he stopped and offered her a ride.
“What took me seven minutes in a car was taking her two hours on foot,” Mr. Reynar said. When he got to the office, he recounted the experience to his colleagues and they started talking about how to connect cars on the road with people who needed a ride.
The original thought was a hitchhiking program — Mr. Reynar had never used Uber — but the idea of enlisting a car-hailing service took hold quickly. The town reached out to several ridesharing companies and chose Uber because it could adapt its smartphone application to the town’s needs.
The company would also collect a wealth of data on ridership patterns with its platform, which the town plans to use to further study its transit needs.
Once the $100,000 set aside for the program is spent, town planners hope to have enough data on how many people are going where and when to make better decisions about developing public transit, said Mr. Cane, the town’s land-use manager. They might extend the program or make adjustments, or they might try to design a fixed bus route to serve a heavily trafficked corridor at an affordable cost.
The data could also allow the town to efficiently deliver transportation subsidies to people in need, he said, and ensure that the money is being spent correctly.
Anyone in town with a mobile phone, and a credit or debit card, can summon a car, which they might share with another passenger going the same way.
“It’s also a way of building community and helping people to get to know each other,” Mr. Reynar said.
The cost to passengers is 3 to 5 Canadian dollars ($2.20 to $3.66) from anywhere in town to four local hubs. Those include the town’s recreation center and an industrial area, as well as a string of provincial bus stops and a car pool lot. For rides anywhere else in town, passengers get a discount of 5 Canadian dollars off the standard UberX fare, understanding that the ride may be shared.
“To look and feel like a public transit model, there had to be a flat rate structure comparable to typical transit fares,” Mr. Cane said.
He said that 3 to 5 Canadian dollars was the range for bus fares in Toronto, and that while Innisfil fares may be more expensive on some route-to-route comparisons, they provide the added benefit of door-to-door service.
One of Innisfil’s taxi companies has signed a similar partnership with the town to provide service for passengers with special transit needs, such as disabled people. They can use the taxi company’s 24-hour call center instead and get the same subsidized service.
One crucial aspect to the program’s success is that enough Uber drivers be available to meet demand. The company ran a local recruitment campaign and, on Monday, the wait for a car was running seven to eight minutes.
“That’s pretty good compared to having no transit, or even the 30-minute wait for a bus in a traditional transit system,” Mr. Cane said.