It was a happy ending for Sasha, but for Peterson and Gerald Johnson, the gastroenterologist at the Animal Medical Center, it was just the beginning. “Dr. Johnson said, ‘You know, I have these other cases that I haven’t been able to figure out,’ ” Peterson recalls. “So we thought: We’ll get them back. Let’s test them.” They quickly found four more cats with benign thyroid tumors and elevated levels of thyroid hormones. And the more they looked, the more hyperthyroid cats they found. “It didn’t take very long to get a dozen cases, and then 30 cases, and then 100 cases,” Peterson says. It was an astonishing discovery — dozens of pets wasting away from a disease that nobody knew existed.
In the spring of 1956, a 5-year-old Minamata girl suddenly lost control of her body. She dropped her food, wobbled when she walked and shuddered with convulsions, biting her tongue until it bled. Other city residents, including the girl’s 2-year-old sister, soon began to exhibit similar symptoms. Thousands of people eventually fell ill; many slipped into comas and died. In 1959, a physician identified the cause of the catastrophe: A local chemical plant had been dumping methylmercury into the bay, poisoning the fish and, ultimately, the humans and cats who ate them. “In retrospect, if we’d paid more attention to the dancing cats, we might have prevented some of the problems of mercury poisoning in the people,” says Peter Rabinowitz, who directs the University of Washington’s Center for One Health Research, which explores connections among human, animal and environmental health.
Rabinowitz, who created the online Canary Database to index papers on animal outbreaks that may be relevant to human health, thinks scientists and clinicians could be more strategic about connecting the dots between species. When he and his colleagues recently investigated the potential health risks of hydraulic fracturing, they discovered that skin problems were common in both the people and the dogs living near gas-extraction sites. “We’re finding that there was really some utility in asking about both people and animals when looking at a new hazard,” Rabinowitz says. He suggests that we consider linking the health records of pets and their owners.
