OSWIECIM, Poland — Back when all he wanted was to play baseball and tinker with his computer, Elisha Wiesel found himself touring Treblinka, evading KGB agents on the Moscow subway and watching his father accept the Nobel Peace Prize.
“I wanted a normal American childhood,” said Mr. Wiesel, 44, the affable and soft-spoken son of Elie Wiesel, the author, activist and Holocaust witness who died last year.
But now, after years of avoiding the spotlight to focus on his family and a 23-year career at Goldman Sachs, where he is chief information officer, the only child of the celebrated memoirist has decided it’s time to step forward and further his father’s work.
Mr. Wiesel was led through the throngs at the Auschwitz-Birkenau Memorial and Museum, passing beneath the infamous “Arbeit Macht Frei” (Work Makes You Free) entrance gate to his marked spot at the front of the crowd.
The International March of the Living is an annual event drawing thousands of people who walk the two miles from the cramped former site of Auschwitz I, the German Nazi concentration camp, to the more sprawling Auschwitz II, a concentration and extermination camp in the suburb of Birkenau.
As many as 10,000 people, most of them young, waited patiently in the breezy cold the last Monday in April for the blare of the shofar to signal the start of the march. Mr. Wiesel was to light one of six torches at the climactic ceremony, a torch dedicated to his father’s memory, and to say a few words.
The organizers of the march saw it as a generational moment, to have the son of Elie Wiesel light a torch and, in a sense, take the torch from his father.
Mr. Wiesel made his first step onto the public stage in November, speaking at a memorial for his father at the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington. Coverage of that event caught Rabbi Rubenstein’s eye.
“I approached him six months ago,” he said. The invitation was accepted.
Elisha Wiesel grew up in Manhattan and suburban New Jersey. For a few months, when he was 6, the family lived in Israel, where many of their relatives had settled. He craved baseball, friends, normalcy.
He describes himself as a socially awkward young man who was most interested in programming computer games. His father, he said, was eager to give him the kind of normal, American upbringing that he craved, but sometimes it was a struggle.
One time he was aghast to learn that his father was declining an invitation to throw out the first pitch at a 1986 World Series game between the Mets and the Red Sox. He had to push his father to do it, and it became one of the best memories of his childhood.
His favorites were the big heavy metal bands of the period, like Iron Maiden and Metallica. But he also caught “the tail end of the Ramones,” he said, and fancied himself a bit of a punk rocker. His mother and father worried, but weathered the rebellious phase, even the time he came home with a purple mohawk.
He went to Yale with every intention of majoring in the humanities. But one day, working on an assignment in a computer lab, he noticed that the guy next to him seemed to be having more fun.
“He was programming,” Mr. Wiesel said.
So, he picked up his computer again and realized that he really missed it. He eventually changed his major, hoping for a career in video games. At first, he did not even intend to interview with Goldman Sachs recruiters.
“I guess I had this image of dark, grim rooms full of guys wearing eyeshades,” he said.
In the end, he did the interview. No dark, grim room. No eyeshades. Instead, he said, he got the most interesting questions about things like algorithms for searching and sorting.
So, he went to Wall Street and got married. His father continued his very public work, but the son kept out of it. “My head was someplace else,” he said.
He prospered at Goldman Sachs and maintained his love of gaming. For three years, he ran Midnight Madness, an annual overnight Manhattan puzzle hunt popular among Wall Street professionals.
But he also found himself edging more deeply into his Jewish faith. He spent a few months shortly after Yale doing basic military training in Israel. There, he was reacquainted with Steve Jackson, a cousin and boyhood chum as well as a fervent Zionist. “He was the first religious Jew who I connected with personally,” he said.
Throughout his young life, Mr. Wiesel’s father made only one demand — that he marry in the Jewish faith, which he did. But as his father neared death, he made one more request, that his son say kaddish for him.
So, he began to go to synagogue every day, sometimes twice a day.
Now, Mr. Wiesel’s son, Elijah, is 11. And his daughter, Shira, turned 9 on the day of the march.
Mr. Wiesel watched raptly, betraying no emotion.
Finally, when his name was called, he strode across the stage and gently lit the flame for his father.
Mr. Wiesel had been determined to mention the refugees who had poured into Europe, often shunned by the region’s governments, including Poland’s.
Rabbi Boteach watched from stageside.
