Nearly all the cases of breast implant-associated anaplastic large-cell lymphoma have been linked to textured implants like this one.
Ms. Hollrah had implants inserted in 2008 and felt fine for five years. Then in 2013, in a matter of days, her right breast tripled in size, filling painfully with fluid.
Her plastic surgeon removed the implant and replaced it. He had just read about the lymphoma, so to be on the safe side, he ordered CD30 testing. The results were positive.
On her doctor’s recommendation, she saw Dr. Clemens, who removed the implants and surrounding tissue. Chemotherapy and radiation were planned but turned out to be unneeded, because tests found no spread of the cancer. She remains well, but returns to MD Anderson once a year for scans.
“I will be monitored for the rest of my life,” she said.
She started a nonprofit, Just Call Me Ray, to help educate women about implants, and she participates in the Facebook group for women who have had the implant-related cancer.
Other women have needed more extreme treatment. Terri McGregor, 52, from North Bay, Ontario, had implant surgery in 2009. Six years later, after a routine mammogram with normal results, she felt lumps in her breast. Thinking the mammogram had ruptured her implants, her doctor removed and replaced them.
Because the tissue around the implants looked abnormal, he had it tested for CD30.
Ms. McGregor was stunned to learn she had the implant-associated lymphoma.
“I had no symptoms,” she said.
The new implants had to be removed. Further tests led to another shock: The cancer was advanced. Ms. McGregor felt ashamed, because she had gotten the implants simply to improve her appearance.
Two chemotherapy regimens failed. In March 2016, she was given three to six months to live. She sold her paving business but tried to keep the prognosis from her sons, who were 20 and 23.
There was one more option: a drug called brentuximab vedotin.
Doctors then gave her high-dose chemotherapy, a transplant of her own stem cells and, in December, 15 radiation treatments.
The aggressive treatment has taken its toll. She used to shovel asphalt and hoist 50-pound bags of cement.
“Now I struggle to carry my laundry basket upstairs,” she said.
She hopes the treatment has cured her.
Like Ms. Hollrah, she participates in the Facebook group, and thinks women need more information.
Stacey Boone, 51, of Bradenton, Fla., also needed a stem-cell transplant, for lymphoma that had invaded her liver by the time it was diagnosed. The disease is in remission.
“It’s been a long road,” she said.
Kim Crespo, 49, from Palm Beach, Fla., said she had consulted several plastic surgeons in Florida who even in 2016 had never heard of lymphoma associated with breast implants. Nor had her gynecologist. She was treated for the disease at MD Anderson.
Ms. Radow’s mother, Bettye C. Yaller, first received an implant about 30 years ago after a mastectomy for breast cancer. She had the implant removed and replaced a few times, and began to have swelling and pain in 2009 or 2010, Ms. Radow said.
Doctors diagnosed an infection, removed the implant and replaced it. In 2012, at 76, her mother became short of breath and had pain and swelling in her breast, a lump in her chest, and swollen lymph nodes in her chest and neck.
“It started the most wild goose chase I’ve ever been on,” Ms. Radow said.
Her mother was hospitalized for two months, worsening steadily, as doctors struggled to determine what was wrong. In desperation, Ms. Radow’s husband consulted a physician friend, who suggested testing for lymphoma — and the diagnosis was finally made. By then, Ms. Yaller was critically ill, on a ventilator.
She improved with chemotherapy and came home from the hospital.
When she was considered strong enough for surgery, she went back to the hospital to have the implant removed. Her heart stopped on the operating table. She was resuscitated but died two weeks later.
Ms. Radow described her mother as a vibrant, lively woman who line danced, took water aerobics classes, traveled, belonged to a book group and reveled in the company of her children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren.
