The new White House budget proposal is built on a deep-rooted conservative belief: The government should help those who are willing to work, and cull from benefit rolls those who aren’t.
That emphasis on work underlies deep cuts and proposed changes to food stamps, cash assistance and health benefits for the poor in a budget that boosts spending for the military and border security. Expect the poor to work in exchange for aid, the White House argues, and antipoverty programs will work better while costing the government less.
If that strategy sounds as if it lacks compassion, says the budget director, Mick Mulvaney, the Trump administration is trying to balance compassion for taxpayers, too.
Mr. Mulvaney did not specify how work requirements might be phased in for food stamps — or how much it would cost to police such requirements for any of these programs — but he questioned whether everyone receiving help today truly needs it.
Food stamp rolls swelled during the recession and have declined only modestly since then as the economy has recovered. The Trump budget proposes cutting the program, used by about 44 million Americans last year, by $191 billion in the coming decade. It proposes more than $600 billion in cuts for Medicaid, a program Republicans in Congress have also been eager to target with work requirements.
The economy will take off for all of us, by Mr. Mulvaney’s rationale, when each able-bodied American embraces the civic duty to hold down a job. He and other conservative proponents of work requirements say the expectation is a fair one. If you want government help, you have to help yourself, by getting a job. And over time, those jobs would theoretically enable the poor to move off government assistance, shrinking the programs in the process.
The best evidence supporting work requirements — much of it after passage of the 1996 welfare overhaul law — was collected during a much stronger economy, however. And research suggests that demanding work in exchange for government aid is a dubious way to lift people out of poverty.
Welfare rolls declined and employment increased in the late 1990s after the welfare overhaul enhanced requirements for work. But the employment gains by people who were required to work (compared with those who weren’t) faded with time, suggesting that the requirement wasn’t making that much difference over the long term. And typically the jobs they did find continued to pay poverty-level wages.
Critics of work requirements also assert that they strip aid from people with legitimate obstacles to finding employment, which can push the poor deeper into poverty. The real problem, opponents argue, isn’t that low-income adults don’t want to work, but that they can’t for hard-to-fix reasons — they lack skills or child care, or have criminal records or health challenges that don’t qualify as a disability.
They need flexible support and training programs, the argument goes, not a shove into the labor pool. But programs that successfully build skills and sustainable careers aren’t cheap.
The Trump budget disproportionately cuts programs that benefit women.
In the two decades since welfare overhaul passed, Ms. Pavetti added, the economy has changed, the labor market has changed, and the population in need of help has changed. The number of would-be workers with criminal backgrounds that disqualify them from many jobs has risen. And so has the importance of education in the labor market, as many living-wage, low-skilled jobs have disappeared.
Her argument underscores the fundamental difference in how conservatives and liberals view the role of work in poverty programs: The liberal view assumes that people want to work, but that they may need assistance to get there, and that government should take on that role. The conservative philosophy assumes that some people choose not to work — or are incentivized not to by government benefits.
“The bottom line is that a work requirement serves as a kind of gatekeeping device,” said Robert Rector, a senior research fellow at the Heritage Foundation who cheers the White House’s embrace of the idea. A work requirement separates people who truly need assistance, he says, from those who don’t but are happy to take free government help. Push those people off the rolls, and that serves another conservative goal: shrinking the size of poverty programs.
But that is what critics fear: that in emphasizing what may look like fairness, policy makers could lose sight of a larger, more complicated picture for low-income Americans trapped in a rough labor market with few skills.
On Tuesday, Mr. Mulvaney cheerfully dispatched the question of what he’d tell an able-bodied American who wants work but simply can’t find any.
