Pro Basketball|Spurs’ Manu Ginobili Gets Quite a Send-Off, but Will He Retire?
Spurs’ Manu Ginobili Gets Quite a Send-Off, but Will He Retire?
SAN ANTONIO — The home crowd was chanting his name in the closing minutes on Monday night, so Manu Ginobili looked up from his seat on the bench and gave a little wave. The fans responded with a roar, a collective expression of appreciation, nostalgia and grief. Patty Mills, Ginobili’s teammate on the San Antonio Spurs, turned to him.
In truth, Ginobili will weigh retirement in the coming weeks after a season that felt, in so many ways, incomplete. Ravaged by injuries, the Spurs were robbed of a real chance to push the Golden State Warriors in the N.B.A.’s Western Conference finals. Ginobili, an old hand at postseason tussles, compared it to going “to war with a bat.” The disparity in talent was too great.
The Warriors completed a four-game sweep of the Spurs on Monday with a 129-115 victory, advancing to their third consecutive N.B.A. finals. It was drama-free basketball. The Spurs never had a chance.
San Antonio’s roster was in such dire shape that Bryn Forbes, a first-year guard, was sent onto the court in the first quarter. Forbes, a regular with the Austin Spurs of the N.B.A. Development League, played sparingly for San Antonio this season. But there he was, supplying big minutes in a closeout game of the conference finals.
Kawhi Leonard, who missed the final three games of the series with a sprained left ankle, looked on from behind the bench with the forlorn expression of an undertaker. The Spurs also went the final weeks of the playoffs without Tony Parker, who went down in the conference semifinals with a ruptured quadriceps tendon.
On top of all that, LaMarcus Aldridge had a series to forget. A five-time All-Star, he settled for a steady diet of fall-away jumpers against the Warriors. The misses piled up. On Monday, he had another meek game, finishing with 8 points and 7 rebounds while shooting 4 for 11 from the field. He looked lost without the playmaking of Parker.
In other words, the Spurs could see the sad end coming days ago. Everyone could. It was all so unavoidable. But it was also somehow unbecoming for a team synonymous with excellence. The Spurs, back when they were whole, had the second-best record in the league during the regular season. They deserved better than to have the Warriors turn them into roadkill.
Ginobili, of course, has been one of the Spurs’ standard-bearers for 15 seasons. He is a four-time N.B.A. champion. He influenced a generation of shooting guards with his versatility. And he helped change the way teams view the role of reserves thanks to his willingness to come off the bench.
In the absence of Parker (and later Leonard), Coach Gregg Popovich leaned on Ginobili in the playoffs. He delivered against the Houston Rockets in the conference semifinals, with a game-saving block of James Harden. Against the Warriors, Ginobili summoned some of his old magic — 17 points in Game 1, 21 points in Game 3 — but the Spurs had lost too many bodies by then.
On Monday, Popovich put Ginobili in the starting lineup. He scored the game’s first points with a floater along the baseline, and the crowd roared. He finished with 15 points in 32 minutes.
Popovich went so far as to compare Ginobili to the likes of Kobe Bryant, Michael Jordan, Larry Bird and Magic Johnson.
Ginobili said he wanted some distance before he made a decision about his future, and Popovich said he would give him the space to make that determination on his own. Ginobili said he appreciated how the crowd treated him during Monday’s game. He also said he was taken aback.
If this was the end for Ginobili, remember his relentless drive and his scoring bursts. Remember the championship runs and the late-game dramatics. And remember Monday, too, if only for the way he competed when none of it mattered.
It still mattered to him.