With the San Antonio Spurs this season, Ginobili has been — and forgive the suggestion — an almost ornamental presence. He is a link between eras, the team’s swingman emeritus, more instructor than player. He shot 39 percent from the field during the regular season. When the Spurs faced the Memphis Grizzlies in the first round of the N.B.A. playoffs, Ginobili collected 14 points in a series that went six games.
All of which is to say, Coach Gregg Popovich no longer leans on Ginobili the way he once did. The explosion, the lift, the quickness, the energy — those are physical gifts that belong to the past.
But occasionally there are still big nights, like Tuesday’s at AT&T Center when Ginobili, with a dunk and a block, reached back to resuscitate the Spurs in their Western Conference semifinal series against the Houston Rockets.
“He was a stud,” Popovich said after the Spurs’ 110-107 overtime victory, which gave them a three-games-to-two lead in their best-of-seven series.
First, there was the dunk, which Ginobili described as a sort of out-of-body experience: a wrong-footed, soaring slam as he sliced between defenders late in the first half. Nobody saw it coming. Not the Rockets, who took halfhearted swipes at the ball as Ginobili traveled to the rim in his time machine. Not the Spurs’ Danny Green, who called the dunk “one for the record books.” And not even Ginobili.
From that point forward, Green said, he could sense that Ginobili was “locked in,” that he had been sipping some sort of magic potion that his teammates call Grandpa Juice. Sure enough, Ginobili remained engaged through the final possession of the game, when he preserved the win by blocking a 3-point attempt by the Rockets’ James Harden. As Harden rose for the shot, Ginobili reached over the top with his left hand and stripped the ball away.
Ahead of Game 6 on Thursday night in Houston, the Spurs are holding themselves together with a combination of duct tape and chewed gum. They lost Tim Duncan to retirement before the start of the season. They lost Tony Parker, their starting point guard, when he ruptured his left quadriceps tendon in Game 2 against the Rockets. And they lost Kawhi Leonard, their do-everything forward, to an ankle injury late in Game 5. Leonard watched overtime from the bench.
Leonard’s status for Game 6 is unclear. He said he was planning to play, but even if he does, his effectiveness is likely to be diminished.
That will be playoff game No. 12 for the Spurs, who are rapidly shedding parts. The Golden State Warriors, however, needed only eight games to advance to the conference finals after sweeping the Portland Trail Blazers and the Utah Jazz in the first two rounds.
But the mistake, as always, is to underestimate the Spurs, to take their resolve for granted. On Tuesday, as they worked to slow an opponent with a plutonium-fueled offense, they proved it again.
Consider the Spurs’ hodgepodge lineup in overtime. LaMarcus Aldridge (a five-time All-Star) was joined by Green (a second-round draft pick), Patty Mills (a second-round draft pick), Jonathon Simmons (undrafted) and Ginobili (the oldest player left in the playoffs).
Green scored the Spurs’ final 7 points. Simmons came on in relief of Leonard to defend Harden, who finished with nine turnovers. And Ginobili had the game-saving block.
At his postgame news conference, Rockets Coach Mike D’Antoni seemed to wear the hollowed-out expression of someone who had seen a ghost, and perhaps that was understandable. Years ago, when D’Antoni was coaching the Phoenix Suns, he had three meetings with the Spurs and Ginobili in the playoffs. Three times, the Suns lost. On Tuesday, Ginobili was back at it. Little had changed.
Ginobili had 12 points, 7 rebounds and 5 assists in 32 minutes — the most minutes he had played in a game since 2014.
He was right, of course. The standards are different now. No one expects Ginobili to be a savior anymore. But the Spurs still expect to compete and succeed, no matter the obstacles. For one night, Ginobili was there to carry them across the finish line. Just like the old days.