Last week, The Times Magazine published a challenging and intriguing article by Susan Dominus that explored marriages that were no longer monogamous, with both spouses’ agreement. For nearly a year, Dominus reported on couples engaged in consensual nonmonogamy (what some involved call polyamory), and returned with a collection of fascinating stories about jealousy, love, desire and trust, all within the loose confines of an open relationship.
For a number of readers, however, the stories in Dominus’s article were familiar and true because they had lived those experiences as well. We asked people to share their stories of engaging in open marriages and relationships and received more than 300 submissions. A select group of their responses are below. They were edited for length and clarity.
Several readers shared how they carefully and deliberately opened their relationships. Despite the challenges of an open marriage, the couples felt strengthened by the decision to engage in outside relationships.
My boyfriend and I have been together for almost five years. We’ve seen each other through some significant health scares, career changes and cross-country moves. Over the course of that time, we were excellent partners and cared for one another immensely, but after a little over a year of being together, our sex life fizzled. It was becoming such an issue that both of us considered ending things, but we didn’t bring it up because our partnership in all other facets of life was so strong.
About two years ago, we were approached by a friend interested in sharing a night with both of us, and we went for it. That led us down a path of actual conversation about the matter, how exciting that night had been for both of us and how unhappy both of us were with the state of our sexual relationship. We gradually opened our relationship.
This was not always an easy process. For a while it meant simply including other people in our shared sexual lives, but it has expanded into the ability for each of us to go do things independently as well. We also have flexibility in the relationship. There are times when one or both of us needs to feel completely supported, and during those times we will close the relationship because we are each other’s most important person and we recognize that there are times when being open doesn’t make sense.
The most important thing this has done for us is remind us that we shouldn’t take each other for granted. Instead, we choose each other over and over because we want to, not because we are simply on autopilot. Crystal A.
My wife and I are 80 and have had an open marriage for 40 years. It started when I had a “secret” relationship and has evolved over the years. I told my wife about a later relationship and suggested that we have an open marriage, never imagining that she would agree. But she did.
I have had one-night stands and relationships that lasted for years. She had several relationships that were very satisfying. It hasn’t all been a bed of roses, though. Our agreement is to tell the other when we are involved with someone, but to not share details.
There have been jealousies, hurt feelings and times when one of us was in a relationship and the other was not. We told our children when they reached college age and they strongly disapproved. Still, I consider the decision to have an open marriage one of the best we have ever made. Watson B.
A number of readers in open marriages came from religious backgrounds and had married young. As a result, they felt they had not been free to experiment sexually, and this feeling of deprivation led them to open their marriages.
My husband and I met when we were 17 and were both raised in strict evangelical homes. I had always known I was a little boy crazy. My childhood diaries were filled with details of all the many boys I’d had crushes on. While I was deeply in love with the man soon to be my husband, I never stopped feeling attraction to others. We married at 21 and then slowly left the church.
I felt a part of my life had been stolen — the part where you explore your own sexuality with multiple people in your early 20s. My husband also knew he was bisexual, and that was something he had never followed through on. A few years into our marriage, we decided to open up to casual experimentation: flings, one-night stands, no emotional attachments.
This first stage was a dizzying sexual adventure with many ups and downs, and we felt our primary connection was overwhelmingly strengthened by these other encounters. We learned to be more open with each other about our sexual needs, desires and kinks — something that our Christian background had always stifled within us.
While there have been problems, of course, and it is true that polyamorous lifestyles can sometimes require an exhausting degree of processing and communication, overall I feel like a more self-actualized and fulfilled person through the whole process, with so much love in my life. I guess in some ways I have the evangelical church to thank for all this. Josie J.
I married my husband at 19. We have always had a successful marriage, working as a perfect team to build our adult lives together. Somewhere along the way, he confessed to me his desire for me to have sex or even flirt with other men, an idea that was outrageous to me at the same, especially given our religious backgrounds.
Years later, at 27, I was a stay-at-home mom of two young children with no family in our state, few friends, a husband who worked out of town and crippling depression and anxiety. I loved my husband, but I had lost my spark. He once again suggested I date other people. This time I agreed because I was desperate. Using Tinder, I dated a variety of men, some married, some not. Then I met Joe and we fell in love.
Today, the three of us openly live together as a triad, raising our kids. My husband and I come from years of maintaining a strong marriage, and I found Joe in the midst of hookup culture. The combination has been interesting, challenging and beautiful. Alicia W.
Other readers shared how opening up their heterosexual marriages finally allowed them to explore their bisexuality while remaining in a committed relationship.
As a young adult, I tried desperately to deny that I was gay. I tried everything I could think of to make myself straight, including marrying a man and having children. 
Coming out to my husband was the hardest thing I have ever done. I fully expected to be planning our divorce by the end of the conversation, but he surprised me.  I’m surprised it took you this long to admit it.” Then he said: “Why would we get divorced? We have kids to raise. They’re happy with their life, and there is no reason to disrupt it. You can date whomever you want. Just don’t break up our family.” I thought long and hard about what he said, and I agreed that we should keep our family intact.
We made some minor changes, like separate bedrooms. I ventured into the world of online dating, and he reconnected with an old girlfriend. That was four years ago, and we’re still going strong. Our marriage is solid, our kids are happy and we each have a romantic relationship outside our marriage that makes us happy. It’s an arrangement that works for us, and I wouldn’t have it any other way. Kim M.
I met the man who is now my husband the year after college. I had only been out as bisexual for a short time, and he was my first real relationship. We fell in love, and were together for years before marrying. I was open with him about my sexuality and my (lack of) sexual history, and he was never anything but supportive.
About a year before we married, and after many discussions, it was actually he who first offered the idea of opening the marriage so that I could see other people (women, in particular). I was stunned but, honestly, grateful and relieved, as it had been something I’d wondered about and didn’t know how to bring up.
Amazingly, I met a woman just a few months after that, and we dated for about a year. Since then, I’ve dated a few people, and am now with a girlfriend I’ve been seeing for 6 months. My husband also eventually found himself someone whom he sees very casually. We’ve had ups and downs and miscommunication, but it has also absolutely strengthened and deepened our relationship with each other and with the people we see. Emily M.
Finally, a group of readers who read the article had attempted an open relationship and wanted to share their negative experiences in order to present a more balanced view. Some argued that they still believed open marriages could work under the right circumstances, but could also lead to disaster when both partners aren’t on the same page.
I was in an open relationship in the past, during the 1970s, when people began to experiment with open marriages. My ex-husband and I were close friends with another couple; he fell in love with the wife first and wanted to open the marriage and have sex with this woman. Her husband felt “obligated” to then pursue a romantic relationship with me (he later told me). I loved them both so much that I complied — but I was also in my early 20s and incredibly naïve.
The foursome became emotionally complicated. We were all in therapy. Both marriages finally fell apart, and we and the other couple divorced. In the end, I felt betrayed by everyone and lost my best girlfriend. In retrospect, I felt the whole experiment was an elaborate ploy so that my ex could have sex with my best friend within the confines of marriage, cloaked in some kind of consensual open-marriage agreement.
I’ve remarried and have been in a monogamous relationship for 28 years. I’ve never gone outside my marriage again. Marissa P.
To tell this story with the kind of depth that it requires, you need to tell the story of those for whom nonmonogamy didn’t work out. In my case, after more than 10 years of marriage and two kids, my wife fell for someone else, and I agreed to open up the marriage.
In retrospect, I never really had a choice, and this was the beginning of the end of the marriage. The issue wasn’t possessiveness on my part. I embraced what I saw as an opportunity for growth. The problem was a lack of consideration on the part of my wife. She was going to do things her way with a total lack of control or regard for my need for some kind of boundary around her activities.
I still think that nonmonogamy can work, but it requires deep care and consideration for each person involved (including any children) and extreme maturity. Running off and ignoring adult responsibilities doesn’t work if you want to stay married.
I did learn about myself that I am fundamentally not a jealous person and that I am committed to the happiness of all concerned in my relationships. I also learned that my wife was not the kind of person I wanted to be married to. Michael B.