All that talk about changing the shape — literally — of modeling has finally been put into action. At least in France.
Just days before the presidential election gave a resounding victory to Emmanuel Macron, heralding a new generation in French politics, two decrees aimed at protecting the health of models and at preventing anorexia were published.
Other countries — including India, Israel, Italy and Spain — have measures to promote the well-being of models, and the Council of Fashion Designers of America has guidelines for its members. But the fact that France is generally considered the home of fashion, and because many young models begin their careers in Paris (for example, Sofia Mechetner, who was “discovered’’ by Dior in 2015 at 14), means the legal changes could have the widest reverberations. Especially because of the penalties involved.
Models are now required to have a medical certificate, valid for up to two years, confirming their general physical well-being and the fact they are not excessively underweight. The much-debated body mass index, or BMI — a measurement whose signifier of health has been widely disputed, as it does not take into account individual physiques — will be part of the consideration for models older than 16.
Separately, beginning Oct. 1, any “commercial” image of a model whose bodily appearance has been digitally or otherwise altered will have to be labeled “photographie retouchée,” or retouched photograph.
Those who do not disclose image retouching are subject to a fine of 37,500 euros, or more than $41,000; employing a model without the health requirements and certificate carries a fine of €75,000 and six months in jail.
Though the law had been under discussion for a long time and was approved by the National Assembly in 2015, its publication in the Official Journal was required for it to take effect, a move that occurred last week, spurred in part by the desire of the health minister, Marisol Touraine, to put it in place before the change of administration.
Whether the law will really make a difference, however, remains to be seen.
After all, a primary reason for the prevalence of anorexia among models, and for their exploitation, is the skewed balance of power in the industry, which places models at the bottom of the totem pole, at the mercy of agents, bookers, photographers, stylists and so on. It is possible that insisting that models be “certified” by yet another authority figure will simply add to the concerns, again putting someone other than the model in the position of judging her health.
In addition, the retouching law applies only to advertising, not to editorial images in magazines or newspapers. And in the hierarchy of fashion, editorial is seen as much more desirable (if less lucrative) than commercial campaigns. Additionally, models are most often discovered and break through in magazines before they are snapped up by brands for marketing campaigns. So the new law would not alleviate the pressure for thinness emanating from the glossy side.
Fashion has a history of periodically engaging in self-recrimination, especially when it comes to models, but of then settling back into familiar patterns. See, for example, the discussion about diversity on the runway, as well as the question of models’ weight. Perhaps the situation will change, however, now that there is actual financial risk.
