Peter Spier, an award-winning children’s-book author and illustrator who depicted Noah’s biblical journey, told the story of the Erie Canal to the words of the song “Low Bridge, Everybody Down” and gave voice to the sounds of hundreds of animals like hippos (“RRUMMPF) and starlings (“FEE-YOU”), died on April 27 in Port Jefferson, N.Y. He was 89.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said his son, Thomas.
Mr. Spier’s dozens of books are filled with meticulously drawn and brilliantly colored images, like the elephants, horses, seals, acrobats, clowns and trapeze artists in “Circus!” (1992) and the myriad pairs of animals in “Noah’s Ark” (1977).
He imbued “Noah’s Ark” with the cinematic sensibility of a Cecil B. DeMille epic, filling it with a cast of creatures that seems animated on the page. He showed Noah’s toils, like pulling a donkey onto the ark and trying to snatch two bees out of a swarm. He tossed in visual jokes, like sheets flapping on a clothesline and rabbits who enter the ark as a couple and leave it as a herd.
“Noah’s Ark” brought Mr. Spier the Caldecott Medal, the highest honor for illustrators of picture books.
One of his earliest books was inspired by a trip to Vermont with his wife, Kathryn. They were singing the old English folk song that begins, “The fox went out on a chilly night,” when Mr. Spier suddenly told her that the song — about a fox who steals a duck and a goose from a farmer to feed his and his wife’s 10 cubs — would be the ideal source for a children’s book.
“When we reached home a week later, I grabbed a few sketchbooks and drove back to New England,” he recalled. He filled the pages with notes about colors, weather and locations, and later added drawings of the covered bridges, cemeteries and farms of Newfane, Vt. Back home, he fleshed out his vision for the book with three full-size paintings.
“My editors at Doubleday took one look at them and said, ‘Great, go ahead,’” he wrote in 2012, the year “The Fox Went Out on a Chilly Night” (1961) was released as an e-book. For that reissue, he colored the pages that had originally been printed in black and white to save money.
Peter Spier in the mid-1960s with one of his model ships.
Peter Edward Spier was born on June 6, 1927, in Amsterdam and grew up in the small town of Broek in Waterland. His father, Jo, was a newspaper illustrator and cartoonist, and his mother, the former Albertine van Raalte, was a homemaker. His formal education ended in his early teens, about a year after the Nazis invaded the Netherlands in 1940.
The elder Mr. Spier was imprisoned by the Nazis for an illustration of Hitler that speculated about what would have happened had he stayed a painter. A Jew, he was subsequently deported to the Theresienstadt concentration camp in Czechoslovakia, as were his wife, his sons and his daughter, Celine. They were liberated by the Soviet Red Army in May 1945.
Mr. Spier returned to his homeland after the war and served in the Royal Netherlands Navy for four years before immigrating to the United States in 1951. He worked in advertising before he began to write and illustrate children’s books. At a visit to Doubleday’s office in the 1950s, he spotted a manuscript on his editor’s desk that immediately interested him.
The finished book, “The Cow Who Fell in the Canal,” by Phyllis Krasilovsky, about a bored cow named Hendrika, was published in 1957.
In addition to his son and brother, Mr. Spier is survived by his wife, the former Kathryn Pallister; his daughter, Kathryn; and two grandsons.
By the mid-1990s, Mr. Spier had largely stopped writing children’s books and turned his fuller attention to building model sailing ships and steamships, a longtime craft that evoked his time sailing in the canals in the Netherlands and his stint with the Dutch Navy. Out of fallen trees or scrap wood, he carved hulls and built planks. He used miniature lathes to make cannons and little saws to make anchors.
