In the spring of 2010, near the end of Alan Gilbert’s first season as music director of the New York Philharmonic, the players in the orchestra pelted him with crumpled pieces of paper in the middle of a performance. This wasn’t a mass jeer. In fact, Mr. Gilbert explained at a public interview at Lincoln Center recently, nothing could have pleased him more.
The incident came during the Philharmonic’s inventive production of Ligeti’s audacious opera “Le Grand Macabre.” For a passage of frenzied mayhem, Mr. Gilbert came up with the idea of having the players toss paper fusillades at him. But there was a purpose to the silliness, Mr. Gilbert, who is stepping aside after eight years as music director, said in the interview.
Boldly stepping into that bigger box, Mr. Gilbert has expanded the mind-set of the Philharmonic — the major legacy of his tenure. His artistic priorities now seem embedded in the orchestra’s identity. It must champion contemporary music. It must foster associations with living composers and maintain the composer-in-residence position that Mr. Gilbert re-established (Esa-Pekka Salonen is now in his second year). It must continue to appoint dynamic performers as artists in residence and give them a say in programming. It must regularly leave Lincoln Center to perform unusual programs in spaces large and small, from National Sawdust in Brooklyn to the massive Park Avenue Armory.
The enormous success of “Le Grand Macabre” emboldened the Philharmonic and its players, at least for a while. In 2011, the Philharmonic presented an enchanting production of Janacek’s “The Cunning Little Vixen,” directed, like the Ligeti opera, by Doug Fitch, who has been a crucial Gilbert ally. In 2013, the Philharmonic offered “A Dancer’s Dream,” a program that included a staging of Stravinsky’s “Petrushka.” During the bustling Shrovetide Fair scene, the musicians, many wearing costumes, stomped their boots and swayed with the music; some even got up and danced. Mr. Gilbert, wearing a satiny black robe, leapt from the podium at one point to play the magician who introduces the puppets at the fair.
Still, from what we know, Mr. Gilbert did not receive consistent support for his ambitious plans from the Philharmonic’s administration and board, especially in recent years, as the orchestra has often seemed adrift. Indeed, the Contact! new-music series, one of Mr. Gilbert’s initiatives, was close to death this season and was saved only by personal contributions from, among others, Mr. Gilbert himself. In recent seasons, he has chosen to pick his battles with the administration, deferring perhaps too much to guest conductors, which has made for some sleepy programs.
At least for the near future, the Philharmonic remains committed to his most ambitious venture: the NY Phil Biennial, a project that has, twice so far, offered festivals that have made New York the capital of the international contemporary-music community. In the most encouraging bit of recent news, Deborah Borda, a visionary who broadly shares Mr. Gilbert’s values, is about to take over as the orchestra’s executive director, following her game-changing tenure at the thriving Los Angeles Philharmonic.
My doubts remain about whether Jaap van Zweden, Mr. Gilbert’s designated successor, will continue the Gilbert legacy. He’s a powerful maestro but has shown less passion for artistic innovation. Lately, though, he’s been talking up contemporary music and voicing strong support for Ms. Borda, both encouraging signs.
Mr. van Zweden has made his reputation in the standard repertory, while over the years, Mr. Gilbert’s conducting of staples has been found wanting by some. I don’t really agree. For me, his performances of standard works as varied as Bach’s Mass in B minor and Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony have demonstrated keen musical insight, a feeling for the shape and flow of a piece, and an unsentimental sense of drama. Also, when it comes to assessing a music director of a major orchestra, I care more about the larger artistic mission than the slow movement of a Brahms symphony.
I understand, though, what those who find Mr. Gilbert’s Beethoven and Mozart a little too wan are taking about. At the public interview, in answering a question about interpretation, he said something revealing. In rehearsal, he explained, especially with a well-known work, when he asks the orchestra to do something (to execute a gradual crescendo, say, or bring out an inner voice, or pull on the tempo), he cautions the players to “not make it obvious.” His interpretive choices should emerge without seeming deliberate.
That’s an admirable but difficult balance to bring off. Mr. Gilbert is not a charismatic type by nature. Perhaps he could go outside his own comfort zone and make things a little more obvious.  And in works that are just outside the standard repertory, like Schoenberg’s early symphonic poem “Pelleas und Melisande” or Ravel’s Suite No. 2 from “Daphnis and Chloe,” which he conducted blazingly with the Philharmonic at Carnegie Hall, he can be superb. His recordings of the complete Carl Nielsen symphonies and concertos, taken from live Philharmonic performances, are matchless.
I regret that he will not be around for the renovation of David Geffen Hall (assuming this $500 million project, currently scheduled to be completed by the fall of 2022, actually happens). The construction will force the orchestra out of its home for at least two seasons, and some within the organization dread the disruption. But Mr. Gilbert was ready to seize on it, as he said in a 2014 interview.
Adam Gopnik, the New Yorker writer who led the public interview, thanked Mr. Gilbert on behalf of the city for bringing a new sense of community to the Philharmonic. I’ve been gratified to see him so committed over the years to the Philharmonic’s concerts in the parks. And the way he commemorated the 10th anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks was perfect: He led a free performance of Mahler’s great “Resurrection” Symphony. The Philharmonic set aside 700 tickets for emergency workers and families of victims, and some 2,000 seats were set up at Lincoln Center Plaza for a video relay of the concert. The ovation went on for 10 minutes.
I’ll join the chorus: Thank you, Alan Gilbert.