255 pages. Scribner. $25.
Her parents scrimped to take her on a grand tour of Europe. Lincoln Center was visited as often as church. The family acquired a summer house on Martha’s Vineyard, to better slip their daughter’s canoe into the elite currents of African-American culture.
Harris attended the High School of Performing Arts in Manhattan, the school later celebrated in the movie “Fame,” and then Bryn Mawr, where she was a member of the class of 1968.
“My Soul Looks Back” is, in large part, about how Harris made a place for herself among New York City’s black intelligentsia in the early 1970s. She was a journalist before she was a food writer, working as the book review editor for Essence magazine and the theater critic for New York Amsterdam News, the oldest black newspaper in the United States.
Floyd was 15 years older than Harris and knew everyone; he grabbed her by the wrist and took her everywhere. Among the personalities who flicker through this memoir (and often through Floyd’s apartment) are Maya Angelou, Nina Simone, Richie Havens, Paule Marshall, Hugh Masekela, Toni Morrison and Max Roach.
Because Harris is Harris, many of her memories are filtered through her recollections of recipes and meals. She’s long had a gift for evoking bygone restaurants and chefs.
Her most recent book, “High on the Hog” (2011), for example, had a fond remembrance of Patrick Clark, the black chef who made his name at Manhattan restaurants like Odeon and Café Luxembourg before his death, at only 42, in 1998.
The restaurant’s “stygian décor of dark wood and stained glass” only intensified the action that took place within. Harris was a devotee of El Faro’s caldo gallego, a Galician white bean soup, and she prints a recipe for it here.
Floyd taught Harris how to entertain. Good conversation mattered most. But after that, the primary rule, then as now, was generosity, never to skimp when it came to feeding others.
She details her low-key professional rivalry with Vertamae Smart-Grosvenor, the author of the influential cookbook “Vibration Cooking” (1970). They overlapped as young journalists at Essence, and Grosvenor wasn’t ecstatic when Harris began writing a food and travel column for the magazine.
Harris’s relationship with Floyd builds to a surprising and rather sad ending, one not worth spoiling here. Her gratitude to him remains enormous.
“My Soul Looks Back” was never, to this reader, uninteresting. It does suffer at times from a softness of focus. This is one of those volumes in which “rooms rang with laughter” and “rapier-fast wit” is prized, but it never makes you laugh.
Harris doesn’t recall the best lines and jokes, and the result is a book that can seem more summary than scene. Clichés arrive often and frequently in pairs (“She’d arrived dressed to impress and pulled out all the stops”), like lovers holding hands.
