Where are the pensioners’ yachts?
That riff on Fred Schwed Jr.’s famous Wall Street tell-all book — which explains why bankers and brokers own yachts, but the customers who take their advice do not — came to mind recently. I was reading a new report detailing how outsize money management fees are crippling the nation’s public pensions.
We’re talking about the fees charged by hedge funds and private equity firms to invest pension fund money — fees that enrich the wealthy but imperil workers, retirees and taxpayers.
State and local pensions oversee $3.6 trillion in investments meant to benefit former teachers, firefighters, police officers and other workers. These people rely on their pensions for a comfortable retirement.
Unfortunately, what many of these funds owe to beneficiaries far exceeds their ability to pay. Truth in Accounting, a nonprofit that aims to educate taxpayers on government finances, estimated that the unfunded liability at 500 large pension plans across the nation stood at $1.3 trillion in fiscal year 2015.
That is a mighty deep hole. And many pension fund trustees have responded by increasing their allocation to so-called alternative investments, such as in hedge funds and private equity, rather than sticking to lower-cost vehicles that invest in stocks and bonds. They seem to think that swinging for the fences with the more exotic strategies will close the yawning gap.
These investments beat the market, sometimes. But their enormous fees — as much as 2 percent in management fees and 20 percent of any gains — must always be paid. And these costs push pension funds deeper into the hole.
Consider the Teachers’ Retirement System of the State of Illinois, a $46 billion pension fund. At the end of fiscal 2016, the retirement system’s funded ratio, a measure of its ability to meet its obligations, stood at 39.8 percent, on an actuarial basis. It had a long-term unfunded liability of $71.4 billion. The fund has 34 percent of its assets in alternatives. And in the 2016 calendar year, its private equity and hedge fund investments underperformed the rise in the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index.
Meanwhile, the fund incurred almost $750 million in direct investment expenses in fiscal 2016, up 7.6 percent from the previous year.
Pensions are deep into alternatives. A recent study by the Pew Charitable Trusts showed that among 73 large state-sponsored pensions, allocations to hedge funds and other exotic investments grew to 25 percent in 2014, up from 11 percent in 2006.
Returns on these vehicles do not always match their promise. “Funds with recent and rapid entries into alternative markets — including significant allocations to hedge funds — were among those with the weakest 10-year yields,” Pew noted.
How these high costs harm pensions is detailed in a new report: “The Big Squeeze: How Money Managers’ Fees Crush State Budgets and Workers’ Retirement Hopes.” The analysis, by the American Federation of Teachers, estimated the costs incurred in alternative investments at 12 large public pensions and determined how much the funds would have saved if they had paid about half the going rate.
The dozen funds included in the analysis held almost $800 billion in assets. If fees on their alternative investments had been halved over the last five fiscal years, the 12 funds would have saved $3.7 billion annually and $18.5 billion over the period. Going forward, that reduced-fee structure would save the average pension fund an additional $1.8 billion over five years and almost $8 billion after 15 years.
The report urges pension fund overseers to work to reduce the fees they pay and adopt policies requiring a full accounting and disclosure of all fees by alternative investment managers.
While some large pension funds have started to cut back on alternative investments, most continue to believe in them.
Dale R. Folwell, the recently elected Republican treasurer of North Carolina and a certified public accountant, is one pension overseer challenging the status quo. The state’s $92 billion pension is one of his responsibilities.
“In the last 16 years, our fees have gone from $50 million to over $600 million,” Mr. Folwell said in an interview. Meanwhile, assets under management grew by only 33 percent over that time.
Since entering office three months ago, Mr. Folwell said he had telephoned all of the pension’s investment managers — roughly 175 — to make sure they had the state’s interests at heart.
“We asked them: ‘Who are you? Where are you? How good are you? And how much are we paying you?’” Mr. Folwell said.
Not everyone made the grade: Mr. Folwell said he had fired nine managers so far. He has also extracted more than $30 million in fee reductions from some managers who remain.
Mr. Folwell is also examining how his fund’s assets are valued. Many alternative investments are illiquid and difficult to assess; because a fund’s fees are based on these valuations, it is imperative that they are not overstated, he said.
Mr. Folwell has an unusual background. For three years, he was North Carolina’s assistant secretary of commerce, and before that he spent eight years in its House of Representatives. Before he got his master’s degree in accounting, he was a trash collector and motorcycle mechanic.
Alas, Mr. Folwell is rare among public pension overseers, many of whom seem to be wowed by the wizards of Wall Street.
Mr. Bergman said he believes one problem with the current system is that many overseers have a duty only to the fund’s beneficiaries. While that might seem appropriate, it can encourage these fiduciaries to make riskier bets in the hopes of generating better returns.
Because that downside ultimately falls to the taxpayers, Mr. Bergman said, pension fund trustees should also have a duty to them.
“We need fundamental changes in fiduciary duties in public pension funds,” he said, “to align the incentives more closely not just with beneficiaries but with taxpayers as well.” A good idea.