Koma Otake has been dealing with a foot injury for nearly a decade. So some show-and-tell was in order on a recent Sunday. In a parked car in the East Village, he took off his shoes and socks to display his ankles to a reporter.
One-half of the acclaimed Japanese performance duo Eiko and Koma, he has now started a solo career — just as Eiko did when Koma was first unable to dance. And technically, it was surgery that got him back on his feet.
Beginning on Thursday, Koma presents “The Ghost Festival,” his first multidisciplinary solo presentation, at Danspace Project. The show begins inside; after the intermission, the audience will go outside to watch Koma dance in and on top of a trailer. His artwork will also be featured: 24 painted panels in the trailer and in the theater space. It is truly a one-man show.
This journey is personal for Koma, who was born in Japan in 1948. “The Ghost Festival” pays homage to his teachers and to dancers important to him, including Kazuo Ohno, a founder of Butoh, a dance form that emerged after World War II. The show also takes inspiration from a dance festival that honors ancestral spirits, Owara Kaze no Bon, in the Toyama Prefecture in northwestern Japan, near Koma’s birthplace, Niigata.
There is dancing over three nights that lasts until dawn. The movement — simple and repetitive — is performed in a counterclockwise motion around a fire and is passed down from one generation to the next.
In “The Ghost Festival,” Koma sees himself as the mediator: He embeds the work with veiled references to his own dance ancestors, letting his movement continually changes texture, from delicate and brash to dreamy.
Known for duets that placed their slowly moving, incandescent bodies on stages, in museums and in nature, Eiko and Koma were a spellbinding pair. But in their solo performances, a new Koma and a new Eiko have emerged: They are even more potent, more raw, more electric.
For Koma, that something else relates to a lineage of dance spirits that includes his teacher, Takaya Eguchi, a modern dancer who studied with the German Expressionists Mary Wigman and Rudolf von Laban. Wigman died before Eiko and Koma could meet her, but before they moved to New York, in 1976, they worked in Europe with Manja Chmiel, a Wigman disciple, and came to discover the German dancers Harald Kreutzberg and Dore Hoyer, and, later, Kurt Jooss and Pina Bausch.
