N.B.A. teams’ fortunes will rise and fall on Tuesday night with the bounce of a ball — a Ping-Pong ball. It’s time once again for the N.B.A. draft lottery.
When and where is it? 8 p.m. Tuesday, New York Hilton Midtown hotel.
Is it on TV? Yes, on ESPN. Steaming on Watch ESPN.com.
Who’s in? The 14 teams that did not make the playoffs are normally eligible. But one of those teams, the Nets, traded its pick away.
How does it work? A random, weighted draw will be held to determine the top three draft picks. Picks 4 to 14 will then be allotted based on teams’ records.
Who has the best chance at the No. 1 pick? The Boston Celtics, at 25 percent.
Wait, Boston? Top-seeded-in-the-playoffs Boston? Yes. Boston has the Nets’ pick, as part of the 2013 trade in which the Nets got Paul Pierce, Kevin Garnett and Jason Terry. The New York Times wrote then that the trade could tip the balance of power in the Eastern Conference. It did not work out that way. The Nets were the worst team in basketball last season and could really use that lottery pick.
Who else has a good chance at No. 1? The next most likely teams are the Suns, 20 percent; the Lakers, 16; the Sixers, 15; the Magic, 9; and the Timberwolves and Knicks, 5.
Who does not have such a good chance? The Mavericks have a 2 percent chance, and the Pelicans, Hornets, Pistons, Nuggets and Heat’s chances all round to 1 percent.
Aren’t the Kings missing? Yes. The Kings would normally have a 3 percent chance at the top spot, but the Sixers have the right to swap picks with them because of an earlier deal. If the Kings get No. 1, of course they will do so.
What about ties? There was a prelottery lottery to rank the teams with identical records. The Knicks, for example, lost a draw to the Timberwolves and will select behind them if neither wins a top-three slot. You can watch a video of it on NBA.com, if you care to.
What’s going on with the Lakers and the Sixers? As part of a 2015 trade involving Michael Carter-Williams, the Sixers have the right to the Lakers’ pick, as long as it is not in the top three. The Lakers have about a 47 percent chance of getting a top-three spot and keeping the pick.
Is what I see on TV the actual lottery? Not really. What you see is more of a ceremonial unveiling. The actual lottery, with Ping-Pong balls, is held just before in front of a handful of league, team and news media witnesses sequestered in another room. In 2015, The Times was there to witness the curious process.
When is the actual draft? The draft will be held June 22 in Brooklyn, after the playoffs are over.
Who will be picked? That’s right, let’s talk basketball, not Ping-Pong balls.
The consensus No. 1 pick is point guard Markelle Fultz, who had a great freshman year with a bad Washington team. Other top-three candidates are swingman Josh Jackson of Kansas, the point guard and noted sneaker pitchman Lonzo Ball of U.C.L.A., forward Jayson Tatum of Duke and point guard De’Aaron Fox of Kentucky. All five were freshmen last season.
No big men? Well, Jackson is 6-foot-8. The top 7-footer is likely to be Lauri Markkanen, a Finn from Arizona.
Any upperclassmen? Probably not in the top 10.
How about the overseas contingent? Frank Ntilikina is a French point guard who plays in France for Strasbourg. Terrance Ferguson, an American guard, bypassed college to play in Australia for the Adelaide 36ers for a year. Both could go in the top 10.