Asia Pacific|Chinese Student in Maryland Is Criticized at Home for Praising U.S.
Chinese Student in Maryland Is Criticized at Home for Praising U.S.
HONG KONG — Speaking at the University of Maryland, Yang Shuping, a graduating senior from China, sprinkled her upbeat commencement speech with observations that drew warm applause: The air was far cleaner in the United States than in China, she said, and she could openly discuss racism, sexism and politics in ways that she had never before dreamed possible.
The episode appeared to show how, as more Chinese study overseas, comments that they make about China or its one-party government can spread online and prompt taunts, even threats, from other students or social media users back home.
There were 328,547 students from China studying at higher education institutions in the United States during the academic year that ended in 2016, nearly one-third of all international students in the country, according to data published by the Institute of International Education, a nonprofit organization based in Washington. That figure was about double the number of students in the United States from India, which ranked second on the institute’s list.
In a separate study that cited data from China’s Education Ministry, the consultancy ICEF Monitor said that 523,700 Chinese students had gone abroad to study in 2015, up from fewer than 300,000 in 2010. The study said that as many as 80 percent of the Chinese students who went abroad typically returned to China to work.
The Maryland episode is hardly the first time that a student or professor at an overseas university has provoked complaints back in China. Earlier this month, for example, a lecturer from Monash University in Australia was suspended after a Chinese student complained on Weibo of a classroom quiz that had appeared to insult Chinese officials.
In 2010, the University of Calgary announced that China’s Education Ministry had removed it from its list of accredited overseas institutions. The decision came weeks after the Canadian university had awarded an honorary degree to the Dalai Lama, whom the Chinese government accuses of promoting Tibetan independence from China.
In her speech on Sunday, Ms. Yang said she had been relieved to find that she did not need to wear any of her five pollution masks in the United States. She also discovered, she said, that the freedoms enshrined in the Declaration of Independence were not the abstractions she had once imagined.
Other users objected to Ms. Yang’s general tone.
Still others cursed at Ms. Yang, or said that she would not be welcome in China.
