Roger Declements likes to build his castles the medieval way.
He starts with stone — up to 1,000 tons of it — and then constructs two parallel walls. After years of work, sometimes an entire decade, these walls add up to what he considers “the most advanced, strongest and most comfortable” abode a person can have.
Unlike castles built centuries ago, his have insulation, modern plumbing and other such amenities, so that people will want to live in them — and pay in the neighborhood of $1 million to do so.
In the United States, where there are no authentic medieval castles, imitation ones are few and far between. But interest in them has grown, in part because of the popularity of books and shows like “Vikings,” “Downton Abbey,” “Game of Thrones” and the Harry Potter series.
John Lavender II took the comfort-and-fantasy approach when he built a castle of his own. He put up a simple wood-frame structure and then hauled in hundreds of tons of stone, putting each one in place by hand. Over the past 35 years, he has created an imposing stone redoubt on Lake George in upstate New York.
He has particularly fond memories of working with his son on the cottage. “We stoned that whole place in one summer together, working very hard on it,” he said.
Castle aficionados, particularly those who know a thing or two about the castles that dot the countryside of Europe, scoff at these Americanized versions of ancient European fortresses. Words like “Disney” and “confection” get bandied about to describe them.
But even on the other side of the pond, there has been an apparent resurgence of interest in castles among those with resources to spare.
He said his firm sometimes gets as many as 200 requests a week.
While castles like Mr. Declements’s in the Pacific Northwest can be had for the price of a one-bedroom condo in Manhattan, Mr. Lavender’s life’s work, known as Highlands Castle, is listed for sale at the royal price of $12.8 million.
Mr. Declements said he sold his last castle, on Lake Pend Oreille, Idaho, for about $1 million, which he said was above the value of other homes in the resort area. He is building two new ones now, he said.
This not the first castle boom in the United States. In the early 20th century, men like William Randolph Hearst, the newspaper publisher, and Raymond Pitcairn, heir to a glass company fortune, built castles to house their collections of medieval art and tapestries.
Professor Easton’s research focuses on Hammond Castle in Gloucester, Mass., which was built by John Hays Hammond Jr. He invented radio-controlled torpedoes but was fascinated by the past, she said.
These 20th-century builders weren’t always faithful to history. Hammond Castle has a great hall that evokes the interior of a medieval church and stained glass in the windows, but it also has grand fireplaces, which would have been out of place, and a courtyard leading to a swimming pool, Professor Easton said.
Many of the grandest castles from the first boom have become museums: Hearst Castle, which is south of San Francisco; Mr. Pitcairn’s Glencairn, outside Philadelphia; and Hammond Castle. Gillette Castle in East Haddam, Conn., was built by an actor famous for playing Sherlock Holmes.
But there are smaller relics from that time that persist as homes. They’re just not all that conducive for living in the modern world, or easy to remodel.
Maria Barr, a Realtor at Select Sotheby’s International Realty, is trying to sell an 8,600-square-foot castle in downtown Albany. It was built in the late 1800s and has ivy crawling up its stone turret.
On the plus side, that much space goes for just under $800,000 — but there are drawbacks. For instance, there is just one full bathroom in the four-floor castle.
For many buyers of existing castles, they are projects.
Tom Vozzella, a Realtor with Berkshire Hathaway Real Estate in Stamford, Conn., spent three years trying to sell a castle in the wooded, northern part of the city. The castle was built by Gustave E. Steinback, an early-20th-century architect, on the highest point of his 79-acre property.
That was in 1906. In the intervening years, the castle had its ups and downs, and it was in need of serious renovations when it went on the market in 2011 for just over $1 million.
Mr. Lavender with his son, Jason, and their dog Chelsea in 1982 at the site where Highlands Castle would be built in Bolton Landing, N.Y.
He struggled to find a buyer until a local mason, impressed by the intricate stonework, bought it for $625,000 in 2014, knowing he might spend twice that amount to update it.
High-end castles in Europe, with their Old World splendor, aren’t any easier to sell. Mr. Braunholtz said his firm has sold only a few castles, despite the hundreds of thousands of people who look at the listings online.
Maintaining an old or a new castle is not cheap. Monique Pignet and her husband bought the Chateau de Moh, a 15th-century number in the Loire Valley of France, eight years ago for 1.6 million euros, or about $2.1 million at the time. It has eight bedrooms, eight baths, a wine cellar, several kitchens and a beautiful view of the wine region.
Ms. Pignet and her husband spent seven years and double the purchase price renovating it.
George Appling, the president and co-founder of Boomcloud 360, an audio technology company, fulfilled a childhood dream when he built a castle in McDade, Tex., about 35 miles outside Austin.
He offsets some of the costs through the Sherwood Forest Faire, a medieval village and Renaissance fair he created.
