U.S.|Three Men Stood Up to Anti-Muslim Attack. Two Paid With Their Lives.
Three Men Stood Up to Anti-Muslim Attack. Two Paid With Their Lives.
An Army veteran, a recent college graduate and a student who once won a poetry contest by condemning prejudice stirred up by the Sept. 11 attacks intervened as a man screamed anti-Muslim insults at two women in Portland, Ore., on Friday.
In the days that followed, the three men were hailed as heroes.
Two of the men — Taliesin Myrddin Namkai Meche, 23, and Rick Best, 53 — died in the attack, which occurred on a commuter train. The third, Micah David-Cole Fletcher, 21, was treated on Saturday for injuries that the police said were serious but not life-threatening.
Jeremy Christian, 35, of North Portland, Ore., was charged with two counts of aggravated murder in the attack and could face additional charges when he is arraigned on Tuesday. Mr. Christian, who the authorities said had a history of making extremist statements on social media, was ranting at, and talking disparagingly about, the two women, one of whom was wearing a hijab.
One of the women, Destinee Mangum, 16, spoke to a Fox affiliate in Oregon on Saturday. She said she is not a Muslim.
About 1,000 people gathered on Saturday night at a vigil to honor the men who intervened, according to The Oregonian.
Representative Keith Ellison, Democrat of Minnesota and the first Muslim elected to Congress, said in a statement that the three men “exhibited the best qualities of American heroes."
“Let us strive to be as brave and as compassionate as them,” Mr. Ellison said.
Mr. Meche worked for the Cadmus Group, a consulting firm, after graduating with an economics degree from Reed College in 2016. Among his classes was an introductory course about Islam, where he distinguished himself as a memorable student, the professor, Kambiz GhaneaBassiri, said.
Mr. Meche’s family recalled him as living “a joyous and full life” with infectious enthusiasm, according to The Oregonian.
“I am so proud to be able to call someone so brave and strong my big brother,” she wrote.
Mr. Best retired from the Army in 2012 as a platoon sergeant after 23 years of service that included tours in Iraq and Afghanistan. He met his wife at Portland Community College, and had three teenage sons and a 12-year-old daughter, according to The Oregonian.
“I’ve talked to most of his co-workers today, and several of them said it’s just like Rick to step in and help somebody out,” Ms. Perkins said.
In 2014, Mr. Best ran for a seat on the Board of Commissioners in nearby Clackamas County, where he lived with his family in the city of Happy Valley. According to a profile in The Oregonian, he refused to accept campaign donations.
A year after moving to the area, he became fed up with local politics. A friend suggested that maybe he should not just complain, but take action and run for office.
“I can’t stand by and do nothing,” Mr. Best said, according to the newspaper.
Mr. Fletcher, a student at Portland State University, was expected to be hospitalized for a few more days, according to The Oregonian. His girlfriend told the newspaper that he had undergone two hours of surgery to remove bone fragments from his throat.
It can be seen at 2:32:30 of this video.
“I just hope that people are listening and try to do something about it,” he told The Oregonian in 2013.