Roger J. Stone Jr., the subject and star of “Get Me Roger Stone,” struts through this documentary with peacock feathers fully fanned. He’s first heard from a perch in some luxury digs, dressed in a tailored chalk-stripe suit with an olive martini at the ready. “My name is Roger Stone,” he says, “and I’m an agent provocateur.” The scene suggests James Bond cosplay, although it’s worth mentioning that the definition of an agent provocateur isn’t a supercool British fantasy spy but someone who persuades others to do wrong.
Whatever else, this is killer timing for Netflix, which is releasing “Get Me Roger Stone” on Friday in theaters and via streaming. That’s especially true because in any other year and perhaps under any other administration, this documentary — the directors are Daniel DiMauro, Dylan Bank and Morgan Pehme — might have disappeared into the ether. But topicality is all or at least a large part of the movie’s draw. A sometimes illuminating, often slapdash and frustrating affair that mixes on-the-scenes bits, found material and original interviews (with the likes of Jeffrey Toobin), it opens with Mr. Trump accepting the presidential nomination in July 2016 and ends soon after his election. Much of the rest is a chronological march through Mr. Stone’s life, which is studded with scandal and boldfaced names like Roy Cohn.
As it maps the road to Trumpville, the movie offers glimpses of Mr. Stone’s youth, including an oft-repeated story about a light-bulb encounter with Barry Goldwater’s book “The Conscience of a Conservative.” An ideological true believer is born who backs legal pot and has a few Nixon-theme bongs that he likes to show off along with his other Nixonian paraphernalia. After a brush with Watergate, Mr. Stone pokes around here and there; works for both of Ronald Reagan’s presidential campaigns; and helps establish a firm that grew into Black, Manafort, Stone and Kelly, one of a number of companies that earned the nickname “the torturers’ lobby” for repping countries condemned as human-rights abusers.
The documentary also sketches a political family tree that could be its own movie and that has Cohn, the chief counsel to Joseph McCarthy, at its head and branches out to include Mr. Stone and Mr. Trump. Mr. Stone wasn’t yet 30 when he met Cohn in 1979. (At the time, Mr. Stone was helping to run Reagan’s presidential campaign.) Cohn served as Mr. Trump’s lawyer for years and, by many accounts, assumed the role of mentor. It was Cohn who introduced Mr. Stone to Mr. Trump; Mr. Stone decided that Mr. Trump was presidential material and, years later, has become identified as one of the president’s outside advisers.
Roger J. Stone Jr., a longtime Trump adviser, has been charged as part of the investigation by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III. He was arrested in a pre-dawn F.B.I. raid in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and appeared in court on Friday.
“I have to use this umbrella to protect myself from the torrent of illegal leaks.” Roger Stone. He’s a Republican political consultant and a self-described — “Agent provocateur.” He was an adviser to longtime friend Donald Trump during his 2016 presidential campaign. “Trying to stop Trump is like stepping in front of a hurtling freight train.” Now, Stone is back in the spotlight. He’s been charged as part of Special Counsel Robert Mueller’s investigation over his communications with WikiLeaks, the organization that released Clinton campaign emails stolen by the Russian government to help Trump win. In 2016, Stone said he had an in with WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange. “I actually have communicated with Assange.” “We have a mutual acquaintance who is a fine gentleman.” But now, he says it was all part of his political game. “I set a Google News alert for ‘Julian Assange.’ I read every interview he gave. And I used that information to posture and to bluff and to punk the Democrats.” Stone has built a reputation on winning at all costs, even if it means bending the truth. “I assumed he was lying. It’s something Roger does.” “Posture and bluff. That’s politics.” Stone started his career as a political operative at a young age. At 19, he was an entry-level trickster for Nixon’s re-election campaign. His name later came up in the Watergate investigation. “I paid $100 to Mr. Roger Stone on one occasion to leave a leaflet, I believe, at Senator McGovern’s headquarters.” Stone and Trump have been friends and associates since the 1980s, when Stone was working as a political consultant with Paul Manafort. Yes, that Paul Manafort, Trump’s former campaign manager, who has since been convicted of financial fraud. Stone says he has been encouraging Donald Trump to run for president since 1988. “I would say that I would have a hell of a chance of winning.” “Between his outspokenness, his national name identification and his issue positions, he could be a formidable candidate.” “I guess we’re looking at it very seriously.” After he got into some trouble working for Bob Dole in 1996, he bounced back — but has largely worked outside of political campaigns. Stone has a unique personal brand: a mix of provocation, politics and fashion. He can often be found discussing some of his favorite topics: the Clintons, how L.B.J. was behind the assassination of J.F.K. and “fake news.” “Fake news.” Stone strongly denies any wrongdoing in 2016. “I haven’t done anything illegal. I’ve been targeted for one reason and one reason only: I am loyal to the president of the United States.” But emails and interviews suggest that he sold himself to the Trump campaign as a conduit to WikiLeaks. He is also connected to a web of associates, some of whom have been interviewed as part of Mueller’s investigation. Stone has been charged with seven counts, including obstruction of an official proceeding, making false statements, and witness tampering.
The movie spends considerable time tagging after the fast-moving Mr. Stone, tracking him from event to event, car to home to microphone, as when he swans into an outdoor rally during the 2016 Republican National Convention that registers as pro-Trump, though perhaps more anti-Clinton. There are signs and people milling about wearing shirts emblazoned with the words “Hillary for Prison”; for his part, the uncharacteristically underdressed Mr. Stone seems almost naked in a T-shirt with Bill Clinton’s smiling likeness and the word “rape.” The movie doesn’t at this point identify Alex Jones, the radio host and conspiracy theorist (the “Pizzagate” hoax), who can be seen hovering at Mr. Stone’s side.
Mr. Jones isn’t formally identified until well into the movie, a careless, exasperating decision. Like other documentaries, this one crams found footage into punchy montage sequences held together by (not always identified) voice-overs. The problem with this clip-art approach is that it tends to turn history into cultural wallpaper, as in the section featuring images of the unnamed Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, who — with the help of Roy Cohn — were executed in 1953 after being convicted of conspiracy to commit espionage. In other areas, the lack of specificity raises questions that remain unanswered, as when an image of the Pentagon flashes by without explanation.
Movies about colorful characters, be they saints or sinners, are often hijacked by their subject, so it’s unsurprising that Mr. Stone, with his bespoke suits and Nixon tattoo, owns this one from the get-go. An energetic tour guide and three-ring circus of one, he seems happiest in front of the camera, which in turn eagerly laps him up. It’s a familiar interdependency and, at times, this movie suggests that his most obvious talent is for self-promotion, one that’s been aided by the attention of the news media. Among the few journalists who seem to have really gotten under his thick skin was Wayne Barrett, an investigative reporter for The Village Voice who died in January.
And on Friday, “Get Me Roger Stone” will do its part to extend Mr. Stone’s reach and his brand, both of which seem as unbounded as he does.