Karl Lagerfeld may have hoped for blazing sunshine and Aegean blue skies in Paris. After all, he staged Chanel’s 2018 cruise show, inspired by the glories of ancient Greece, under the rounded glass ceiling of the Grand Palais. His models wore gold: gilded laurels swirled into sunglasses, Delphos-pleated dresses corded with sequins, even beach cover-ups licked with golden vines. King Midas has nothing on Kaiser Karl.
But alas, it was Paris in May. The sky was a sullen shade of Elgin-marble gray on Wednesday.
No matter. Instead of showing amid the original ruins, Chanel spent a king’s ransom erecting its own. The set was based on the Parthenon as well as the Temple of Poseidon on Cape Sounion. It took 50 craftspeople three weeks of construction, and nine days of assembly, to complete.
“It’s his dream of the ideal,” said Lady Amanda Harlech, Chanel’s creative consultant. “But he wanted it to look modern, modern, modern.” The cash-strapped status of modern Greece makes, perhaps, for an odd allusion when a cruise collection is involved. Though the show was held in Paris, Chanel’s homeland, it wasn’t Chanel on the cheap; there was, of course, no reason for it to be. Although Chanel is privately owned and its financial figures are not released, last year Forbes estimated the brand’s value to be around $7.2 billion, against annual sales of $5.2 billion.
Falling between the traditional fall/winter and spring/summer seasons, the cruise season — and its late-summer counterpart, pre-fall — accounts for between 60 and 80 percent of designer clothing sales. They are ostensibly interim collections, but Lagerfeld can be credited with making the cruise season visible and commercially important. Later this month, Louis Vuitton will present its collection in Kyoto, Christian Dior in Los Angeles, Gucci in Florence and Prada, for the first time, in Milan.
Greece in the Grand Palais seems tame next to those locations. But Mr. Lagerfeld’s initial inspiration came from even closer to home: a first century B.C. statue of Venus in Gabrielle Chanel’s Rue Cambon apartment, above Chanel’s flagship boutique. That led him to think about ancient times, and the “modernity of antiquity,” words he chose as the title of the collection. The theme was evident in various forms. Neo-Classical dance and the attire of Isadora Duncan were also cited as influences.
There was a Cecil B. DeMille-like quality to the painstakingly recreated ruins and the painted sunset backdrop, around which the models meandered in draped jersey dresses that scrambled perceptions of time. They suggested the Greek goddesses found on a 1930s Hollywood studio lot, the plissé gowns of Madame Grès, or the Dionysian revels of Studio 54.
Just as Michel Gaubert’s soundtrack combined the cerebral compositions of Iannis Xenakis alongside the campy tracks of the Greek prog-rock band Aphrodite’s Child, Mr. Lagerfeld’s clothes were Greece, remixed, a sprint of Olympian proportions through Ionic iconography. There were amphora-shaped dresses of compressed pleats, draped chiffon pieces corseted with “cracked” marble and sandals with columns as heels. So far, not so Coco.
