WASHINGTON — Skeptical federal judges peppered a government lawyer on Monday with questions about how much weight to give President Trump’s campaign statements calling for a “Muslim ban” as they assess the constitutionality of his revised travel ban.
The two-hour argument, before a 13-judge panel of the federal appeals court in Richmond, Va., was the first appellate test of Mr. Trump’s revised executive order limiting travel from six predominantly Muslim countries.
By the end of the argument, the judges appeared divided into two camps.
Some seemed prepared to look behind the face of the revised order to take account of Mr. Trump’s statements, and several suggested the remarks could doom the order. Others, though, said the law did not permit judges to second-guess a president’s national security assessments, indicating that they were prepared to uphold the order.
Groups challenging the order have said Mr. Trump’s statements concerning Muslims show that the revised order is the product of religious hostility. Such discrimination, they add, violates the First Amendment’s ban on government establishment of religion.
Judge Robert B. King suggested that judges could not ignore Mr. Trump’s statements and motives. “He’s never repudiated what he said about the Muslim ban,” Judge King said of the president.
Jeffrey B. Wall, the acting United States solicitor general, said the court should not look behind the revised executive order to assess Mr. Trump’s motives. Most of Mr. Trump’s statements were made before he took the oath of office, formed a government and took advice from cabinet officials. “Candidates talk about things on the campaign trail all the time,” Mr. Wall said.
He added that the order concerned national security, an area in which courts should be reluctant to second-guess the executive branch.
“Do you really mean we can’t consider the statements?” she asked.
Mr. Wall said there might be reason to do so if the situation were that extreme.
Judge Dennis W. Shedd urged Mr. Wall to be careful about his concessions. “You’re cracking that door,” Judge Shedd said.
But Judge Shedd remained wary. “You just opened it,” he said.
Omar C. Jadwat, a lawyer with the American Civil Liberties Union representing people and groups challenging the order, said the volume and specificity of the comments from Mr. Trump and his advisers could not be ignored. He was repeatedly pressed by Judge Niemeyer on whether the order was problematic on its own.
“You just don’t want to answer the question of whether this order on its face is legitimate,” Judge Niemeyer said.
The revised order, issued in March, sought to address judicial objections to an earlier one, issued in January. The first order, which caused chaos and drew protests at airports around the nation, was blocked in February by the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in San Francisco.
The new order’s 90-day suspension of entry from Iran, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria and Yemen was more limited and subject to case-by-case exceptions. It omitted Iraq, which had been listed in the earlier order. It removed a complete ban on Syrian refugees. And it deleted explicit references to religion. Like the earlier order, the new one suspended the nation’s refugee program for 120 days and reduced the annual number of refugees to 50,000 from 120,000.
Judge Chuang’s ruling blocked the part of the order concerning travel from the six countries.
The court hearing the case on Monday, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, did not follow its usual practices in considering the appeal. Ordinarily, a three-judge panel would have heard the case and decided it, with the possibility of full-court review afterward.
Skipping that step and scheduling arguments before the full court signaled the exceptional importance of the case. So did the court’s decision to allow C-Span to broadcast live audio coverage of the arguments.
Nine of the judges who heard Monday’s arguments were appointed by Democratic presidents and three by Republican ones. Chief Judge Roger L. Gregory was initially appointed by President Bill Clinton during a Senate recess and was later reappointed by President George W. Bush.
Judge J. Harvie Wilkinson III, appointed by President Ronald Reagan, recused himself, presumably because Mr. Wall, the government lawyer, is his son-in-law. Judge Allyson Kay Duncan, appointed by Mr. Bush, also disqualified herself, without giving a reason.
Next Monday, the Ninth Circuit will hear a separate appeal of another decision blocking aspects of the revised travel ban, from the federal judge in Hawaii. That appeal will be heard by a three-judge panel.
Mr. Wall argued that presidents have vast constitutional and statutory authority over immigration. Under a 1972 Supreme Court immigration decision, he said, judges should not second-guess the government’s “facially legitimate and bona fide reason” for denying visas.
More recently, in a fractured 5-to-4 decision in 2015 with no majority opinion, the Supreme Court refused to second-guess the denial of a visa on national security grounds to the Afghan husband of an American woman. In a concurrence, Justice Anthony M. Kennedy said it might be proper to look behind the offered reason for the denial if there was evidence that the consular officer had acted in bad faith.
Mr. Jadwat, the lawyer for the challengers, said Mr. Trump’s statements were evidence of such bad faith. He added that cases claiming religious discrimination require a different analysis from the one courts usually use in immigration cases. In religion cases, he said, motives matter.