The choreographer Christopher Williams’s works are a bit like a cabinet of curiosities. They reflect his fascination with very old stories, particularly ones that include mythological beings and magical transformations. He has made phantasmagorical dances inspired by the lives — and violent deaths — of the early saints, by Greek mythology and by Scottish fairy tales, among other wild tales. To say he is an artist of peculiar obsessions is an understatement.
For Mr. Williams, 41, dance — wordless and based in the body — is the logical medium for telling these stories; as he sees it, dance is “a ritual we use to tell our mythology.” A ritual that he reinforces by dressing his dancers in fantastical designs, usually involving sculptural adornments that make them look not quite human.
The look alludes to both the ancient Roman Venus Barbata — or bearded Venus — and to the Ephesian Artemis, a Greek deity depicted in statues with row upon row of breasts, or maybe eggs (or even, possibly, bull’s testicles). “It feels like an empowered animal femininity,” said Christiana Axelsen, who is playing Venus.
Wings sprout from the arms and legs of Amore (Cupid), the driver of the story, and his two minions. Layered and stiff, their feathers are more reminiscent of an iguana’s crest than of a bird’s soft plumage. The characters’ reptilian qualities are heightened by the choreography: vigorous, even aggressive jumps, punctuated by flicks of the shoulders and wrists. Their sharp twitches are in dramatic contrast to the soft, languid, flattened movements of the lovers. They look “as if they were pressed into a frame,” Mr. Williams said.
Scarlatti’s Baroque serenata is a short entertainment for two voices and small musical ensemble meant to be performed in the home or garden of an aristocratic family. This gentle love story set in a forest glen was written for a low female voice and a castrato, a male singer castrated as a child to preserve his ability to produce the high, pure notes of a boy soprano. In the 1964 recording selected by Mr. Williams, by the Munich Chamber Orchestra, both singers are women. (The castrato part, sung here by a woman, can also be given to a countertenor.) Curiously, at least to the modern ear, the lower voice (a contralto) represents Venus, while the soprano line is given to Adonis.
These doublings and mythical flights of fancy fit surprisingly neatly into Scarlatti’s lovely, but rather slender, serenata. Mr. Williams has listened closely to the music, and tied each character to an individual instrument or voice. The vocal lines find direct physical expression in the movement. The words, too, are echoed by the dancer’s gestures. When the contralto speaks of her love pains, Ms. Axelsen staggers slightly, as if in physical distress; when the two lovers’ voices express sadness, the dancers cover their faces and curve forward, as if weighed down by emotion. The effect is subtle — less like mime and more like painterly gesture.
