WASHINGTON — The F.B.I. on Tuesday clarified testimony last week by its director, James B. Comey, about how classified information ended up on the laptop of the disgraced former congressman Anthony Weiner, hours before Mr. Comey was fired by President Trump.
Mr. Comey had told the Senate Judiciary Committee that during the F.B.I.’s investigation into Hillary Clinton’s use of a private email server while secretary of state, officers uncovered evidence that Mrs. Clinton’s aide, Huma Abedin, had “forwarded hundreds and thousands of emails, some of which contain classified information” to Mr. Weiner, her husband.
But while some of the emails were forwarded, the F.B.I. told Congress that it was likely that the vast majority were instead backed up to Mr. Weiner’s laptop.
The F.B.I. sent a letter on Tuesday to the Senate Judiciary Committee, clarifying Director James B. Comey's testimony from last week about how Huma Abedin handled emails of former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.
“Our investigation determined that Ms. Abedin commonly forwarded emails to others who would print documents for her,” Gregory A. Brower, the assistant director in the F.B.I.’s Office of Congressional Affairs, wrote in a letter to the chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa.
The F.B.I. found that two emails that Ms. Abedin forwarded to Mr. Weiner contained classified information, according to law enforcement officials. Ten other emails that were backed up on Mr. Weiner’s laptop contained classified information.
Mr. Trump cited Mr. Comey’s handling of the investigation into Mrs. Clinton’s emails in saying he had concluded Mr. Comey was “not able to effectively lead the bureau.” Mr. Comey broke with tradition by announcing last summer that he would not recommend charges for Mrs. Clinton or her aides and criticizing her “extremely careless” handling of classified information.
Then in October, less than two weeks before Election Day, Mr. Comey informed Congress that officers had reopened the investigation based on the new emails found on Mr. Weiner’s computer. Democrats were infuriated by that decision, and Mrs. Clinton said it cost her the election.
Mr. Clapper responded that if enough evidence were found, his office would have followed procedure and alerted the Justice Department that a crime was likely committed.
Mr. Comey said at last week’s hearing that the F.B.I. did not believe it had enough evidence to charge anyone with a crime in connection with Mrs. Clinton’s email server because it could not prove Mrs. Clinton or her aides intentionally broke the law.
“We could not prove that the people sending the information, either in that case or in the other case with the secretary, were acting with any kind of the mens rea — with any kind of criminal intent,” Mr. Comey said.
The New York Times noted in its coverage of Mr. Comey’s testimony on Wednesday that he had mischaracterized what the bureau had uncovered. A report late Monday in ProPublica saying that the F.B.I. was struggling to determine how to clarify Mr. Comey’s testimony set off a new round of criticism of his comments.
The investigation into Mrs. Clinton’s use of a private email server was a political liability throughout the 2016 presidential campaign. The case dragged on for months, contributed to Republican criticism that Mrs. Clinton was hiding something and created the spectacle of the Democratic front-runner being interviewed for hours at F.B.I. Headquarters last July.
The F.B.I. seized Mr. Weiner’s computer as part of a separate investigation into whether he had exchanged illicit text messages or photographs with a teenage girl. The bureau found evidence on the laptop that there were emails associated with Mrs. Clinton’s email server, and Mr. Comey gave his officers approval on Oct. 27 to request a search warrant to examine those emails. He informed Congress the next day.
The F.B.I. found nothing that changed its original conclusion not to recommend charges in the case.
In his testimony last week, Mr. Comey said that he felt obligated to inform Congress because he had testified earlier that the investigation had been completed.