A new television deal is stirring some bad memories of the Murdoch entertainment empire. Just a few months ago, James Murdoch, 21st Century Fox’s chief executive, denied any interest in buying more TV stations in the United States and told investors to “rest easy” about the idea. Now Fox is looking at a possible deal for Tribune Media in partnership with a private equity firm, the Blackstone Group.
There seems to have been a change of heart. Fox, which is controlled by the Murdoch family using a feudal shareholder structure, is teaming with Blackstone to run the numbers on Tribune and its 42 stations. Blackstone, led by Stephen A. Schwarzman, would provide the cash and Fox would contribute its 28 stations.
Last month, the F.C.C. indeed made it easier for companies to grow without breaching restrictions on their coverage areas. That made Tribune a more tempting target. Sinclair Broadcast and Nexstar are also eyeing the Chicago-based Tribune group, which portends a bidding war. Its shares jumped 6 percent Monday morning.
With Blackstone involved, Fox might be able to expand without straining its balance sheet any further. At the same time, Mr. Murdoch is waiting to see if Fox passes Britain’s “fit and proper” test before it can buy the rest of the European satellite group Sky for $14.5 billion. If that deal goes through, Fox’s debt will increase to about four times earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda.
Surprising shareholders with grander merger and acquisition plans during a touchy acquisition of Sky, which faltered once before, and scandals at its all-important Fox News operation is evocative of another era, however. Rupert Murdoch, the Fox chairman and James’s father, was known for capricious and overpriced deals, including Myspace and The Wall Street Journal’s parent, Dow Jones, until his right-hand man at the time, Chase Carey, helped usher in a more disciplined use of capital in 2011. The Tribune reversal risks a throwback to the company’s erratic ways.