Mario Maglieri, who presided over a rock ’n’ roll mini-empire on the Sunset Strip in West Hollywood at the Whisky a Go Go and the Rainbow Bar & Grill, where he nurtured generations of musicians with encouragement, food and tough love, died on May 4 in Los Angeles. He was 93.
His death was confirmed by his son Mikeal.
The Whisky was opened in 1964 by a former policeman named Elmer Valentine, who soon asked Mr. Maglieri, a friend from Chicago, to help run the club. It became a critical part of the Los Angeles rock scene.
For a time, the Doors were the house band. Jimi Hendrix and Janis Joplin played there. So did Led Zeppelin, the Byrds, the Who, Otis Redding, the Turtles and Neil Young. Later on came Guns N’ Roses, Motley Crue and Metallica.
“He looked at me and says, ‘I can have you killed,’” Mr. Maglieri said, after which he grabbed Mr. Manson and threw him out of the club.
The silver-haired, cigar-smoking Mr. Maglieri was more accommodating to the musicians who played at the Whisky or ate at the nearby Rainbow Bar, with its signature Italian food. He understood that some needed a free meal and others a kind word.
But Mr. Maglieri worried that some of the musicians and other stars who came through his doors were drinking too heavily or taking too many drugs. He told The Los Angeles Times in 1993 that he had warned Jim Morrison, the lead singer of the Doors, and Joplin to straighten out, without success.
Mario Mikeal Maglieri was born on Feb. 7, 1924, in Sepino, Italy, to Alfonso and Christina Maglieri. The family moved to Chicago, where his father opened a nightclub, when Mario was 4 years old.
As a teenager, he drove a beer truck. He later served in the Army and took part in the D-Day invasion of Normandy. Back in Chicago, he got jobs as a court bailiff and nightclub manager before opening his own clubs.
In 1964 he moved to Los Angeles, where he was helping a friend open the Playboy Club when he got a call from Mr. Valentine.
Mr. Maglieri opened the Rainbow in 1972 with Mr. Valentine and the music impresario Lou Adler, who also owned a piece of the Whisky. Mr. Adler and Mr. Valentine subsequently opened the Roxy Theater on Sunset Boulevard, which also became a musical mecca; Mr. Maglieri managed it for 25 years but did not have an ownership interest.
In addition to his son, Mr. Maglieri is survived by his wife, the former Scarlett Tribolet; seven grandchildren; and five great-grandchildren.
Of course, he added, when things did get out of hand, Mr. Maglieri took control. The band’s drummer, John Bonham, once punched his chauffeur and some customers, and took a swing at Mr. Maglieri, who decked Bonham with a punch to the jaw.
