Business|Should Free Markets Govern the Bond Rating Agencies?
Should Free Markets Govern the Bond Rating Agencies?
There’s a lot not to like in the Financial Choice Act, the deregulatory construct put forward by House Republicans on April 28. Dubbed by its creators the “alternative to the failed Dodd-Frank Act,” it aims to repeal the 2010 law’s prohibition against banks engaging in risky trading for their own accounts. It also seeks to gut the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, one of the more effective agencies in Washington.
What hasn’t received much attention is how the bill would change the rules governing credit ratings agencies — but it should. What the Choice Act would require is bad, both in how it would roll back the law and in what it would keep. But the bill also misses a big opportunity to change the ratings industry for the better.
First, a little history. The ratings agencies — Moody’s Investors Service, Standard & Poor’s Financial Services and Fitch Ratings are the major ones — played a central role in the financial crisis. They assigned high grades to mortgage securities that quickly collapsed, leaving investors with billions in losses. The ratings agencies failed abjectly to assess the credit risk in these securities, which were brimming with poisonous loans. That was their job.
After the crisis, the ratings agencies paid big fines to settle government inquiries. Still, the ratings agencies did not have to change their business models, in which the issuer of the debt instrument being analyzed pays for the grade it receives.
This is an obvious conflict of interest. But rather than changing the pay model, regulators responded to the crisis by heightening their scrutiny of the ratings agencies that are registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission. The agencies must disclose certain information, for example, about their performance measurement statistics and the procedures they use to determine debt grades. Ratings agencies must also establish an “effective internal control structure governing the implementation of and adherence to policies, procedures, and methodologies for determining credit ratings” according to the S.E.C.
The Choice Act fails in two ways related to the credit rating agencies. First, it proposes rolling back Dodd-Frank’s accountability measures over these companies, no longer requiring that the chief executive of a ratings agency attest to the company’s internal controls over the processes it uses to determine credit grades. The bill would also rescind the Dodd-Frank requirement that a ratings agency confirm in its disclosures that a rating was not influenced by its business activities.
There’s more. What’s especially odd about the Choice Act, given that it was written by lawmakers with a deregulatory and free-market bent, is that it would keep the existing agencies entrenched and protected from competition. It achieves this by maintaining the government imprimatur for ratings agencies known as a nationally recognized statistical rating organization — an N.R.S.R.O., in industry parlance. Aspiring ratings agencies must apply to the S.E.C. to receive this imprimatur, which is very difficult to get.
Bill Harrington is a former senior credit officer and senior vice president at Moody’s and an expert in ratings on asset-backed securities and derivatives. In an open letter on LinkedIn, he called the bill a gift to the ratings agencies and said it would eliminate any accountability that exists among these companies.
Jeff Emerson, a spokesman for the House Financial Services Committee — from which the Choice Act emerged — contended that because raters can already offer services without applying for the government’s seal of approval, the free market is working.
Mr. Harrington said he thought the comment from the committee spokesman was evidence of a deep misunderstanding of how the ratings agency business works, especially of how beneficial the government’s designation is to the companies who have it. He is disturbed that the Choice Act would keep ratings agencies entrenched and the S.E.C. as a gatekeeper that inhibits competition in the arena.
There is a better idea, said Lawrence J. White, a professor at New York University’s Stern School of Business: Eliminate the government’s certification once and for all. Let anyone publish opinions on the creditworthiness of a debt obligation, and allow the market for these services to reward excellence and punish failure.
He took this position in a paper on the topic back in 2013.
Mr. Harrington and five former ratings agency executives agree entirely with Mr. White. And they published a letter on LinkedIn on May 1 recommending the idea.
The requirement to license ratings agencies, they wrote, puts “the government’s imprimatur on credit assessments that are too often the result of sloppy procedures and/or commercial bias.” Stripping them of the government’s stamp of approval would allow the market to work by opening up the business to competition.
Eliminating the lock that the big agencies have on ratings might also avoid another financial mess, the group contended. “A return to something resembling the pre-2008 status quo, in which a government-sanctioned oligopoly of conflicted companies assess credit quality risks a repeat of the financial crisis,” they wrote.
Over the years, lawmakers have tried to open the world of ratings agencies to encourage more participants and, possibly, better performance. Legislation in 2006 encouraged the S.E.C. to let new companies into the ratings club. The commission set up the Office of Credit Ratings to register new entrants. But the number of credit ratings agencies — now 10 — has not grown. It has been almost five years since a new entrant has been allowed into the club.
The six people who signed the letter have been discussing regulatory policy on ratings agencies for the past several years, Mr. Joffe said. One of them is Ann Rutledge, a founder of R & R Consulting in New York and CreditSpectrum, a provider of credit analytics.
