WASHINGTON — The Supreme Court struck down two North Carolina congressional districts on Monday, ruling that lawmakers had violated the Constitution by relying too heavily on race in drawing them, in a decision that could affect many voting maps, generally in the South.
The decision was handed down by an unusual coalition of justices, and was the latest in a series of setbacks for Republican-led legislatures. In recent cases concerning legislative maps in Alabama and Virginia, as well, the Supreme Court has insisted that packing black voters into a few districts — which dilutes their voting power — violates the Constitution.
Republicans in the North Carolina legislature denied that race was the predominant factor in redrawing the boundaries of the two districts under review. In one of them, though, they said, they had made some use of race.
The lawmakers said they had tried to comply with the Voting Rights Act, which in some settings requires that black voters be concentrated in numbers sufficient to provide them with an opportunity to elect their preferred candidates. But critics of the voting map said the legislature was actually trying to diminish the number of districts in the state that could be won by Democrats.
Writing for the majority, Justice Elena Kagan said states did not have unlimited leeway in drawing districts in a claimed attempt to comply with the voting law. With the decision, the court was also trying to solve a constitutional puzzle: how to disentangle the roles of race and partisanship when black voters overwhelmingly favor Democrats. The difference matters because the Supreme Court has said only racial gerrymandering is constitutionally suspect.
Some election law experts said the ruling, which upheld a lower court decision, would make it easier to challenge voting districts based partly on partisan affiliations and partly on race.
“This will lead to many more successful racial gerrymandering cases in the American South and elsewhere,” said Richard L. Hasen, a law professor at the University of California, Irvine.
Others said the decision merely applied settled legal principles.
“This is part of a court project over 30 years now of trying to see that race is not used in the design of election districts any more than is absolutely necessary,” said Richard H. Pildes, a law professor at New York University.
Whether the decision announced new legal principles or applied old ones, Democrats welcomed it.
Conservatives complained that the Supreme Court had succeeded only in making the law murkier.
“The Supreme Court says race can be a factor in redistricting, but not the predominant factor, a rule that is so vague, so broad and so lacking in a definable legal standard that it is not really a rule at all,” Hans von Spakovsky, a lawyer with the Heritage Foundation, said in a statement.
The map that the court rejected was redrawn in 2016 under a court order, but the latest version, whose Republican drafters openly admitted was drawn to favor Republicans, is being challenged in court as a partisan gerrymander. The districts ruled unconstitutional by the court, District 1 and District 12, are represented by G. K. Butterfield and Alma Adams. Both are Democrats and African-American.
The ruling on Monday was the second Supreme Court victory for North Carolina Democrats this month. Last Monday, the justices declined to hear an appeal of a decision that had struck down parts of a restrictive North Carolina voting law that, among other things, tightened voter identification requirements and cut back on early voting.
The Supreme Court will soon consider yet another North Carolina election law appeal, this one from a federal trial court’s decision that found some of the state’s General Assembly districts had been tainted by unconstitutional racial gerrymandering.
In Monday’s decision on North Carolina’s congressional map, the justices were unanimous in rejecting District 1, in the northeastern part of the state. After the 2010 census, lawmakers increased the district’s black voting-age population to 52.7 percent from 48.6 percent.
Justice Kagan said black voters, in coalitions with others, had been able to elect their preferred candidates even before the redistricting. Adding more black voters to the district, she wrote, amounted to an unconstitutional racial gerrymander.
The court divided, 5 to 3, in rejecting District 12, in the south-central part of the state. Lawmakers increased the number of black voters to 50.7 percent from 43.8 percent. “To be specific, the new District 12 had 35,000 more African-Americans of voting age and 50,000 fewer whites of that age,” Justice Kagan wrote.
The five-justice majority for the part of the decision concerning District 12 was an unusual coalition. Justices Clarence Thomas, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen G. Breyer and Sonia Sotomayor joined Justice Kagan’s majority opinion.
In defending the new district lines for District 12, state lawmakers said they had meant to secure a partisan advantage for Republicans, a lawful goal. But Justice Kagan said race could predominate even if legislators had mixed motives.
“The sorting of voters on the grounds of their race remains suspect even if race is meant to function as a proxy for other (including political) characteristics,” she wrote, in a passage that some election law experts said would make it easier to challenge asserted racial gerrymanders.
In dissent, Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr., joined by Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. and Justice Anthony M. Kennedy, wrote that the challengers had not shown that race rather than partisanship motivated the drawing of the district.
The two factors are highly correlated, Justice Alito wrote.
Justice Alito also criticized the challengers for not proposing an alternative map, which he said was required by an earlier decision. “A precedent of this court should not be treated like a disposable household item — say, a paper plate or napkin — to be used once and then tossed in the trash,” he wrote.
Justice Neil M. Gorsuch did not participate in the case, which was argued before he joined the court.
The decision, Cooper v. Harris, No. 15-1262, affirmed a decision from the Federal District Court in Greensboro, N.C.
Voting rights lawyers are hoping to open a second front in legal challenges to gerrymandering. In addition to suits based on race, they hope to persuade the court to allow challenges based on partisan gerrymandering, notably in a case from Wisconsin.
To succeed, they would almost certainly need the vote of Justice Kennedy. But on Monday, he joined Justice Alito’s dissent saying that partisan gerrymandering was lawful.
Some election law scholars said that was merely an uncontroversial description of current law. Others detected a hint that Justice Kennedy is not ready to rule that at least some partisan gerrymanders cross a constitutional line.