A report by antidoping officials says the coach, Alberto Salazar, violated drug protocols with Dathan Ritzenhein, Mo Farah and other elite runners.
Dathan Ritzenhein, an Olympic distance runner for the United States, was starting to feel sick from his thyroid medication — a drug that was not medically necessary but one that his coach, a powerful and combative figure in the sport, had strongly recommended to improve his performance.
The tension between Ritzenhein and Salazar over medical issues and methods of performance enhancement was not uncommon in the Oregon Project, the vaunted team financed by Nike and led by Salazar that includes some of the world’s most celebrated runners. Ritzenhein’s experience, along with incidents involving several other athletes, were laid out in vivid detail in a confidential report written by the United States Anti-Doping Agency that was obtained by The New York Times.
The report, some aspects of which have been reported by The Times of London, describes, over 269 pages, a culture of coercion, secrecy and possible medical malpractice in the Oregon Project, an effort to make American distance running relevant again on the international stage.
Salazar has emphatically denied violating antidoping rules. He has said that he and his athletes closely followed all protocols established by antidoping authorities.
But in the report, antidoping officials depicted Salazar as a medicine chest whose door swung open for the world-class athletes on Nike’s payroll. They said he provided or helped gain access to prescription-dose vitamin D; calcitonin; ferrous sulfate; Advair; testosterone; and various thyroid medications. Many of the drugs have no proven benefits for runners.
“Salazar’s conduct here is patently calculating, misleading and dishonest,” the antidoping officials wrote in the report, which was drafted in March 2016 as an appeal to the Texas Medical Board to compel the release of the endocrinologist’s medical files.
Salazar, who refused to cooperate with the antidoping agency’s investigation, did not respond to interview requests. Nike declined to respond to questions about the report.
Ritzenhein declined to comment on specifics of his time with Salazar, instead deferring to his sworn testimony in the report, in which he and other athletes described an environment in which they felt immense pressure to do as their coach instructed or lose their livelihoods.
For Ritzenhein, getting a contract with Nike in 2004 was the culmination of years of hard work. “It’s every kid’s dream to sign a professional contract,” he said in a recent phone interview.
In June 2010, after an unproductive season of injury, Ritzenhein and Salazar’s conversations moved from supplements to “synthetic thyroid,” Ritzenhein testified, saying it was “to help with low testosterone levels.” Blood work performed at Nike’s lab showed that Ritzenhein’s thyroid-stimulating hormone and his testosterone levels were both within the normal range. Regardless, Salazar sent him to see Dr. Jeffrey Stuart Brown, an endocrinologist who is known for his belief that synthetic thyroid medication enhances athletic performance.
According to the report, Dr. Brown was Salazar’s personal physician and was being paid a monthly retainer to work with the Oregon Project athletes. Ritzenhein said he did not know any of this at the time.
Dr. Brown is known in the track world for diagnosing hypothyroidism in distance runners. The condition involves an underactive thyroid that can lead to weight gain and fatigue, but is considered relatively rare among athletes.
Some experts say that thyroid hormone can serve as a stimulant, lead to weight loss and improve alertness among athletes.
After contacting the researchers, Salazar learned that one was about to bring an L-carnitine drink product to market. He spent thousands of Nike dollars on pallets of the preproduction drink and began distributing it to his runners, telling them that access to this special L-carnitine product was something to be kept secret. Salazar knew he would lose his advantage if competitors used it.
L-carnitine levels are notoriously hard to increase, however, so it would take up to six months of loading with the drink before the promised enhancement in performance could be realized on the track. Salazar was impatient; Ritzenhein had the 2012 Olympic marathon trials coming up in just two months.
The Nottingham researchers had written about a method in which they were able to infuse patients with L-carnitine to bring levels up thousands of times compared with the baseline. This procedure took 4 hours 10 minutes instead of six months of drink consumption. Acting with urgency, Salazar decided to test the process on an employee. Steve Magness, an assistant coach, was the chosen guinea pig.
Magness, who was at first unwilling, eventually relented to Salazar’s demands and soon took a preinfusion treadmill test. Medical records obtained by the antidoping agency showed that Dr. Brown then gave Magness a continuous gravity drip infusion of L-carnitine on Nov. 28, 2011, that lasted 4 hours 10 minutes. The records note that Dr. Brown used the same duration, method and solution of L-carnitine and dextrose outlined by the Nottingham researchers.
Fifty milliliters is about three tablespoons of liquid, an amount that would not take four hours to infuse.
Magness said in a recent interview that he was not aware at the time that the treatment would be more than 50 milliliters and a violation of doping rules. “Both Dr. Brown and Alberto told me it was good with Usada and I mistakenly trusted them,” he said.
Magness described the results of his post-L-carnitine treadmill test as “almost unbelievable.” Salazar was enamored, and quickly focused on making sure Ritzenhein got the treatment as soon as possible.
Realizing that the procedure was a breach of antidoping rules, the report said, Salazar and Dr. Brown changed the infusion protocol. From now on, the athletes would be infused for just over an hour, instead of the more conspicuous four.
Nike had begun making fewer payments to Ritzenhein based on his disappointing performance, he said. He believed that his options were to submit to the infusions or leave the Oregon Project. “There’s no way for me to get around it at that point, in my eyes,” he said in the report.
He received the infusion — which now took just 1 hour 10 minutes — in Dr. Brown’s Houston offices on Dec. 13, 2011. He also mentioned that Dr. Brown or someone on his staff would come in every few minutes and squeeze the infusion bag.
Dr. Brown provided antidoping officials with Ritzenhein’s medical records, but the report says the version he sent was altered. A page was removed and an added annotation read “45mL.” Antidoping officials said they were able to determine the alteration by comparing the records with those provided by Ritzenhein.
Ritzenhein did not run fast enough to qualify for the Olympic team at the marathon trials in 2012, and Nike paid him only half his expected $200,000 salary for the year, he said.
As previously reported by The Times of London, the report also said that Galen Rupp, an Olympic silver medalist, and Mo Farah of Britain, one of the most successful runners in Olympic history, also received infusions of L-carnitine. Rupp, Farah and Salazar have repeatedly rejected any claims that they violated antidoping rules.
Her comments to Usada — not given under oath — in the report were starkly different than her initial views in 2012, seeming to indicate that her beliefs about Salazar and the program had changed. Welling recalled Salazar’s abusing medications by giving her the prescription drug Celebrex out of his personal supply. She also spoke to the secrecy of the program, in which she said Salazar demanded that athletes remain closemouthed about all things related to the Oregon Project.
In a subsequent interview, Welling admitted that she had seen Dr. Brown and that he had drawn blood and performed a physical exam, a bone exam, a lower leg jump-test and an asthma lung-capacity test, and had poked her with a “roller thing.” Regarding the L-carnitine infusion, however, she said she could not remember a single detail.
Welling’s medical records showed a nearly 11,000 percent increase in her muscle L-carnitine levels after the infusion. For the antidoping officials, this was evidence of illicit performance enhancement.
When pressed about the infusion during her interview with the agency, Welling began crying. “I don’t know if Alberto did something to me,” she said.
Ritzenhein still runs competitively, but is without a sponsor, having left the Nike-funded program in May 2014. He no longer has a relationship with Salazar and has moved back to his home state, Michigan. Welling left the Oregon Project in December 2015. She is no longer sponsored by Nike, and now runs for Skechers.
Antidoping officials have not announced sanctions against anyone implicated in the report.