The Times loves cats. At least, it’s clear we had a thing for them in the past.
This particular folder is grouped with a handful of others dedicated to archival cat photos, including kittens, “longhairs, shorthairs” and cat rescues. Taken together, the photos “reveal a golden era for feline adventures in the late 19th and early 20th centuries,” notes our Pet City columnist Andy Newman.
But the cat files are just the tip of the iceberg. Hundreds of file cabinets are stuffed with folders containing all manner of photos.
We didn’t begin to appreciate just how far and deep our archives go until we began curating The Times’s @nytarchives Instagram feed last fall. Today we launch nytimes.com/flashback, a new home for this archival feed, which also includes links to the Times articles we reference when we write our @nytarchives posts.
Once a day, we’re sharing an image from the newspaper’s rich visual history. Our goal is to highlight photos from the vast archives of The Times, with a focus on lighter news. Some photos we find because we’re looking for something in particular — a person, an event or an occasion, like Mother’s Day — and others we find by pure chance.
This is a project devoted to the work of photographers who have shot for The Times over the years. Most never could have dreamed of the impact social media would one day have on their profession. Today, the job of a Times photographer can include tweeting photos, producing an Instagram Story or shooting in 360 degrees.
So what happens when you bring history to Instagram? We’re still learning, but so far, it’s clear that people are drawn to photos of landmarks, like the Statue of Liberty and the Lincoln Memorial; babies, like this little Easter darling; and beauty, like these lilies.
Yet some of the gems are not quite as “like”-able. Consider our 1950s-era food pictures — a beloved collection curated by our dining photo editor, Tiina Loite. The food photos are the very definition of bad Instagram pictures. (Vienna cocktail sausages with aspic, anyone?) But they’re a fascinating window into Times history.
All these photographs come from the morgue, but many have been published before — some in print long ago; others in recent articles that reference the past, like obituaries. Quite a few have appeared on The Lively Morgue, a Tumblr created in 2012 by Times photo editor Darcy Eveleigh, which features the fronts and backs of archival images. But for many people — certainly for us — these images are new.
To get started, find Flashback here. And check back often: We won’t run out of pictures any time soon.