ATLANTA — Toronto Blue Jays center fielder Kevin Pillar was suspended for two games on Thursday after he yelled an anti-gay slur at a Braves pitcher.
The Blue Jays suspended Pillar shortly after he apologized, saying he was “completely and utterly embarrassed” by his actions toward the pitcher, Jason Motte, during Atlanta’s 8-4 victory Wednesday night.
Pillar was angry because he thought Motte had quick-pitched him to get a strikeout that ended the seventh inning. Replays appeared to show Pillar yelling the slur toward the mound.
After what he described as a sleepless night, Pillar acknowledged wrongdoing.
Blue Jays General Manager Ross Atkins flew to Atlanta to apologize on behalf of the organization and announce the suspension, which he said had been deemed appropriate by Major League Baseball and Commissioner Rob Manfred.
Pillar was set to miss Thursday’s game against the Braves, as well as Friday’s game at Baltimore. He will forfeit about $6,066 of his $550,000 salary, with the money donated to charity.
Pillar will also pay an undisclosed fine.
The episode occurred during the Blue Jays’ third straight loss to the Braves. With his team trailing, 8-3, Pillar struck out swinging to end a 1-2-3 seventh. He yelled toward the mound, prompting Motte to throw up his arms as if he did not know what the problem was.
Atlanta catcher Kurt Suzuki and the home plate umpire Brian O’Nora stepped in to defuse the tension. Pillar headed toward the outfield, and the Braves left the field for the dugout.
Afterward, Pillar conceded to reporters that he was frustrated by his team’s struggles, though he did not mention what he had said.
In 2012, the Blue Jays gave shortstop Yunel Escobar a three-game suspension after he played a game with an anti-gay slur written in Spanish on his eye-black stickers. The team took a similar position toward Pillar.
“We wanted to make sure we were as proactive as possible to get in front of it,” Atkins said.
Pillar’s slur came during a heated game in which the Braves star Freddie Freeman was struck on the left wrist by a pitch, resulting in a fracture that will sideline him for about 10 weeks.
In the eighth inning, both teams charged onto the field after Toronto’s Jose Bautista homered against Eric O’Flaherty, stared him down and flipped his bat high in the air. Jace Peterson shouted something at Bautista as he rounded first base, and Suzuki exchanged words with Bautista after he touched home plate.
No punches were thrown, but O’Flaherty issued a rebuke to Bautista after the game.
