I have been covering educational technology for more than a decade as the editor of the Tech Tools blog and feel that on balance schools get more than they give up. As far as losing a generation of students to Google’s relentless compiling of personal data, our children are already tracked minutely by Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and others. It is wishful thinking that they would be free of this commercial intrusion while at school. In fact, these companies already know a lot more about the children in some respects than their parents do.
There’s a Silicon Valley saying that when you pay for something, it’s the product. When you get it for free, you’re the product. In these straitened times for districts, it’s really becoming a question of whether you go with Google and Chromebooks and accept what they entail or do without.
BRIAN NADEL, PELHAM, N.Y.
Sadly, American public education lurches from one fad to another. Remember “schools without walls” or the “new math”? Chromebooks are simply the latest fad. There is little evidence that computers in classrooms produce student outcomes superior to traditional teaching methods, at least when the latter are implemented properly.
Elite private schools have computers, but they are far less central to the educational process. Instead, smaller class sizes and better teachers are emphasized. However, these are a lot more expensive than Chromebooks.
I’m an adjunct professor and I’ve been watching this disturbing trend for many years. Where do many of the technology executives in Silicon Valley send their own kids? To the technology-free Waldorf School. Parents and educators should think about why the people designing and selling these tech tools do not allow their own children to be educated through technology.
The big question everyone should be asking here is: Are we educating our kids to become active citizens or passive, unquestioning consumers? 
I am the parent of two elementary-school children. Our school district has Google accounts for all the schoolchildren, and I couldn’t be happier. My children have learned how to use word processing, create spreadsheets, make and give presentations, and use email — all at a young age in a safe environment. They can log into their accounts from anywhere, do their homework (it even saves their work automatically every few seconds), communicate with their teachers and classmates, and even submit their homework online. All their work is saved and accessible anywhere, anytime. They both have cellphones and can also access their accounts on their phones.
Chromebooks might make a teacher’s job easier, but don’t be fooled into thinking they will produce better educated and more responsible citizens, more creative kids or a highly skilled work force. The distractions that Chromebooks present offset many of the advantages. If Google or Apple or Facebook were serious about providing a useful tool for students, the platform would have looked much different. It would have limited access to the web, disallowing all sites but those with strictly educational value. We would never use textbooks jammed with advertisements, inappropriate pictures or games.
I know there is no getting this toothpaste back in the tube, but the last thing children need is more screen time. Google has been virtually giving out Chromebooks like lollipops. It knew full well that the temptation to stray from schoolwork into cybertainment would be inevitable, providing Google with infinite data mining and marketing research opportunities.
The Chromebook movement at the high school level has also spawned some very creative ways to “share” homework, classroom assignments and screenshots of tests.
RICK BOBRICK, MEDUSA, N.Y.
The writer is a junior high school science teacher.
Google’s education apps group director, Jonathan Rochelle, questions the value of teaching students the skills of mathematical thinking when students can just “ask Google for the answer.” The purpose of education should not be to teach students how to mindlessly search the internet and locate the answer to a question. Whether the class is mathematics, history, literature, science, civics or the arts, a good teacher will encourage students to think critically for themselves, ask their own questions and discover answers.
It is hard for this reader to accept that a laptop with a bunch of apps will ever teach students more meaningfully than a skilled and inspiring teacher standing up in front, armed only with chalk, and challenging students to think.
DAVID E. COHEN, WYCKOFF, N.J.
This article gave copious details about how the tech giant Google won over numerous school districts around the country, and beat out Microsoft, but I wish it had focused more on what the Google tools were, and how they helped students gain knowledge and acquire inspiration.
During my years in junior high school I learned the formula for solving quadratic equations and how it worked, and as an aerospace physicist for more than 40 years, I found I needed it often. By being stored in my memory it was at my immediate disposal.
Of course we should use computers as we do libraries to look up information. But certain fundamental rules, laws, processes and shortcuts should be memorized, so they are conveniently available. I also found that depending on computers for solving problems can often result in a “garbage in, garbage out” situation. If you can’t solve the problem as a rough “back of the envelope” calculation, you’ll never know if your computer got it right.
Good for Google. It figured out how to level the playing field across different types of schools and districts to help close the digital divide. And it has helped spawn a new generation of digital citizens who are learning how to use technology in a social, positive manner geared toward learning. Schools can be left scrambling to find ways to give each student full access to a good education. At low cost and with easy-to-use tools, Google has skinned the cat.
Yes, Google also has almost unfettered access to a new generation of consumers. That’s a price worth paying given the high returns to students in the form of contemporary, relevant learning.
The article raises many valid concerns about the infiltration of Google into the lives of our children. The question, however, as to “whether the purpose of public schools is to turn out knowledgeable citizens or skilled workers” is no longer relevant. They must be one and the same. I hope the public schools can embrace and facilitate this reality.
