F. Scott Fitzgerald, circa 1921.
Illustrated. 358 pp. Scribner. $28.
In the heyday of mass-market “slick” magazines, a serious fiction writer actually had the option of selling out, but you had to have a knack for it. A young Richard Yates tried and failed; the author of “Revolutionary Road” and “The Easter Parade” — grindingly bleak indictments of the postwar middle class — could rarely see his way clear to the requisite happy ending, and was mortified by the results when he managed it. His hero F. Scott Fitzgerald, however, had the knack in spades, learning early that it hardly made sense to knock himself out on a novella-length masterpiece like “The Diamond as Big as the Ritz” when he’d have to sell it for a pittance to the highbrow Smart Set. Meanwhile his tales of sassy, glamorous flappers, dashed off in a day or three, were constantly in demand at The Saturday Evening Post, which paid him a peak fee of $4,000 per story in 1929, the equivalent of about $57,000 today. No wonder nine years passed between his best novels, “The Great Gatsby” (1925) and “Tender Is the Night” (1934); indeed Fitzgerald’s facility for the short form would prove a mixed blessing, to put it mildly, somewhat akin to Muhammad Ali learning, late in his career, that he could take a punch.
And now, inevitably, we have the latest and perhaps last collection, “I’d Die for You”: the “lost” stories and other bits of ephemera that were unpublished in Fitzgerald’s lifetime — the uber-dregs, as it were. Most of these were written at the bottom of the Depression, when the author languished in various Smoky Mountains hotels near his wife Zelda’s sanitarium, where she was being treated (expensively) for schizophrenia. This in case you were wondering what Dorothy Parker meant when she murmured “The poor son of a bitch” while gazing into Fitzgerald’s coffin. A few years before that, Fitzgerald had complained to his faithful agent, Harold Ober: “I used to write for myself — now I write for editors because I never have time to really think what I do like or find anything to like. Its [sic] like a man drawing water out in drops because he’s too thirsty to wait for the well to fill.” Not only was Fitzgerald depleted in body and mind, but the high-dollar “slicks” were vanishing like so many dodos. One of the best stories in this collection, “The Pearl and the Fur,” was sold in 1936 for the relatively negligible sum of $1,000 (about $18,000 today) to something called The Pictorial Review, a once-popular women’s magazine that never got around to running Fitzgerald’s story before going under in 1939.
This “boy,” as we learn from the story’s headnote, was none other than Charles Marquis (Bill) Warren, who would go on to collaborate with Fitzgerald in Hollywood and, most notably, create the television series “Rawhide” in 1959. This fun fact comes to us courtesy of the book’s editor, Anne Margaret Daniel, whose exuberant diligence is more worthwhile than most of the stories. “I have tried not to reveal crucial plot details,” she writes of her entertaining, fastidiously researched headnotes. “However, to avoid any spoilers, please read the stories themselves first.” Fat chance! I’d rather know in advance that The Saturday Evening Post, Cosmopolitan, Redbook and even College Humor (“all magazines that had regularly and eagerly published Fitzgerald’s work”) were of one mind regarding the lame “Nightmare,” or that another, undated, story, “The Couple,” was probably completed sometime between August 1921 and October 1922, when the Fitzgeralds lived in St. Paul, or so Daniel surmised given that the latter part of the manuscript was handwritten on Goldsmith’s Bond, “one of the largest stationers … in the Midwest.” As one gleans from these details, Daniel’s labors are loving if a little quixotic; frankly I doubt even her family will read every item among the 30 fine-print pages of notes at the end of the book. A desultory skim is worth your while, though, as you’ll learn, say, that El Patio is “a top Havana restaurant” to this day, or that “Les Apaches de Belleville” inspired “a rather violent Jazz Age dance, in which the partners cuff each other around and melt into a concluding waltz,” or that, less whimsically, Zelda’s brother was also mentally ill and his suicide resulted in a “new defeatism” on his sister’s part, or so her worried husband saw fit to inform a doctor.
And finally, inferior Fitzgerald is still Fitzgerald, and his best readers will find much to enjoy in this gorgeously produced book. Even the weaker pieces are sustained by flourishes of prose style — “a pink glow of summer evening” on the surface of a mountain lake, a motif of changing light that’s nicely sustained in the title story until the author seems to lose steam and tend wanly to plot mechanics per se. His energy failed him, but his talent abided. “Smoking meant a lot to her sometimes,” he wrote in “Thanks for the Light,” about a lonely traveling saleswoman. “She was a widow and she had no close relatives to write to in the evenings, while more than one moving picture a week hurt her eyes, so that smoking had come to be an important punctuation mark in the long sentence of a day on the road.” The New Yorker turned down the story in 1936 — “so curious and so unlike the kind of thing we associate with him”— but published it 76 years later, when Fitzgerald was allowed, at last, to be the kind of writer who evoked the homeliest anodynes of middle age.