Recently, George L. Kelling, the criminologist who pioneered “broken windows” theory, the catalyst for drastic changes in American policing over the past three decades, wrote a new paper, adapted in part from a previous one, “Measuring What Matters Redux: Ensuring Public Safety and Improving Police Performance.” It is a drab title for the presentation of ideas that would strike his critics as startling.
In the study, written with Catherine M. Coles, Mr. Kelling, a senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute for Policy Research, argues for a new and considerably more pliant framework to evaluate policing, one that borrows largely from the concept of the “balanced scorecard,” first introduced in the Harvard Business Review in the 1990s. In simplest terms, the balanced scorecard is a management system that applies diverse criteria to measuring corporate success, criteria that extend beyond traditional financial benchmarks found in earnings reports and include relationships with consumers, internal dynamics and so on.
Deployed in the context of policing, this approach would require departments to grade themselves not merely according to metrics of crime reduction — or crucially, how many arrests they piled up, arrests functioning as a dangerous indicator of productivity, Mr. Kelling concedes — but by how well they had engaged communities and collaborated with them. In other words, they would now ask themselves, like so many Tim Cooks: Are we keeping the customer happy?
Should these ideas come into wide national use, the implications would be enormous, arriving as they do in the aftermath of the era of stop-and-frisk policing — for which “broken windows,” the notion that law enforcers should go after low-level offenses as a means of preventing actual violence, served as an ideological buttress.
As New York City’s police department, the largest in the country, undergoes a transformation in how it serves and relates to the communities where faith in law enforcement has eroded, it is a good moment to ask just how happy the customers are. How are the renewed efforts in neighborhood policing, the move to have officers better connected to the people they are entrusted to protect, experienced in everyday life?
Several days ago, I met with five community leaders, all of them presidents of tenants’ associations in public housing complexes in Queens. April Simpson, president of the tenants’ association at the Queensbridge Houses, the largest complex in the city, was born on her parents’ bed in that development and remained.
The leaders could recall when officers knew the names of everyone in a family. Annie Cotton-Morris, a longtime resident of the Woodside Houses and the head of its tenants’ association, has had many issues with the New York City Housing Authority’s top-down approach to dealing with the people who live in its buildings, but she had many good things to say about how law enforcement had treated her neighbors more recently. She is not seeing the needless harassment of young people so much anymore, she told me; she is witnessing instead the development of closer and healthier relationships between them and the officers at Woodside.
At the same time, the Housing Authority has been working to overhaul a policy bearing the ominous name of “permanent exclusion,” an outgrowth of federal litigation in the 1970s, when housing advocates maintained that the authority was evicting too many families because one member had committed a crime. As a response, the authority developed a policy that barred people with criminal records not just from living in public housing but also from visiting family in the apartments where they used to live. The policy has largely had a negative impact on women — wives, mothers, grandmothers and partners — who have been denied the support of men who could help them. Legal Aid lawyers have countless stories of men being hauled away by inspectors, who make unannounced calls, for visiting children to, say, bring diapers.
Ms. Simpson shared anecdotes, all of them from Queensbridge. In one instance, a woman who had lived in the complex for 66 years was visited by her great-grandson, who was in college. He was on the permanent exclusion list, she said, for something he had done in the 1990s. When he was caught on the grounds, his great-grandmother faced the threat of having her lease terminated.
Reflecting progressive trends in criminal justice reform, the Housing Authority has sought counsel from places like the Vera Institute of Justice. It now makes the application process for exemption from permanent exclusion easier, and it is working to ensure that only people who are a true threat to the safety of residents are kept away. Keeping people coming out of prison from important connections in their lives goes against every principle of effective re-entry.
But so many other sectors of the system need to be brought along for a new order to emerge. At the end of March, during a housing crisis so acute that the city has record levels of homelessness, its Department of Investigation released a report saying that the Housing Authority wasn’t evicting enough people connected to those who had committed crimes. The report chides the authority for settling only 32 percent of its tenancy termination cases last year through “permanent exclusion,” and bringing only 1 percent of cases to an eviction hearing.
But these policies, as Lucy Newman, a lawyer for the Legal Aid Society, put it, “merely displace risk.” The report, for example, relays the case of a 24-year-old woman it identifies as Yvonne who allowed her brother to live in her apartment in the Ingersoll Houses in Brooklyn without authorization; he had served two years in prison for gun possession. In 2015, he fired shots at off-duty police officers between the Ingersoll and Walt Whitman Houses. What the report doesn’t make clear is how evicting his sister would have curtailed his criminal impulses.