At the beginning of April, a short blog post about Donald Trump’s Mar-a-Lago resort appeared on ShareAmerica, a web property administered by the State Department. The post was an anodyne history of the property, one of many such posts on the site, which is full of easily digestible tidbits about America meant for a foreign audience (“New York Restaurant Named Best in the World,” for example, or “The Year of the Rooster: How Are Americans Celebrating?”). It sat quietly for several weeks, until a promotional tweet from a State Department account caught the eye of Senator Ron Wyden of Oregon, who wondered aloud on Twitter why the federal government was in the business of advertising the president’s private club. The post was removed after the subsequent furor, an apology left in its place.
The I.I.P. was formed in 1999 at the State Department from the wreckage of the United States Information Agency (U.S.I.A.) — the seminal Cold War-era institution that at one time housed the Voice of America (a radio agency originally established to combat Nazi propaganda). Today, the I.I.P. runs “American Spaces,” physical locations abroad that host speakers and events and provide reading materials to foreign publics. (I.I.P. “used to send more good American writers to Europe than HUAC,” a former I.I.P. contractor told me.) It has worked with public and private institutions to sponsor contests and other programs aimed at attracting world youth to democratic ideals. But like the U.S.I.A. before it, the I.I.P.’s most tangible stock in trade is publications — in English and other languages — for global dissemination through U.S. embassies, consulates and, now, the internet.
For an American reader, I.I.P.’s body of work offers a fascinating look not only at what our government wants to tell the world but also at what it wants to believe about itself. The obvious conflicts of interest that accompanied Donald Trump into office are in one sense the least of I.I.P.’s problems; the larger question is what a propaganda unit is supposed to do when the pronouncements of its head of state are so often at odds with the national vision it tries to sell to the world.
Thanks to its fundamental openness, the United States today is among the most culturally and religiously diverse countries in the world — so much so that, within 30 years, its minority populations will outnumber the majority. Without fear of encountering institutionalized discrimination, American citizens are free to practice their religion, give voice to their views and use their creative energies to pursue their personal aspirations. The result is a dynamic marketplace of ideas where all have the right to express themselves, as long as they are respectful of the rights of others.
It’s unclear how, and how swiftly, a change in the Oval Office translates to an explicit shift in priorities for American public diplomacy, although since Trump took office and installed Rex Tillerson as secretary of state, the I.I.P. U.R.L. takes you to a new landing page with a fraction of the publications it used to have. (As of this writing, the I.I.P. staff has not responded to questions about program and content priorities.) But the Mar-a-Lago problem is just one piece of baggage in a monogrammed set that Trump brings to his office, and a look at ShareAmerica since his election reveals that the I.I.P. under Trump is perhaps not so much a sinister puppet, as its new critics have claimed, but a beleaguered office with a challenging job to do.
