WASHINGTON — Before he was confirmed last month as deputy attorney general, the nation’s No. 2 law enforcement official, Rod J. Rosenstein was cast as an evenhanded career prosecutor who had transcended partisan politics.
Now, Mr. Rosenstein, a former United States attorney in Maryland who served under Presidents Barack Obama and George W. Bush, has been thrust into the center of a bitter political firestorm over his pivotal role in President Trump’s decision on Tuesday to fire James B. Comey as director of the F.B.I.
Mr. Rosenstein wrote a three-page memo that Mr. Trump cited as the basis for the ouster, and he met with Mr. Trump and Attorney General Jeff Sessions on Monday and discussed “reasons for removing the director,” according to the White House. People close to Mr. Trump said the president had been openly talking about firing Mr. Comey for at least a week.
It was unclear Wednesday what had prompted Mr. Rosenstein to write the memo, which enumerated ways in which Mr. Comey had done “substantial harm” to the reputation of the F.B.I. Mr. Rosenstein did not respond to inquiries.
In addition to a Justice Department investigation, there are several congressional inquiries into potential ties between President Trump’s associates and Russia.
But some of his former colleagues, who would not speak on the record, and those who have followed his career said they wondered how he, a prosecutor who took pains to be apolitical, had become the legitimizing force behind Mr. Trump’s decision to dismiss Mr. Comey days after the F.B.I. director had told Mr. Rosenstein that he wanted to put more resources into the Russia investigation.
Defenders of Mr. Trump’s decision seized on Mr. Rosenstein’s reputation for nonpartisanship as crucial validation for the firing.
In his memo, Mr. Rosenstein criticized Mr. Comey for announcing in July that the investigation into Hillary Clinton’s email use would be closed without prosecution while calling her “extremely careless” in her handling of classified information. It was not Mr. Comey’s role to make such a determination, Mr. Rosenstein said, but rather the attorney general’s.
But former federal prosecutors who worked with Mr. Rosenstein in Maryland said that while his central role in the political turmoil was unusual, the objections he raised over how Mr. Comey had behaved — making public statements about an investigation “as if it were a closing argument, but without a trial” — were consistent with his by-the-book philosophy.
Mr. Rosenstein’s experience with leak investigations, a stated priority for Mr. Trump, may have won him particular admiration from Mr. Sessions, who first called him in November about the job, two months before Mr. Trump nominated him to be deputy attorney general.
Read the letter President Trump sent the F.B.I. director about his firing.
Last year, Mr. Rosenstein won a guilty plea in the high-profile leak case of James E. Cartwright, a retired four-star Marine general and former vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Mr. Rosenstein, along with another prosecutor, was asked by Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. to handle the investigation after the Obama administration was accused of leaking classified information on cyberattacks and drone strikes to reporters.
Mr. Rosenstein’s entire career has been in government. After graduating from the University of Pennsylvania and Harvard Law School, where he was an editor of the Harvard Law Review, he clerked for a federal judge, Douglas H. Ginsburg of the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, a Reagan appointee.
Mr. Rosenstein was appointed United States attorney for the District of Maryland by Mr. Bush in 2005 and stayed on for all of the Obama administration, a bipartisan rarity among scores of United States attorneys.
During his 12 years as the top federal prosecutor in Maryland, Mr. Rosenstein emphasized prosecutions of violent crimes and saw a bigger decrease in statewide murders than the national average. He has stressed the importance of applying special scrutiny to repeat offenders and of collaborations among law enforcement agencies to stem crime.
At his confirmation hearing in March, Mr. Rosenstein said that he had learned to respond to difficult issues by considering three questions.
The second: “What should we do?” He explained that law enforcement officials had to appreciate “the intended and unintended consequences” of their actions.
