NICE, France — The lights dimmed and the music steadily built. Ravel’s “Bolero,” at once martial and sensual, wrapped the crowd in its sinister embrace, the atmosphere laced with menace. The audience murmured in the dark, expectant, awaiting deliverance.
It came in a carefully orchestrated burst of bright lights and radiant chords. The far-right presidential candidate of the National Front, Marine Le Pen, strode onto the stage, beaming. The symbolism was obvious. The darkness enveloping the hall, and France, could lift.
Darkness and light: For most of her career, ever since Ms. Le Pen, now 48, broke into the political spotlight 15 years ago as the daughter and defender of the National Front’s patriarch, Jean-Marie, her path has been defined by their interplay. “She busted the TV screen wide open!” he once admiringly told an interviewer of that moment.
Now a global figure, a far-right populist who has threatened to bring down the European Union, Ms. Le Pen is at the threshold of power as France prepares for the final round of voting for president on Sunday. Her odds, judging by the polls, are long. But even if she does not succeed against the independent centrist Emmanuel Macron, Ms. Le Pen is likely to be a powerful fixture of French politics for years to come. She is a political veteran, a fierce debater and perhaps the ablest campaigner in the entire French political spectrum.
Yet she has made a risky bargain. She has cast off the xenophobic legacy of the National Front, and she has not. Her father never swayed from the hardest, most hate-filled of political lines. The daughter aspires to the presidency. She has made a very public campaign of “un-demonizing” — shedding the party’s bigoted heritage — even as skeptics still wonder if the effort is more tactical than genuine. Her unspoken gamble is that she can keep the National Front legacy even as she reassures millions of French that she has transcended it.
When Donald J. Trump won the American presidential election, Ms. Le Pen suddenly seemed part of a global populist vanguard. But if that populist surge appears to be peaking — for now — it is also true that Ms. Le Pen is no Mr. Trump.
Unlike him, she does not improvise her policies, which are the product of a decades-long honing of National Front ideology. That ideology is not sui generis, unlike Mr. Trump’s. Its roots are in classic French far-right thinking going back 100 years or more. Indeed, some reputable scholars think that France, not Italy, was the true birthplace of fascism at the turn of the 20th century.
And she speaks in polished, complete sentences, informed by her training as a lawyer and by the advisers, some well versed in old French far-right doctrines, who surround her. She easily jousts with reporters, even while working a crowd, brushing off a British television reporter who questioned her electoral potential at one stop with a quotation from the right-wing Roman Catholic author George Bernanos.
French economists, political analysts and think tanks are virtually united in predicting a crisis for France if Ms. Le Pen is elected. Her plan to take France out of the eurozone would lead to an immediate devaluation of any new national currency, with devastating effect on her core base of supporters, economists say. Her stigmatization of immigrants would exacerbate social tensions in already edgy suburbs.
Yet in many parts of France, her appeal is undeniable. Hatred of the political establishment — seen as responsible for France’s economic stagnation, its persistent unemployment rate of 10 percent, its shuttered factories and its waves of immigrants — provides her with a powerful boost. In person and on the campaign trail, the twice-divorced mother of three conveys tough frankness in familiar, gravelly tones conditioned by years of smoking — an alluring combination to growing ranks of French voters.
Her campaign posters are affixed across the country, subtle reminders of her efforts to run from the past. There is no mention of the National Front, and its associations with anti-Semitism, racism, and nostalgia for France’s collaboration with the Nazis. Even the Le Pen name, tied to her father, is absent. There is just her recognizable face and her recognizable given name, Marine. She is the brand; the National Front is the unspoken subtext of her politics.
That recognition is the result of a life in the spotlight, if often in the shadow of her father, whose cronies once sneered at the young upstart, a wealthy heiress with a fondness for Champagne and parties — until she took leadership of the party from him in 2011 and cast him out in 2015.
At the raucous rallies that pack in thousands, many proudly trace their allegiance back to her overthrown father. But under the daughter, the National Front’s appeal has grown steadily. She got over seven million votes in the election’s first round, on April 23, a million more than in 2015 regional elections, and nearly two million more than her father received in 2002.
Her critics regard her as a dangerous nationalist and demagogue. Her supporters interpret her willingness to cast blame on “the system,” “the oligarchy” and especially immigrants as proof of her sincerity.
“It’s the truthfulness with which she expresses herself,” said Michel Duvernet, a middle-aged shopkeeper from the southern town of Cogolin, explaining why he had come to Ms. Le Pen’s rally in the coastal city of St.-Raphaël in March.
“Also, the simplicity of her words,” said Mr. Duvernet, praising Ms. Le Pen for putting her finger on what he called “the Islamic unbearableness of what we live every day,” in the speech she had just given.
“Plus, she just reaches out to ordinary people,” he said.
Raymond Herbreteau, a physical education coach from the Orne administrative department, who traveled to Ms. Le Pen’s rally in the western city of Nantes in February, spoke of Ms. Le Pen filling a new vacuum in French politics.
For the unconvinced, Ms. Le Pen has staged the elaborate “un-demonizing” of her party, as even her aides put it, in the full glare of the public spotlight. As ultimate proof, she presents an act of “violence,” as she put it in a television interview Sunday night: the expulsion of her own father from the party after yet another anti-Semitic outburst.
“For the higher interest of the nation, you’ve got to be capable of hurting yourself,” she said. “And that did hurt me, because I am a daughter,” she told the interviewer, explaining her decision to get rid of her father.
What part of it is sincere, and what part is mere political calculation?
“For 40 years, she had been hearing exactly the same things” from her father, “and it did not bother her in the slightest,” said Mr. Martinez, Mr. Le Pen’s old associate.
Her aides, often close personal friends in the National Front’s clannish culture, reject this view.
“She’s got the French national heritage stapled to her being, but modernized,” he added.
The record suggests a constant shifting back and forth: edging away from her father’s worldview, and then edging back toward it, or at least part of it.
Her first big break with her father, in 2005, came after he called the German wartime occupation of France “not particularly inhumane.” Furious over his maintaining what she called a “counterproductive” strategy, she fled with her children to the family’s seaside villa and began writing her autobiography. Despite the split, she remained important in the party hierarchy.
After 2010 regional elections, when Ms. Le Pen did well, she began to consolidate her hold on the National Front. That same year, she described the Muslim presence in France as an “occupation,” a remark that brought her to court on charges of inciting religious hatred.
After she gained control of the party in 2011, she went on television to declare the Nazi camps “the height of barbarity” — a clear break with years of National Front policy.
Mr. Chauprade was more categorical. “She’s got an enormous capacity to lie,” he said.