If the Mets were looking for excuses for poor play on Monday night, there was no shortage of them at their fingertips.
The pregame talk revolved around Matt Harvey, the erstwhile ace currently under team suspension for reasons that remain unclear, except that it is agreed that he did not show up for work Saturday.
The starting shortstop, Asdrubal Cabrera, was still too sore to play after spraining his thumb diving after a ball on Saturday. Aside from Harvey’s banishment, the Mets’ rotation was depleted by injury, with starters Noah Syndergaard, Steven Matz and Seth Lugo on the disabled list, and the position players Yoenis Cespedes and Lucas Duda were also sidelined.
To cap it all, the Mets were coming off a demoralizing 7-0 loss to the Miami Marlins on Sunday as the news about Harvey swirled around their clubhouse. And yet, even after squandering a good start by Jacob deGrom and wasting opportunity after opportunity in the first eight innings against the San Francisco Giants at Citi Field, the Mets emerged with a 4-3 win.
Perhaps unlikelier than the victory was the man who delivered it: Neil Walker, batting .207 — up from .195 for the month of April — who came up with two on and two outs in a 3-3 game in the bottom of the ninth. And the count was 1-2.
Batting against Giants reliever Hunter Strickland, Walker fouled off a pair of two-strike pitches, one of them a nasty curve that he barely got a piece of, before getting a fastball. He saved his best swing for that one, lining a single into the right-field corner that scored Michael Conforto and gave the Mets their seventh win in 10 games.
Starved for starting pitching, the Mets got an ace-like performance out of deGrom, who struck out 11 in six innings — the fourth time in his last five starts he has posted double-digit strikeouts — but deprived himself of a chance for a win by allowing home runs to Hunter Pence, a two-run shot in the first, and Buster Posey, a solo blast in the sixth.
Posey’s homer left deGrom on the short end of a 3-2 score.
But Curtis Granderson, batting for deGrom in the bottom of the inning, got him off the hook with a double that drove in a run. Still, it appeared as if the Mets might be headed for a demoralizing defeat when Cabrera, who batted with the bases loaded in the eighth, rapped into an inning-ending double play.
But that ultimately set the stage for Walker to play hero in the ninth.
The left-handed pitcher Tommy Milone was added to the major league roster before the game. Milone, claimed off waivers from the Milwaukee Brewers on Saturday, is one of the candidates to start Wednesday’s series finale against the Giants. Adam Wilk, rushed into emergency starting duty on Sunday to replace the suspended Matt Harvey, was designated for assignment to clear a roster spot.