Fighting the expansion of the so-called welfare state is a fundamental premise of the American conservative movement. But as tens of millions of Americans have come to rely on coverage under the 2010 health law, Republicans have learned the political risks of being seen as taking a hatchet to the program, however imperfect it may be.
So conservatives have now cast aside their high-minded arguments of political principle, replacing them with dense discussions of policy. Pre-existing conditions, risk pools and premium costs — not the more conventional Republican disquisitions in favor of the free market, personal responsibility and smaller government — dominate the debate today.
The health care law, said Thomas Miller, a fellow at the conservative American Enterprise Institute, has underscored how new entitlements inevitably become part of what he called the “demilitarized zone” of politics.
“One of the problems Republicans have had in 2017 is that the narrative and the discussion have changed,” Mr. Miller said.
But it is not just the tenor of the debate that has changed. The bill that the House passed last week was less ambitious than the full-on repeal that conservatives have argued for since President Barack Obama signed the law seven years ago.
“There’s a reason this has never been done before in the modern era,” said Tim Phillips, president of Americans for Prosperity. With new government benefits, he said, comes incredible political power.
As politically useful as it may be to retain parts of the law, many conservatives have started asking whether the Republican Party is abandoning its core principles.

Mr. Voegeli pointed to a long list of government programs that Republicans have promised to defund or eliminate — the National Endowment for the Arts, public broadcasting, the Department of Education and, of course, the Affordable Care Act — amid the expansion of the liberal “administrative state,” to use a term popular inside the Trump administration.
On Fox News over the weekend, the conservative columnist Charles Krauthammer said Republicans had basically given up on arguing for a more purely free-market health care system.
To the dismay of many conservatives, the promise to repeal had morphed into a pledge to replace. Even worse, some Republicans started talking about another dreaded R word: repair.
Mr. Ryan, speaking on Sunday on ABC News, used language not ordinarily heard from free-market, anti-entitlement conservatives like himself. The speaker, perhaps his party’s most vocal proponent of bringing down the cost of entitlements, argued for the House bill not on the basis of how much money it would save — in part because he rushed the vote before a proper accounting could be completed — but how many people would be left covered.
The health and human services secretary, Tom Price, sounded a similar note, telling NBC News that the goal was something that Republicans usually dismissed as utopian fantasy: universal coverage.
Even if the official party line is merely to provide access to coverage, the bill that the House passed aims to preserve some of the most popular parts of the 2010 law. For instance, Republicans say they have kept protections for people with health conditions that would have allowed insurers to deny them coverage before, though critics say they may face higher costs.
“They’re basically taking Obamacare and changing it around the margins,” said Adam Jentleson, a former senior aide to Harry Reid, who led Senate Democrats when the law was passed.
Also lost in the debate today is much of the disagreement over the proper scope of government authority. Republicans in the past often framed the debate in terms of personal freedom, choice and liberty — as opposed to the soft tyranny that can come through well-meaning laws.
Some saw another lesson for Republicans: that the general and philosophical are merely that.
“Republicans are strongest on these issues on the level of generality as opposed to the pragmatics,” Mr. Miller, of the American Enterprise Institute, said. That explains why their arguments have shifted to explaining how the law is failing rather than how it is a betrayal of the American tradition.
