How did a young graffiti rebel go from selling drawings for $50 in 1980 to having a painting come up for auction this week at a staggering $60 million?
The answer to this remarkable trajectory of Jean-Michel Basquiat, who died at 27 of a drug overdose in 1988, lies in the art market’s unpredictable but powerful alchemy: a combination of raw talent, compelling biography and limited supply.
On Thursday night, Sotheby’s will offer Basquiat’s 1982 painting of a face in the shape of a skull, “Untitled,” with a guaranteed price of at least $60 million, an auction high for the artist. And given the current international appetite for his work, that figure could go higher in a bidding war.
Such eight-figure sums are a stunning jump in value for a piece that sold for just $19,000 in 1984 to two collectors of emerging artists, Jerry and Emily Spiegel. The work hasn’t been on the market since.
High prices are hardly new for Basquiat, art experts note. Last year, he became the highest-grossing American artist at auction, generating $171.5 million from 80 works, according to the Artprice database. The auction high for Basquiat has increased at least tenfold in the last 15 years, soaring to $57.3 million in 2016 with Christie’s spring sale of a 1982 “Untitled” Basquiat owned by the New York collector Adam Lindemann, in which the artist depicts himself as a horned devil amid orange, red, white and black brush strokes.
The question is whether price levels will remain this high. Typically, people in the auction world say, a surge in prices prompts collectors to jump on the bandwagon, consigning their works by the same artist. Indeed, after Christie’s success with its Basquiat last spring, it seemed as though everyone wanted in on the action.
There are no fewer than 16 Basquiats on offer at Sotheby’s, Christie’s and Phillips’s evening auctions this season, which together represent an estimated minimum value of about $119 million — out of a total of $690 million for the three sales. Basquiat is, both numerically and financially, the week’s heavyweight artist.
When it comes to the best of Basquiat, however — generally, works produced between 1981 and 1983 at the start of his short career (though there are also good later pieces) — the demand remains high. Collectors who own top Basquiats don’t want to sell, and museums can’t afford them, so few of his paintings are in major institutions.
Though Basquiat might be the darling of the market and have a grass-roots popularity, there has been a paucity of big retrospectives in major international museums like the Tate Modern in London or the Museum of Modern Art in New York. A large show, “Basquiat: Boom for Real,” opening at the Barbican Center in London on Sept. 21, will be the first large-scale British exhibition of his work.
People are also drawn to Basquiat’s personal story: a young black man in dreadlocks from Brooklyn who died just seven years into an exploding career.
The collectors Herb and Lenore Schorr were among Basquiat’s earliest supporters. In 1981, they bought the artist’s eight-foot-wide painting “Poison Oasis” from the New York dealer Annina Nosei for $3,500. Just two years later, they purchased another painting for $10,000 at the Fun Gallery’s one-man Basquiat show in New York.
Artists’ flames have died out in the past. The question is whether this one will continue to burn.
