Pro Basketball|The Irresistible Cavaliers. The Immovable Warriors.
The Irresistible Cavaliers. The Immovable Warriors.
Ever since the Cavaliers came back to beat the Warriors in last year’s N.B.A. Finals, just about everyone has been counting the days until the expected rematch this season.
The addition of Kevin Durant to the loaded Warriors and the continued excellence of LeBron James for the Cavs made any other Finals seem unlikely to most observers.
The feeling persisted even when there were regular season blips: The Warriors won 67 games, but that fell short of their record-breaking 73 last season; the Cavs won only 51 and did not even get the top seed in the East.
And since the playoffs started, both teams have looked unstoppable again.
The Warriors swept the Blazers and the Jazz and are 2-0 up on the Spurs. The Cavs swept the Pacers and the Raptors and are 1-0 up on the Celtics going into Friday night’s game. The teams’ combined record is 19-0.
So far it is the Warriors who have put up the more impressive postseason streak. The Cavs have won their games by an average of 10 points, a figure held down by a curiously close set of games against the Pacers in the opening round. The Warriors are winning by an average of 17 points, including a 36-point blowout of the Spurs in Game 2 of the Western finals.
There are potential pitfalls ahead. Teams like the Cavs that win Game 1 on the road to capture home-court advantage often let up in Game 2. And Isaiah Thomas is always going to be a threat to take over a game and lead the Celtics to victory. The Warriors face two games in San Antonio; doesn’t it seem likely that the Spurs will win at least one of those, even with Kawhi Leonard’s status questionable?
Still, both teams are favored in their next games on the road, the Cavs by 5½ points and the Warriors by 6.
And should either team make the Finals unbeaten, the streak should end there. Computer ratings make the Warriors the hypothetical favorite by 8 points in home games, but by only 2 in Cleveland. Those who watched last year’s series won’t be eager to bet against the Cavs.
Since the current N.B.A. playoff format began in 2003, only five teams had previously made the conference finals without a loss. Oddly, four of them lost there. The exception was last year’s Cavaliers, who pulled off two sweeps before beating the Raptors four games to two.
Going a little further back, two teams stand out as having the greatest N.B.A. playoff runs. The 2001 Lakers tore through three playoff series without a defeat and almost everyone was expecting another sweep against the 76ers in the Finals. Allen Iverson managed to will the Sixers to victory with 48 points in Game 1, but the Lakers won the rest to post an impressive 15-1 playoff record.
It was the 1983 Sixers whose playoff mark is most remembered. Asked for a prediction before the playoffs, then three rounds long for the top teams, center Moses Malone declared “Four, four, four.” He was almost right, as the Sixers took four, five and four games to claim the title, still the last one for the team.
