Carol L. Schneider, 66, is a staff chaplain at NYU Winthrop Hospital in Mineola, N.Y.
Q. What background do you bring to the job?
A. I enrolled in seminary at age 60 and received my master’s in divinity in 2014. Prior to that, I was a trust officer at a national bank in Oregon, and later I worked as a consultant to the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, where I advised congregations on church-building projects.
How did you wind up as a hospital chaplain?
I spent my clinical pastoral education, which is required for certification as a chaplain, at a hospital in Brooklyn. Then I was hired by the HealthCare Chaplaincy Network, a nonprofit organization that provides interfaith chaplains to help people faced with illness, and operates at major New York hospitals like Winthrop and Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center.
I do quite a bit of grief counseling, helping people who receive an unexpected medical diagnosis or are facing end-of-life decisions. That includes families who may have to decide whether to remove a family member from life support.
Is every decision about life or death?
Sometimes it’s helping someone deal with a chronic but life-changing illness, like rheumatoid arthritis, diabetes or kidney disease. I help people find meaning in their situation.
What prepared you for this kind of job?
My entire life has been working with family units of various kinds. When I was at the bank, I would help people, for example, settle an estate or decide whether to put a family member in a nursing home. There are often differences of opinion.
What is the best — and the worst — thing about your job?
It can be the same thing. You are comforting a person and helping them cope in a time of distress. It’s about listening. But it’s difficult not to get emotionally involved. One of the hardest parts is not knowing what happens after they leave the hospital.
How do you deal with such a stressful and emotional job?
Meditation, needlework, going to the ballet and just connecting with a friend or someone in my church congregation.