“The Graduate” celebrates an anniversary year. Classic Empire runs the course at Churchill Downs in the first leg of the Triple Crown. And Alec Baldwin and David Letterman watch some movies.
THE GRADUATE (1967) on Mubi. “Well, I would say that I’m just drifting. Here in the pool,” Benjamin Braddock (Dustin Hoffman), a recent college graduate, tells his father after moving back home to California. “It’s very comfortable just to drift here.” Then he embarks on an affair with Mrs. Robinson (Anne Bancroft), the wife of his father’s law partner, before falling for that couple’s daughter, Elaine (Katharine Ross). This Mike Nichols classic celebrates its 50th year. Pour yourself a bourbon and hum along to Simon and Garfunkel on the soundtrack.
THE KENTUCKY DERBY 2:30 p.m. on NBC. The 3-year-old Classic Empire is the favored thoroughbred in this 143rd run for the roses at Churchill Downs, with Always Dreaming and McCracken close on his heels. Bob Costas leads the coverage and interviews four of the only eight men who have called the race, and the chef Bobby Flay whips up some Southern fare to serve the team. Post time is 6:34.
SECRETARIAT (2010) 8 p.m. on CMT. Diane Lane plays Penny Chenery, the owner of Secretariat, the thoroughbred who in 1973 became the first Triple Crown champion in 25 years, setting records that still stand. John Malkovich is Lucien Laurin, who came out of retirement shortly before leading Secretariat to victory. “It’s a pleasurable, seductive fantasy partly because, as we have known from the start of cinema, the sight of a running horse is a beautiful thing,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times.
THE ESSENTIALS 8 p.m. on TCM. Alec Baldwin takes over for Robert Osborne, who died in March, as host of this franchise featuring “must-see” films and explaining why they are required viewing. And David Letterman joins him in the studio for a four-episode arc as his first guest. The discussion begins with “The Bad and the Beautiful” (1952), Vincente Minnelli’s drama about an unscrupulous movie producer, played by Kirk Douglas, who climbs all over the actors and studio types around him on his way to the top. Tina Fey and William Friedkin will join Mr. Baldwin later in the season.
SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE 11:30 p.m. on NBC. Chris Pine, soon to appear in “Wonder Woman,” makes his hosting debut in this second of four episodes to be broadcast live coast-to-coast; LCD Soundsystem is the musical guest.