Snap investors may be feeling nauseated. The company, parent of the disappearing-message app Snapchat, reported a slowdown in user growth and a $2.2 billion quarterly loss. Meanwhile, rivals are co-opting features. These are worrisome trends, since its lofty $27 billion value hinges on attracting more people.
The company, known for its rainbow-vomit photo filters, suffered a market drop of more than 25 percent during after-hours trading on Wednesday, sending shares close to its $17 offer price before it went public on March 2.
On just about every metric, Snap disappointed. Revenue rose almost 300 percent to nearly $150 million but missed analysts’ consensus. It torched more cash. Even excluding the whopping $2 billion in stock-based compensation, adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda, it still notched a loss of $188 million.
Perhaps most concerning for the five-year-old company is the snaillike pace of daily active user growth. Year-over-year, it rose 36 percent to 166 million. That compares to a 48 percent year-over-year uptick in the fourth quarter.
Evan Spiegel, the co-founder and chief executive, chalked up the tepid growth to exclusivity. It is true that part of its appeal to a young base — more than 80 percent of social network users in the United States between 12 and 17 use the app, according to eMarketer — is the way it allows close management of contacts. But slow growth also implies that Snap’s valuation at 27 times revenue, at least before Wednesday afternoon, is unjustified. Facebook, for example, is trading at around 11 times estimated sales for this year.
In the meantime, Facebook is treating Snapchat like its own research and development lab. Mark Zuckerberg’s social network has copied signature functions like disappearing videos and photos without even bothering to change the name. Instagram’s “stories” feature has already amassed 200 million daily active users since it was introduced in August.
Twitter was also once full of promise. Now it is hamstrung by slowing adoption and declining revenue. Snap’s first set of results looks more like an egg hatched out of Twitter’s nest.