I called the woman. She had just gone public with allegations that Bill Cosby had drugged and sexually assaulted her. Now I listened as she told her account of what had happened 40 years earlier, how she had kept it a secret, and how, she said, it had wrecked her life.
This was not terrain I had expected to find myself going over only a few months earlier, but it ended up forming a part of my reporting life for two and a half years.
When the Cosby story began gaining momentum in October 2014, I had just returned from a reporting stint in Kabul, Afghanistan, and was working as an investigative reporter for the Culture section.
Then came a long line of women making headlines with accusations of sexual assaults stretching back over decades.
It soon became clear that the story was going to take on outsize meaning. In my encounters with the women, with the strenuous pushback from Mr. Cosby’s legal team and his supporters, in the reverberations of the story across popular culture, I saw it was about power relationships; about race; about how sexual assault cases are prosecuted; and about an icon who had changed the face of American television with “The Cosby Show.” As a Brit, it took me into a new arena of American mythology and celebrity.
I found myself exercising a completely new set of reportorial skills. This wasn’t the war zone of Afghanistan, or the bright lights of Manhattan art auctions. Instead, I had to learn to listen — quietly, patiently — to people who said they had been sexually assaulted, and to spokesmen for Mr. Cosby who said these same people were liars.
At the beginning, my team and I spent several months trying to find and talk to some of the women with stories of sexual assault who had stepped forward publicly into a glaring media spotlight — and some who hadn’t. This task involved spending long hours listening to the harrowing accounts of what they said they had been through and carefully gauging the credibility of the accusations. How did they come to meet him? What, if anything, did they gain from going public? What were the details — similarities to other women’s accounts, a willingness to share private details, their own loss of innocence — that pointed to whether they were reliable?
In order to give the women’s accounts context, we had to piece together Mr. Cosby’s own life and career in the 1960s, 1970s and onward, recreating his daily routines around stage sets and performances from New York to Las Vegas. We tracked down people who had known him back then to ask about his habits at work, his family life, and whether his vehement denials were plausible after so many women had come forward with similar accusations of assault.
It became another kind of story altogether. Now it was about arguing with lawyers, mastering a labyrinthine court records system, understanding local politics and explaining the complicated legal chess game that played out between the accusers and the accused.
A reporting breakthrough came in July 2015, when we realized we could buy, from a court reporting service in Philadelphia, the transcript of a deposition Mr. Cosby had given defending himself in a 2005 civil suit. Hundreds of pages of documents that had not surfaced for a decade detailed, in Mr. Cosby’s own words over four days of intense testimony, an account of his unapologetic pursuit of young women.
When Mr. Cosby was arrested, in December 2015, I began traveling to Norristown, Pa., to witness the criminal hearings. For successive sessions I sat, on the left side, behind the line of prosecutors. About 30 feet away, Mr. Cosby sat at the front of the court as his lawyers argued and sought to have the charges thrown out before it got to trial, in the end unsuccessfully.
On June 5, I will be back in Norristown for the trial, which is expected to take two weeks, a drama that is likely once again to draw in issues of gender and race, and is likely to decide the fate and legacy of a man who is inextricable from American culture.