Asia Pacific|Bangladesh Police Go After U.N. Official. The Issue: A Used Car.
Bangladesh Police Go After U.N. Official. The Issue: A Used Car.
DHAKA, Bangladesh — The sale of a used car is developing into an unusual criminal case and a potential diplomatic sore point between the United Nations and Bangladesh, whose government has frequently bristled at criticism from the international community.
At the heart of the case is an official named Stefan Priesner, an Austrian who headed the United Nations Development Program in Bangladesh from 2008 to 2012. When he left at the end of his tenure, Mr. Priesner sold his imported sport utility vehicle to a colleague.
But the customs police now say that he evaded $51,732 in taxes owed on the sale. The director general of the customs police, Moinul Khan, said on Thursday that the police were seeking authorization to charge Mr. Priesner with tax evasion and, because he received the proceeds through a foreign bank account, with money laundering.
The government’s real grudge may be not with Mr. Priesner but with the United Nations and other international institutions. The program Mr. Priesner headed worked on electoral reform in Bangladesh, where Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina won the 2014 election essentially by default after major opposition groups boycotted the vote. The next general election is scheduled for next year, and will probably be closely scrutinized.
The customs police have also investigated officials from the World Bank and the International Labor Organization for tax evasion. The World Bank has spoken out about allegations of corruption involving infrastructure projects in Bangladesh, and the International Labor Organization has raised concerns about working conditions in the country’s garment industry.
The Bangladesh government has been defiant in the face of international criticism, and the climate for international organizations working in the country has worsened. A law enacted in October gives the government sweeping powers to shut down nonprofit groups that receive foreign funds.
The United Nations Development Program said in a statement that Mr. Priesner had complied with all Bangladeshi laws in selling his car, and that it will cooperate with the country’s tax agency, the National Board of Revenue, known as the N.B.R.
“At the point of his reassignment, Mr. Priesner agreed to sell his car to Mr. Ashiqul Tareq, a staff member,” the statement said. “He secured the N.B.R.’s permission to do so, and executed a bill of sale with Mr. Tareq with the clear, formal and mutually signed agreement that confirmed Mr. Tareq would be solely responsible to pay all statutory dues.” The statement added that the relevant documents were shared with customs officials.
Mr. Khan of the customs police insisted on Thursday that the investigation of the car sale had not been influenced by politics.
The police also plan to ask United Nations headquarters in New York to take action against Mr. Priesner, who is currently the organization’s resident coordinator in Uzbekistan, Mr. Khan said.