Workers in South Korea on Thursday raised the ferry Sewol, which capsized and sank in April 2014. More than 300 people died, many of them students.
SEOUL, South Korea — A South Korean ferry that sank nearly three years ago, killing more than 300 people — most of them teenagers on a school trip — was raised to the surface on Thursday. It was an emotional moment for families who are still looking for their missing children and a step toward closing one of the most traumatic episodes in South Korea’s history.
The ferry, the 6,825-ton Sewol, capsized and sank off the southwestern tip of South Korea on April 16, 2014. The accident was the country’s worst catastrophe in decades, and it contributed to the recent ouster of President Park Geun-hye. The ship went under while teenagers trapped inside sent text messages asking for help that never came or saying goodbye to their families.
A monthslong underwater search of the ship ended after 295 bodies were recovered. Nine people who were on board remain missing, including four students and two teachers from Danwon High School in Ansan, south of Seoul, the South Korean capital. Of the 324 students from the school on board for a field trip, 250 drowned.
Bereaved families have demanded that the ship be salvaged, hoping that the bodies of the missing would be found inside. They also hoped that the wreckage would reveal more clues to what caused the ship to sink. Government investigators have blamed overloading, the ship’s structural imbalance and poor decisions by the crew for the disaster.
In 2015, the government announced plans to raise the ship, contracting a consortium of Chinese and South Korean salvage crews for the $76 million operation. Their work has been painstakingly slow because of strong currents, frequent periods of bad weather, poor underwater visibility and the complicated engineering maneuvers needed to raise the ship, which was lying on its side about 145 feet below the surface.
Divers spent months placing 33 lifting beams underneath the ferry and tying cables to both ends of them. After days of testing, two salvage barges began pulling up the cables on Wednesday, raising the ship inch by inch.
By Thursday morning, the ferry’s mud-covered, rusting hull broke through the surface, and workers began fastening the ferry to the barges.
Family members of the victims watched the operation overnight from a government ship.
Choi Young-Su is the photographer.