Nearly five years after the collapse of Dewey & LeBoeuf, and roughly 20 months after a mistrial in an earlier criminal proceeding, prosecutors got a split decision on Monday in an accounting fraud case against two former executives of the once-mighty New York law firm.
A jury in Manhattan convicted Joel Sanders, the law firm’s former chief financial officer, on three criminal counts arising from what prosecutors said was a scheme to hide the firm’s failing finances from financial backers.
But another former executive on trial, Stephen DiCarmine, was acquitted of the same charges.
The verdict came after five full days of deliberation by the jury in State Supreme Court in Lower Manhattan following a trial that began in January.
The mixed emotions from the split verdict, announced late Monday afternoon, were on display in the courtroom.
After the verdicts were read, Mr. DiCarmine was hugged by his lawyer, and the trial judge told him he was free to leave. Supporters of Mr. Sanders cried as his verdicts were read.
As Mr. DiCarmine left the courtroom, his thoughts were on his co-defendant and former colleague. “Joel is innocent,” he said.
The second trial took place with much less attention than the first, which was closely followed by New York lawyers given the spectacular nature of Dewey’s collapse into bankruptcy in May 2012. Two years after the firm’s fall, criminal charges were filed against some of its most senior executives.
Andrew Frisch, a lawyer for Mr. Sanders, said his client would appeal.
Dewey & LeBoeuf — which was created a decade ago from the merger of two storied law firms, Dewey Ballantine and LeBoeuf, Lamb, Greene & MacRae — once employed more than 1,300 lawyers. But the new firm quickly ran into trouble during the financial crisis that erupted soon after the merger.
Manhattan prosecutors said that Mr. DiCarmine, 60, the firm’s former executive director, and Mr. Sanders, 59, were part of a plot to manipulate the firm’s financial records to defraud bank lenders and insurance companies that invested in a bond offering.
The jury convicted Mr. Sanders, who could be sentenced to as many as four years in prison, on charges of securities fraud, scheme to defraud and conspiracy.
In his charge to the jury on May 1, Justice Robert M. Stolz said Mr. DiCarmine and Mr. Sanders were on trial not for the financial collapse of Dewey but on charges that they sought to conceal the severity of its financial situation.
Dewey represents one of the most significant white-collar cases Cyrus R. Vance Jr. has filed as Manhattan district attorney. The initial indictment had more than 100 charges. In bringing the case, Mr. Vance also announced his office had secured guilty pleas — most of them for misdemeanors — from seven low-level employees at the firm.
But in the first proceeding, Justice Stolz declared a mistrial after the jury had deliberated for 21 days. That was something of an embarrassment for Mr. Vance given all the resources his office had invested in the case and the fanfare with which he had announced the indictments in March 2014.
The split decision in the retrial gives Mr. Vance and his office some degree of vindication.
The spokeswoman added that prosecutors were disappointed in the acquittal of Mr. DiCarmine “but respect the jury’s conclusion that the evidence was insufficient” to convict him.
Mr. Frisch declined to speculate on why the jury found his client guilty but acquitted Mr. DiCarmine.
One juror, Darryl Downing, a producer for the New Heritage Theatre Group in Harlem, said prosecutors did not make their case with Mr. DiCarmine but “did a much better job with Sanders.” A fellow juror who did not give her name noted that Mr. DiCarmine did not appear on any incriminating emails introduced by prosecutors.
Several jurors interviewed after the first trial said they had wrestled more with the evidence presented against Mr. Sanders.
The second trial, while almost as long as the first one, was different in some important ways.
A few months after the first trial, prosecutors whittled down the case by dismissing dozens of charges and entered into a five-year deferred-prosecution agreement with one of the defendants: Steven H. Davis, the firm’s former chairman. Justice Stolz later tossed out the most serious larceny charges that Mr. DiCarmine and Mr. Sanders faced.
A fourth man, Zachary Warren, had criminal charges against him dismissed in January under the terms of a deferred-prosecution agreement. Mr. Warren, who was a low-level employee at Dewey, is now a lawyer at Williams & Connolly in Washington.
Prosecutors went to trial in the second proceeding with a slimmed-down case — just three charges against each man. But in other ways, this trial largely followed a similar script.
The prosecution called more than 30 witnesses, including its star witness, Francis Canellas, Dewey’s former finance director. Just as at the first trial, the defense did not call any witnesses, relying on the strength of its cross-examination of the prosecution’s witnesses to make its case.
And a jury of eight women and four men — just as in the first trial — decided the fates of Mr. DiCarmine and Mr. Sanders. One juror was a lawyer at a large New York law firm.
The Securities and Exchange Commission has filed a lawsuit against Mr. DiCarmine and Mr. Sanders that is pending.
Mr. DiCarmine’s lawyer, Rita Glavin of Seward & Kissel, said in the hallway outside the courtroom afterward that her client never did anything wrong. “It’s an absolute joyous day for Stephen DiCarmine,” she said.
