MILWAUKEE — When Terry Collins took over as manager of the Mets in 2011, he knew the team was heavily rebuilding after having fallen short of the playoffs in the previous four seasons, despite one of the highest payrolls in the major leagues. The transition had begun with a new general manager, Sandy Alderson, who hired Collins even though he had already managed two teams in nearly six seasons without taking either to the postseason.
Collins had no idea how long he would have the job. But he heard plenty of the conventional wisdom about the leaders of such teams.
“People were telling me, ‘You’re only gonna be here until they get to be good, and they’ll get somebody else,’” Collins said over the weekend, in the visitors’ dugout at Milwaukee’s Miller Park.
Six years later, after a slow crawl from the bottom of the National League East to a World Series appearance in 2015 and a wild-card playoff berth the next season, Collins is about to become the longest-tenured manager in Mets history. Barring postponements or other complications, he will manage his 1,013th Mets game and surpass Davey Johnson on Saturday against the Angels, one of the other teams Collins has managed.
The record is approaching during a particularly rough stretch for the Mets. They have lost four in a row as their record has slipped to 16-20. Pitcher Matt Harvey recently served a three-day suspension for failing to show up for a game the night before one of his starts. Reliever Jeurys Familia needed surgery to treat a blood clot. Because of inconsistent performances from, and injuries to, critical pitchers like Noah Syndergaard, the Mets’ once vaunted staff has been among the worst in the major leagues.
“You get up in the morning around here, and you don’t know what you’re going to face,” Collins said after the Mets blew a six-run lead Sunday in an 11-9 loss to the Milwaukee Brewers.
The Mets have had 20 managers since the team was founded in 1962, and only Bobby Valentine, Collins and Johnson have lasted more than 1,000 games. Johnson, who won the 1986 World Series with the Mets, has the team’s highest career winning percentage, .588.
“About time,” Johnson, who was fired by the Mets after the 1990 season, said of his record being broken soon.
Collins’s tenure highlights a harsh reality about managing in the major leagues: It is a relentless job, with much turnover. Only five active managers have continuously held their jobs longer than Collins: Mike Scioscia (with the Angels since 2000), Bruce Bochy (San Francisco Giants, 2007), Joe Girardi (Yankees, 2008), Buck Showalter (Baltimore Orioles, 2010) and Ned Yost (Kansas City Royals, 2010).
Each of them, except Showalter, has won at least one World Series with his current team.
In 2011, when Alderson and the Mets’ owners, the Wilpon family, had promoted Collins from the minor-league field coordinator’s job, they were aiming for contention years down the road. As they overhauled the roster, they put stock in Collins’s ability to teach young players.
Facing budget constraints, the Mets posted losing records from 2011 to 2014, but they slowly moved up in the standings because of the emergence of young players like Jacob deGrom, Zack Wheeler, Familia and Harvey.
Michael Conforto, Steven Matz and Syndergaard, all top prospects, arrived from the minor leagues in 2015 as the Mets vaulted into contention. Veteran players like Curtis Granderson, Asdrubal Cabrera, Jay Bruce and Neil Walker were added throughout the years. And now the Mets are flush with experience.
Wright, the Mets’ captain and longest-tenured player, said he had enjoyed watching Collins guide the team’s ascent on the field.
“Deservingly so, Terry has gotten a chance to see that light at the end of that tunnel,” Wright said.
Collins came to New York with a fiery persona that had undermined him in his previous managerial stints, in Houston and Anaheim, Calif., in the 1990s. He waited 11 years, which included a managing stint in Japan, to become a major league manager again. Given the job with the Mets, he vowed to be more relaxed, even under the bright lights of New York.
So when questions about Collins’s job security surfaced in 2015 and 2016, he leaned on that mellower approach and tried not to fret.
That mentality has helped as Collins, the oldest manager in the major leagues, deals with the rigors of leading a high-profile team.
Collins, who is known more for his people skills, has heard plenty of doubts about his work, whether it is questions about his relationship with Alderson or critiques of his game strategy.
The injuries and other problems of this season, however, have taken a toll on Collins’s energy.
Collins, who is in the final year of his contract, has occasionally mentioned wanting to spend more time with his wife, Debbie, and their grandchildren. But he will not allow himself to think about the future until the off-season. He will stop, he said, only when he thinks he cannot manage with the verve the job requires.
“When you can’t do that anymore, then you’ve got to hand it over to the next guy,” he said.
Under Collins, the Mets have a .493 winning percentage. Collins said passing Johnson in longevity would mean a lot to him if the Mets could overcome their deficiencies and reach the playoffs for a third straight season.
