BOSTON — The Boston Red Sox on Wednesday permanently barred from Fenway Park a man who they said used a racial slur toward another fan the previous night. It was a separate confrontation from the insults directed at Baltimore Orioles outfielder Adam Jones on Monday, but one the team said it was taking just as seriously.
“I’m here to send a message, loud and clear, that the behavior, the language, the treatment of others that you’ve heard about and read about is not acceptable,” Sam Kennedy, the Red Sox’ president, said during an impromptu update for reporters in the press box during Wednesday night’s game against Baltimore.
One night after Jones spoke out about a fan in the Fenway stands who had used a racial slur toward him, rekindling discussions about the city’s mixed history of racial tolerance, the ballpark was the site of another racist episode.
Calvin Hennick, a Boston resident taking his son to his first Red Sox game as a present for his sixth birthday, said on Wednesday night that a neighboring fan had used a racial slur when referring to the national anthem singer. Surprised, Hennick asked the fan to repeat it, and he did.
Hennick summoned security, and the other fan, whose name has not been released, was ejected. Hennick said the man denied to the security officers that he had used a racial slur.
Hennick, who is white, was at the game with his father-in-law, who is originally from Haiti, and his son, who is biracial. At first, Hennick said, he assumed the other fan had mistaken him for a kindred spirit, but now Hennick believes the man was reacting to the uproar over Jones.
The Red Sox declined to identify the barred person, saying the matter had been referred to the police. The Boston Police Department confirmed that its civil rights unit was investigating and would determine whether further action was warranted.
Kennedy said he believed it was the first time a fan had been barred for life from the ballpark. Ushers at the gates will be notified that the fan is not to be admitted.
Hennick said he did not feel that the experience had soured him on the ballpark or the city.
“My wife and I have been happy here,” he said. “I don’t feel uncomfortable walking around Boston with my mixed-race family, but that doesn’t mean that it’s not a common occurrence for people.
