Mr. Putin, who has a long record of seizing on foreign crises to make Russia’s voice heard, announced during a news conference in Sochi, Russia, the Black Sea resort that has become his equivalent of Mr. Trump’s Mar-a-Lago, that he has a “record” of the American president’s meeting at the White House with two senior Russian officials and was ready to give it to Congress — so long as Mr. Trump does not object.
Mr. Putin’s offer to release a record of what was said, made after a meeting with the visiting prime minister of Italy, Paolo Gentiloni, suggested less an effort to create clarity over what Mr. Trump actually said in the Oval Office last Wednesday than a headline-grabbing assertion of his own authority and a reminder that he should not be ignored.
To that end, the Russian government has been angling for months for a meeting between Mr. Putin and Mr. Trump, who has met a host of foreign leaders since he took office in January but only spoken with the Russian president by telephone. They are expected to get together during a summit meeting of the Group of 20 nations in Germany in July.
As with many of Mr. Putin’s maneuvers, his offer to release a record of the White House meeting with Russia’s foreign minister, Sergey V. Lavrov, and its Washington ambassador, Sergey I. Kislyak, seemed designed to unnerve and confuse.
For a start, the offer left everyone guessing about what kind of “record” Mr. Putin has of his diplomats’ meeting with Mr. Trump. Intentionally or otherwise, Mr. Putin muddied the waters by using a Russian word that can mean both audio recording and a written account. A Kremlin aide, Yury Ushakov, later clarified that Moscow has in its possession a written transcript, not a tape.
But, he added, the main target of Mr. Putin’s intervention was domestic opinion, as has been the case with most moves by the Russian president that baffle and dismay foreigners.
Mr. Putin’s remarks are unlikely to please the White House, which has given conflicting accounts of what Mr. Trump told the Russians and has resisted giving details of their conversation.
Aleksei V. Makarkin, deputy head of the Center for Political Technologies, a Moscow research group, said he doubted Mr. Putin had set out to offend Mr. Trump and questioned whether the Russian record would ever see the light of day.
“On the personal level, Trump clearly wants to improve relations with Russia. The problem is that he is also president of the U.S., head of the state apparatus. This makes it much more difficult to make deals with Russia,” Mr. Makarkin said.
American officials have said that Mr. Trump revealed secret information provided by Israel about a planned terrorist operation by the Islamic State militant group. In the process, they say, he named the city in Syria where the information was collected, potentially jeopardizing the source.
Mr. Trump has acknowledged discussing terrorism but has not specified what he told the Russian envoys.
Mr. Putin dismissed the claim that Mr. Trump had revealed any information that could be considered highly sensitive, returning to a favorite Kremlin theme: that the United States is gripped by an anti-Russian fever.
“What surprises me is that they are shaking up the domestic political situation, using anti-Russian slogans. Either they don’t understand the damage they’re doing to their own country, in which case they are simply stupid, or they understand everything, in which case they are dangerous and corrupt,” Mr. Putin said.
Mr. Putin’s fans in Russia reacted with delight to Mr. Putin’s move, with Sergei A. Markov, an analyst close to the Kremlin, rejoicing on Twitter over the Russian president’s assertiveness. “Well done, Putin. He surfed the wave into the U.S. information storm,” Mr. Markov wrote.
Russia, where the political elite celebrated Mr. Trump’s defeat of Hillary Clinton in November, has grown increasingly disillusioned of late with the new administration’s failure to deliver on Mr. Trump’s campaign pledges to “get along” with Moscow. A Facebook page named “Russians for Donald Trump” amended its name to add “R.I.P.,” after Mr. Trump ordered missile attacks on Russia’s ally, Syria, in retaliation for a chemical weapons attack.
Mr. Putin and his aides have repeatedly denied allegations that Russia interfered in last year’s presidential election in the United States.
At the same time, however, it has reaped great benefit from all the attention focused on Russia, even if most of it is negative. Accusations of Russian meddling have played into a domestic propaganda campaign that portrays all the country’s economic and other problems as a result of Russophobic foreigners intent on vilifying Russia. Moreover, the image of Moscow in the United States as a master manipulator has only reinforced Mr. Putin’s status as a supremely competent leader.
