Neither director wanted him, but then they took a look at him, and then he opened his mouth.
He was hungry, and pushy, and the director Guy Ritchie liked that. He was gorgeous, and charmed women and children, and the director James Gray liked that, too.
Charlie Hunnam is not exactly a household name in the United States, at least not just yet.
But all those parts did not make a breakout star of Mr. Hunnam, 37, not least because he has been enormously picky about roles. He once spent a few lean years living off an organic marijuana crop he cultivated in his Los Angeles home, he said, rather than taking jobs that left him cold.
“I can’t even believe I’m being this candid,” Mr. Hunnam said as he revealed his pot-growing days — they’re behind him now, he swears — over a lunch of seared halibut and spring peas at the Four Seasons in Lower Manhattan a few weeks ago.
Tall and V-shaped, blond and chiseled, Mr. Hunnam has been likened to Brad Pitt and Channing Tatum. Yet he didn’t carry the “here we go again” ennui or whiff of wariness that often permeates the air around celebrities. This despite the fact that he was in the thick of the press tour for “King Arthur,” the $102 million film Mr. Ritchie directed and helped write, in theaters Friday, May 12, with Mr. Hunnam as its star.
Scant weeks before, he had been out promoting Mr. Gray’s “The Lost City of Z,” which he starred in, too. By every appearance, the lean years are no more. Yet both films nearly eluded him.
The director continued, “When someone’s hungry and pushy and they can back it up with something, then it’s a wonderful conspiracy.” Mr. Hunnam was smart, meticulous and dived deep. He also hit the gym like a madman and, soon enough, looked like He-Man.
This in turn dismayed Mr. Gray, when, eight days after wrapping “King Arthur,” Mr. Hunnam showed up for a costume fitting for “Z.” The film is about Percy Fawcett, a real-life British explorer who disappeared in the Amazon in 1925 while searching for signs of an ancient civilization.
That said, Mr. Pitt was the one who got Mr. Hunnam the part of Fawcett. Mr. Pitt’s production company, Plan B, had tapped Mr. Gray, whose previous films include “The Yards” and “We Own the Night,” to write and direct the picture.
Mr. Pitt was to star but dropped out because of scheduling conflicts; then the lead was to be Benedict Cumberbatch, but his wife was about to give birth. Plan B suggested Mr. Hunnam, at which point Mr. Gray balked.
“I thought he was a Hells Angels kind of guy, which makes me feel like an absolute fool beyond comprehension,” Mr. Gray said, in a phone chat.
After learning Mr. Hunnam was British, Mr. Gray invited him over for dinner, making spaghetti and meatballs, which Mr. Hunnam dutifully ate even though, as Mr. Gray later learned, he avoids carbs.
For Mr. Gray, that was key. Like his character in the film, Mr. Hunnam burned with the need to prove himself.
Mr. Hunnam grew up in a struggling former coal-mining hub, Newcastle upon Tyne, in Northeast England, which makes him a Geordie, the nickname for people from that region and their dialect — “dead” sounds like “deed,” “crown” like “croon.” His parents split when he was 2, and though Charlie and his older brother lived with their mother, his father loomed large. Respected and feared, Billy Hunnam was a sharp-dressing scrap-metal dealer who, his son said, largely operated outside the law, and left young Charlie in awe. “He was a titan amongst men in that town,” Mr. Hunnam said.
Yet while his father had off-the-books wealth, he gave little money to Charlie, his brother or their mother, something Mr. Hunnam bears no animus about.
Whatever ambition poverty might have fueled in Mr. Hunnam was boosted by his angelic looks. After being spotted in a shop, he was cast in a television series, and then later, when he was 18, as a 15-year-old seduced by Aidan Gillen, then 30, in the British series “Queer as Folk,” which ignited controversy for its racy gay sex scenes (and predated the American version).
At 18, he entered a short marriage to the actress Katharine Towne, and then moved to California, where he developed a much discussed hybridized accent. He was offered a few good roles and plenty of terrible ones, and turned to writing screenplays — selling one, about Vlad the Impaler, to Summit Entertainment and Plan B — and the aforementioned pot, which he sold to a medical dispensary.
Mr. Hunnam has since added yet another feather to his cap; he starred, with Rami Malek, in the remake of “Papillon,” which wrapped production this past December.
But he can’t, or won’t, breathe easy yet.
First, with the “King Arthur” tour’s end in sight, he feels himself staring into an abyss. He’s long grappled with existentialism and, left to his own devices, can get overwhelmed, depressed. And he also struggles with reintegrating into off-set life, which includes his long-term relationship with the jewelry designer Morgana McNelis.
He also knows his time at the summit might be fleeting.
“The fear of ‘Is it going to happen?’ just immediately gets replaced with ‘Is it going to be temporary?’” he said.
 One recent night in New York, Mr. Ritchie invited Mr. Hunnam to join a bunch of friends for a nice dinner. Mr. Hunnam replied thanks, but he was already eating dinner, by himself, in a sushi joint a few blocks away.