SYDNEY, Australia — The advice for Australian Muslims traveling overseas, in a booklet from a legal rights group, was straightforward: If anything on your phone could be construed as advocating violence, delete it.
When the immigration minister, Peter Dutton, learned about it — from The Australian, a newspaper that published an article on Tuesday headlined “Muslim tips to evade airport security” — he wrote to the Muslim Legal Network NSW, which published the booklet, demanding an explanation.
“In the current international climate, I am very concerned this guidance could be interpreted as advice to evade Border Force and conceal illegal activity,” Mr. Dutton wrote in the letter.
Zaahir Edries, the president of the legal rights group, was taken aback — since the advice had originally come from Mr. Dutton’s own department.
“By keeping images like this on your electronic devices such as a hard drive, computer or mobile phone, even if someone has sent them to you, you may be committing an offense,” the fact sheet says.
“It was pretty upsetting for it be portrayed as anything other than an education piece, particularly because we used information provided by the government,” Mr. Edries said.
It was not the first time Mr. Dutton, a conservative, had offended Muslim communities. Last year, he caused an outcry after asserting that former Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser should not have allowed Lebanese Muslim migrants into Australia.
The 95-page booklet by the Muslim Legal Network NSW, released last week, is the most recent edition of its guide to Australia’s complex counterterrorism laws, originally published in 2004. Mr. Edries said lawyers and other experts had worked on the latest version for more than 18 months.
NSW stands for New South Wales, the state that includes Sydney.
The edition has been updated to cover new laws related to citizenship and passports, mandatory metadata retention, and the extension of control orders — court-imposed restrictions on movements or communications — to children as young as 14. It also features a new section on secrecy provisions, preventive detention and police stop-and-search powers.
“It’s really difficult when we try to pick up information that is provided generally from the government and provide it in an easy to understand communiqué and then be put under suspicion,” Mr. Edries said.
Lesley Lynch, vice president of the NSW Council for Civil Liberties, called the reaction to the booklet “a heartbreakingly outrageous interpretation.” She said the legal network should have been praised for producing an easily understood guide to terrorism laws.
