Max’s Kansas City was a legendary watering hole at 213 Park Avenue South for Andy Warhol and the habitués of the Factory, then located nearby off Union Square, as well as a hot spot for downtown mid-’70s bands like the Fast and the Mumps.
We had already journeyed to see Patti Smith, Talking Heads, the Shirts, Orchestra Luna and David Johansen at various Connecticut joints but had yet to cross the line into the Big Apple. It was curious, and fortuitous, that these personalities who came across almost as Fellini characters in the pages of the rock mags would exhibit their wild ways in the Nutmeg State. Possibly Connecticut had a less jaded audience to work out material in front of, which invariably made the performances slightly more jarring. We knew New York City was a whole other planet of perversion, and we knew we had to go there A.S.A.P.
So we jumped into my beat-up Volkswagen bug and putted to Max’s, entering the downstairs bar around 4 p.m. We just sat there drinking rum and Cokes, waiting for action. (The drinking age back then was 18, and many bartenders just rolled their eyes anyway.) As the evening progressed, we asked a waitress where the bands played, and she laughed and pointed to the stairwell. Oh, they play upstairs! We charged up there and witnessed Suicide, the Cramps and Fuse — one of the long-lost great street rock bands of the mid-’70s.
After running back to Bethel, silenced by Suicide’s Alan Vega strangling audience members with his microphone cord, among other exhilarating confrontations, we knew we had to return posthaste. I personally wanted to get to CBGB, as it sounded like a looser, rowdier hangout. But the next gig we went to was Wayne County & the Backstreet Boys at a new but very short-lived space at Bleecker and Lafayette called On the Rocks — and Joey Ramone was there.
“Yeah, sure!!” Joey seemed a bit inebriated, possibly, and his pal took him by the arm. I could see he was protecting Joey from getting into some strange car with a couple of dudes he didn’t know. So we parked the bug nearby and proceeded to the club.
CBGB was like a witch’s house with its stucco exterior, swinging wooden doors and opaque windows smeared with layers of fliers and wheat-paste residue. We walked in, and I was entering the dreams I envisioned from the pages of Rock Scene, which included the row of beer signs hanging from the ceiling leading to the stage. It was $3 to enter, which at that time was fairly steep, at least for teenagers from Connecticut with just enough coin from lawn-mowing jobs to pay for gas, cigs and a few Cokes. We were out of money and wondering how to get in when I noticed Richard Hell hanging around the door. I asked him if he could help. He had a stamp on his hand and licked it and pressed it on ours, and we slinked in.
We slowly moved toward the front, all new terrain for us, and suddenly a beer bottle came flying at high speed from across the room, whizzed right past my head and crashed into the wall behind the bar. And no one reacted! We found a seat and watched as a couple of cats and a dog named Jonathan moved through the audience and on and off the stage. People were eating hamburgers and smoking in the midst of the coolest place on Earth. The Mumps came on, and there was the lead singer Lance Loud dancing like a madman with the remarkable Kristian Hoffman on keyboards. And then Blondie played, and it was beyond great with Debbie Harry karate-kicking the audience and Gary Valentine bopping in dark shades.
Over time, I realized that not all the bands at CBGB were amazing. There were definitely some duds, a lot of faded stardust with yesterday’s shag haircut, but signals were changing. What struck me the most was the sheer bloody-mindedness of the artists, poets, filmmakers and musicians who were rubbing up against one another there. Whatever glamour there was on that stage, many of the artists were basically subsisting at poverty level. Fame had little to do with money, which the club infamously paid little of. But being there felt like you were at ground zero of the most critical listening room of the future.
CBGB was our university. We all met each other in 1976, and some of us — Jim Jarmusch, Lydia Lunch, Jean-Michel Basquiat, Kathy Acker, Glenn Branca et al. — realized immediately that our devotion was decided. By the end of the year I’d be playing in the Coachmen, an art school band from the Rhode Island School of Design informed by the college mates Talking Heads, né the Artistics/Autistics. By springtime ’77 I had my $115-a-month pad on 13th Street between Avenues A and B. When Sonic Youth came together in late 1980, I asked Hilly Kristal, the proprietor of CBGB, if we could play there. He recognized me from being this kid who basically lived at his club since late ’76 and said, “Of course you can.” He became a champion to me, always letting me present the band there in any context. When people ask me how I tune my guitar, I always say CBGB.