Mayor Bill de Blasio and executives from Madison Square Garden, CBS and the Recording Academy announced on Tuesday that the Grammy Awards ceremony would be held in New York on Jan. 28, returning the event to the city for the first time in 15 years.
The news — which most in the music industry had expected — came after months of negotiations among the city, the Garden, its labor unions and the academy, which presents the awards.
In the middle of those talks was Julie Menin, the commissioner of the Mayor’s Office of Media and Entertainment, the agency best known for coordinating permits for film and television productions. When the mayor appointed Ms. Menin last year, he added music, publishing, advertising and digital media to the office’s portfolio, giving the music industry its first liaison and advocate in the city’s government.
“I think it’s incredibly important that we have one agency that soup-to-nuts is dealing with all of these various media and entertainment industries,” Ms. Menin, previously the commissioner of the city’s Department of Consumer Affairs, said in a recent interview.
In just over a year on the job, Ms. Menin, 48, has ordered a study on the music industry’s economic impact on New York, arranged for the city to underwrite $30,000 in free rehearsal space for musicians, and announced a conference at New York University in June that will examine two of the biggest forces on music in the city: technology and real estate.
But her biggest task by far has been helping to bring the Grammys back to New York, a process that has introduced her to the delicate politics of the music industry.
In her first week on the job, in February 2016, Ms. Menin met in Los Angeles with executives at the Recording Academy, she said. The Grammys have been held at Staples Center there for 17 of the last 18 years — a visit to Madison Square Garden in 2003 was the only interruption — and the awards are closely intertwined with the location, through a walk of fame and the Grammy Museum nearby.
The expansion of the Grammys into a full week of conferences and other industry events has made the event even more attractive to a host city. An economic study of the 2014 awards found $82 million in benefits to Los Angeles.
The higher costs to stage the event in New York have been a longstanding obstacle, as has a lack of political will. Expenses for facilities, labor and housing the Recording Academy’s staff contribute to a total price that is $6 million to $8 million higher than in Los Angeles, according to Ms. Menin and others involved in the talks. To accommodate staging and rehearsals, the Grammys can require a venue for as many as 11 days.
Labor concessions amounted to only about $250,000, mostly through scheduling adjustments, according to two people with direct knowledge of the talks who were not authorized to speak about them publicly. Still, labor leaders and others in the music industry are quick to credit Ms. Menin with pushing the deals through.
Yet the city’s excitement clashed with the academy’s reluctance to announce anything prematurely. A leaked invitation to a we-did-it dinner in New York last fall was followed by months of nonstatements and delays from the academy and Madison Square Garden, whose executives said that detailed contracts — not to mention the scheduling of Knicks and Rangers games — needed to be worked out.
In an interview, Neil Portnow, the chief executive of the Recording Academy, praised Ms. Menin for her work and enthusiasm, calling her “a pistol.” But he said the initial discussions with the Garden preceded the city’s involvement.
Los Angeles was also eager to get the Grammys back. AEG, the entertainment company that owns Staples Center — and competes with the Madison Square Garden Company, which owns the Forum in Inglewood, Calif. — booked the awards to a multiyear deal, starting in 2019, well before next year’s show was confirmed for New York.
Ms. Menin said the Grammys were only one component of the support she wanted the city to lend to the music industry. In March, her office released a report, conducted by the Boston Consulting Group, that examined for the first time the economic impact of the city’s music industry.
Among its findings were that the broader music business — including not only musicians and record companies but also studios and technology companies — was responsible for 31,400 jobs and $2.8 billion in wages, with billions more attributed to ancillary spending and tourism.
For several years, New York Is Music pushed for a state tax credit for music production, but the lack of a formal study posed an obstacle in the lobbying effort, Mr. Kalifowitz said. Last year, a bill on the music tax credit passed the Legislature but was vetoed by Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo.
According to the economic impact study, overall employment in music has been growing since 2000. But while it may be increasing for concert promoters and technology companies, the number of performing groups and record label employees has been dropping.
Ms. Menin said that before the study was completed, she heard many anecdotal complaints that the music industry was abandoning New York for Los Angeles and elsewhere. The study, she said, refutes that.
