Institutional asset managers, overseeing trillions of other peoples’ investment dollars, carry enormous clout across corporate America. They can use the power and weight of their clients’ shares in public companies to vote for change on crucial matters, like outsize executive pay and anti-investor antics in the boardroom.
Too bad, then, that so many of these managers choose instead to support the status quo, even when investors are ill served.
Take, for example, Arconic, the industrial metals company that spun off Alcoa in November. Some of its directors are facing a proxy challenge to be decided Thursday at the company’s annual meeting.
Mounted by Elliott Management, the giant hedge fund, the battle follows years of declining sales, rising losses and a subpar stock performance at Alcoa.
Another problem: The structure of Arconic’s board — and Alcoa’s before it — is investor-unfriendly. It is what’s known as a classified board, in which directors’ terms are staggered, protecting them from being voted out en masse.
Nevertheless, two of the company’s largest shareholders, BlackRock and Vanguard, voted their clients’ shares in support of Alcoa’s management and board last year. And they rejected a proposal urging the company install an independent chairperson. At the time, Klaus Kleinfeld, Alcoa’s longtime chief executive, was also its chairman.
Had BlackRock and Vanguard favored the proposal for an independent chairperson, Mr. Kleinfeld might have been subject to greater oversight.
This may have been a good idea, given the bizarre sequence of events that forced Mr. Kleinfeld from his posts at Arconic last month. But we’ll return to that later.
BlackRock and Vanguard control a combined $9 trillion in assets, so how they vote their investors’ shares could not be more important. Their votes can hold boards and company executives accountable for their actions.
Or not, as in the Arconic case.
At last year’s annual meeting of Alcoa, BlackRock and Vanguard not only rejected the independent chairperson proposal, they supported generous pay practices at the company. Even as profits disappeared, compensation for the people in charge did not decline significantly. Both votes followed the recommendations of Alcoa management.
This is far from unusual. According to Proxy Insight, a data analytics firm that tracks shareholder votes, BlackRock voted in favor of 95.4 percent of management-sponsored proposals last year, while Vanguard sided 94.7 percent of the time with management.
Such support suggests that today’s corporations are models of perfection, requiring little change in the way they operate and serve shareholders. It seems unlikely that clients of BlackRock and Vanguard agree with that view.
Asked about its voting record on Alcoa, Zach Oleksiuk, head of investment stewardship for the Americas at BlackRock, said that the firm had repeatedly voted to declassify the board but had been thwarted by the company’s requirement that a proposal will prevail only if a supermajority of shares back it. “Our voting record shows that we support activist campaigns where we believe they will contribute to long-term value creation,” he added, in a statement.
BlackRock and Vanguard are not the only asset managers who act as a rubber stamp for corporate management. But the nature of these companies’ offerings — mostly passive investments such as index funds and exchange-traded funds — sets them apart in the governance arena.
As overseers of index funds and E.T.F.s, BlackRock and Vanguard are forced to own the company shares that are specific to an industry or index group. That means they cannot respond to problematic pay practices or board structure at a company by selling its stock. As a result, one may hope that these managers would be more vigilant about dubious corporate activities, not less.
Which brings us back to Arconic. Last year, in spite of declining corporate performance and questionable board governance at Alcoa, both BlackRock and Vanguard — two of its biggest holders — voted in step with management’s recommendations on two important matters.
The company, experiencing declining revenues and ballooning losses, had generated a one-year total shareholder return lower than its peers. Still, BlackRock and Vanguard voted in favor of lavish pay, awarding Mr. Kleinfeld a package worth $17.5 million in 2015, down only slightly from the $18.2 million of a year earlier.
Then there was the shareholder proposal urging the company to hire an independent chairperson. Voting in favor could have signaled dissatisfaction with Alcoa’s staggered board, a structure that both BlackRock and Vanguard criticize.
But the firms sent no such signal to Alcoa.
Other shareholders were more discerning in their votes. Fully one-third of the votes cast at the 2016 meeting favored an independent board chairperson, a high result for a proposal opposed by management. Had BlackRock and Vanguard voted their clients’ shares for the proposal, it would have garnered more than half the votes cast, making the message of greater independence on the board harder to ignore.
As it turned out, an independent board chairperson might have been just what Arconic — and Mr. Kleinfeld — needed.
When Elliott informed the Arconic board of the letter, which the hedge fund officials perceived as a threat, the directors determined that Mr. Kleinfeld had “showed poor judgment” in writing it. He was ousted.
Arconic has also highlighted strong first-quarter results as evidence that the company is turning around without Elliott’s help. Revenue rose 4.5 percent, and cost savings hit $61 million.
I asked Ms. Sabnis what Mr. Kleinfeld received in severance pay, a figure that has not been made public. She declined to comment.
Elliott has owned Arconic shares since mid-2015, when it was still Alcoa, and in early 2016 struck an agreement with the company to bring on three new directors. But Arconic’s performance continued to falter, and on Jan. 31, 2017, Elliott lost patience, saying it would nominate its own slate of directors for the company’s annual shareholder meeting this spring.
A spokesman for Elliott declined to comment. But the fund already performed a service for Arconic shareholders: The board recently said it would require annual elections for directors by 2018.
It will be fascinating to see on Thursday if BlackRock and Vanguard vote their investors’ Arconic shares in lock step with its management once again. Vanguard’s vote will be especially revealing given that one of its own directors, Rajiv Gupta, joined the board of Alcoa (and now Arconic) last September. Mr. Gupta has been a director of the Vanguard Group since 2001.
One thing is certain: Both asset managers could have done far more to hold this company’s management and board to account before now.