A spread from the yearbook of Shawnee Mission East High School in Prairie Village, Kan. The contentious presidential election posed a challenge for high school yearbook staffs.
A high school yearbook is a keepsake. Like an Instagram filter, it’s meant to bathe recent memories in the warm, soft-focus glow of nostalgia. As an object, it evokes affection and community; you hope to show it to your children and grandchildren someday. A yearbook isn’t supposed to be divisive.
So how to commemorate a school year that coincided with a meltdown in decorum in American politics?
That was the question high school yearbook editors and their advisers had to ask themselves while they were busy gathering up mug shots of the seniors, quotes, and group photographs of the football team, the cheerleading squad and the chess club.
The challenge of how to capture this raucous political moment was especially pressing in America’s purple places, like the Kansas City region, where Trump supporters and women’s marchers live and learn in proximity.
Some of their yearbooks celebrated President Trump’s challenge to the political order, while also debating the fairness of the Electoral College and arguing over the role that race and gender played in the outcome. Students used sharp graphics to compare actual vote counts with the schools’ own mock election results, which often mirrored the leanings of the local communities.
There were spreads devoted to students’ formal introduction to politics — registering to vote and interning with campaigns — and to their unvarnished opinions of the candidates.
A Kearney classmate was clear about why he preferred Mr. Trump: “I don’t want a girl president,” he said.
Now that their yearbooks are being distributed and cracked open, the pages offer a glimpse at how teenagers in one diverse region experienced an exhausting and exhilarating year in politics.
The yearbook editors at Lincoln College Preparatory Academy in Kansas City, Mo., where 80 percent of the students are black and Hispanic, decided to de-emphasize the election.
As in most of liberal America, Mr. Trump’s triumph on Nov. 8 caught yearbook editors at Lincoln College Preparatory Academy, a public school in central Kansas City, Mo., by surprise.
“The morning after Trump got elected, a lot of our friends were crying,” said Ayana Belk, a senior and the yearbook’s business and social media manager.
Lincoln’s student body is about 80 percent black and Hispanic. Last year, its yearbook won the grand prize in a national competition held by Entourage Yearbooks, which prints over 4,000 yearbooks annually. Like professional journalists across the country, in the aftermath of Election Day, the Lincoln yearbook editors met to discuss how the outcome would change editorial plans. They decided to de-emphasize politics altogether.
So the original plans — a two-page layout commemorating a Clinton victory — became a quarter page portraying Mr. Trump’s win alongside graphical representations of the Black Lives Matter movement and Mrs. Clinton’s erstwhile hashtag, #I’mWithHer.
The yearbook adviser, Jennifer Raynor, said covering the election in greater depth might have meant quoting the school’s very few Trump supporters, and both adults and students in the building were concerned about singling out those students.
Donald Trump won the mock election at Staley High School in Clay County, Mo. The yearbook reported those results, but also devoted a third of a page to students and teachers who participated in the local Women’s March on Jan. 21.
When members of the Lincoln staff attended a regional student journalism conference last month, they learned that at majority-white schools in the Kansas City suburbs, where student bodies tend to lean conservative, yearbooks covered the election with more gusto.
Mr. Trump won the mock election at Staley High School in Clay County, Mo., north of central Kansas City, taking 223 votes to Mrs. Clinton’s 173. The yearbook devoted two pages to the presidential election and, in a quest for balance, devoted a third of a page to students and teachers who participated in the local Women’s March on Jan. 21.
 Students gossiped when their classmates showed up to school in “Make America Great Again” gear. Many left-leaning students supported Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont in the Democratic primary and attended his Kansas City rally in February 2016, but then did not back Mrs. Clinton during the general election, he said.
The students were more united when it came to another issue, a state amendment that would have raised cigarette taxes and used the revenue for early childhood education, children’s health care and smoking cessation efforts. The measure passed at Staley 337 to 68.
Those of legal smoking age were less enthusiastic about the idea. Among actual voters, the measure failed in every single county in Missouri.
The yearbook for Mill Valley High School in Shawnee, Kan., features students’ Twitter posts about the campaign and their one-word descriptions of the election (“headache,” “divided,” “disappointed”).
Mr. Trump also won the mock vote at Mill Valley High School, 42 percent to Mrs. Clinton’s 31 percent, with Gary Johnson, Jill Stein and “other” filling out the tally. The yearbook features students’ Twitter posts about the campaign (“I’m not big on the idea of Trump being president, it’s just him over Hillary, that’s all”) and their one-word descriptions of the election (“headache,” “divided,” “disappointed”).
In an infographic, the yearbook editors emphasized that Mrs. Clinton had won the national popular vote. “We wanted to get the facts so people can look back and remember,” Sarah Morgan, one of three editors in chief, said.
The yearbook team at Blue Valley High School in Overland Park, Kan., where the student body leans conservative, noted the school’s mock election, the Electoral College results and the national popular vote.
Indeed, yearbooks reflected a broad distrust of Mrs. Clinton among the region’s suburban teenagers.
The team at Blue Valley High School in Overland Park, Kan., laid out a two-page spread that featured students’ favorite election-related Snapchat filters and a photo of a young man holding a large Trump/Pence banner.
It also had a large infographic highlighting the discrepancy between the national popular and Electoral College votes, as well as the results of Blue Valley’s mock election, in which 55 percent voted for Mr. Trump, 32 percent for Mrs. Clinton and 12 percent for Mr. Johnson or Ms. Stein.
Alex Roberts, a Blue Valley senior and a co-editor in chief of the yearbook, said gun rights were a major issue for her “country” classmates, and for herself; she was too young to vote, but chose Mr. Trump in the mock election. Still, objectivity was the goal as she and her fellow editors worked on the book.
