CANBERRA, Australia — In the year that he has been president of the Philippines, Rodrigo Duterte has been called a murderer, a tyrant, a misogynist and a madman. And yet, according to some recent opinion polls, he inspires “much trust” in 80 percent of Filipinos.
Mr. Duterte’s supporters are sometimes pejoratively called “Dutertards.” But are they simply naïve, and easy prey for demagoguery, propaganda and fake news? I don’t think so.
For more than three years, I have been studying how democratic politics takes shape in post-disaster contexts — specifically in communities that were affected by Typhoon Haiyan in November 2013. Haiyan was one of the strongest tropical storms ever to make landfall, and it killed more than 6,200 people.
Tacloban City, my field site, was ground zero for the cyclone. A city of about 240,000 people in the central part of the Philippines, it is a hub of commerce, trade, education and tourism in one of the country’s poorest regions. I have talked to more than 250 residents, mostly in hazard-prone areas the government has declared “no-build zones,” and many, while still reeling from the disaster, were energized when Mr. Duterte ran for the presidency, and when he won it.
Tacloban may not be an exact snapshot of the entire country, but it reveals something important, and something beyond the merely anecdotal, about why communities living in precarious conditions value Mr. Duterte’s leadership: He seems like a rare politician who doesn’t forget about the people.
Consider Shirelyn, a gregarious mother of two in her 20s. When I first met her in 2014, she lived in a shanty made of driftwood and galvanized iron sheets. Her home had been washed away by the typhoon. Shirelyn worked odd jobs whenever her partner, a pedicab driver, failed to earn enough to support the family.
Last year, she chose to forego a few days’ pay to campaign for Mr. Duterte when he was running for president. “This is the least I can do,” she told me in April 2016, at the height of the race.
Mr. Duterte was the mayor of Davao City when Haiyan struck, and he sent rescue operations to Tacloban at the time. “It’s our turn to help him” said posters plastered around Tacloban during his presidential bid.
Six months into his term, Mr. Duterte’s campaign promise “change is coming” materialized for Shirelyn. She and her family were relocated to the northern part of the city — to a house with concrete walls, a toilet, even a garden. Her new home brings to mind the aspirational middle-class gated communities of Manila, with their brightly painted welcome arches, rowhouse designs and picket fences.
“I knew Duterte would not forget,” Shirelyn said.
In the same speech, Mr. Duterte also made a comment implying that he had ogled Vice President Leni Robredo’s legs during cabinet meetings.
Politicians in the Philippines are often viewed as opportunists who reach out to constituents while they are courting votes but disappear from view once in office. To Haiyan survivors, Mr. Duterte is different. Three years after the disaster, even since becoming president, he came to Tacloban. This set him apart from his predecessor, Benigno S. Aquino, who once castigated survivors for complaining about their hardships instead of being grateful for still being alive.
The paradox, of course, is that even as Mr. Duterte restores dignity to disaster victims who have felt neglected by the state, his administration is attacking other vulnerable communities, like suspected drug users and those around them.
In January I asked Rafael, a security guard in Tacloban, how he felt about the government’s campaign against drugs, which has already claimed more lives than Haiyan did. Rafael lost his wife to the typhoon.
I asked if he thought that what Mr. Duterte was doing was fair. “He has been fair to us,” Rafael replied.
In other words: Not all suffering is equal, and compassion must be earned. Mr. Duterte’s antidrug campaign masterfully builds on the popular view that there are hierarchies of misery.
In a village near where Shirelyn used to live, a market vendor proudly told me that she had reported a drug dealer to the head of the village.
The dealer is now on a government watch list.
According to a poll conducted in March, 73 percent of respondents said they were worried that they or someone they knew might become the victim of an extrajudicial killing. But the anxiety I encountered in Tacloban was about something else. It was about people’s fear of being abandoned by the state once again.
Shirelyn showed me a notebook in which she had written down the promises Mr. Duterte made in his first address to the country as president. This was in January, a few months after she moved into her new home. For that, she was grateful; about the rest — the jobs, the new schools and the better health care to come — she was unsure.
“I made a list so I won’t forget,” she said. “We know what we deserve.” Mr. Duterte might get away with murder, but he won’t get away with broken promises.