SAN FRANCISCO — As the race to bring self-driving vehicles to the public intensifies, two of Silicon Valley’s most prominent players are teaming up.
The partnership indicates that Waymo believes its self-driving-car technology has moved past the research stage and is ready to be applied commercially. Alphabet, Google’s parent company, spun Waymo out of Google’s X project lab in December after more than eight years of research. The vehicles have been tested on closed tracks and open roads in Arizona, California, Texas and Washington, where state law allows the testing of autonomous vehicles. Waymo has said the vehicles have logged more than three million miles of real-world testing.
For Lyft, which has said it has no plans to develop its own self-driving-car technology, the deal with Waymo offers another way into the market. While Lyft has said it will work with G.M. on testing autonomous vehicles, G.M. bought the self-driving-technology start-up Cruise Automation last year for more than $1 billion in cash and stock. Cruise has begun testing G.M. vehicles on the open road in California.
In April, Lyft said it had raised $600 million in new venture capital, an investment round that valued the company at $6.9 billion.
Travis Kalanick, Uber’s chief executive, has said he views the race to bring self-driving technology to market as “existential” to Uber’s future. The company has poured hundreds of millions of dollars into catching up with Google and others. Uber opened its Advanced Technologies Center in Pittsburgh — a hub for self-driving-car research — in 2015 and recently announced a similar initiative in Toronto. Last year, Uber acquired Otto, a self-driving trucking start-up, for more than $680 million.
The Otto deal led Waymo to accuse Uber in a lawsuit of using Waymo’s intellectual property in its self-driving-vehicle designs. Waymo says Anthony Levandowski, who had been a key leader of Google’s self-driving car research and a founder of Otto, conspired with Uber to steal thousands of files related to autonomous-vehicle research before he left Google last year on his way to joining Uber.
The case could affect the speed at which Uber’s self-driving efforts come to market. Waymo is seeking a preliminary injunction to block Uber from using its trade secrets. If granted, such an injunction could halt some of Uber’s research until a trial concludes.