FRANKLIN, Tenn. — At a Chris Stapleton concert, there is incendiary singing, rich celebrations of country music tradition and, most important, the eye thing.
It happens frequently onstage when that country singer and his wife, Morgane, face each other, not the crowd, and hold each other’s gaze for seconds, sometimes minutes. It is a shocking reframing of live performance. Even though the show is technically Mr. Stapleton’s, with Ms. Stapleton singing backup, and even though there is an audience rapturously watching, often it feels as if the whole room is reduced to wordless, loving conversation between two people.
The dynamic between the two is one of country’s great treats, a vivid display of affection that elevates their music. It also creates a showcase for Ms. Stapleton, who, over a decade ago, was an aspiring country star with a record deal of her own. Her harmonies are some of the most affecting parts of “From A Room: Volume 1,” Mr. Stapleton’s second solo album, which will be released on Friday, two years after “Traveller,” his debut, which went platinum and earned him two Grammys, five Country Music Association awards and the somewhat unexpected role of high-profile vintage country preservationist.
“Traveller” kickstarted Mr. Stapleton’s solo career (after years in bands, and one false solo start) and, as a bonus, revived his wife’s as well.
The two met in 2003. Both were songwriters who plied their trade in adjacent buildings, and Ms. Stapleton was close friends with the woman responsible for pushing Mr. Stapleton’s songs to singers who might record them. After a few months, he asked if she’d like to write a song together. She proposed Friday at 6 p.m., a time when not much songwriting gets done. Four years later they were married. They have two children, now 6 and 8.
Though she recorded about three albums’ worth of songs, she never formally released any music. Her Myspace page survives, revealing a tender-voiced singer with sass and a dark streak. (Check out the wry “We Just Talk About It” and the bitter “We Tried.” She sang demos for $60 a pop (until someone told her she could charge $125), and backed up Lee Ann Womack on tour. She had some success as a songwriter, including on Carrie Underwood’s “Don’t Forget to Remember Me,” which went to No .2 on the Billboard country songs chart.
She asked to be released from her record contract, and for years largely avoided the stage. Before “Traveller,” Ms. Stapleton occasionally joined Mr. Stapleton’s set, but during the tour for that album, her presence became more frequent, and more integral.
Now, the show is incomplete without their interplay, Mr. Stapleton’s lionesque roar against Ms. Stapleton’s rustic balm.
If it happens, it will certainly be with Mr. Stapleton at her side, probably with eyes fixed on each other.
