Politics|Less Tweeting, Lawyers Beg. ‘Covfefe,’ the President Says.
Less Tweeting, Lawyers Beg. ‘Covfefe,’ the President Says.
WASHINGTON — There was a time in the not-too-distant past when President Trump refrained from flamethrowing messages on Twitter.
Never mind that his aides have asked him to stop. Never mind that now the lawyers have told him to stop. Even though his White House has been warned that tweets could be used as evidence against him, Mr. Trump has made clear in the days after returning from a largely Twitter-free overseas trip that he fully intends to stick to his favorite means of communication.
Throughout last year’s campaign and into the early months of his presidency, the concern among Mr. Trump’s advisers was mainly political. Every time the president let loose with one of his 140-character blasts, it distracted from his agenda and touched off a media frenzy that could last for days. But now the worry has turned increasingly legal. With multiple investigations looking at whether the president’s associates collaborated with Russia to influence the election, any random, unfiltered tweet could become part of a legal case.
More than ever before, the White House is looking at the Russia case through a legal prism and hoping to wall it off from day-to-day governance. The president’s aides are assembling a team of lawyers, including some who would join the staff and others who would remain outside the White House. Individual aides are also shopping for lawyers.
At his daily briefing Wednesday, Sean Spicer, the White House press secretary, refused to address matters related to the Russia investigations, saying that from now on all such inquiries should go to Marc E. Kasowitz, the president’s personal lawyer. Mr. Kasowitz’s office, which was still setting up operations, said it had no comment on Wednesday.
Mr. Spicer seemed to suggest it was either an inside joke or a kind of code. “The president and a small group of people know exactly what he meant,” he said in total seriousness and then refused to elaborate.
Whether the same could be true in criminal proceedings was unclear, some lawyers said, but they asked why he would take the chance. As it is, some of his tweets in recent weeks have provided fodder for critics who accused him of obstructing justice by firing James B. Comey, the F.B.I. director who was leading the Russia investigation. Moreover, provocative tweets could unwisely anger prosecutors and investigators.
One example cited by lawyers is when Mr. Trump seemed to threaten Mr. Comey if he talked publicly about his encounters with the president. “James Comey better hope that there are no ‘tapes’ of our conversations before he starts leaking to the press!” Mr. Trump wrote on Twitter. Some lawyers have said that that could be interpreted as witness tampering.
Mr. Comey plans to testify next week on Capitol Hill, where lawmakers are certain to ask about reports that Mr. Trump asked him to shut down an investigation into Michael T. Flynn, the president’s former national security adviser.
Mr. Trump sees Twitter as an asset. “Trump at his best is most effective as a politician when he is most unvarnished, able to say things other people aren’t allowed to say — which allows him to shape the whole conversation,” said Tim Miller, communications director for Jeb Bush’s 2016 campaign and a frequent critic of the president’s.
Instead, his social media presence was conventional and even conciliatory. “Honor of a lifetime to meet His Holiness Pope Francis,” Mr. Trump wrote at one point, offering an electronic olive branch to the pontiff with whom he had feuded during the campaign.
The best way to keep Mr. Trump off Twitter, advisers said, is to keep him busy. During his foreign trip, he was occupied 12 to 15 hours a day, seldom left alone to fulminate over the Russian investigation and given less unstructured time to watch television — although he did tune in to CNN International and fumed privately that it was even more hostile to him than the domestic network.
It helped, aides said, that Melania Trump, a sometimes moderating force who has largely remained in New York since the inauguration, accompanied him on the trip.
But hopes that Mr. Trump had turned a page while abroad quickly dissipated when he returned to the White House over the weekend. At 7:33 a.m. on Sunday, his first morning home, he began venting on Twitter against what he said were unfair news media reports. “It is my opinion that many of the leaks coming out of the White House are fabricated lies made up by the #FakeNews media,” he wrote.
