Walter Russell Mead, in his review of Condoleezza Rice’s “Democracy” (May 7), neglects an important part of the biography of the former national security adviser and secretary of state in the George W. Bush administration: According to the Senate Select Intelligence Committee report on the C.I.A.’s detention and interrogation program, Rice was among the first top administration officials to approve the torture of Abu Zubaydah, a terrorist suspect and human being, who was subjected to waterboarding 83 times as well as sleep deprivation, beatings and confinement for hours in a coffin-like box in violation of domestic and international law and fundamental ethical principles. This should be germane to Secretary Rice’s qualifications to write about the promotion of freedom and democracy.
The abject failure of the American imperialistic belief that military intervention can force or create democratic successes in foreign lands is proved once again in Condoleezza Rice’s “Democracy” and Walter Russell Mead’s review. Their examples of successful democratic influence by the United States in “Colombia, Kenya, Tunisia and Ghana” did not involve substantial military intervention, while the failure of military intervention continues its long march from Vietnam to Afghanistan, Iraq and Syria and onward.
For Rice to promote in her book the same deadly opinions she advocated from 2001 to 2009 shows anew how she and her mentor, President Bush, guided our nation into misguided and counterproductive wars.
The writer is a professor of criminal justice at Tennessee State University.
Re “Your Writing Tools Aren’t Mine,” by Viet Thanh Nguyen (Critic’s Take, April 30): One promising development on the landscape of M.F.A. creative writing programs in recent decades has been the emergence of nonfiction concentrations at many schools. Students practice memoir, essay, biography, literary journalism and other fact-based forms in which show and tell may be the better rule, and “art” and life (“politics, history, theory, philosophy, ideology”) need not conflict. The result is new writing that is as diverse as students’ own experience, as wide-ranging in content as curiosity will allow. “Write what you know” expands to “write what you can find out” through research. Faculty across genres in M.F.A. programs these days seek to foster unique student expression, but nonfiction, with its profusion of forms, may be the genre in which many students can most naturally find and exercise their own voices in workshops less bound by tradition.
The writer, who won the 2014 Pulitzer in biography and memoir, teaches nonfiction writing and archival research in the M.F.A. program at Emerson College.
James Ryerson reviewed three new exciting books on the history and role of numbers in society (Ivory Tower, May 7), among them Keith Devlin’s “Finding Fibonacci.” Arguably, Fibonacci’s greatest contribution was helping to introduce Europeans to the Hindu-Arabic numerals. Going from Roman numerals to this system dramatically simplifies and extends arithmetic calculation. Fibonacci, as a boy, learned the new way to represent numbers and to calculate with them in North Africa, (present-day Algeria), where his father was serving as a trade representative.
SOUTH DENNIS, MASS.
James Ryerson’s discussion of the Amazonian Pirahã’s sense of number (Ivory Tower, May 7), in connection with his discussion of Caleb Everett’s “Numbers and the Making of Us,” is reminiscent of the cognitive psychologist and epistemologist Jean Piaget’s observation that children’s earliest mathematics is ultrametric — not quantified metrically, but rather derived from concepts of enclosure and topology. Mathematicians call this early mathematics p-adic mathematics, in which numbers do not quantify count or measure size in the usual sense, but instead label paths of a hierarchy tree. Some cognitive scientists consider p-adic mathematics the natural mathematics of cognition, evolutionarily developed to conceptualize large quantities of complex information.
The writer is author of “Digital Mind Math,” the story of p-adic cognition.
The Book Review wants to hear from readers. Letters for publication should include the writer’s name, address and telephone number. Please address them to books@nytimes or to The Editor, The New York Times Book Review, 620 Eighth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10018. Comments may also be posted on the Book Review’s Facebook page.
Letters may be edited for length and clarity. We regret that we are unable to acknowledge letters.
Information about subscriptions and submitting books for review may be found here.