Matt Harvey, battered and beleaguered, walked into the media room at Citi Field on Tuesday afternoon with his head down and sat down in front of the microphone.
He had just finished apologizing to his teammates and his coaches, speaking emotionally for about 10 minutes behind the closed doors of the clubhouse and addressing his failure to show up for Saturday’s game, an act that led to a three-game suspension.
Now the 28-year-old Harvey had to deliver an apology for the public to hear. And he did, without offering any alibis for his actions.
“I’m extremely embarrassed,” Harvey said at one point.
In addressing what had occurred on Saturday, Harvey acknowledged that he had been out late Friday in Manhattan — “past curfew,” as he put it — and said he then played golf on Saturday morning.
The combination of those two activities, he implied, prevented him from showing up at Citi Field on Saturday afternoon as the Mets prepared to play a night game against the Miami Marlins.
While he belatedly contacted the Mets that afternoon, he did not follow the team’s protocol in doing so, and the Mets ended up sending team employees to his apartment to check on him.
Over the weekend, a person close to Harvey who said he was not authorized to speak publicly said that Harvey had a migraine on Saturday afternoon and that that was why he did not go to the ballpark.
However, at his news conference, which included opening remarks and then a half-dozen questions from reporters, Harvey did not mention having a headache. He stuck to putting himself at fault and said he felt “terrible” thinking about how his actions had affected the team.
They were contrite words from a pitcher who in 2013 was one of the best in baseball but has since endured two operations, assorted struggles on the mound and the increasing perception that he is too wedded to a celebrity lifestyle and does not take his job seriously enough. Harvey has struggled this season, and his E.R.A. is an unsightly 5.14.
Among the teammates who addressed Harvey’s apology before Tuesday’s game were Jay Bruce and Curtis Granderson, who both said they accepted him at his word. “It was genuine and heartfelt, and he definitely thought it out,” Granderson said.
Collins said he was pleased with how Harvey had handled his remarks to his teammates, saying he had struck a tone different from previous conversations he had had with him. “He didn’t mince words,” Collins said.
At his news conference, Harvey said he understood the Mets’ reasoning behind the suspension and said a grievance of the Mets’ action, which would proceed through the players’ union, was “the last thing” on his mind.
He also said he wanted to send his apologies to any Mets fans who went to Citi Field on Sunday hoping to see him pitch and instead discovered that he was suspended. In his absence, the Mets used Adam Wilk, a minor league call-up who was quickly hammered by the Marlins in a disheartening 7-0 defeat.
Making good on that pledge may be Harvey’s biggest challenge. In October 2015, Harvey failed to show up for the Mets’ first workout of the postseason. In that instance, he was also out with friends the night before. At the time, he said it would not happen again — and now it has.
Asked about that episode at the news conference, Harvey said people make mistakes.
Harvey did not specify what he would do. Teammates had spoken to him about that issue even before Tuesday, and Collins said that Bartolo Colon, a former teammate of Harvey’s, had sent him a text message of support that also challenged him to do better.
“He knows he’s got people in his corner no matter what their title is, that are going to help him go down the right path and do the right things,” Collins said.
Nevertheless, a lot of those fans may have grown weary of Harvey’s failures on and off the field. To win them back, he will probably have to do more than apologize — he will need to carry out his promise to both carry himself and pitch better than he has this season, and help restore some stability to the Mets’ injury-riddled starting rotation.
His first chance will come on Friday night in Milwaukee. “We’ve got to get him back out there,” Collins said.