Not long ago, The New York Post heralded the arrival of a new king of the city. There on the front page, beneath a jaunty crown, was the grinning visage of Mr. Met. For the first time since people started monitoring such things, the Mets — the perennial punch line, the professional underdogs — had eclipsed the Yankees in popularity among New York City baseball fans. Lovers of the National League franchise, who’ve always cherished a vague sense of moral superiority, felt briefly vindicated. I couldn’t help noticing that it was Mr. Met — and not the actual players — who was coronated.
Unlike most mascots, Mr. Met is not a literal representation of his team, perhaps because the abstract “Metropolitans” didn’t suggest a more obvious candidate. Still, in some ways it’s a curious choice. Mr. Met — with his wide, perpetual grin; his aw-shucks demeanor; and a noggin that would never fit on the 7 train — hardly seems like a native New Yorker. The official Mets biography is vague on his origins: Mr. Met, like a Greek god, simply manifests. “On the first spring morning of ’63, with the dew still dampening Coogan’s Bluff, Casey Stengel, the old skipper of the young Mets, saw a figure in the distance. Deep in the Polo Grounds’ center field stood a fan like no other — a fan clearly born to root for the New York Mets.” It goes on to explain that he can’t talk because he shouted himself hoarse rooting for his team. It can’t help that he has a gigantic baseball for a head, and that his mouth is permanently fixed in a silent grin (or scream).
For such a public figure, Mr. Met manages to maintain a Garbo-like mystique. Hard facts about his history are curiously difficult to pin down; speculation and wild claims are rampant. More than one artist has taken credit for his design. (The most popular theory is that the comic-book artist Al Avison was at least partly responsible.) For a while, he had a wife, Lady Met, and a family of hardball-headed kids, too. According to the recollections of one mid-1970s Mrs. Met, she was subject to so much sexual harassment that eventually she ended up standing at a barrier with a security guard by her side.
As for much of New York, the ’70s weren’t easy for Mr. Met: The team phased him out in the later part of the decade, briefly replacing him with a pack animal named Mettle the Mule. He wasn’t reinstated until 1994, thanks, according to Mets lore, to a Queens folk hero named Lois Kaufmann, who is said to have agitated not only for his reinstatement but also to wear the suit. (The second request was denied.) By 2012, he had been voted the most popular sports mascot in all the land. He has even gotten his family back.
My brother and I grew up playing with a stuffed Mr. Met doll that, in retrospect, must have been manufactured and purchased before we were born. For we grew up in those lean, Mr. Metless years. We didn’t care that he had been retired; he aroused a fierce, protective love in each of us. He seemed so kind and friendly, neither peer nor grown-up but a being completely devoted to the happiness and success of the chosen people: Mets fans. It was like maintaining loyalty to a deposed, exiled monarch, or perhaps the charismatic leader of a cult. He was America and our dad and a fellow kid all at once; he was the crumminess of Shea and the glory of ’86 and the meeting of child and adult that is sports. The fact that he existed only in lore burnished this image.
In adulthood, my affection for Mr. Met hasn’t faded, and so it has become a bit of a joke among my friends. When I was 25, I had “I [Heart] Mr. Met” ironed onto an American Apparel T-shirt and then wore it to a 20th-anniversary celebration for the 1986 Mets at Rockefeller Center. I have a picture of myself, beaming, hand in hand with Mr. Met, who is beaming, too (not that he had a choice). After we took the picture, I remember he pointed at me, then at himself; he indicated in American Sign Language that he loved me, too. And love is not logical.
I’ve read Mets fans described as the CrossFitters of the sports world: constantly complaining, saying that no one has it harder than them, when in fact they know exactly what they signed up for. Besides, the Mets are a reasonably successful franchise whose legendarily heartbreaking late-season losses have as much to do with mismanagement as some kind of curse. We disdain the (mascotless) Yankees as sellouts willing to buy success at any cost, but the Mets are one of the wealthiest teams in the National League. They just lose a lot. Mr. Met puts a smile on the face of this self-delusion, so common among baseball fans.
At a recent dinner, a friend unfamiliar with Mr. Met asked me what his race is. “He’s a baseball,” I said. He is, presumably, composed of cork, yarn and stitched cowhide. Baseballs are made to be knocked around: hit, thrown, covered in dirt and grass. And yet he strides around the field free of resentment, existing only to be used and abused and to cheerily support his tormentors. Stadiums may acquire corporate names and gourmet hot dogs. Logos might evolve with the shifting skyline. Teams may lose; players may take steroids or beat their wives. Not Mr. Met; he is one of life’s few immutables. No matter who occupies that massive head of his, Mets fans see in his face that same friendly nothingness, onto which we can project our hopes and memories.