It explains a good deal to recognize that President Trump understands no principle other than naked self-interest. He doesn’t comprehend the notion of rule of law, or the independence of the branches and institutions of government. That’s why he can ask for James Comey’s “loyalty.” As Mr. Trump repeatedly points out, the Democrats lost the election. He won. That makes him the boss, and all elected and appointed officials, certainly all of us as citizens, are his subordinates. He decrees; we obey.
In the same way, Mr. Trump, quite extraordinarily, doesn’t understand the difference between truth and lie. What he says on any given occasion is whatever he perceives to serve his interest on that occasion. When the next day he says something else, that's because his perception of the circumstances or his self-interest has changed. Inconsistency? Contradiction? Those are meaningless concepts.
The sooner the media, public servants and the citizenry in general understand this, the better.
It wasn’t enough for President Trump to simply fire James Comey. He had to take it one step further by accusing of him of being a “showboat” and “grandstander.” Mr. Trump seems never to be able to take action against people without also attacking them personally, calling into question either their patriotism or professional competence, or both.
JOE ELLIOTT, ASHEVILLE, N.C.
The differing accounts of the firing of James Comey bring to mind what Mark Twain said: If you tell the truth, you don’t have to keep track of what you said.
LAUREL GIBALDI, KATONAH, N.Y.
The Times is right that protecting the sanctity of the American electoral process requires getting to the bottom of the Trump-Russia nexus. However, even more important than finding out what happened in the 2016 election is finding out whether, going forward, President Trump is secretly collaborating with, or subject to manipulation by, a hostile foreign power. Plumbing the Trump-Russia nexus may answer both questions simultaneously, but no issue can be more urgent than the possibility of divided loyalty in the White House.
The refusal of former Acting Attorney General Sally Yates to defend the overturned travel ban was truly a breath of fresh air. She has been the rare government official to have the guts and the integrity to stand up for what is right, while the rest of them continue to blindly grovel and praise every misstep by their train wreck of a boss.
