VANCOUVER, British Columbia — British Columbia is well known for its spectacular landscape and outdoorsy living, its swanky urban real estate and bouillabaisse of cultures.
A fact not so well known? It has a sweet deal for businesses, offering them tax breaks in an unusually opaque arrangement.
Like many places, British Columbia set up a system of tax incentives to lure businesses to the far western Canadian province in the hopes of creating jobs and transforming Vancouver into a global financial center.
But if the program has been good for business, it’s been less beneficial for British Columbia.
In a recent interview, though, he said that its goal was really to enlarge the local financial services sector. “The program was not actually set up to be a job creator,” he said.
Provincial officials have praised the tax breaks as a boon to economic ties between China and British Columbia, and have devoted significant time and political capital in recent years to tailoring it to Chinese investors and the financial institutions that cater to them.
In 2014, the province expanded the program for foreign banks, which it said would raise the potential for investment from Asia, especially China. “These amendments to the International Business Activity Act send a strong message to foreign companies that B.C. welcomes their business, setting the stage for increased investment,” said Michael de Jong, the finance minister, according to a government news release.
Mr. de Jong declined to answer questions about the program, including whether the public should be able to know which companies are receiving the tax breaks.
PacNet Services Ltd., a payment processing company, had been a core member of AdvantageBC since at least 2006. In September 2016, the United States Treasury Department listed PacNet as a significant transnational criminal organization for its “lengthy history of money laundering,” and froze the company’s American assets. The company has denied the accusations. Rosanne Day, PacNet’s president, declined to comment on whether the company was in the tax-incentive program and has received benefits.
After inquiries by The New York Times, PacNet, two associated companies that have also been sanctioned and several other firms were removed from AdvantageBC’s website last month. Mr. Hansen later said they were no longer members.