Derek Jeter officially took his place among Yankees immortals on Sunday, with a plaque in Monument Park and his famous No. 2 taking its place among 21 other retired numbers on the wall above the left-field bleachers at Yankee Stadium.
In a 40-minute, on-field ceremony attended by 20 of his former teammates, managers, coaches and other associates from a 20-year major league career in which he accumulated 3,465 hits — more than all but five players in baseball history — Jeter, 42, was commemorated as a winner and was presented with mementos of his days as a Yankee.
The ceremony began with the unveiling of Jeter’s No. 2 disc, which is affixed to the opposite side of the center field wall, above a flower bed in Monument Park. The team said that Jeter’s plaque, which was presented near the mound, would most likely be hung this week on the back wall of Monument Park, next to Jorge Posada’s or Yogi Berra’s.
A video tribute featuring Jeter’s career highlights, at the plate and at shortstop, played on the center-field screen: his first major league hit; the flip to home plate for a crucial out in the 2001 postseason; the dive into the stands; the home run on the first pitch of Game 3 of the 2000 World Series against the Mets; the so-called Mr. November home run that won Game 4 of the 2001 World Series against the Arizona Diamondbacks; the game-winning single in his final home game as a Yankee in 2014.
After that came the introductions of Mariano Rivera, Andy Pettitte and Posada, his compatriots in the Core Four of the Yankees team that won five World Series between 1996 and 2009.
Video testimonials appeared — from former opponents such as Troy Tulowitzki and Adam Jones — and then came an audio clip of the Yankees’ late public-address announcer, Bob Sheppard, whose voice introduced Jeter for every one of his home at-bats. Even after Sheppard died in 2010, a recording of his Jeter introduction remained in use.
Jeter and his wife, Hannah, were driven through a gate in the center-field fence and then along the warning track as Frank Sinatra’s “My Way” blared. After a brief detour during which Jeter went into the Yankees’ dugout to greet the current players, only a handful of whom had played with him, he emerged to address the crowd. A chant of “Derek Jeter!” rained down from the sold-out stadium.
The plaque bearing his likeness and career milestones was unveiled at the pitcher’s mound, and Jeter received gifts from the children of the late owner George M. Steinbrenner: the current principal owner, Hal Steinbrenner, and his sisters, Jessica Steinbrenner and Jennifer Steinbrenner Swindal.
Jeter left the field as it was prepared for the upcoming game against the Houston Astros. But after the Yankees had taken their positions, Jeter was brought out one more time, to throw a ceremonial first pitch. He received a standing ovation from the crowd, much of which appeared to be dressed in white Yankees jerseys emblazoned with the number of the day. No. 2.