ATLANTA — The Mets’ game against the Atlanta Braves on Thursday was postponed after a two-hour rain delay that began in the fourth inning. A makeup date will be announced at a later date.
As a result of the rainout, the three-plus innings of play at SunTrust Park on Thursday were wiped off the record, and the rescheduled game will begin from scratch. Jay Bruce, who smashed what would have been his team-leading 10th home run of the season in the fourth inning, is likely to be the most disappointed by that development.
The game was paused as Jose Reyes was batting with two outs in the top of the fourth inning and the Mets leading, 3-1. Three batters earlier, Bruce had clobbered a two-run shot off Braves starter Jaime Garcia.
Despite a gloomy forecast, the game began as scheduled, which meant the Mets burned Zack Wheeler for 68 pitches over three innings. Had the game not been played, the Mets would have pushed Wheeler back a day to start on Friday against the Miami Marlins in New York.
That would have allowed the Mets and their underperforming and battered rotation to skip Rafael Montero, the replacement starter for the injured Noah Syndergaard.
Now, Montero, who has been at Class AAA Las Vegas, will have to start as first planned on Friday in New York, where rain is also in the forecast.
Asked if he was upset about the two-hour delay before the game was called, Mets Manager Terry Collins bit his tongue. “I have too much respect for the people in Atlanta to say much,” he said.
Play was suspended at 8:45 p.m., and the game was called around 10:45.
After the postponement was announced, clubhouse assistants scurried about, packing the team’s gear for the flight back to New York. Wheeler, who is from the Atlanta area and had family members and friends in attendance to watch him pitch, spoke to reporters in the laundry room of the visiting clubhouse.
Asked about the lack of a roof on the Braves’ new $672 million stadium, Wheeler smiled.
Travis d’Arnaud was set to see a doctor on Thursday afternoon for his sore right wrist, Terry Collins said. D’Arnaud left Tuesday’s game after aggravating a wrist injury he had sustained two weeks ago. He did not play Wednesday and was not in Thursday’s lineup.