RIO DE JANEIRO — A food company executive secretly recorded President Michel Temer of Brazil endorsing the executive’s payment of hush money to a once-powerful politician jailed for corruption, a Brazilian newspaper reported Wednesday night.
The newspaper, O Globo, said that Mr. Temer also directed the executive to pay a lawmaker to help resolve a problem at a company plant, and that the police later filmed the lawmaker receiving about $143,000.
The allegations could not immediately be confirmed independently, and Mr. Temer issued a statement late Wednesday night denying them. But even after years of sensational accusations and arrests in Brazil’s corruption scandals, the report sent shock waves through the country’s establishment.
According to O Globo, the recording was made as part of a plea bargain that the brothers Joesley and Wesley Batista, who control the family-owned meat giant JBS, made with prosecutors. The plea bargain arose out of the giant graft investigation involving Petrobras, the national oil company.
Joesley Batista, the chief executive of J&F Investments, which controls JBS, visited Mr. Temer at his official residence in Brasília, the capital, on the evening of March 7.
Mr. Batista was carrying a hidden recording device, the newspaper reported. On the recording, Mr. Batista said he had been paying hush money to Eduardo Cunha — the former speaker of Brazil’s lower house of Congress, who has been jailed since last year for his role in the graft scheme — and Lúcio Funaro, who also figured in the Cunha case.
Mr. Temer told Mr. Batista that he would have to keep up the payments, the newspaper said. Then he told Mr. Batista to contact a lawmaker from Mr. Temer’s party about a problem J&F was having at a power plant it owned. Another company executive was filmed handing over a first payment, about $143,000, to the lawmaker.
In a statement, Mr. Temer confirmed the meeting in March but denied the accusations.
“President Michel Temer never solicited payments to obtain the silence of ex-deputy Eduardo Cunha,” the statement said. “He did not participate nor authorize any movement with the objective of avoiding a plea bargain or collaboration between the justice system” and Mr. Cunha.
Mr. Temer was already accused of negotiating a $40 million bribe in 2010 for his Brazilian Democratic Movement Party, a claim he also denies. Prosecutors have said he has temporary immunity from being investigated for matters outside his time in office, which lasts through 2018.
Mr. Temer’s government has lurched from crisis to crisis since taking power nearly a year ago after a prolonged battle to oust his leftist predecessor, Dilma Rousseff.
The corruption investigation centered on Petrobras created a political crisis that led to Ms. Rousseff’s downfall, and the scandals have since metastasized, ensnaring dozens of leading politicians and once-prominent business executives.
Despite low approval ratings, Mr. Temer has been trying to gain support for austerity measures, including an overhaul of Brazil’s crisis-plagued pension system, viewed as an important factor in restoring confidence in the country’s beleaguered economy.
A poll in April showed that 92 percent of Brazilians thought the country was on the wrong path, with Mr. Temer’s own approval rating standing at just 4 percent.