Though the new restaurant and market Botanica just opened today in Los Angeles’s Silver Lake neighborhood, it already has a signature (and highly Instagrammable) dish: a two-tiered tower overflowing with fresh farmers’ market finds that have been thoughtfully prepared and arranged in a rainbow heap. The recipe first appeared on Botanica’s website, an online food and entertaining magazine that launched in December.
Fiffer and her business partner, Heather Sperling, extend the we-are-what-we-eat aphorism to their whole business model. Like the grand vegetable plate, everything about the way Botanica is designed, staffed and served echoes an environmentally minded, globally inspired, locally sourced and community-oriented ethos. A concern for positive social impact permeates hiring practices and incentive programs, and success is measured in more than monetary gains.
Before Botanica, each woman spent a decade entrenched in Chicago’s food media world — Sperling as an editor at Tasting Table and Fiffer as an editor at DailyCandy. Then the friends began hosting large-scale indie flea markets and social gatherings centered around food and shopping. “We felt a really strong desire to make a physical space that could be a nexus for community — and also create a community,” Sperling says. So Fiffer went on to train at two London restaurants (Moro and Nopi), and Sperling moved to New York to work with chefs and consult on the then-burgeoning food hall trend. The seed for Botanica was planted; and two years ago, the women moved to L.A. to help it grow.
Botanica’s menu skews vegetarian and is predicated on healthfulness. Turkish eggs are served with sheep’s milk yogurt and Aleppo-Urfa butter; grilled lamb kebabs are hidden under a bright herb salad. There are ancient grains, aromatics and infusions. And in the plates’ descriptions, words like “herbaceous” and “moreish” are mentioned often.
A small marketplace adjacent to the dining room stocks local, high-quality groceries, natural and biodynamic wines, specialty pantry items from their travels and house-made offerings from granola to marinated olives. A percentage of sales goes toward reconciling the usual discrepancy between behind-the-scenes kitchen workers and their (generously tipped) front-of-house counterparts. Additionally, Fiffer and Sperling are lining up field trips, workshops and demos to educate all levels of staff, equally.
