The Bombardier family was once corporate nobility in Quebec, with patriarchs who became folk heroes in the province.
Now, after a string of setbacks that required government bailouts, followed by a decision to increase executive pay, Bombardier, the airplane and train manufacturer that bears the family name, is a target of protests on the streets of Montreal and the proxy forms of major investors.
On Thursday, the family, which controls Bombardier through special voting shares, responded to the growing criticism. Shortly before the company’s annual meeting, Pierre Beaudoin, a Bombardier scion, announced that he would resign as executive chairman. Mr. Beaudoin will continue as chairman, but he will no longer work full time or perform any management duties at the company, which was started by his grandfather Joseph-Armand Bombardier.
The resignation followed an unusual agreement reached before the meeting by several of Canada’s major pension funds. The Quebec pension fund, which invested $1.5 billion in Bombardier in exchange for a one-third stake in the company’s rail unit, said it would not support Mr. Beaudoin. The fund, Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec, criticized the company for raising executive pay after accepting government aid and announcing 14,000 job cuts.
Joining the proxy protest were the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board, the Ontario Teachers’ Pension Plan and the British Columbia Investment Management Corporation.
Bombardier’s biggest headache, and its greatest hope for a turnaround, is its CSeries airliner. Since moving into the aviation business in 1986, the company has become a major force in the private jet market, under its name and Lear’s, and in the market for turboprops and jet airliners used by airlines on regional routes. The CSeries, however, is in almost direct competition with the smallest airliners made by Boeing and Airbus.
The plane has received positive reviews, particularly for its low noise levels and miserly fuel consumption, but it entered service more than two years late and about $2 billion over budget, straining Bombardier’s finances. In addition to the Caisse pension fund, the province of Quebec and the government of Canada invested in the company to avoid a crisis.
The CSeries planes initially struggled to find buyers. But the program received a major endorsement last summer when Delta agreed to buy 75 of the planes rather than new versions of Boeing’s 737 or the Airbus A320. The deal was worth $5.6 billion based on the CSeries’ list prices, although airlines, like car buyers, rarely pay full price.
The Delta deal has, however, created another problem for Bombardier. Last month, Boeing asked the United States Department of Commerce to impose anti-dumping duties and other tariffs on Bombardier, saying it had used money from Quebec and the Canadian governments to sell the planes to Delta at artificially low prices.
Bombardier and the Quebec government have rejected Boeing’s accusations.
Bombardier’s rail unit also has troubles. In March, Swedish police arrested three company executives based in the country amid an investigation into allegations that they had bribed railway officials in Azerbaijan. And rail cars made by a Bombardier-led group in Australia have braking problems and other flaws.
A program worth 1 billion Canadian dollars (about $730 million at the current exchange rate) that was supposed to have delivered 121 new streetcars to Toronto by now has produced only 35, and Toronto’s transit authority moved to break a contract for light rail cars worth 770 million Canadian dollars because of missed deadlines. A judge gave Bombardier an injunction blocking that action but left open the possibility of canceling the contract in the future.
Bombardier also attracted widespread criticism this year when it announced plans to raise the pay of top executives, including Mr. Beaudoin, by about 50 percent. Board members said the increases were necessary, in part to retain top talent. The company has since backed off, somewhat. Mr. Beaudoin agreed to give up his raise, and part of the increases in compensation for other executives were deferred. That did not prevent protests outside of Bombardier’s Montreal headquarters or end criticism from politicians and, most recently, investors. The annual meeting on Thursday was dominated by questions about the pay deals.
This is the second time that Mr. Beaudoin has pulled back. Early in 2015, he relinquished the chief executive’s job to Alain Bellemare, a Canadian who was previously an executive in United Technologies’ aerospace group.
Professor Moore, of McGill University, said he anticipated that major investors would push the Bombardier family to reduce its board membership. It holds six of the 15 positions.
He said it was less likely that the family would voluntarily abandon the company’s structure, which gives its members 53 percent of voting control though they own only 13 percent of its equity. Many analysts have said that an end to the family’s control would immediately lift Bombardier’s share price, which has fallen about 75 percent in the past nine years.