He was held up as a hero without a cape — the sort of brave, compassionate human being whose actions while on board a Portland light-rail train last week made his mother proud.
By Wednesday, though, Micah David-Cole Fletcher seemed to have had enough; enough of the media spotlight, the many laudatory internet stories and even the swelling donations.
So Mr. Fletcher, 21, sat down in a room, turned on a camera and decided to speak out. He was one of at least three people who stepped in to try to stop a man’s xenophobic tirade directed at two girls on Friday. That man killed two other men, the authorities say, and Mr. Fletcher suffered a serious stab wound.
But Mr. Fletcher, a Portland State University student, was worried that while he was being lionized, two other very important victims of Friday’s attack were being largely forgotten.
During the approximately seven-minute video, Mr. Fletcher thanked supporters for their generosity, but worried that longstanding local attitudes and biases caused aid to flow more freely to him than to one of the girls. By Wednesday night, the video had been viewed more than 80,000 times.
Mr. Fletcher, who identified himself as a poet, expressed his misgivings less than a day after he attended the first court appearance for the man accused of the fatal attack.
During Mr. Christian’s profanity-laced tirade, which appeared to be aimed at the girls, he told them to “go home” and referred to the Islamic State and Saudi Arabia, according to the court document.
Soon after, a tussle began in which Mr. Christian and Mr. Fletcher shoved each other, the affidavit said. After Mr. Fletcher told the man to get off the train, Mr. Christian stabbed Mr. Fletcher in the neck, the documents said, before proceeding to fatally stab two other men, Ricky John Best, 53, and Taliesin Myrddin Namkai Meche, 23.
Mr. Fletcher’s wound to the left side of his neck “missed being a fatal injury by millimeters” the documents said. He did not immediately respond to a Facebook message seeking comment on Wednesday night, and members of his family also did not respond to a phone call and an email.
But in his video, Mr. Fletcher called on viewers to “imagine” that they were one of the girls on the train.
