For months, protesters hounded Mayor Bill de Blasio at town hall-style meetings and fund-raisers from Manhattan to Fort Lauderdale, Fla., demanding that he shut down New York City’s main jail complex on Rikers Island.
Eventually, Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, embraced their cause, and recently called for its closing — a shift that did not go unnoticed by liberal activists.
Some advocates who have long complained that Mr. de Blasio’s administration has not built enough low-income housing are now looking to follow a similar model with a campaign targeting their bête noire: the deputy mayor in charge of housing and economic development, Alicia K. Glen.
The strategy involves trying to paint the housing plan with the broad brush of anti-Wall Street sentiment. They have pledged to protest Ms. Glen at public appearances and rally against her housing agenda on the steps of City Hall. They are emphasizing similarities between the mayor’s approach to housing and Ms. Glen’s projects at Goldman Sachs, where she led the firm’s urban investment group, financing affordable housing and other projects, before joining the de Blasio administration in 2014.
The goal is to force Mr. de Blasio to shift course on his 10-year housing plan, which is on pace to create 200,000 units of new housing for low- to moderate-income residents across New York. Instead, advocates want the city to redirect funds toward building new homes for only the poorest New Yorkers, to stave off gentrification and, they hope, to help reduce homelessness.
The tactic of sustained and targeted protest is certainly not new. In this administration alone, police officers protested Mr. de Blasio outside Gracie Mansion, the mayoral residence, and the Prospect Park YMCA, where he works out. And demonstrators set up shop at the home of Steven Banks, the city’s top homelessness official. Their effectiveness is open to debate: Patrol officers got a new contract, though the mayor’s shelter plan is more assertive, not less.
But no election-year incumbent wants a story line muddled by angry bands of roving protesters. That applies even to Mr. de Blasio, who enjoys a wide lead in polls against his likely opponents.
Many of the same groups that are pressing Mr. de Blasio on the issue of housing, like the organization Ms. Lewis founded, the Black Institute, and New York Communities for Change, have also criticized his approach to policing, another issue resonant with the mayor’s minority supporters. They are looking to the tactics employed in the Rikers campaign by Glenn Martin of JustLeadershipUSA and others who protested the mayor on some of the same social justice issues.
In addition to protests, Mr. Martin said, his group engaged in “power mapping” the mayor — identifying roughly 1,500 people most important to him and targeting them with digital messages — so that Mr. de Blasio would feel surrounded by its campaign. “We logged 20,000 tweets to the mayor in one day alone,” Mr. Martin said.
So far, Mr. de Blasio has not shown enough political weakness for a prominent challenger to emerge from the left. Most of his rivals, both in his own party and among Republicans, have opted for more centrist campaigns to unseat him; the only one to challenge from the left is a police reform advocate, Robert Gangi, 73, a Democrat who has never before held public office or run a political campaign.
Indeed the coalition now attacking Mr. de Blasio’s housing plan has also previously endorsed elements of the mayor’s approach.
The new effort does go further in attacking Ms. Glen, accusing her of bringing a Goldman Sachs model of development to City Hall. To buttress the argument, activists compiled a report looking at projects created by three developers — L&M Development Partners, BRP Development Corporation and BFC Partners — that worked with Ms. Glen both before and after she joined the de Blasio administration.
The projects, the report argues, fuel gentrification and do not provide enough housing for residents who already live in places like East Harlem and Flatbush, Brooklyn.
The report compares several projects by the de Blasio administration to the Aspen, an early Bloomberg-era development and venture between Ms. Glen and L&M that included half market-rate apartments, and half that were affordable units at either 50 or 130 percent of the city’s so-called area median income (currently about $86,000 for a family of three).
Among those singled out is the Bedford-Union Armory project, a redevelopment on public land by BFC Partners that includes half market-rate apartments and also a recreational center. The project has been criticized by some local elected officials who, along with advocates, have called for the entire project to be affordable units.
The city has said the market-rate units in the armory project are necessary to offset the cost of the recreational center. And officials disagreed with the idea that affordable housing projects exacerbate gentrification.
Those pushing the protest strategy say that it has already been effective for them — a notion that the city disputes.
The mayor announced in February that he would add $1.9 billion more in city subsidies to include 10,000 more affordable units for New Yorkers earning less than $40,000 a year, bringing the total number of such units in the plan to 50,000 — one quarter of the 200,000 total. The city is now set to spend about $10 billion in subsidies on the overall housing plan, city officials said.
Yet not all advocates of more affordable housing are on board with personalizing the campaign for more low-income housing.
Javier H. Valdés of Make the Road New York, an immigrant rights and social justice organization, said that Mr. Westin had approached him about joining the campaign against Ms. Glen and he declined.
