If you had called Lloyd Cotsen a collector, he might have corrected you and said that he was really an accumulator. With an eclectic eye, he accumulated Japanese bamboo baskets, small pieces of textiles, bronze Chinese mirrors and illustrated children’s books.
Collecting beguiled him as a child when he amassed baseball cards and matchbooks. The habit continued when he was a Navy lieutenant on layovers; an executive at Neutrogena, the skin and hair-care company his father-in-law founded; and a man of great wealth, after he sold the company to Johnson & Johnson in 1994 for $924 million.
By the time he died at 88 on May 8 in Beverly Hills, Calif., Mr. Cotsen (pronounced COAT-zen) had donated about half of the material in his collections to institutions like the Asian Art Museum in San Francisco, Princeton University and the Museum of International Folk Art in Santa Fe, N.M.
His death was confirmed by Jolie Godoy, his executive assistant.
Mr. Cotsen’s collection of children’s books began with the ones he bought for his four children. Eventually he had more than 100,000 volumes, and they have arrived at the Princeton University Library over the years in eighteen-wheelers.
Ms. Immel said he had been fascinated by the children’s book illustrations in various countries, some dating to the 15th century.
Mr. Cotsen was similarly intrigued by the Chinese mirrors and Japanese bamboo baskets, niche areas that were not widely collected. The baskets — used for tea ceremonies, floral arrangements and carrying fruit — were crafted traditionally or to look like Mobius strips.
Lloyd Edward Cotsen was born in Boston on Feb. 25, 1929, to Lloyd. Edward Cotsen, who ran the eastern division of Tung-Sol, which made electrical equipment and electronics, and the former Sophie Novick. He earned a bachelor’s degree in history at Princeton and, after his service in the Navy, returned there to study architecture. He also spent a summer in Greece as a field architect for a prehistoric excavation.
After earning an M.B.A. at Harvard Business School, Mr. Cotsen joined Natone, a cosmetics supply company started by his father-in-law, Emanuel Stolaroff, that would eventually be renamed Neutrogena. Mr. Cotsen is credited by the company with elevating the cachet of its amber-colored glycerin soap, which had been developed in Belgium to rinse quickly and leave no residue.
He gave dermatologists free samples to distribute to their patients, providing the veneer of a medical endorsement. He also made deals with luxury hotels to stock miniature soap bars in their guest rooms. And he set pricing that placed Neutrogena above mass-market soaps but below more expensive products, according to a corporate history.
Mr. Cotsen became the company’s president in 1967 and was named chief executive in 1973 and chairman in 1991.
When he sold the company in 1994, the shares he controlled were worth nearly $350 million before taxes.
His first wife, the former Joanne Stolaroff, did not live to see him rise to the top of her father’s company. In 1979, while Mr. Cotsen was on a business trip in New York, Ms. Cotsen, their 13-year-old son, Noah, and a house guest were shot and killed in the Cotsens’ Beverly Hills home. The main suspect, a Belgian business rival who was said to have fought with Mr. Cotsen over the Neutrogena trademark, killed himself in Brussels before the Beverly Hills police could question him.
Mr. Cotsen’s second marriage, to Jacqueline Brandwynne, ended in divorce. He is survived by his third wife, the former Margit Sperling; two daughters, Corinna Cotsen and Tobey Cotsen-Victor, and a son, Eric, all from his first marriage; and eight grandchildren.
After leaving Neutrogena, Mr. Cotsen focused on collecting contemporary textile fragments — a piece of a tunic or a kimono, for instance — as well as Japanese ceramics and turned wood, whose grain and texture offered him the sort of tactile experience that he coveted.
His curator, Lyssa Stapleton, said the fragments force people to examine them closely.
The accumulated things that Mr. Cotsen did not donate reside in private galleries and an 8,000-square-foot warehouse in the Los Angeles area, continuing evidence of a bevy of artistic fascinations and obsessions.
