Watching “I Love Dick” is like attending an exhibition for which the artist has supplied her own curator’s notes. It’s an experience as much as a story: arresting, disorienting and provocative. It’s also very conscious of explaining to you how and why it arrests, disorients and provokes.
The form of “I Love Dick,” whose eight-episode first season arrives on Friday on Amazon, fits its subject. Adapted by Jill Soloway (“Transparent”) and the playwright Sarah Gubbins from a cult novel by Chris Kraus, it’s art TV about artists, a love triangle as Conceptual performance.
As a sideline, Dick runs a residency fellowship program, where he collects artists and intellectuals like prickly cactuses. One makes video game art; another studies the aesthetics of pornography. Enter Sylvère (Griffin Dunne), Dick’s newest fellow and a Holocaust scholar, who arrives from Brooklyn with his wife, Chris (Kathryn Hahn), an experimental director whose latest work has just been dropped from the Venice Film Festival.
Chris plans to keep the letters to herself, but reads one to Sylvère. It has an aphrodisiac effect. Dick becomes an invisible third player in their marriage and a source of creative arousal — until the letters become public, and the season spins into drama and farce.
Ms. Hahn, a frequent comedy actress whose dramatic talent Ms. Soloway showcased in “Transparent” and the movie “Afternoon Delight,” shows fantastic range as Chris: raw-nerved, hyperverbal and caught up in her own head.
Thematically, making Dick a symbol as much as a person works. Ms. Soloway has said she wants the series to exemplify the “female gaze” in art. But, together with the familiarity of Chris and Sylvère’s frustrated-intellectual-couple dynamic, it makes it harder to invest in the relationship triangle. The characters’ tendency to explicate the story’s themes is also distancing, albeit plausible for a series about theory-conscious aesthetes.
I’ve likened “Transparent,” Ms. Soloway’s remarkable Amazon series about a transgender woman and her family, to “The Wire.” Both are fueled by social mission, which can be the death of nuance, yet they make their messages organic rather than preachy. To push the analogy, “I Love Dick” might be her “Treme” (David Simon’s New Orleans follow-up to “The Wire”), exploring similar themes — here, feminism, identity and power — as expressed through culture and art.
But the series is best when it does what art does: to express what can’t be said literally, to be the painting — or the brick — and not the plaque next to it.
Ms. Soloway directs the fifth and best episode, a transfixingly visualized 20-minute collection of monologues by women in the Marfa community about art and their sexual awakenings. Roberta Colindrez is luminous and intense as Devon, a lesbian playwright and working-class Marfa native. If the series has future seasons, it has a strong ensemble to build on.
If the first season doesn’t entirely hang together, it’s bracingly risk-taking. At its best, it captures the artistic process in a way that TV rarely does, and it works as a kind of video art itself. But as with some other recent experimental series — “The Young Pope,” for instance — it’s best to realize that going in.
Toward the end of the season, Chris mentions to Dick that she’s seen a new work of his — a line of boulders outdoors, snaking toward the horizon. “Did you like it?” he asks.
“I Love Dick,” too, feels as if it might work better in memory than in the moment — once you’ve had some time to sit with it for a while, and tune out the noise.