Images of children and adults, foaming at the mouth, struggling to breathe, flooded international TV screens hours after the deadly chemical attack on Khan Sheikhoun on April 4. A week later, President Bashar al-Assad of Syria went on television to deny Syrian involvement and to dispute the fact that any attack had even taken place.
There is a simple answer to that question: Find a computer, get on Google Earth and match what you see in the video to the streets and buildings. For the six years since the Syrian conflict began, I’ve used these basic tools — and widely accessible information — to verify images broadcast on television.
My investigation into the veracity of the alleged April 4 chemical attack began with a YouTube video of bombs dropping over Khan Sheikhoun. Using social media, I found and interviewed people who had witnessed the bombings. I obtained exclusive video and photos of the buildings that were bombed from residents of the town. Using GPS coordinates and other mapping techniques, I determined their exact location.
I supplemented my reporting with notes from our Middle Eastern correspondents Anne Barnard, Hwaida Saad and Patrick Kingsley, who interviewed witnesses soon after the attack. I spoke with human rights investigators and weapons experts conducting their own analysis. I found more videos uploaded to YouTube and Facebook by residents of the area by searching for the Arabic spelling of Khan Sheikhoun. I examined other videos gathered by the journalist Eliot Higgins and the social media news agency Storyful.
Our investigation into the question of whether a chemical attack took place in Syria on April 4 relied on a fairly novel combination of forensic mapping techniques with analysis of witness content to enhance our reporting. Our work confirmed, conclusively, that a chemical attack had taken place in Khan Sheikhoun, and provided a concrete example of what we mean when we talk of video and the way it can strengthen our storytelling.
In combination with graphics and on-the-ground reporting, our video forensic work also showed conclusively that the attack on the Syrian town of Khan Sheikhoun took place hours before Syria — and its Russian allies — say that it occurred and cast doubt on the official account of the attack that Russia provided.
Khan Sheikhoun is a town of many minarets. We started our investigation by mapping these towers; they provide identifiable reference points that we linked to images in the first videos from the morning of the attack. We also mapped distant hills, the alignment of fields and houses, roads out of the town and a large mound in the center of the town.
Take a look at the Google Earth/DigitalGlobe satellite image above. I placed an electronic pin on every towering minaret in this image and identified each by the shadows they cast. When I couldn’t easily determine whether a particular structure was a mosque or a minaret, I referred to historical satellite imagery, available on Google Earth, to examine older images, taken from alternate camera angles or on clearer days when shadows were more distinct.
By zooming in on terrain view, another feature of Google Earth, I simulated how the town looked from the ground. Terrain view doesn’t provide an exact 3-D replica of the town, but it shows the contours of the ground as hills rise and fall. This allowed me to match the position of minarets against distant hills as the video shows, and put myself in the cameraman’s shoes.
Analyzing the camera position, it was clear that the video was filmed in Khan Sheikhoun, it was not video from another town. I established that the camera was positioned to the north of the town and was looking south.
The location was important because it helped us to ascertain what time the video was filmed, which we could estimate based on the sunlight illuminating the minarets on the video.
Who filmed it? I examined the uploader’s YouTube, Google Plus, Twitter and Facebook profiles. In his social media history, he regularly talks about events in Khan Sheikhoun. His cover photos are pictures of Khan Sheikhoun. This and other information in his profiles indicated that he was a journalist or activist who lived in the town.
His YouTube account contained several videos of bombings and other events related to the conflict that were filmed from the same northerly vantage point. The voice-over on these videos was the same voice that we heard on the April 4 video.
Why was this important? It gave me confidence the video was shot by someone who regularly films events in his hometown — not someone who copies and reposts videos from elsewhere.
The Syrian foreign minister, President Assad and a Russian military spokesman said the attack took place between 11:30 a.m. and 12:30 p.m. that day. Video forensics, however, proves that it took place much earlier.
According to SunCalc, the sun rose at around 6.17 a.m. on the morning of April 4, almost directly to the east (from the left in the video). This matched what we saw in the video — the left side of the minarets were facing the sun. Khan Sheikhoun sits below hills to the east, so the actual sunrise would be sometime after 6.17 a.m.
My colleague Neil Collier made contact with the uploader, Mohamad Salom, and interviewed him at length. He corroborated the time of the bombing as early morning, soon after 6:35 a.m.
Our network of sources in Syria put us in touch with other town residents. A second witness who had filmed the attack sent us more footage that I verified using the same mapping techniques. We interviewed this witness and found that the time frame he presented corroborated Mr. Salom’s account.
Doctors at hospitals in the area coordinate support services using WhatsApp, and a medic sent me screenshots of messages they sent in the hours after the attack. The Times’s Beirut bureau chief, Ms. Barnard, and Ms. Saad, a Times reporter in Beirut, verified the messages with two independent medical sources. The timing of these communications was consistent with what additional open source material indicated was the time that multiple casualties connected with exposure to chemical agents was reported.
All of this occurred hours before Russian and Syrian officials acknowledged that regular bombing missions had been carried out in Khan Sheikhoun. No other bombing runs were reported that morning until warplanes hit a hospital in Khan Sheikhoun after midday.
The time difference is important because Russia and Syria have frequently distorted the location and timing of events throughout the conflict, a technique meant to discredit evidence posted on YouTube and other social platforms. (After a chemical weapons attack on Eastern Ghouta in 2013, Russia claimed that the event was staged because videos were uploaded before the time of the attack. They were proved wrong.) Here, President Assad described the attack on Khan Sheikhoun as a “100 percent fabrication” and tried to distort the time frame of Syria’s military activity that day to raise questions about the videos posted online.
Video-enhanced investigative work helped us set the record straight.
A Russian military spokesman suggested that Syrian aircraft bombed a “large depot” on the “eastern outskirts” of the town where, he alleged, “terrorists,” or opposition forces, manufactured chemical weapons.
However, there were no visible depots near the strike points on the videos taken that morning. Small buildings were hit, and people described them as homes.
Note that the videos show conventional bombing and do not depict chemical weapons. However, witnesses told us that the chemical weapons were dropped in the same bombing mission and took place near the conventional strike points.
A resident sent me photos of buildings blown out by the airstrikes. They were consistent with the images other residents had posted on social media that morning. Using VerExif.com, I extracted the metadata in the images and used it to determine the precise latitude and longitude of each photo.
Using TerraServer and DigitalGlobe, I got new and old satellite images of the town, zoomed into the buildings’ coordinates and saw that the damage matched exactly what we see in the photos. As does the rubble in the streets.
The satellite verification also corroborated our interviews and established precisely what was hit — those small buildings that residents described as people’s homes.
Russia said that a “large depot” was bombed on the “eastern outskirts” of the town. The only large buildings near the strike points that match this description are a bakery and a grain silo. I found archive footage on YouTube showing they had been targeted in the past. But satellite imagery from April 6 showed that they had suffered no recent damage.
We neither received nor found evidence of any other points being hit in the eastern parts of the town that morning. This casts further serious doubt on Russia’s story.
Town residents pointed to a crater on the road by the grain silo and bakery where the chemical weapons attack reportedly took place. Fresh scarring in the video indicated the crater was new and, again, before-and-after satellite imagery confirmed this.
Though we are not certain what caused the crater, circumstantial evidence and witness testimony establish the crater as the site of the attack. Several town residents say planes passed over the town twice and dropped bombs across it.
I spoke with Kareem Shaheen, a Guardian journalist who visited Khan Sheikhoun two days after the attack, and that is what residents told him. He also entered the grain silo and saw no signs of chemical weapons manufacture, as alleged by Russia.
My colleague Neil Collier spoke with the activist Hadi Abdullah, who visited the town hours after the attack. Witnesses provided him with the same account: Four bombs were dropped on the town. He too filmed inside the grain silo.
Rebel-held parts of Syria have a network of spotters that monitor warplanes. They share information with residents and rescuers in an effort to warn of impending strikes. According to information our Beirut bureau received that day, spotters saw a fighter plane over Khan Sheikhoun twice within a few minutes that morning. This corroborates the accounts we received from witnesses.
A Human Rights Watch report, based on interviews with 32 Khan Skeikhoun residents and published on May 1, supports our account of the timing and the attack.
The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons said that tests on victims and survivors found “incontrovertible evidence” that the chemical agent sarin or a sarin-like toxin was used in Khan Sheikhoun. And a French report published on April 26 detected traces of the chemical hexamine in samples from Khan Sheikhoun. Hexamine is an additive sometimes used in sarin that was found at the site of the 2013 chemical weapons attack in Eastern Ghouta; Syria claimed to have destroyed its entire stock of chemical weapons after this attack. The O.P.C.W. said it could not confirm that Syria was free of all chemical weapons and, in a 2016 report, it said that Syria must still explain the presence of four chemical agents.
Our investigation does not prove who is responsible for the attack, nor does it attempt to. The O.P.C.W. said it intends to search the site as soon as it is safe to do so. What our investigation shows is how the visual evidence debunks Russia and Syria’s claims about what happened that day. The evidence builds on the testimony gathered by others and puts Syria and Russia’s account into serious doubt.
This investigation offered a promising occasion to use new technologies to bolster and extend our reporting into new areas, and it nicely illustrates the importance and possibilities forensic mapping and visual storytelling present.
Readers interested in learning more about the digital forensics community might like to look at the work of Forensic Architecture, Bellingcat, Storyful and the forensics teams at Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International. Journalists and others interested in tips and case studies on social journalism can refer to First Draft News (full disclosure — I used to blog for First Draft, and I worked at Storyful for four years).