Mastery, the undefeated colt, was born on Kentucky Derby Day and had the bloodlines and athleticism for stardom. Then one bad step ended it all.
ARCADIA, Calif. — He had been at the track since 4:30 a.m., starting his rounds in the dark, letting the snorts and shuffles of racehorses clear the sleep out of his eyes. The backside before dawn is more than Dr. Ryan Carpenter’s office, it is one of his favorite places, especially on mornings of big races like this day.
He had checked on four dozen thoroughbreds and there were no surgeries to perform that afternoon. So he sat beneath a TV in a barn to watch the one horse he couldn’t get his mind off: Mastery, the undefeated colt, ambling toward the starting gate here at Santa Anita Park for the San Felipe Stakes.
Carpenter watched Mastery shoot out of the starting gate like a missile in this March race and knew he was going to win. Heck, he was going to prevail in this year’s 143rd running of the Kentucky Derby, which will be held on Saturday.
It wasn’t because Mastery was his patient, or that Mastery’s trainer, Bob Baffert, and jockey, Mike Smith — both Hall of Famers — couldn’t contain their enthusiasm for this colt, who had won his previous three races by a combined 12 ¾ lengths and returned to the winner’s circle each time without a rushed breath.
No, Carpenter had his hands on him most mornings and knew he was perfectly engineered — straight legged as a chorus line of Rockettes, better balanced than an aerial artist. Carpenter stood up as Smith glided Mastery into the far turn and let him roll, picking up momentum like a steel ball circling a roulette wheel.
They hit the stretch a length and a half in front and kept on flying. They were two, four, six, and finally seven and a quarter lengths ahead of their nearest rival when they crossed the finish line.
Carpenter rose for the door but stopped in his tracks when, 50 yards past the finish line, Smith pulled Mastery up. He angled the colt to the outside of the track and leapt off his back. It was definitely not the way you want to see the Kentucky Derby favorite finish a race.
Carpenter quick-stepped out of the barn and headed for Santa Anita’s backside equine hospital to retrieve an X-ray machine.
On May 3, 2014, the foal that would become Mastery wriggled out of the mare Steady Course, wet, wobbly and eager to find his legs. His father, Candy Ride, was bred in Argentina and retired undefeated after winning the 2003 Pacific Classic at the Derby distance of a mile and a quarter. He had already sired three champions and, for the past three years, his offspring were successful enough to keep Candy Ride ranked in the top five of American stallions.
Steady Course offered class and a regal bloodline as well as the artistry of Arthur Hancock III, a fourth-generation Kentucky horseman with three Derby champions on his résumé: Gato Del Sol (1982), Sunday Silence (1989) and Fusaichi Pegasus (2000). He saw a Derby-winning pedigree on paper when he chose Candy Ride to mate with Steady Course.
Hancock viewed a future Derby winner in the flesh a year later, he thought, when he saw how the foal had grown into an athlete with a commanding walk and the cool of a battlefield general. Hancock, 74, had a feeling that here was “the icing on the cake” on a great life in horse racing.
You want another omen? Mastery was born on the first Saturday of May, the day the Derby is run each year. In fact, a pretty good colt by the name of California Chrome captured the 2014 rendition on the day Mastery was born.
How Well Do You Know Your Kentucky Derby History?
It just might be the most exciting eight questions in sports.
What did all this thought, magic and money — Mastery cost $425,000 at auction — guarantee? Not much for his buyer, Everett Dobson, an Oklahoma-based telecommunications magnate who has owned and bred horses for nearly two decades.
Mastery was one of 22,905 foals born in North America that year, and Dobson was among a multitude of breeders and owners chasing racetrack glory at auction, where about $900 million is spent annually, according to the Jockey Club. He was fortunate: The colt was one of only 8,523 horses in that 2014 crop to race as a 2-year-old, winning all three of his races last year, including the Grade I Los Alamitos Cash Call Futurity, and earning $511,200.
With the Derby less than two months away, Mastery earned another $240,000 in runaway style during his 3-year-old debut.
As Dobson started down the stairs to the winner’s circle, he said, all he could think about was how his fortune had held. Then he saw Smith on his feet on the track, sliding his saddle off Mastery’s back. Dobson’s heart dropped into his stomach.
Baffert was picking his way through the crowd with his 12-year-old son, Bode, certain that he was about to greet a future Derby champ, potentially his fifth as a trainer, and thrilled that Mastery was as good as he had thought he was.
“I’m going to run the table again,” he recalled thinking after Mastery’s victory, referring to 2015 when his prodigy American Pharoah became the 12th colt to sweep the Triple Crown, ending a 37-year wait.
His reverie, however, was interrupted with a jolt.
“I hope your horse is O.K.,” someone offered from the crowd.
“No, it isn’t,” said Baffert, putting his hand on his son’s shoulder.
Smith, 51, owns a face as leathery and cracked as an old saddle. Usually it is bisected by an incandescent smile for good reason — he has ridden perhaps more great horses than any of his peers: Holy Bull, the champion mare Zenyatta, as well as Arrogate, considered the best horse in the world currently racing.
Now, he wore a grimace in the midst of a moment that he dreads most. He has broken numerous bones, including vertebrae, which put him in a body cast for months. Those injuries pale compared with Smith’s memories of the horses that suffered catastrophic injuries while he was on them.
He remains haunted by those horses, especially by Prairie Bayou, whom he rode to victory in the 1993 Preakness Stakes, only to be devastated three weeks later in the Belmont Stakes when the gelding sustained multiple fractures in his left leg and had to be put down. Smith was inconsolable afterward, tears falling as he tried to explain what happened, as he replayed the moment into the night.
When Smith got to Dobson and Baffert, he told him what he knew.
On the upside, he told them, the colt was able to walk onto the equine ambulance comfortably and under his own power.
“Let’s hope,” Smith said.
Back at the barn, Baffert’s top assistant, Jimmy Barnes, was hopeful when Mastery ambled from the ambulance as if nothing was wrong. But as soon as the colt’s adrenaline dissipated, his left ankle started to swell.
Dr. Vince Baker X-rayed the colt in his stall and then showed the pictures to Dobson and Baffert. It was bad: Mastery had a complete displaced condylar fracture, or in layman’s terms, a broken ankle. When Dobson saw the X-rays, he wondered how the colt was able to walk.
His future was now in the hands of Carpenter, a surgeon in Baker’s practice. The next 48 hours were about caution and were critical to Mastery’s future.
There was one certainty: He was out of the Kentucky Derby.
Whether Mastery returned to racing, retired to a life as a stallion or suffered a more tragic fate was dependent on his being comfortable and free of infection.
Horses can’t just put their casts up on a couch and wait to heal. Their well-being depends on being sound and on their feet. The dangers they face when immobile range from debilitating pneumonia to colitis, an assault on a horse’s large intestine that can cause diarrhea and dehydration and lead to death.
For Mastery, the keys to well-being were a clean, comfortable bandage on his injured leg, antibiotics and Carpenter’s keen attention to the colt’s basic functions and temperament.
Carpenter grew up an hour and a half north of here in Somis, Calif., raising pigs and calves as a member of the 4-H club.
It didn’t take him long to figure out that offering the best care to patients who could not talk was through monitoring their bowel movements, appetites and energy levels. He was barely a teenager when he began volunteering at the nearby Humphrey, Giacopuzzi and Associates Equine Hospital. He was barely a teenager when he started dreaming about taking care of thoroughbreds.
Just as rewarding are the surgeries that Carpenter performs free a couple of times a month on racehorses that are neither as talented nor as valuable as Nyquist or Mastery. He can put them back together to have a second career as a child’s riding horse or as a hunter-jumper on the equestrian circuit.
Injuries that horses sustain at the racetrack have caught the attention of animal rights activists who find it abhorrent that horses are run for the pleasure and profit of owners and gamblers. Over the past decade, Congress has held hearings that have shown the use of performance-enhancing drugs has eroded racing’s popularity — and its bottom line.
Hancock and a host of others in the field agree and have pushed lawmakers to pass the Horseracing Integrity Act, which, among other steps, would put the United States Anti-Doping Agency in charge of policing performance-enhancing drugs as well as those that mask pain and can lead to injury.
Between the stricter drug rules that have been put in place across the country and advances in technology and medicine, there are encouraging signs of progress. The Jockey Club’s Equine Injury Database released statistics showing that equine fatalities in 2016, most often from euthanasia after a broken limb, were at their lowest since the database began in 2009.
The hospital here exudes all the charm of a double-wide trailer. Inside, however, the technology is cutting edge and the know-how of surgeons like Carpenter have made it the equine version of the renowned Hospital for Special Surgery in New York.
Around noon on March 13, Mastery was sedated. He gently crumpled to his belly. With the help of two technicians, Carpenter rolled Mastery on his back and attached him to a hoist. In seconds, a 1,200-pound colt was zip-lining the 12 feet or so to the operating table.
An anesthesiologist hooked Mastery to a ventilator and eased him into unconsciousness, then an arthroscope was inserted to provide pictures. The colt was on his side as Carpenter pushed and turned Mastery’s foot, trying to align the broken bones. When he saw that he had them snapped together like Legos, he put clamps on to hold them all in place. He then inserted three screws to seal the hold.
By 1:30 p.m., the leg was sutured and covered with a cast. Beneath their surgical gowns, Carpenter and his team were sweating. Mastery was hoisted once more and slid into a recovery room.
He was laid on his side with his cast leg up. The team attached ropes to Mastery’s head and tail, to control him once he came to in the dark, tight enclosure, not exactly a horse’s happy place.
After an hour, Mastery pulled himself off the floor like a boxer who had just been knocked down, then had a moment of panic. Carpenter and his team held on to both ropes and quickly soothed him.
His cast was cut off. He was loaded back into the ambulance. By 2:30 p.m., Mastery was back in his stall in Baffert’s barn.
It’s hard to watch Mastery walk the shed row here and not think about the Kentucky Derby. He is now up to 10 minutes of exercise a day, is recovering well, and is on track to have the screws removed in June.
He probably won’t race again. His pedigree and the talent displayed on the track, bloodstock agents say, put his value as a stallion north of $8 million, a number that could rise exponentially if he passes on his speed gene to future generations. He will live the rich, leisurely life of a stud at Claiborne Farm in Kentucky.
Those closest to the colt try their best but will never really cope with how, in an instant, they went from the elation of having a horse of a lifetime to worrying that he might not survive.
Smith will be in Kentucky riding the Louisiana Derby champion, Girvin, on Saturday. Baffert, however, will not be there, and will instead watch the race from his couch.
Mastery was one of the lucky ones, a fact that Dobson continues to remind himself.
