LOUISVILLE, Ky. — As states across the nation enact increasingly aggressive restrictions on abortion, perhaps nowhere has the political climate shifted as much as here in Kentucky, where the E.M.W. Women’s Surgical Center, a squat tan brick building on Market Street, is the state’s sole abortion clinic.
Over the past year, Gov. Matt Bevin, a Republican who calls himself “unapologetically pro-life,” has blocked a new Planned Parenthood clinic from performing abortions, shuttered E.M.W.’s satellite clinic in Lexington and threatened to close the existing one in Louisville. Backed by the American Civil Liberties Union, the clinic has sued the state; a trial is set for September.
The governor’s forceful moves have rattled reproductive rights advocates, made him a hero among abortion opponents and prompted both sides in the debate to ask a question: Could Kentucky become America’s only state to lack a single abortion clinic?
Across the country, the number of abortion providers has been steadily dropping for decades, partly because of better access to birth control — which means fewer unplanned pregnancies, and thus fewer abortions — but also because of restrictions that make it difficult for clinics to stay open.
Kentucky, which had 17 abortion providers in 1978, is today among seven states — the others are North Dakota, South Dakota, Missouri, Mississippi, Wyoming and West Virginia — with just one.
Mr. Bevin’s election in 2015 was only the beginning of the shift in the abortion landscape here. Republicans, riding Donald J. Trump’s coattails, took control of the Kentucky House in November for the first time in 95 years. Their first order of business in January was to pass two measures restricting abortion — one banning the procedure after 20 weeks into a pregnancy, and the other requiring doctors to narrate ultrasounds in detail, regardless of patients’ wishes.
At 7:30 in the morning, every Tuesday through Saturday, Kentucky’s intensifying battle over abortion plays out in downtown Louisville, along the sidewalk in front of the E.M.W. clinic.
The clinic’s mirrored doors are guarded by a volunteer corps of orange-vested escorts, who station themselves strategically at street corners so they can usher patients to the center from nearby parking lots, past a phalanx of protesters.
Men in ball caps finger rosary beads and recite the Lord’s Prayer.  On a recent weekday morning, a young woman arrived, accompanied by her grandmother and carrying a toddler in her arms.
Inside the clinic, soothing music played. Eleven patients were scheduled that day, roughly half for “medical abortions” in which pills are used to induce miscarriage. One by one, they visited with the clinic’s director and counselor, Anne Ahola, who joined the center 17 years ago after working with abused children.
Kentucky law requires that women receive counseling, either in person or by video, at least 24 hours before an abortion. Their stories offered a glimpse into the varied reasons, and often painful decisions, involved in ending pregnancies — especially in a state like Kentucky, where, Dr. Marshall said, many of his colleagues in obstetrics and gynecology oppose abortion.
One 37-year-old woman tearfully confessed that she had had an affair with a co-worker, who was married: “I’m his boss, and this is strictly forbidden; we could both lose our jobs.” She quietly asked for a copy of her ultrasound picture.
Reproductive rights advocates say women in Kentucky, especially those in poor rural parts of the state, have long faced economic and geographic barriers to obtaining abortions. Many cannot afford to travel or to pay for the procedure. And as surrounding states have enacted restrictions, their options are narrowing.
Yet until recently, advocates hoped abortion services would expand in Kentucky.
When Mr. Bevin’s Democratic predecessor, Gov. Steve Beshear, was in office, Planned Parenthood built a new health care center in Louisville. After Mr. Bevin became governor, the center briefly offered abortions, following standard state procedures to obtain a license, said Tamarra Wieder, a spokeswoman for Planned Parenthood here.
The Bevin administration promptly sued, claiming the center was performing abortions illegally. A judge dismissed the case, but the state appealed. So while the Planned Parenthood center is open and offers an array of reproductive health services, it is obeying the state’s “cease and desist” order not to perform abortions.
“For a state as big as Kentucky, one abortion provider is not enough,” Ms. Wieder said.
Dr. Marshall’s conflict with the state began about a year ago, when state inspectors showed up at his Lexington clinic, which he says operated as a physician’s office and thus did not require a license. The state insisted it did.
A legal battle ensued, but as the case dragged on, E.M.W. in Lexington could not afford to stay open without seeing patients, and its landlord refused to renew its lease, said Dona Wells, the former clinic administrator. It closed in January.
The Kentucky National Organization for Women declared the clinic “a permanent casualty” of the governor, while abortion opponents, long beleaguered under Governor Beshear, cheered.
But Donald Cox, a lawyer for the Louisville clinic, said the state’s complaint was rooted in a technicality: A Catholic health care organization, part owner of the nearby University of Louisville Hospital, will not sign the center’s longstanding agreements because of religious objections to abortion.
The case will be an early test of how federal courts interpret a 2016 Supreme Court ruling, in which the justices struck down parts of a Texas law that imposed similar requirements to Kentucky’s, saying they posed an “undue burden” on women, said Brigitte Amiri, a lawyer with the A.C.L.U.’s Reproductive Freedom Project, which also represents the clinic.
