The email read like one that could easily be circulating at any American college in 2017: a professor at Duke Divinity School urged her colleagues to attend a two-day session on how to recognize and combat racism.
But to Paul Griffiths, a professor of Catholic theology, the March course was something else: akin to the retraining of intellectuals by “bureaucrats and apparatchiks” in totalitarian societies, he wrote in an email to his fellow professors that afternoon.
The exchange soon dragged Duke Divinity School into the nationwide debates over political correctness, racism and free speech on college campuses, and now has ended with Professor Griffiths’s decision to step down.
Professor Griffiths did not respond to requests for comment on his decision, which was reported Tuesday by The News and Observer of Raleigh. A supportive colleague, Thomas Pfau, a professor of English at Duke University who also teaches in the divinity school and had seen the resignation letter, said it was effective in June 2018, meaning that Professor Griffiths, 61, would remain on the staff for another year.
Professor Pfau said Professor Griffiths had not been pressured to resign. But he was not in the divinity school’s good graces.
As a result, she said, he would be barred from faculty meetings, and if he continued to refuse to meet with her, he would face the loss of travel and research funds, and possibly other penalties.
Professor Griffiths, for his part, wrote an email to his colleagues saying that “freedom to speak and write without fear of discipline and punishment” was “under pressure” at Duke Divinity, and that he was facing disciplinary action because of his public stance against the diversity training. He said that he was willing to meet with Dr. Heath, but that they could not agree on terms.
He said Dr. Heath had accused him of “unprofessional conduct” and that Professor Portier-Young had accused him of harassment.
The series of emails and Dr. Heath’s letter were leaked to Rod Dreher of The American Conservative, who published them this week, questioning whether Professor Griffiths had been railroaded.
Professor Portier-Young, who like Professor Griffiths is white, declined to comment through a spokesman for the university, Michael Schoenfeld.
Dr. Pfau said Dr. Griffiths’s emails about diversity training had been misconstrued as a personal attack on Dr. Portier-Young. “Paul Griffiths’s style can be quite acerbic and vehement, though I have found it to be fueled by a genuine concern with the subject matter at hand, rather than ad hominem, as some have alleged,” Dr. Pfau said, adding that he had always found him to be a “generous and formidably thoughtful” colleague.
Still, the tone of Dr. Griffiths’s email concerned another admirer, the Rev. Morgan Guyton of New Orleans, a former Duke Divinity student.
