WASHINGTON — President Trump said Tuesday that the United States needed “a good ‘shutdown’” this fall to force a partisan confrontation over federal spending and suggested that he might move to reverse longstanding Senate rules that effectively require a supermajority to approve most major pieces of legislation.
Senate Republicans promptly and uniformly rejected Mr. Trump’s threats of a more partisan approach in the future.
The Twitter messages were also an indication of the degree to which bipartisan negotiations in Congress on the spending bill and others, including a health care overhaul that appeared on Tuesday to be stalled again, have bedeviled Mr. Trump at this early stage of his presidency, forcing him to bow to political realities to which he had insisted he was immune.
Mick Mulvaney, his budget director, conceded as much in a briefing with reporters later in the day, saying that Mr. Trump had made the comments because he had become “frustrated” that congressional Democrats had decided to “spike the football” and claim victory on the spending package.
“The reason for the plan negotiated between the Republicans and Democrats is that we need 60 votes in the Senate which are not there!” Mr. Trump said in one post, apparently a reference to the measure, which would fund the government through September.
The solution, he said, was either to elect more Republican senators in 2018, the next midterm elections, “or change the rules now to 51%.” That appeared to refer to scrapping the filibuster, which allows any senator to insist on a three-fifths vote, rather than a simple majority, to act on legislative matters.
Republicans already moved last month to eliminate the use of the tactic for Supreme Court confirmations, allowing them to move forward with the approval of Justice Neil M. Gorsuch over near-unanimous Democratic opposition.
“Our country needs a good ‘shutdown’ in September to fix mess!” Mr. Trump said.
The Twitter posts set off a scramble at the White House, upending a frenetic effort by Mr. Trump’s advisers to portray the spending agreement as a major victory for the president. By early afternoon, Mr. Trump had turned an appearance with Air Force Academy cadets in the Rose Garden into a pep rally for the spending bill, which he declared “a clear win for the American people.” And he dispatched Mr. Mulvaney to brief reporters twice — once by telephone in a conference call that devolved into a comedy of errors, and once in person — to defend it.
The president cited large spending increases for the military and border security contained in the measure, saying that those resources were “enough money to make a down payment on the border wall,” despite the fact that the bill provides no funding for the structure.
Mr. Mulvaney argued that the president had actually outfoxed Democrats who were eager for a shutdown.
“This is a huge victory for the president,” he said.
But by publicly courting a government shutdown, an extraordinary move for a sitting president, Mr. Trump instead seemed to be confirming his reputation for rash statements that may yield little in the way of follow-through.
Indeed, Republicans appeared eager to ignore Mr. Trump’s latest outburst and focus on an agreement they said was worth supporting.
“How many times have I had this: ‘Do you agree with a tweet this morning?’” the House speaker, Paul D. Ryan, Republican of Wisconsin, joked after being asked about the president’s Twitter statements.
Mr. Ryan said he did “share the president’s frustration” but noted that bipartisan support was required for spending measures.
“Having said all that, I feel very good about the wins we got with the administration in this bill,” Mr. Ryan said.
Anti-abortion rights groups also objected because the measure does not defund Planned Parenthood, a goal that Mr. Trump has said he shares.
Mr. Mulvaney said the move to defund Planned Parenthood would wait for enactment of the health care overhaul, a prospect that seemed to be growing more remote, not less, on Tuesday as influential Republicans said they could not support it.
And he said the president’s shutdown threat stemmed from anger at Democrats. “The president is frustrated with the fact that he negotiated in good faith with the Democrats and they went out to try and spike the football and make him look bad,” he said.
Democrats said Mr. Trump’s actions assured that partisan rancor would continue to hang over Capitol Hill in the coming months.
“Threatening to shut down the government, on the heels of a successful bipartisan agreement, is a sour and shameful note to kick off negotiations” for the coming year, said Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont.
Mr. Trump’s comments also seemed to augur more difficulties in the months to come with his own party.
“That will not happen,” Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, said of Mr. Trump’s threat to eliminate the filibuster, citing an “overwhelming majority” of support for the rules in the Senate, where more than 60 have signed a letter urging their preservation.
“I just don’t agree” with Mr. Trump’s suggestion of a shutdown, said Senator John Cornyn of Texas, the No. 2 Republican, who said he would try to stop any effort to obliterate the filibuster.
Some House Republicans who have long chafed at the strictures of Senate procedure cheered the efforts to change the rules.
Senator Bob Corker, Republican of Tennessee, who said he planned to vote against the spending bill, made it clear that he wished that Mr. Trump would keep his musings on the subject to himself.
“I do wish somebody would take his iPhone away from him,” Mr. Corker said.