WASHINGTON — What a day for President Trump’s first face-to-face meeting with a top Russian official.
For all of Mr. Lavrov’s jovial spin, though, the optics were not what the Kremlin had in mind.
Instead of basking in the glow of questions focused on Russia’s plans to bring peace to Syria, Mr. Lavrov faced a battery of queries about the effect of the Comey firing on relations with Russia. Mr. Lavrov last visited Washington in 2013.
Mr. Trump’s decision to sack Mr. Comey and then meet Mr. Lavrov and Mr. Kislyak the next morning — while cable television news was showing wall-to-wall coverage of the firing — was a sign of amateurish scheduling, Mr. Frolov argued.
But to Mr. Trump and administration officials, solving the problem of the F.B.I. director was a separate issue.
When Vladimir V. Putin, the Russian president, was asked on Wednesday about the implications of Mr. Comey’s firing, he seemed to agree.
Back in Washington, when Mr. Lavrov was asked if he was relieved that Mr. Comey had been fired, given that the F.B.I. director was pursuing accusations of Russian efforts to influence an American election, the foreign minister laughed.
“I never thought I’d have to answer such questions, all the more in the United States of America, with your greatly developed democratic and political system,” he said, a tinge of sarcasm in his voice.
He said Russia was aware that relations with the United States were sputtering against an “abnormal background” and all the “noise” raised about the nature of those relations.
The United States has been uncomfortable with the idea of participating in security zones in Syria because of the involvement of Iran, not to mention the government of President Bashar al-Assad, in carrying out that plan.
And he paid a compliment to the Trump administration.
He said that American sanctions on Russia related to events in Ukraine — the United States accuses Moscow of aggression there — were not discussed, and his annoyance showed as the questions continued.
Mr. Kislyak, the Russian ambassador in Washington, has been a central figure in the questions surrounding the contacts between the Trump campaign and the Kremlin. Michael T. Flynn was forced to resign as national security adviser in February after it was revealed that he had talked to Mr. Kislyak about lifting American economic sanctions on Russia and then lied about it to senior administration officials.
And Russia had clearly hoped for some progress with the Trump administration, especially on Syria, after Mr. Putin called Mr. Trump last week to discuss the issue.
“For now there are more questions than answers, and there was likely a desire as it were to somehow coordinate at least part of these questions,” said Aleksei V. Makarkin, the deputy head of the Center for Political Technologies, a think tank based in Moscow.
Whether anything concrete will emerge from the meetings in Washington is not yet clear, but in Moscow, at least, the meeting could be used to show that Russia was welcome in the White House.
