New York|In Times Square Attack, Bollards Stopped One Car. But What About the Next?
In Times Square Attack, Bollards Stopped One Car. But What About the Next?
Planners describe it as a turning point in the redesign of Times Square: a meeting around the end of 2012 when David C. Kelly, then the Police Department’s assistant commissioner for counterterrorism, showed up with a copy of Al Qaeda’s English-language magazine, which called on attackers to "mow down” pedestrians with pickup trucks.
Soon, at Mr. Kelly’s recommendation, pedestrian plazas that had replaced roadway along a five-block stretch of Broadway were guarded by three-foot-tall, stainless-steel cylindrical bollards.
The thick posts stopped a sedan last week from plowing into dozens more pedestrians after a man, high on PCP, drove unimpeded through three blocks of city sidewalk, killing an 18-year-old woman and injuring 20 other people, the police said. The rampage brought to mind the terrorist attack last year in Nice, France, in which a cargo truck killed scores of people celebrating Bastille Day, but the authorities in New York said that while the driver, Richard Rojas, was trying to kill people, he had a history of mental illness and that they did not consider it a terrorist attack.
The bombing on Monday in Manchester, England, was another reminder of ever-evolving terrorist tactics, and it prompted counterterrorism officials in New York and in other large United States cities to look into additional precautions.
The city is considering adding bollards on sidewalks around Times Square to match those around pedestrian plazas, the Police Department’s deputy commissioner for intelligence and counterterrorism, John J. Miller, told the City Council on Monday.
But some elected leaders and planners who worked on the Times Square redesign say the attack raises a more fundamental question: Why are cars still allowed to drive through the city’s most clogged tourist attractions in the first place?
Within hours of the attack on Thursday, the police had placed temporary concrete blocks along corners on the west side of Seventh Avenue. Mr. Rojas, driving south on Seventh Avenue, made a U-turn at 42nd Street and hit people walking on the west side of Seventh Avenue as he headed to the pedestrian plaza at Broadway and 45th Street, where a bollard stopped his car.
Stephen Davis, the Police Department’s top spokesman, said the police were re-evaluating security for the streets around the Empire State Building and other prominent locations. But he said installing too many bollards could impede people who might be trying to flee buildings in emergencies and hinder vehicles that might be trying to respond.
Ydanis Rodriguez, a city councilman who is the chairman of the transportation committee, said he began drafting legislation several months ago to ask that bollards be installed outside schools and on busy corners across the city.
In the Times Square overhaul, completed last year after about six years of design and construction, planners sought to protect pedestrians without cluttering the sidewalks. Craig Dykers, founding partner of Snohetta, the architectural firm on the project, said the bollards were designed to be thinner and spaced widely enough to allow two people to pass through side by side. The bollards are removable — so fire trucks and billboard maintenance vehicles — can enter the pedestrian plazas, and planted just under the surface of the street so as not to interfere with the subway system below. Benches also double as security barriers.
Mr. Kelly, now an associate managing director at K2 Intelligence, an investigations and cyberdefense firm, said he heard about the planned pedestrian plazas from a friend in 2012 and pushed to have protections incorporated into the design, rather than installing unsightly concrete barriers later. He said the police were worried about intentional attacks, accidents that sent cars toward pedestrians, and confused drivers trying to turn onto plazas that used to be streets. He said planners determined that bollards were needed on the plazas but not on all the sidewalks, because people relaxing at patio tables and pedestrians distracted by performances would be more vulnerable in the plazas.
The changes to traffic patterns seem to have made Times Square safer. Thirty-seven pedestrians, cyclists and car occupants were injured on average per year in Times Square from 2014 to 2016, compared with 62 from 2006 to 2008, before Broadway was closed to cars.
David Burney, the commissioner of the Department of Design and Construction under former Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, said sidewalks were already too crowded to accommodate many extra bollards. Instead, he said, Seventh Avenue should be closed to cars from 42nd to 47th Streets to allow crowds to spill off sidewalks. He said the city should also consider adding protections around bike lanes.
Tim Tompkins, the president of the Times Square Alliance, said he had asked Snohetta in recent days to dust off old drawings and make preparations for adding additional barriers of some kind.
As tourism surges and the city grows more crowded, residents have grown alarmed about throngs of people visiting attractions, like the Fearless Girl statue, that do not have permanent protections from car traffic. In other places, though, like the New York Stock Exchange area, the city is reassessing years of security measures that have made streets forbidding to tourists and residents alike, said Jessica Lappin, the president of the Downtown Alliance. That group has enlisted a design firm to help make the neighborhood more passable.