As family and friends mourned the death of a 15-year-old boy shot in the head by a police officer in a Dallas suburb over the weekend, the police chief said Monday that new evidence showed the killing did not unfold the way the authorities had originally claimed.
But Jonathan Haber, the police chief, told reporters at a news conference on Monday afternoon that video showed the opposite. He said the officer fired when the car was “moving forward as the officers approached,” according to The Associated Press. The Dallas County medical examiner’s report ruled the death a homicide caused by a “rifle wound” to the head.
Efforts to reach officials with the Police Department after Monday’s news conference were unsuccessful.
But the department published an updated statement later on Monday that said the officers had been investigating a house party when they heard gunshots. When they went outside to investigate, they “confronted” a vehicle backing down the street that continued to reverse despite multiple commands to stop, the statement said.
“The vehicle then pulled forward as the officer continued to approach the vehicle giving verbal commands. The vehicle continued the main roadway driving away from the officer as an officer shot into the vehicle striking the passenger,” the statement said.
Mr. Merritt called the change in the department’s account “a hopeful sign” about the transparency of the investigation, but he said the authorities needed to do more.
Jordan, a popular football player, was killed shortly after leaving a party with a group of friends on Saturday night. The police said in a statement on Sunday that officers were in the area responding to a 911 call complaining about drunken young people.
The initial statement had said officers fired on the car after they heard gunfire from an “unknown altercation.” Jordan, a passenger, was shot in the head and later died from his injuries at a hospital.
“The entire district — especially the staff and students of Mesquite High School — are mourning this terrible loss,” the district said.
Local media reported on what the death of the teenager meant to the community.
The first day of spring football practice at Mesquite High School was canceled on Monday because of Jordan’s death.
His teammates are grieving, said Jeff Fleener, the coach of the high school team, the Skeeters. Sheer athleticism aside, Jordan’s “big smile” would be missed by his team, Mr. Fleener said in a telephone interview on Monday.
“I met Jordan on Day 1 and learned his name very quickly just because of the type of kid he was,” Mr. Fleener said.
Jordan, who weighed 150 pounds and was nearly six feet tall, was a committed athlete who was often seen either working out in the weight room or surrounded by the camaraderie of teammates in the locker room and on the field. He had aspirations to play college football and was trying out for the team’s defensive position, Mr. Fleener said.
Body camera footage has been crucial in investigations of police shootings in the United States, particularly in cases involving black victims and white officers that have fueled racial discord in communities.