Here is what we know about the election in South Korea, where voters were choosing a successor to former President Park Geun-hye, forced from office in a corruption scandal. Polls closed at 8 p.m. Tuesday local time (7 a.m. Eastern time).
■ Moon Jae-in, the candidate who favors dialogue with North Korea and was leading in the vote-counting by a comfortable margin three hours after polls closed, declared victory in a nationally televised speech. “I will be a president for all the people,” he said, vowing to work together with his political rivals.
■ With 60 percent of the vote counted, Mr. Moon was in first place with 39.6 percent of the vote. Hong Joon-pyo, a conservative who wants to keep a tough stance against North Korea, had 26.2 percent. Ahn Cheol-soo, a centrist, had 21.3 percent.
■ Mr. Hong said he was “accepting the election results” and would focus on rebuilding his party, in what the South Korean news media interpreted to be a concession to Mr. Moon. Mr. Ahn similarly said he was also “humbly accepting” the results, adding that he had failed to live up to his supporters’ expectations. Neither candidate explicitly conceded.
■ Mr. Moon, a human rights lawyer, told cheering supporters at his Democratic Party headquarters that he would push for “both reform and unity” if he were confirmed as president. It could be well into Wednesday before enough votes have been officially counted by the National Election Commission to make it clear who has won, local news outlets said. Nationwide turnout was 77.2 percent, the highest in two decades for a presidential election.
■ The election is being closely watched in China. Its relations with South Korea have been tense since an American antimissile system was deployed on Korean soil, prompting Chinese boycotts of Korean products.
■ American leaders are concerned that a victory by Mr. Moon could lessen South Korean resolve to confront North Korea over its nuclear and missile programs.
The world’s 11th-largest economy, South Korea is a staunch ally of the United States. In 1953, when the Korean Peninsula was effectively partitioned at the end of the Korean War, the United States and South Korea agreed on a mutual defense treaty, the bedrock of the alliance. About 28,500 American troops are stationed in South Korea, which contributes to the cost of the defense. The American military uses frequent drills with South Korea’s army and navy as a show of force to North Korea.
South Korea’s rapid economic rise preceded its transition to democracy in the 1980s, after the assassination of the military dictator Park Chung-hee.
His daughter, Park Geun-hye, was forced from office in March after being impeached and accused of collecting or demanding $52 million in bribes from Samsung and other big businesses. She is now in prison.
During huge, monthslong rallies that propelled her impeachment, South Koreans called for the ouster not only of Ms. Park, a conservative icon, but also of what they called jeokpae — the entrenched corruption and incompetence that people said have bedeviled successive governments.
The unstable dictatorship in North Korea is a major issue in the South. Longstanding efforts to get the North to curb its nuclear program have yielded little success, and the Trump administration’s unpredictability has complicated the picture.
If the winner of the election pursues dialogue with North Korea, he could also be accused of disrupting the American-led international efforts to squeeze the North with additional sanctions. Straining relations with Washington would be a risky — and for many citizens, unacceptable — gamble.
A Moon victory will mean the return of liberal forces to the center of control after nine years of conservative rule. The conservatives, who have governed South Korea except for a decade of progressive power from 1998 to 2008, would once again take a back seat.
Ms. Park, the last conservative president, and her conservative predecessor, Lee Myung-bak, had worked closely with the United States to enforce sanctions and otherwise press North Korea to give up its nuclear and long-range ballistic missile programs. But those programs have only expanded.
Mr. Moon argues that however distasteful the North Korean leadership is, South Korea, the United States and others must use dialogue and economic exchanges to build trust and persuade the North to negotiate away its weapons.
But conservative rivals like Mr. Hong call that vision naïve, arguing that North Korea will use negotiations to extract concessions from the South while never giving up its weapons.
The new president must deal with both Kim Jong-un, the leader of North Korea who remains determined to expand his arsenal of nuclear missiles, and President Trump, whose approach to the North has alarmed many South Koreans who find it confusing and even dangerous.
Mr. Trump has warned of a “major, major conflict” with North Korea but has also said he would be “honored” to meet Mr. Kim under the right circumstances.
Mr. Trump has also unsettled South Koreans by accusing them of not paying enough for the presence of American troops stationed in the country and by threatening to kill a trade agreement with Seoul, which he said took away jobs from Americans. He also said he thought South Korea should pay for the $1 billion missile-defense system the United States has installed in the country despite protests.
Mr. Moon said that if elected, he would “review” whether an agreement, made under Ms. Park, over the deployment of the American missile defense battery, known as Thaad, was in South Korea’s best interest.
At home, the new president must address the mounting public grievances against deep-rooted corrupt ties between the government and businesses that brought about Ms. Park’s downfall. All candidates have pledged to overhaul the chaebol, the family-controlled conglomerates that have dominated the economy for decades, to make them more transparent.
Jitters are also running high over slowing economic growth, rising household debt and soaring unemployment rates among the youth. But whoever wins the election will find it hard to enact change through the deeply fractured National Assembly, where no party controls a majority.