NEW DELHI — India’s Supreme Court upheld on Friday the death sentence for four men who were found guilty of raping and disemboweling a 23-year-old student on a moving bus in 2012, a crime that came to embody the menace lurking in India’s sprawling, chaotic cities.
The decision was unusual. While Indian trial courts aggressively impose death sentences, 95 percent of them have been overturned or commuted by higher courts in recent years, a recent study showed, typically in consideration of “mitigating circumstances” like slipshod investigations or the potential of the accused to be rehabilitated.
The “Delhi gang rape,” as it came to be known, riveted the public from the start, setting off street protests and months of play-by-play coverage.
Returning home from a movie at a crowded mall with a male friend, she boarded a private bus to discover that it was already occupied by a group of young men, working-class migrants who had been drinking.
While the bus circled the city, the men attacked the pair, took Ms. Pandey to the back of the bus and raped her, at one point penetrating her with a metal rod and perforating her colon. The two were dumped on the roadside, naked and bleeding, and remained there for nearly two hours before police officers arrived and took them to a hospital. Her attackers were identified, in some cases, by bite marks that covered her body. She died two weeks later of her injuries.
Her story ignited public fury. At court hearings, activists would stand with heavy nooses looped around their necks, chanting: “Hang the rapists! Hang the rapists!” Flamboyant celebrity lawyers, who agreed to defend the accused, were frequently immobilized by a scrum of cameramen.
After the decision was announced, the courtroom broke out in applause. “They should be castrated first!” one lawyer called out. Ms. Pandey’s mother wept with relief, embracing the people who surrounded her, while her father, Badri Nath Singh, seemed to exhale.
Legal experts noted that public outrage over rapes is selective, and they questioned whether it should be factored into legal judgments.
Just a day earlier, Mumbai’s High Court had finally upheld the convictions of 11 men in the 2002 gang rape of Bilkis Bano, a Muslim who was assaulted by a group of Hindu men during religious riots in the western state of Gujarat. But that case, which has crept through the legal system for 15 years, has never generated public outrage.
Ms. Grover, who opposes the death penalty, said she did not believe the execution of the four men — a fruit vendor, a bus attendant, a gym handyman and an unemployed man — would serve as a deterrent to future rapists.
