NASHVILLE — From the roof deck of Vadis Turner’s house, she can see the cranes that dot the skyline here. Condos and office buildings are going up at dizzying speed. Dynamite blasts like seismic tremors rumble the ground. Nashville is a boomtown. And in her own small way, Ms. Turner is part of it.
Ms. Turner, a 39-year-old artist who makes mixed-media pieces using traditionally feminine materials like ribbons and quilt fabric, grew up in this city. Her grandfather, Don Pierce, ran Starday Records, a label that recorded George Jones, Willie Nelson and other country legends.
She remembers the Nashville she left at 18, in 1995, as a city whose downtown went sleepy on weekends and whose buildings were vacant above the storefront honky-tonks, a place enamored with the chain retailers and restaurants that were homogenizing American towns in those years.
But a funny thing happened in the 20 years Ms. Turner was away: Brooklyn started to look like the South with its bearded dudes in flannel and its bourbon distilleries. Nashville, meanwhile, was alive with new restaurants and independent stores, as an influx of young creative people from New York, Los Angeles and elsewhere flocked there for the cheaper real estate and collaborative arts scene.
In 2014, the couple did go home, but they transported their urban lifestyle south. Instead of buying a Craftsman bungalow with a backyard in an up-and-coming residential neighborhood like East Nashville, Ms. Turner and Mr. Ezell paid $1.1 million for a mixed-use two-story, white-brick house in Rutledge Hill, a nowhere land of industrial buildings and crisscrossing freeways a short walk from downtown and the famous honky-tonks on Lower Broadway.
The 4,760-square-foot Second Empire-style building sits next door to an empty HVAC supply warehouse, looking stranded with its big magnolia tree in the front yard, like the last remnant of a stately old neighborhood.
The couple rent the ground floor to a commercial tenant, and live in an apartment carved out from the second floor. The arrangement was inspired by the Brooklyn brownstone gentry they once aspired to be, who live on the upper floors of their restored townhouses while renting the garden level.
Undertaking a renovation when the very ground around you is shifting from progress can be challenging. One day, after blasting nearby for yet another high-rise, it was discovered that a portion of the house had sunk an inch and a half. The blasting had compromised the load-bearing historic masonry walls, requiring shoring and reinforcement.
But, Ms. Turner added, to have full ownership of a space for the first time in her life was “a wonderful and exciting and creative undertaking.” She oversaw decorating the apartment, with help from her friend McLean Barbieri, a local interior designer, and approached the project as you’d expect an artist to: with each room and hallway done in bright, vivid, often clashing colors and patterns.
In the family room, for one wall Ms. Turner splurged on Pierre Frey wallpaper; the pattern’s brush-stroke pinks, whites, yellows and blues resemble a large Abstract Expressionist canvas.
For a half-bathroom, she used tiles made of recycled skateboard decks, which were inlaid into a rectangular section of the exposed brick. The same bathroom has a chocolate-brown toilet, a toilet-paper holder covered in camel’s hair that Ms. Turner found “in this dumpy flea market in Tangiers” and a scalloped agate sink fit for a mermaid.
Ms. Turner’s favorite decorating medium is lighting: Each room contains a wacky fixture, including a paper-plate chandelier by her friend Christopher Trujillo in the dining area.
The wackiest of them greets visitors in the entry hall. When Ms. Turner inherited a crystal chandelier from her mother-in-law, who was downsizing from her traditional Southern home in tony Belle Meade, Tenn., she spray-painted it yellow and affixed it with 100 plastic bananas.
With the move to Nashville, Mr. Ezell has switched careers from Manhattan literary agent to running a composting company with his brother. He said he generally agrees that his wife can do her thing with the apartment, although he has the occasional veto. When Ms. Turner found a dated and hideous concrete-and-glass coffee table on Craigslist and stuck it in the family room, he evidently didn’t exercise his rights.
Their renewed love for Nashville is something more. Since returning home, the couple has had a second son, Vreeland, and after two years in a temporary house while the renovations were completed, they finally moved into their home in January. Ms. Turner has a solo show this spring at the Frist Center for the Visual Arts.
And what about the buildings going up all around her, and the people moving there every day, transforming Nashville into something new and as yet to be determined?
