323 pp. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $26.
VanderMeer is that rare novelist who turns to nonhumans not to make them approximate us as much as possible but to make such approximation impossible. All of this is magnified a hundredfold in “Borne,” his new novel. At the center is the titular hero, a nondescript object when first introduced by the narrator and aspiring mother Rachel, who plucks him off the fur of the gigantic flying bear Mord. At that point Borne is no more than the size of Rachel’s fist, catching her attention only because “beacon-like, he strobed emerald green across the purple every half minute or so.” But he soon gets bigger, sometimes doubling or even tripling in size in a matter of weeks. He will eat anything: crumb, pebble, any worm or insect. Even though so much goes into him, nothing ever comes out, a fact that strikes Rachel as “absurd, even humorously sinister.” The sinister absurdity deepens with the disappearance of five feral children who have tortured Rachel after breaking into her hideout.
Borne, now, is suddenly able to talk, demonstrating knowledge of many things he couldn’t have experienced. He is also suddenly polymorphous, becoming a rock, a lizard, even a human. Rachel tries to parent him, educate him, but it’s pointless, because he’s already a nonstop learning machine, reading, sampling and incorporating into himself everything that comes his way. How can one educate a “hybrid of sea anemone and squid,” a liquid sprawl of “rippling colors that strayed from purple toward deep blues and sea greens”?
Nautical images are everywhere in “Borne,” though the setting is in fact land rather than sea. But the sea isn’t too far away — not far in memory, anyway, for Rachel is a climate refugee from a submerged archipelago, long dependent on the ocean for sustenance and learning the hard way that what feeds can also drown. She and her parents used to bring out their telescope to look for lights from neighboring islands, until one night they put the useless instrument away for good. The family fled their own island when Rachel was 6, moving from camp to camp, hoping to outrun disaster and never succeeding. Then her parents were lost as well. Rachel is now in a new city, scavenging on her own, finding shelter only when she takes up with her companion Wick in his much fortified and oddly sea-haunted Balcony Cliffs, a warren of apartments with marine objects etched into many of its secrets, including a “diagram of a fish curled inside the outer tube of a broken telescope and a metal box filled with tiny vermilion nautilus shells,” tucked away in a locked drawer.
VanderMeer is telling us something here, for this new city is a lost island too in its own way, submerged in a medium equally encompassing — a sea of toxicity. Presiding over it is “the Company,” a biotech conglomerate that has gone defunct, but not before filling the world with its many products. Even now it’s still the source of everything that ails the city and everything that keeps it going. There’s no escape from its contamination. The polluted river glows pink and orange; yet the “memory beetles” people stick into their ears and the “diagnostic worms” they use to heal wounds do make life tolerable in nontrivial ways. Wick, for one, wouldn’t be able to survive without his nautilus pills.
Here is the story about biotech that VanderMeer wants to tell, a vision of the nonhuman not as one fixed thing, one fixed destiny, but as either peaceful or catastrophic, by our side or out on a rampage as our behavior dictates — for these are our children, born of us and now to be borne in whatever shape or mess we have created. This coming-of-age story signals that eco-fiction has come of age as well: wilder, more reckless and more breathtaking than previously thought, a wager and a promise that what emerges from the 21st century will be as good as any from the 20th, or the 19th.