An image of President Trump’s Twitter account. “Despite the constant negative press covfefe,” the post began, at 12:06 a.m. And there it ended.
WASHINGTON — And on the 132nd day, just after midnight, President Trump had at last delivered the nation to something approaching unity — in bewilderment, if nothing else.
The state of our union was … covfefe.
The trouble began, as it so often does, on Twitter, in the early minutes of Wednesday morning. Mr. Trump had something to say. Kind of.
“Despite the constant negative press covfefe,” the Twitter post began, at 12:06 a.m., from @realDonaldTrump, the irrepressible internal monologue of his presidency.
A minute passed. Then another. Then five.
Surely he would delete the message.
Ten. Twenty. It was nearly 12:30 a.m.
Forty minutes. An hour. The questions mounted.
Had the president’s lawyers, so eager to curb his stream-of-consciousness missives, tackled the commander in chief under the cover of night?
Perhaps, some worried aloud, Mr. Trump had experienced a medical episode a quarter of the way through his 140 characters.
No one at the White House could immediately be reached for comment overnight.
Some appeared to temper their whimsy as more sobering news dominated the medium: a huge explosion in Kabul, Afghanistan, leaving dozens dead or wounded.
Yet the instinct to linger was powerful, for those who had glimpsed the initial post, even if they did not seem entirely sure why they were still awake.
And as the hour wore on, stragglers turned their lonely eyes to the only account that could save them. “Help, @MerriamWebster,” pleaded Jessica Taylor, a reporter at NPR, one of several to make the request.
The dictionary obliged.
Just after 6 a.m., the president resurfaced, finally deleting the Twitter post and tapping out another.
Little became clearer in daylight hours.
Consensus proved elusive — to say nothing of pronunciation guidelines — and the White House appeared disinclined to help. “The president and a small group of people know exactly what he meant,” Sean Spicer, the press secretary, said flatly. He did not elaborate.
