What the experiences of nonmonogamous couples can tell us about jealousy, love, desire and trust.
I thought that by the time I met Joe and Zaeli and Blake in February at their home in Austin that I had become used to the idea of openness. But from the moment I entered their house, I did not know where to look. Joe, warm and outgoing, greeted me at the door, making small talk I could barely engage in, as his wife and Blake were, at that moment, nuzzling by the stove, reunited after having been apart for most of the day. We sat down to dinner, Blake ushering their daughter — Joe and Zaeli’s daughter, biologically, but one Blake was helping to raise as part of the family — to the table. Blake does an equal share of day-to-day caregiving of Joe and Zaeli’s child, and Blake also does most of the cooking. That night, he made a Thai chicken soup for dinner.
Their story is a kind of counterpoint to Daniel and Elizabeth’s, the couples’ marriage plots overlapping at crucial times but diverging at others. Daniel, too, after a year, also felt burdened by resentments, disappointed by how painful the path to a better relationship with his wife had been, and by how many logistical hurdles were in the way of a relationship with someone else. Neither he nor the woman to whom he felt so close had the finances or time to support a long-distance relationship. After a few months of sweet, sad instant-message exchanges, they agreed that they would not be able to see each other again any time soon — and that it might be less painful, especially for her, to break off the steady communication.
Elizabeth was still seeing Joseph one year after she and Daniel opened their marriage. The fact that Joseph’s wife didn’t know troubles her, and she wrestled with guilt. But he had become someone she loved. Their relationship had permanence. When Daniel and Elizabeth fought, they no longer wondered if that might mean the end but knew instead they would work it out. Daniel had come to see Joseph as “part of my tribe.” He often helped Joseph out with computer problems; when he heard that Joseph had the flu, Daniel texted to see if there was anything he needed.
Instead of detracting from Elizabeth and Daniel’s marriage, Joseph sometimes served as a foil, a contrast against which Elizabeth could better see her husband — and not just her husband, but their history, the way he pulled over, without even asking, any time they drove by an ice-cream parlor, knowing it would delight her, or brought home a Diet Pepsi for her on his way back from work. And in starting something new with Joseph, she found she had refreshed her idea of what love could look like, which also infused her marriage.
