For decades, Chick Donohue’s “greatest beer run” story has been met with incredulous scoffs.
“For half a century, I’ve been told I was full of it, to the point where I stopped even telling this story,” said Mr. Donohue, 75, who has related countless times how he took a patriotic bartender’s suggestion and made a daring, adventurous visit to Vietnam in 1967 as a civilian to deliver beer to his soldier buddies.
It was the ultimate saloon tale: Mr. Donohue has told it in many New York City bars.
But others — friends, strangers, even some relatives — called it a tale too tall even for Mr. Donohue, who seemed to know people wherever he went and could hatch and pull off the most adventurous of plans.
Tired of the scoffing, he has now written a book about it — “The Greatest Beer Run Ever: A True Story of Friendship Stronger Than War” — with Joanna Molloy, a former reporter for The New York Daily News.
The book includes images of Mr. Donohue in Vietnam with the soldiers he visited as well as interviews with them.
The self-published book is not exactly commanding high-powered publicity events, so the ever-resourceful Mr. Donohue is promoting it on his own, arranging readings at union meetings and veterans groups.
Mr. Donohue made his living as a sandhog, one of the urban miners who dig train and water tunnels deep in New York City’s bedrock.
Now retired, he showed up recently at a monthly meeting of Sandhogs Local 147, in the Teamsters building in Manhattan.
Richie Fitzsimmons, the local’s longtime business manager, said the beer run story had become lore among union members. He called Mr. Donohue to the lectern to read from the book and then announced that Mr. Donohue would be signing books and selling them for $10.
“How much without the signature?” one member yelled, drawing laughs.
Mr. Fitzsimmons, whose three sons work as sandhogs, took over running the local in the mid-1990s from his father, also Richie Fitzsimmons, who was known as the “King of the Sandhogs” and who died in 2006.
“I regret that my dad isn’t here today to hear this, because he didn’t believe one word of this,” Mr. Fitzsimmons said. Mr. Donohue shot back that his own father did not believe it, either.
Mr. Donohue, whose given name is John, grew up in Inwood, a neighborhood in Upper Manhattan that in the late 1960s was largely Irish-American and dense with bars.
As the Vietnam War intensified, Mr. Donohue said, he attended at least two-dozen funerals of young soldiers from Inwood, and grew tired of antiwar demonstrators extending their criticism to American soldiers.
This sentiment was echoed back then by George Lynch, a bartender at Doc Fiddler’s in Inwood. He groused one day in November 1967 that someone should go to Vietnam to give the soldiers a pat on the back and buy them a beer.
Mr. Donohue, who had served four years in the Marine Corps and was working as a merchant seaman, took this to heart and got a job as an oiler on the Drake Victory, a merchant ship taking ammunition from New York to Vietnam. He shipped out with a duffel bag full of beer and what information he could gather on a half-dozen friends stationed in Vietnam.
“It took two months to get there, so I drank all the beer,” he told the sandhogs, adding that he replenished his supply in Vietnam. He arrived in Qui Nhon harbor, where his friend Tom Collins was stationed with the 127th Military Police Company.
The book details how Mr. Donohue, clad in loud civilian clothes, embarked on a long odyssey through Vietnam, using his wiles to visit various military companies to surprise his friends.
This required clever and gutsy navigating through military officialdom and hitching all sorts of rides on jeeps and planes. He practically bumped into one friend, Kevin McLoone, on a road in An Khe.
Mr. McLoone, a former Marine Corps service member, said he was driving a jeep when he came upon Mr. Donohue, who was looking for a ride.
At one point, Mr. Donohue talked his way onto a military mail plane and headed to find Rick Duggan, who lived in the same building in Manhattan as Mr. Donohue growing up. Mr. Duggan was serving as a specialist with the Army First Air Cavalry Division fighting in Khe Sanh.
Mr. Duggan, who went on to become a New York City police lieutenant, said Mr. Donohue had spent a combat-filled night with his company and exchanged fire with enemy soldiers.
Bob Pappas, 73, who was a communications sergeant at an ammunition depot in Long Binh, said he had grown fatalistic after hearing that several of their Inwood buddies were killed in action.
“But seeing Chick gave me a lot of encouragement that I was going to make it back,” Mr. Pappas said. He added that being interviewed for the book helped persuade him to finally begin counseling for post-traumatic stress disorder.
Mr. Donohue said he had initially ordered 120 books to be printed and sold out at three events in recent days, including a meeting of the Narrowbacks, an Irish-American group.
At an American Legion post in Yonkers, he told a room of Vietnam-era veterans that the beer run lasted from December 1967 until “after St. Patrick’s Day” in 1968.
