At the White House, President Trump had proclaimed May 1 to be “Loyalty Day,” a time for Americans to reaffirm their commitment to “individual liberties, to limited government and to the inherent dignity of every human being” with Pledge of Allegiance ceremonies and a display of American flags.
Some Americans had other plans.
In major cities and dozens of smaller communities, protesters marched for immigrants, for workers, for women and for others, grafting their myriad pleas onto a day traditionally reserved for the cause of laborers around the world.
Many surrendered a shift’s pay. Labor and immigrants’ rights activists, criticizing Mr. Trump’s detention and deportation agenda, had called for a general strike on May 1, also known as May Day, to emphasize the overlap between the concerns of unauthorized immigrants — on whom farms, restaurants, construction projects and other industries depend — and those of workers.
“Trump has pitted the U.S. working class against migrant workers and refugees, and so we must strive to create bridges, not bans or walls, to connect our struggles together,” representatives of the International Migrants Alliance wrote in its call to assemble.
One of the marches, in Portland, Ore., was ended by the police after some protesters threw rocks, lead balls, smoke bombs and full cans of Pepsi at officers. The police blamed anarchist groups — which have disrupted other protests since the election — for destroying a police car, attacking officers, damaging windows and starting fires. More than two dozen people were arrested.
But most of the day’s events were peaceful. In Grand Rapids, Mich., more than 4,000 people — twice the number of people who sat out jobs and school days in Grand Rapids on February’s nationwide “Day Without Immigrants” — had turned out in the rain by midafternoon, closing large sections of the city’s Latino community. Bakeries, markets, restaurants and clothing stores had shuttered for the day out of solidarity or for lack of workers.
In Homestead, Fla., where immigrant farmworkers keep fields of zucchini, beans, cherry tomatoes and okra growing, over 1,000 people marched from a park to City Hall. Many were not sure how employers would react when they returned to work on Tuesday. Local activists had planned to accompany farmworkers back to their jobs to offer support.
About 300 people gathered outside a Home Depot near Minneapolis to protest what they said were the anti-labor practices of some janitorial companies that clean stores for Home Depot, Sears and other retailers.
In Austin, Tex., some immigrants’ rights advocates staged a sit-in at the office of Gov. Greg Abbott, a Republican, over legislation that would punish local officials and cities for refusing to help the federal government with deportations. Outside the Immigration and Customs Enforcement office in San Francisco, protesters blocked an intersection and a driveway.
In New York, protesters in Union Square and Washington Square Park waved signs with slogans in Spanish, like “Workers united will never be defeated.” There were more than 30 arrests, mostly for disorderly conduct.
Damian Rodriguez, the owner of First Class Car and Limo Service in Inwood, said his company had given its 400 drivers the option of staying home on Monday morning, and about 20 percent of them accepted.
“We all have family members and acquaintances who are affected, who don’t have their papers and are afraid,” he said.
Still, for at least one limousine driver, taking the day off was simply unaffordable. As he bought coffee and a pastry at a Dominican bakery in Washington Heights, Fernando Garcia, 49, explained that because he was a partner in his company, they all had to contribute equally or the business would suffer.
Rent was due on May 1, he added. “I’m going to work today because without work, who’s going to pay the bills?” he said in Spanish, to a murmur of approval from a bakery worker behind the counter.
As May Day commemorations go, Monday’s turnout was extraordinary. But in a crowded calendar of anti-Trump dissent — after January’s Women’s March, late April’s March for Science and Saturday’s People’s Climate March — the scenes and chants took on the quality of a refrain.
In Los Angeles, tens of thousands of people holding signs declaring “No human is illegal” and “Sanctuary now!” marched about two miles from MacArthur Park to City Hall downtown.
The crowd swelled with members of unions representing janitors, health care workers and hotel employees, as well as members of the Writers Guild of America and other Hollywood unions.
Across the street from City Hall, dozens of police officers separated a few dozen Trump supporters from the protesters as they shouted bitterly at one another.
