Barack Obama vexed his biographers by beating them to his origin story. His memoir “Dreams From My Father” — published in 1995 and reissued a decade later — locked down the narrative of how the son of a white American mother and an absent African father struggled for self-understanding until he embraced an African-American identity and married Michelle Robinson, a charismatic Harvard Law School graduate like himself and a member of Chicago’s small and insular black elite. Critics have often pointed to misstatements, errors of fact and composite characterizations in the book without impeaching its central narrative. But the historian David J. Garrow takes a hard line in “Rising Star: The Making of Barack Obama.” This impressive if gratuitously snarly biography is clearly intended to break the 44th president’s monopoly on his personal narrative.
Garrow argues that “Dreams From My Father” is neither memoir nor autobiography but “a work of historical fiction.” He further accuses the author of inventing a racial identity struggle that never happened and retrofitting his early life story to conform to it. In Garrow’s take-no-prisoners telling, the charismatic president-to-be subordinates his every breath — and his love life — to a politically expedient journey-to-blackness narrative. He seeks evidence from classmates, co-workers and others who claim not to recognize the anguished young Obama put forward in the book. But this approach collides with a well-worn truth about the man — that he was opaque and impenetrable even to the women who aspired to marry him. If Obama concealed his inner life even from those who thought themselves close to him, who can gainsay the version of the identity struggle put forward in his memoir?
Garrow’s exploration of his subject’s sex life brings to mind his monumental civil rights book, “Bearing the Cross: Martin Luther King, Jr., and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference.” That book counterbalanced King’s saintly public persona by revealing the sexually athletic philanderer who dominated his motel-room life. Obama’s love life is dull and uneventful by comparison. “Rising Star” takes him to task for writing three of his early lovers out of his memoir — implying that he did so because they did not fit the journey-to-blackness story line. The journalist David Maraniss introduced two of these girlfriends in his 2012 biography “Barack Obama: The Story.” Garrow credits Maraniss’s reporting, while diminishing it to enhance the importance of his own. He crows about uncovering a third, particularly angry former lover in Sheila Jager, a half-Dutch, half-Japanese woman who was a graduate student in anthropology at the University of Chicago when she lived with the young Obama for nearly two years and hoped to marry him. Jager is incensed that her former lover rolled her into a composite characterization with two other girlfriends — particularly since she helped him write the book by turning over copies of love letters he had written her. And she is offended that the New Yorker editor David Remnick referenced her as an unnamed “white University of Chicago student” in his 2010 biography, “The Bridge: The Life and Rise of Barack Obama.” “Rising Star” offers Jager an opportunity to write herself into Obama’s life story — whether he likes it or not — and she takes full advantage.
This scene seems startling because we think of Obama as preternaturally imperturbable. But when we put aside preconception, the fight and the 20-something Obama’s love life generally show themselves to be utterly ordinary. The complaints from his lovers — that he was emotionally inaccessible and lacked a commitment to forever — are standard-issue as well. The long, drawn-out breakup with Jager — it came to a conclusion in 1991, when Obama was well into a relationship with Robinson — illustrates that he of the tidy memoir lived as messy a love life as anybody else. With that established, one might expect to see Jager ushered off stage. Instead, Garrow makes her a through line of the story and calls on her frequently for observations, not just about her intimate life with the young Obama but on his presidency and his worth as a person. Her assessments — “Something changed in him after we went our separate ways” or “I think the seeds of his future failings were always present in Chicago” — are often referential of their relationship and a spirit of grievance whose headwaters are well known to us.
Sex sells. But this deeply reported work of biography could easily have done without it. “Rising Star” seems to include every human being who came within arm’s length of the young president-to-be. The depth of detail allows the reader to see familiar parts of this story with fresh eyes. Garrow made the inspired decision to open the book on the economically ravaged South Side of Chicago in 1980 — five years before Obama showed up as a novice community organizer — thus giving us a sidewalk-level view of the joblessness, environmental degradation and failing schools that formed day-to-day reality. We see right away what our hero is up against in his altruistic quest to “create change” on the South Side of Chicago — and that he must inevitably fail. This book is a master class in Chicago politics during a time when Harold Washington — the city’s first African-American mayor — struggled to wrest control of the Democratic machine while managing the rising expectations of black Chicagoans who had long been shortchanged by City Hall and who had greeted him as the Messiah. The parade of characters who march across the page include not just well-known people like Richard M. Daley, Jesse Jackson and Carol Moseley Braun but also colorful South Side grifters and political operatives who are rarely heard of outside the Windy City.
“Rising Star” permits the reader to see that Obama’s annoying tendency to cast himself as a mediator who channels the views of others — while submerging his own — grew out of a dysfunctional childhood. His parents essentially abandoned him to be raised primarily by his devoted but deeply unhappy grandparents. Children in such situations can take on precocious maturity as they turn their energies to resolving differences among adults. This book reminds us that the mediator’s pose is often a strategy of concealment. We learn in the acknowledgments, on Page 1,084, that Obama read nearly all of “Rising Star” before publication and argued intensely with Garrow about some of the characterizations — but did so in “off the record” conversations about which the reader is left guessing. What must it have been like to be a fly on the wall in that room?