Go ahead, knee-jerk basketball critics, have your doomsday reaction to the San Antonio Spurs’ stunning loss of Tony Parker. Write them off at your reputational risk.
“To think that would be nuts,” P. J. Carlesimo said when asked if Parker’s potentially career-threatening injury, combined with the fading influence of the 39-year-old Manu Ginobili, one season after the retirement of the great Tim Duncan, could mean the end of the Spurs as we have known them.
The Spurs have pretty much been — with five championships and two decades of regular-season excellence in the books — the N.B.A.’s version of the New England Patriots.
“Absolutely, very similar, and I know that those franchises look at each other that way,” Carlesimo said, affirming the assessment during a telephone interview from Bristol, Conn., on Thursday night, where he was working as a studio analyst for ESPN.
I have known Carlesimo since the mid-1970s, when he was coaching Wagner College and I was working at The Staten Island Advance. Carlesimo would demand that the kitchen remain open at the Roadhouse restaurant until Advance reporters rolled in after finishing game-night stories.
When Carlesimo was attacked and choked by his star guard, Latrell Sprewell, while coaching the Golden State Warriors in December 1997, I took a short walk through my Montclair, N.J., neighborhood to knock on the door of his parents, Pete and Lucy, and offer sympathies.
One other thing we’ve had in common over the years: We are Spurs guys — Carlesimo as a former assistant to Coach Gregg Popovich and, briefly, as team broadcast analyst; me as an unabashed admirer (with too much journalistic pride to say “fan”) of the San Antonio way.
On Thursday, the day after Parker was hurt in a playoff game against the Houston Rockets, Carlesimo wasn’t ready to concede the Spurs’ Western Conference semifinal series to James Harden and company — before they went to Houston on Friday and impressively won Game 3, 103-92, for a two-games-to-one lead.
But he and I readily agreed that in the bigger picture — beyond this season, which never promised late springtime celebration despite 61 victories, only six fewer than the Golden State juggernaut — the Spurs were not in jeopardy.
Would you dismiss Bill Belichick and the Patriots he has coached to five Super Bowl triumphs if Tom Brady could no longer be the poster boy for American male envy? Perhaps you would: Quarterbacks are that important. But while Duncan was the hub and soul of the Spurs for most of a career that began in 1997, he quit last summer with the assurance that his successor, Kawhi Leonard, had seemingly been created from Duncan DNA.
Despite their different positions, that’s how much the 6-foot-7 Leonard and the 6-foot-11 Duncan resemble each other in demeanor and approach, as if Popovich went to the player assembly factory, filled out an order form and had Leonard delivered, no assembly required.
In reality, Popovich and R. C. Buford, the team’s general manager, stole Leonard, the No. 15 pick, in a 2011 draft-night trade with the Indiana Pacers. They got him in exchange for George Hill, which cost Larry Bird, now the Pacers’ former president, any chance of building a champion. The Spurs also acquired Davis Bertans, a 6-foot-10 forward from Latvia who was a second-round pick that year, in the same brilliant deal.
The Spurs think Bertans is a keeper and possibly a late-draft steal reminiscent of Parker, whom they got as a 19-year-old from France with the 28th pick in 2001, and Ginobili, who was swiped with the 57th and next-to-last pick in 1999.
Back to Parker and Ginobili in a bit, but let’s remember that on the level of celestial recruitment, the N.B.A. has become a magnet league — superstars drawing others, especially after championship collaborations in Boston and Miami, with another at Golden State most likely on the horizon.
If nothing else comes out of this season for the Spurs, it will still have been a successful transition from Duncan’s era to Leonard’s, boding well for the future.
The Spurs drew LaMarcus Aldridge to their small, relatively sleepy market as a premier free agent in 2015. With many choices, Pau Gasol bolted Chicago for South Texas last summer.
Given the financial incentives for stars to stay rooted, speculation about moves is cheap. But given that Parker is soon to turn 35, with one year left on his contract and his foreseeable future in doubt, might Chris Paul be willing to separate himself from the Los Angeles Clippers and become the Spurs’ point guard? Might Paul, with a chance to opt out of his contract, prefer to partner with Leonard for a distinct shot at shedding his growing rap of being postseason-challenged?
Parker underwent surgery on Friday to repair a ruptured left quadriceps tendon. No timetable was set for his return. Carlesimo, who is periodically in touch with Popovich, said the Spurs had been encouraged by Parker’s spring resurgence after an unsteady regular season. Whether he comes back next season or not, the Spurs need to get younger and more athletic in the backcourt to compete with the Warriors.
It is no stretch to say the curtain is falling on the French-and-Argentine connection — Parker and Ginobili — that indisputably changed the Spurs from plodding to dashing.
Ten years ago, between Games 1 and 2 of the Spurs’ sweep of LeBron James and the Cleveland Cavaliers in the N.B.A. finals, Popovich was asked a question he was tired of hearing: Why were the Spurs not considered by fans, news media, television and league executives to be sexy enough to sell?
His response was a Popovich classic.
He didn’t. The Spurs’ show went on, and it continues, and as long as Leonard and Popovich are in tandem, don’t turn the channel or the page on them yet.