CEDAR RAPIDS, Iowa — It is still uncertain whether Republicans in Congress will succeed in undoing the Affordable Care Act, but the debate over repealing it may have already done in Midwestern Nice.
It was Tuesday evening, and inside a community college gymnasium, the jeers were hailing down on Representative Rod Blum, a Republican from northeastern Iowa, as he defended his vote for a bill that would reshape health care and repeal much of President Barack Obama’s biggest domestic accomplishment.
Few Republicans are holding in-person town hall events in the wake of the bill’s narrow passage in the House last week, but Mr. Blum’s constituents were not giving him any credit for showing up. They waved red sheets of paper to signal their disapproval and hurled down a chorus of criticism over health care, President Trump’s taxes, the investigations into Russian meddling in the presidential election and the latest bombshell: the firing of the F.B.I. director, James B. Comey.
“I’m not going to over-shout you, so if you want to keep interrupting,” Mr. Blum started to say.
“It’s kind of sad that politics has come to this,” he began again.
Iowans in the crowd said the stakes of the Republican bill to repeal the Affordable Care Act and deeply cut Medicaid were worth shouting about. To some, it was life and death. To conservatives, it was freedom versus a failing bureaucracy.
For Mr. Blum, it was the latest stop in a rocky recess.
On Monday, he walked out of a television interview after being pressed on why his office was checking identification at the door to restrict attendance at the town halls to residents of his district. When the reporter, Josh Scheinblum, asked Mr. Blum whether he would also reject donations from outside his district, Mr. Blum removed his microphone and left the room, trailed by a cluster of children from a local nonprofit who had been surrounding him.
On Tuesday, hundreds of Mr. Blum’s constituents streamed into a gymnasium at Kirkwood Community College, stopping at registration tables to present their identification first. Many said they had come because they were worried: not about themselves, but about whether their children, grandchildren or friends who had diabetes, cancer or mental illness could lose health coverage or face prohibitively high premiums under the Republicans’ plan.
Mr. Blum, a member of the conservative House Freedom Caucus, kicked off the meeting by saying his office had received death threats. He set off a cascade of boos when he said that the Republican health care bill would have no impact on employer health plans, Medicare or Medicaid (it would cut Medicaid by $880 billion over a decade), and would affect only about 12,000 people in Iowa’s First Congressional District who bought their insurance on the individual market.
Of course, angry conservatives did plenty of shouting during town hall meetings when a Democratic-controlled Congress was passing the Affordable Care Act in 2009. And on Tuesday, the jeers ran both ways.
Halfway through the town hall, as constituents rose to ask Mr. Blum about Mr. Trump’s proposed budget cuts or about how coverage of their pre-existing conditions would change, a father named Dale Todd took the microphone and made an impassioned argument on behalf of people like his son, Adam, who has a severe form of epilepsy and relies on Medicaid.
As Mr. Blum listened and Adam, 18, leaned a cheek against his father’s back, a barbed cry directed at Mr. Todd, a former Cedar Rapids city councilman, sailed out from the audience. After Mr. Todd was done telling his story to Mr. Blum, he confronted the man who had taunted him from the audience.
Mr. Todd ducked out of the town hall early to take care of Adam, but the next morning he chewed over the tense exchange.
After the sound and fury were done and people filtered into the night, Donna Winter, 68, a retired social studies teacher and a Democratic voter, stood outside the gymnasium with a new friend from the rally and chatted about her husband, who is a committed Republican, and her concerns about the country she taught students about for 43 years.
