OTTAWA — With their season on the line, the Ottawa Senators found a way to dig a little deeper on Tuesday, rebounding from a humiliating outing two days earlier with a 2-1 victory over the Pittsburgh Penguins that kept them from elimination.
The Senators, who had been routed, 7-0, in Pittsburgh on Sunday, tied the Eastern Conference finals at three games apiece, with Game 7 set for Thursday in Pittsburgh.
Craig Anderson, the Ottawa goaltender who was chased during the first period of the Game 5 loss after allowing four goals, anchored the Senators with 45 saves on Tuesday, the most he has made in the playoffs.
With Anderson keeping the Penguins at bay, Mike Hoffman delivered the winner 1 minute 34 seconds into the third period. Defenseman Fredrik Claesson carried the puck up, then dropped it back to Hoffman and drove to the net to create a screen. Hoffman fired a shot from the top of the face-off circle and tucked it under the crossbar.
“He’s one of the best shooters in the league,” Penguins goaltender Matt Murray said of Hoffman.
Anderson faced a number of talented shooters himself and was forced to make a number of big saves throughout the third as the Senators fought to keep their season alive.
Evgeni Malkin, with his seventh goal of the playoffs, was the only Penguin to beat Anderson. Murray made 28 saves for Pittsburgh.
Ahead of a decisive final game, Penguins Coach Mike Sullivan saw no reason to sound any alarms.
The game was still very much in doubt with 20 minutes remaining at Canadian Tire Centre, with the score tied, 1-1, after an eventful second period. Pittsburgh appeared to have opened the scoring just a little more than three minutes into the second, when Trevor Daley pushed a puck in under Anderson. But the Senators challenged the call, and Daley was ruled to have interfered with Anderson. Still, it did not take long for the Penguins to put the puck back in the net.
Less than two minutes later, Malkin picked up a rebound of his own shot and was able to move the puck from his forehand to his backhand to beat Anderson.
Despite giving up the first goal, the Senators were determined not to unravel like they had on Sunday.
The Senators got their first power play at 11:45 mark of the second period, though it had not been much of an advantage for them of late. Going into the game, Ottawa was 0 for 29 on power plays, having scored no power-play goals since Game 1 of the Eastern Conference semifinals against the Rangers. It had been just one more source of frustration in this series.
Thirty-six seconds into the power play, Ian Cole drew a high-sticking penalty, giving the Senators a two-man advantage for 1:24.
Ottawa took advantage, as Erik Karlsson found Kyle Turris, who passed to Ryan. He was able to beat Murray on the short side with a one-timer to tie the score, and the crowd responded with a roar.
“Don’t want to say it was a turning point, but it was a building point,” Ryan said of his power-play goal.
The Senators may have felt fortunate to get out of the period with the game tied as the Penguins outshot them, 23-10. If not for Anderson, the game — and the series — could have gotten away from them.
