229 pages. W.W Norton & Company. $26.95.
Truck driving may be dangerous, and truck driving may be stressful, but Finn Murphy is here to tell you that of all species of truckers driving all species of trucks, it’s the long-distance drivers of moving vans who have it worst. You think easing a 53-foot rig through snowy Loveland Pass high in the Rockies requires steel-reinforced nerves? Ha! Here’s what requires a cast-iron stomach and the imperturbability of a Navy SEAL: Backing that rig into the twisting driveway of some starter castle in Aspen, Colo., or Greenwich, Conn., without getting stuck or crushing the new owners’ geraniums.
O.K. Perhaps that’s not fair. But Murphy, the author of “The Long Haul: A Trucker’s Tales of Life on the Road,” is not here to make friends. His point is that these long-distance movers need superb navigational skills and spatial sense in addition to the usual trucking expertise. They need to be able to drive on both the cobblestone streets of Manhattan and the back roads of rural Virginia; they need to drive gracefully in reverse; they need to know how to do U-turns in spaces the size of a teacup.
Other terms that will prove catnip for lovers of professional slang: bobtailing, deadheading, lollipops. (Driving a tractor without a trailer; driving an empty truck; those tiny green mile markers freckling the interstate.) Hitting a low bridge is “getting a haircut.” “Chicken chokers” are truckers who move animals, “parking lot attendants” are truckers who move cars, and “suicide jockeys” are truckers who move hazardous materials. Fellows like Murphy are called bedbuggers; and their trucks, roach coaches.
“The Long Haul” can be almost shamefully enjoyable, allowing readers to have their fix of “fabulous-life-of” porn and class outrage, too. You wouldn’t believe the downpour of indignities and diminishments Murphy has weathered over the years — being videotaped from one room to the next, being banished to distant porta-potties when functional bathrooms were steps away. One client — an ex-banker from an ex-bank — was so awful that Murphy ordered his crew to install the guy’s eight gravestones of Qing dynasty emperors upside down.
How Murphy came to read Chinese is another story, and it’s inseparable from the strengths and weaknesses of this memoir.
As he himself says, Murphy does not meet your average trucker profile. He was raised in Cos Cob, a comfortable suburb of Connecticut and spent three years at Colby College before dropping out to drive a truck. (Hence the elementary Chinese. He studied it for a semester.) He’s an amateur sociologist and a philosopher, opining on such topics as the origins of the “anti-urban, anti-statist” trucker culture and the transcendent pointlessness of material possessions.
Yet there’s a huge question at the heart of Murphy’s memoir, and it’s one he never answers: How did a guy like him — who falls asleep reading Jane Austen, who has a crush on Terry Gross — become a long-haul mover?
Murphy gives us a partial explanation. He was a restless adolescent. “Many young male neurotics find out early that hard labor is salve for an overactive mind,” he writes. Moving furniture gave him a measure of self-determination he badly craved. A whole subset of truckers, he notes, are tumbleweeds, preferring to “go through life on an anonymous surface.” They’re ghosts in snakeskin boots.
What the reader doesn’t realize, at least for a long while, is that Murphy is a member of that subset. Midway through “The Long Haul,” he does something disconcerting and entirely unexpected: He gives up driving. For more than 20 years, if I’m calculating correctly. And he never says why.
Now, I’m not saying this omission is on par with the 18½ missing minutes of conversation between Richard Nixon and H. R. Haldeman. But it does seem like a literary crime of some sort. It makes you wonder, at any rate, whether those years contain the real story about this man. He alludes to “an avalanche of poor decisions,” though we never learn what they were. We simply know that at 51, Murphy found himself in a city out West where he knew no one and had “no job, no plans, no nothing,” and wanted back in his truck.
At just the moment our engagement with Murphy should deepen, it shallows. He gets his second act. But we never learn what went wrong in Act I.
And Murphy is clearly conflicted about class, justifiably furious at the rich executives who condescend to him but equally condescending to his trucker brethren who earn far less than he does. (Which, in a good year, can be as much as $250,000.) Murphy senses, probably correctly, that their preoccupation with the status of their vehicles is a kind of anxious compensation for low wages.
What redeems this book, time and time again, are the stories Murphy tells. My goodness, how astonishing they are, and how moving, and how funny, and how just plain weird. Wait until you get to the one about the unlikely polygamist. Or the client who dies, mid-move. The next time you think of your movers as invisible, remember: They see all of your secrets. They know exactly who you are.