Most New Yorkers, seeing a parking ticket on their car windows, wince, then curse, maybe mutter a serenity prayer. Giancarlo De Lellis, a home improvement contractor with jobs in Manhattan, has numbed himself.
Prayers and profanity aside, businesses with big piles of tickets occasionally hire brokers who deal with them in bulk before city administrative judges. Park at a hydrant? No reduction. In a truck zone? That might be dropped.
As Mr. De Lellis, 32, grew a family business from its base in Queens and on Long Island into Manhattan, he needed help managing the summonses.
Three years ago, he hired as his representative one Emmanuel Amofah, a former parking ticket judge, the author of a $40 book on how to beat tickets, and the operator of ParkingTicketBusters.com, which would contest summonses for clients.
For a time, it was a great success.
Mr. Amofah won the dismissal of hundreds of tickets issued to De Lellis vehicles, collecting a fee of 20 percent of the original fine. Rather than go to the bulk ticket courtroom, Mr. Amofah fought each ticket by email, submitting a defense online. He lost on only a few tickets, which Mr. De Lellis paid.
Last autumn, a parking ticket judge noticed that the proof in one case looked suspicious, and sent it to the fraud division for parking violations in the city’s Department of Finance. A meter receipt seemed to show that Mr. De Lellis had, in fact, paid the meter at the very time that the ticket was issued.
Actually, the receipt had been doctored. So had hundreds more submitted by Mr. Amofah on behalf of Mr. De Lellis and other clients, according to Ellen Young Fein, director of legal affairs for the parking division. Real receipts were altered to cover the time and date of the tickets. But an investigation found they had been issued by machines not in service at the relevant time, or showed rates not charged at those meters, or more hours than were available.
Next year, the city expects to collect $631 million in parking fines, up 15 percent from 2014; the haul from fines is three times as much as what the city gets from legal parking at meters.
With such stakes, the parking fraud division has developed formidable antennas. For instance, a large food distribution company based in New Jersey disguised the true identity of its trucks by changing the insignia on the grills and bumpers to other makes and models, the motor vehicle equivalent of wearing a wig and fake beard to a bank robbery. Parking tickets cited the bogus make and model. Later, the food company would argue that the tickets were defective and produce the trucks’ registration papers, which showed their real provenance. Eventually, this string of unlikely victories turned up on a computer report, and city lawyers recovered $680,000.
The meter receipt scheme evaded detection because each ticket was disputed separately online, with cases dispersed among as many as 200 judges.
“Obviously, if you show up with 100 muni-meter receipts and say your street officers overlooked these, they are going to say this is absolutely impossible,” Mr. De Lellis said.
But who is on the hook for the tickets that should have been paid — and the stiff penalties for a scam? Ms. Young Fein says the answer in state law is unequivocal: the owner of the vehicle, not an agent or broker. A $65 ticket becomes a $345 one.
But, Mr. De Lellis protests, he had nothing to do with the scheme. The first he knew of it, he said, was when the city notified him in November.
His tickets for three years, originally $25,400, would cost $132,038 with penalties counted.
Suddenly, Mr. Amofah dropped out of touch. All their dealings had been by email, Mr. De Lellis said; there was a weekly invoice showing the tickets dismissed, and others that he had to pay. “He never showed us what his evidence was that was sent to the city,” Mr. De Lellis said. (Mr. Amofah could not be reached by phone or email this week.) A city program now allows businesses with fleets of vehicles to pay tickets in bulk at set rates.
Mr. De Lellis said he would gladly pay the full cost, but that fraud penalties would ruin him.
Ms. Young Fein said that if vehicle owners could pin the blame for fraud on agents, they would have nothing to lose by going to unscrupulous ones.
“It’s not fair to the people who activate the meters and park the way they’re supposed to,” she said.
The experience has eaten away at Mr. De Lellis’s serenity about tickets. “I’m trying to defend myself to the death,” he said.