• John O. Brennan, the former director of the C.I.A., said publicly for the first time Tuesday that he was concerned about possible ties between Russia and the Trump campaign.
• President Trump asked two top intelligence officials to deny the existence of any evidence of collusion between his campaign and Russia, former officials said. Both of the intelligence officials testified before lawmakers on Tuesday.
The former C.I.A. chief speaks publicly about his worries.
Mr. Brennan, the former C.I.A. director, said Tuesday that he became concerned last year that the Russian government was trying to influence members of the Trump campaign to act — wittingly or unwittingly — on Moscow’s behalf.
He said he left office in January with many unanswered questions about the Russian influence operation. Intelligence officials have said Russia tried to tip the election toward Mr. Trump.
Mr. Brennan became so concerned last summer about signs of Russian election meddling that he held urgent, classified briefings for eight senior members of Congress, speaking with some of them over secure phone lines while they were on recess. In those conversations, he told lawmakers there was evidence that Russia was working to elect Mr. Trump president.
Mr. Brennan was also one of a handful of officials who briefed both President Barack Obama and Mr. Trump in January on a broad intelligence community report revealing that President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia had personally ordered an “influence campaign” targeting the presidential election.
Trump asked two intelligence chiefs to push back on the inquiry, officials say.
Mr. Trump asked two of the country’s top intelligence officials to make public statements saying there was no evidence of collusion between his campaign and Russian officials, hoping to undercut an F.B.I. investigation into meddling by Russia in the 2016 presidential election, two former American officials said.
The requests were made in late March to Dan Coats, the director of national intelligence, and Adm. Michael S. Rogers, the chief of the National Security Agency. Both men rebuffed the request, which they saw as an inappropriate effort to inject politics into an intelligence and law enforcement matter, the former officials said.
Days before, James B. Comey, then the F.B.I. director, had publicly acknowledged for the first time that the bureau was running a broad counterintelligence investigation into Russia’s interference in the presidential campaign and any possible collusion between associates of Mr. Trump and Russian officials. The revelation stung Mr. Trump, who has repeatedly said there was no collusion, and he wanted Mr. Coats and Admiral Rogers to publicly back him.
On the day of Mr. Comey’s hearing, a call from the White House switchboard came in to Mr. Coats’s office with a request to speak to the director, a former intelligence official said. Calls from the switchboard are usually from the highest officials at the White House — the president, the vice president or the national security adviser.
Mr. Coats took the call. The official would not confirm what was discussed.
Mr. Trump’s requests to Mr. Coats and Admiral Rogers were first reported by The Washington Post.
Coats declines to detail conversations with Trump.
Senator John McCain of Arizona, the Republican chairman of the Armed Services Committee, opened questioning at a hearing Tuesday by asking Mr. Coats about Mr. Trump’s request to publicly dispute that any evidence exists of collusion between the Trump campaign and Russia.
“Lives are at stake in many instances, and leaks jeopardize those lives,” Mr. Coats said.
More Flynn documents are being subpoenaed.
The Senate Intelligence Committee issued subpoenas Tuesday for documents from two businesses owned by Michael T. Flynn, Mr. Trump’s former national security adviser, the committee’s senior members said.
The move, coming the day after Mr. Flynn rejected the panel’s subpoena for any emails or other records of any dealings with Russians, escalates his standoff with Senate investigators looking into potential collusion between Mr. Trump’s associates and Russian officials.
Senator Richard M. Burr of North Carolina, the committee’s Republican chairman, said panel members had also written back to Mr. Flynn’s legal team, requesting clarity about whether the Fifth Amendment could indeed shield an individual from producing documents, as well as challenging his claim that the committee’s previous requests for documents lacked specificity.
Mr. Burr left open the possibility of holding Mr. Flynn in contempt of Congress.
But the committee members are not ready to take that step, Mr. Burr said, adding that they want to give Mr. Flynn the opportunity he requested to tell his story.
Senator Mark Warner of Virginia, the panel’s top Democrat, said the subpoenas were for the firms Flynn Intel LLC and Flynn Intel Incorporated.
Flynn Intel Group was hired by a Turkish-American businessman to represent Turkish interests in a dispute with the United States government last year, while Mr. Flynn was advising the Trump campaign. He was paid more than $500,000. Mr. Flynn, who initially did not file the paperwork to disclose this connection, belatedly registered with the government as a foreign agent after being forced out of the Trump administration.
Official says Russia may have had two aims.
One of the enduring questions about Russia’s interference in the 2016 presidential election is whether the Russian government wanted to simply hurt Hillary Clinton or was actively trying to secure the election of Mr. Trump.
Mr. Putin had long viewed Ms. Clinton as an implacable foe, he explained, and saw in Mr. Trump a businessman who might take a softer line on Russia.
“They felt that Mr. Trump, being a bit of an outsider, that they in the past had some good relations with businessmen who happened to elevate into positions of government authority,” Mr. Brennan said.
“They clearly had a more favorable view toward Mr. Trump and actions they were taking were trying to increase his prospects, even though they probably thought they were not that great,” he said.
“They anticipated that Secretary Clinton was going to win the election, and I believe they tried to damage and bloody her before the election,” Mr. Brennan said.
Ethics experts clear Mueller as the special counsel.
The Trump administration said Tuesday that ethics experts had decided that Robert S. Mueller III, the special counsel overseeing the federal investigation into possible Russian interference in the election, could carry out the inquiry even though his former law firm represents some of Mr. Trump’s family members and his former campaign chairman.
The firm, WilmerHale, represents Paul Manafort, the former Trump campaign chairman, and Mr. Trump’s daughter Ivanka and son-in-law, Jared Kushner. While Mr. Mueller did not personally represent them, Reuters reported that the White House was considering using conflict-of-interest rules to undermine the investigation.
Mr. Mueller resigned his role as a partner at WilmerHale to become the special counsel.
“Department ethics experts have reviewed the matters and determined that Mr. Mueller’s participation in the matters assigned to him is appropriate,” the statement said.
Russia may try to interfere in 2018 elections, a former C.I.A. director warns.
He said Russia would continue to try to “exploit elections,” but was also looking at other targets.
Russian intelligence was aggressively trying to collect intelligence about prominent Americans both inside and outside the government, Mr. Brennan said. The Russians would use whatever information they obtained to gain influence over individuals who help shape American opinion.