MANCHESTER, England — The stretch of Wilmslow Road that runs through the Rusholme neighborhood, south of the city center, is known as the Curry Mile, thanks to the Indian and Pakistani restaurants that have been here for decades.
But that label no longer seems to do the place justice.
Kurdish barbers sit next to stores selling shimmering saris. An Islamic bookstore faces a Jamaican supermarket. The air carries the sweet scent of shisha, emanating from cafes named after Damascus and Dubai. The food is from Tunisia, Vietnam and all points in between. These few blocks contain a whole world.
And part of that world are the 10,000 or so Libyans in Manchester, the largest community outside Libya. Many arrived here to escape Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi’s brutal regime and have been here for decades, a quiet presence in the city, well woven into Manchester’s fabric.
Now, a British citizen of Libyan descent, Salman Abedi, has inflicted the most grievous pain on the place that raised him. On Monday night, he detonated a bomb full of nails, bolts and ball bearings at the Manchester Arena, killing 22 people and injuring dozens more.
He attacked not just a concert venue. He attacked a city and its sense of self as the proudly cosmopolitan, multicultural capital of northern England.
The Manchester still reeling from Monday night’s terrorist attack is not the decaying postindustrial wasteland of the 1970s. Nor is it the Ecstasy-fueled party city that emerged a decade later, or the gang-ridden gun crime capital of Britain that lodged itself in the popular imagination at the turn of the century.
It is none of those things and all of those things. It is the gleaming glass towers of Spinningfields and the hipster bars of the Northern Quarter, the leafy suburbs of Chorlton and Didsbury, the high-rises of Hulme and the uneasy, red brick streets of Moss Side.
It is a city of 530,000 people — in a metropolitan area of 2.5 million — many of them now wondering whether the city really is the exotic, polyglot, polychrome place they believe it to be. It is smaller than London, of course, and perhaps not as rich or as sophisticated, or as famous, but no less confident or international.
It is that open-mindedness that first brought Libyans here, in search of their own haven. “People often call it Libya’s second capital,” said Hashem Ben Ghalbon, a Libyan who has lived here since 1976 and who was, for decades, one of the leading figures in the dissident movement based in Manchester after escaping Colonel Qaddafi’s rule.
When he first came, he said, he found “no more than a hundred” of his countrymen.
He works in a Lebanese restaurant called Beirut on the Curry Mile. There are no Libyan restaurants or bars nearby, nor are there shops or community centers dotted around the city — no physical sign at all, in fact, of a thriving expatriate culture.
“There are a lot of us here, but we don’t live in the same place, like the Jewish community,” said Tariq Olilish, 18, a native Libyan raised in Manchester.
Mr. Ben Ghalbon suggested that could be explained by the circumstances of their arrival. Like him, many who came to Manchester were dissidents fleeing Colonel Qaddafi’s repression.
They came, he said, because it was “cheaper than London, life was not so fast, but it was still cosmopolitan and welcoming,” and it became a hive of anti-Qaddafi activity. Mr. Ben Ghalbon and his brother, Mohamed, founded the Libyan Constitutional Union, an activist group dedicated to Colonel Qaddafi’s removal and the restoration of Libya’s Constitution.
Among the exiles, though, there were countless schisms. Mr. Ben Ghalbon said some were “more religious” than others, and some had differing tribal loyalties. “We were not well integrated among ourselves,” he said.
Even like-minded dissidents were afraid to congregate, unsure who was a fellow traveler and who was a secret agent for Colonel Qaddafi. For “security,” Mr. Ben Ghalbon said, it was better to stay apart, to blend in and to disappear.
The people of Manchester, Mancunians — derived from Mancunium, the Latin name for the Roman settlement here — are “a family,” he said.
Mr. Olilish described the people of Manchester as kind and tolerant, saying he always felt part of the community and never felt discriminated against.
That open-mindedness has remained unchanged, even as the city’s outward appearance, and its public perception, have shifted over the decades the Libyans have been here.
By the time Mr. Olilish came, in 2002, it was Britain’s party town, known as Madchester, home of the Hacienda nightclub and the gay bars of Canal Street, the Stone Roses and the Happy Mondays.
“All Manchester is missing,” the Stone Roses lead singer, Ian Brown, said, “is a beach.” In 1993, the city felt sufficiently sure of itself to make a bid to host the 2000 Olympics.
It remodeled itself after 1996, when a devastating truck bombing by the Irish Republican Army obliterated parts of the city center and shook the area to its core. In the early years of the 21st century, it recovered from a spate of spiraling gun crime — Madchester becoming Gunchester — to become a byword for urban regeneration.
When the British government announced its plan, in 2010, to build a “Northern Powerhouse” to rebalance the country’s economy away from London, Manchester sat at its center.
This time, the damage to the city is emotional more than structural.
Yet, in the days after the attack, the first shoots of a new civic identity have emerged to match the glimmering cityscape Manchester seems to be developing, one proud not just of what the city once was but what it has become: a multicultural melting pot, open to all, a Rusholme on a grand scale.
