One of the finest and least-known books about Richard M. Nixon’s presidency and the shrinking American soul is, of all things, a nonpolitician’s memoir: Charles L. Mee Jr.’s “A Visit to Haldeman and Other States of Mind,” first published by M. Evans & Company in 1977.
It’s a moody, patriotic, paranoid (“When politics goes berserk,” Mee writes, “we all go mad”), unbuttoned and deeply literate book about one man’s search for what went wrong with the American experiment, and what still might be worth upholding and defending in our politics. It’s never felt more relevant.
It reads like a subversive civics class written by Michael Kinsley by way of Charles Portis, Warren Zevon, Garry Trudeau’s Mike Doonesbury and the madcap 1960s underground journalist Raymond Mungo. It’s a short, strange trip.
Mee was and is — now in his late 70s, he’s a professor of theater at Columbia University — a complicated cat. He was in his 30s when he wrote “A Visit to Haldeman.” He’d already composed plays, books of history (“Meeting at Potsdam,” published in 1975, was a main selection of the Literary Guild) and had been the editor of magazines including Horizon and Playbill, the theater guide.
He was a twice-divorced Harvard graduate, a proto-hippie, a polio survivor and the co-founder and chairman of the National Committee on the Presidency, which worked for Nixon’s impeachment. He racked up big bar tabs at Elaine’s.
H. R. Haldeman, Nixon’s former chief of staff, his Reince Priebus, reached out to Mee and suggested they work on a book together. Mee turned this odd idea over in his mind. He began to think that if he could stare “the old malefactor” in the eye, he might find some clues about what happened to America.
This sort of thing, stirring though it may be, can take you only so far. It’s a visit to the op-ed page. “A Visit to Haldeman” works because Mee has such a wily mind, febrile imagination and casually intense confessional voice.
The theater director André Gregory makes a cameo appearance. He has “the energetic look of a Rasputin who took vitamin B12” and buys airline tickets for every day of the week to Rio de Janeiro, just in case nuclear missiles begin to fly.
Like Zevon’s narrator, Mee is on a quest. (He does eventually meet Haldeman; the details aren’t worth spoiling here.) It’s one that takes him back to his own Midwestern childhood. He lingers especially on the polio that nearly killed him.
“A Visit to Haldeman” has other champions, notably the critic Greil Marcus. But I’ve yet to meet anyone who’s read it. It’s a pessimistic book that nonetheless bends toward optimism, and it is a tonic for sore hearts and minds.