The news cycle this week felt like a cyclone, with never-ending scoops tossed at unsuspecting readers from multiple outlets at all hours. The first of these bombshells landed in the early evening on Monday from The Washington Post, which reported that President Trump had revealed highly classified intelligence to the Russian foreign minister and ambassador. Moreover, the story noted, the intelligence was not Trump’s to provide: It had been given to the United States by an intelligence-sharing partner that stipulated the information must not be shared with others, let alone an adversary.
The following morning, Michael Barbaro, the host of the Times podcast “The Daily,” asked Matthew Rosenberg, the story’s lead reporter, which ally shared the intelligence.
“We’re not saying,” Rosenberg said.
“For a set of editorial or national security reasons?” Barbaro asked.
Yet by that afternoon, The Times did name the ally: Israel.
The reversal befuddled a number of readers.
Why did the Times ultimately reveal that Israel was the source of the intelligence when the crux of the initial story was that President Trump’s leak of info was so damaging because it made it possible for the Russians to figure out who the source was? Indeed, on the morning podcast the reporter, who seemed to know the source, was specifically not revealing it.
Leslie Werstein Hann, Glen Gardner, N.J.
We asked Joe Kahn, the managing editor, to help clarify The Times’s thinking.
It’s a fair question. We did in fact hold off naming Israel as the source of the intelligence the first day. The second day several reporters pressed for answers as to why we should hold off. The answers we were given by several senior officials were boilerplate and off the record. We asked for greater detail about the ways this information could cause problems and no detail was forthcoming. While we named Israel as the source, we did not discuss specifics of how the intelligence was gathered. So there were unconvincing reasons for not publishing. There were also convincing reasons in favor of publishing. For one, Israel is particularly wary of Russia, which has close relationships with Iran and Syria, avowed enemies of Israel. Second, Trump is on his way to Israel for his first major overseas trip. So for reasons involving diplomacy and relations with a crucial ally, we considered the fact that Israel was the source to be newsworthy and in the public interest.
The public editor’s take: I agree. It’s a good question and a helpful response. It’s hard to withhold relevant information if the government isn’t providing a compelling reason to do so.
For several years, The Times has put out a call for high school seniors to submit their college application essays that focused on money, work and class. This year’s selection, chosen by the Your Money columnist, Ron Lieber, was published last Friday, packaged in two articles: one announcing the five students, the other presenting their essays. Except only four of those essays appeared in that article — all of which were from white students — while the other appeared on The Times’s new Snapchat Discover.
Over the weekend, several readers wrote in to note that the optics might indicate the need for a more wide-reaching call out.
This year’s selection of 4 essays on money, work and class were lovely. All 4 writers were white. Only one even mentioned race. Last year’s selection featured 3 white Anglo contributors and one Latina one. This cannot possibly reflect the college-bound population that thinks and writes about money, work and class. Maybe it’s time for the NYT to improve its recruitment and outreach so that the published essays show something about the actual reality of young people.
Ghita Schwarz, Brooklyn, N.Y.
We asked Lieber for a response.
Thanks for reading, and thanks for asking. We read and judge all the submissions without looking at the students’ names, genders, hometowns or the school they plan to attend. We also do not ask for pictures with the submissions or ask about race, though it sometimes comes up in the essay. Over the five years that we’ve been doing this, 12 of the 23 writers appear to have been people of color. We ran five essays this year, not four, and as best we can tell, one is a person of color (while another is the son of refugees). We share the goal of presenting a broad range of perspectives and have already committed to doing more and different outreach next year to attract an even more diverse pool of writers. As someone who has learned just as much from readers over the years as I have from sources, I’d welcome suggestions on how best to do this — please write to me at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| with any and all ideas.
The public editor’s take: Two reactions. First, why not run all five student essays in the pages of The Times, even if one appears on Snapchat as well? That way, readers who went directly to the essays would have seen all the winners, not four white faces. Second, kudos to Lieber for doing a call-out to reach a more diverse pool of applicants. And here’s hoping for more diversity next year.
When Bret Stephens joined The Times last month, hundreds of readers wrote in threatening to cancel their subscriptions, as we have chronicled in the Friday mailbag. Soon after, the public editor, addressing Stephens’s hiring in a column, noted that “relatively few” actually canceled.
Then, last Friday, The Times’s publisher, Arthur O. Sulzberger Jr., sent a personal appeal to subscribers who canceled their subscriptions because of the hiring.
This week, prompted by the publisher’s letter, several readers asked us to clarify how many readers had actually canceled their subscriptions.
MSNBC’s Christopher Hayes has tweeted, “This suggests to me that a lot of people actually cancelled their subscriptions” over the hiring of climate change denier Bret Stephens. Times publisher Sulzberger has sent out an email to all Times readers who have cancelled their subscriptions to The Times, suggesting that many have, indeed, cancelled their subscriptions since Bret Stephens was hired. Yet you wrote that “relatively few” subscribers have actually cancelled their subscriptions. Have only a “relatively few” cancelled their subscriptions? Or is Chris Hayes correct, and The Times has experienced a flood of cancellations over Stephens’ hiring.
Sean Goldrick, Riverside, Conn.
On that note, have a good weekend, everybody.