Baryshnikov Arts Center, 450 W. 37th St.
There was John Sex, the python-hugging entertainer who credited his sky-high hairdo to “Dippity-do, Aqua Net, egg whites, beer and semen.” And David, a No-Wave obsessive who cataloged every band that played the late-night clubs. And Elaine, a dancer and baby sitter and house sitter and artist’s model.
These are the “unfamous legends” of “Radicals in Miniature,” a furtive heartbreaker of a piece at the Baryshnikov Arts Center, created and performed by Ain Gordon, with the help of the musician Josh Quillen and a gallant assist from the stage manager Ed Fitzgerald. On a set dotted with a dozen monitors and tidily littered with rows of Starbucks coffee cups, Mr. Gordon offers an elegy for the men and women, now dead, who populated the electric, ungentrified New York that he knew in the 1970s and ’80s.
Mr. Gordon is a writer and performer with a predilection for the “also pictured” and the “also ran,” people whose names remain unboldfaced. If “Radicals in Miniature” is a kind of hagiography, these saints are very minor. Most of the people described were artists of limited renown and scant gifts. (The exception: a genius accountant.) “Is talent the one question?” Mr. Gordon wonders.
The talents of Mr. Gordon, a three-time Obie winner and the son of the choreographer David Gordon and the dancer Valda Setterfield, have rarely been in doubt. His style is intense, sardonic, philosophical, with a tendency to skitter away from the spotlight even as he places himself center stage.
Here, dressed entirely in black and topped with a springy thatch of salt-and-pepper hair, he performs portraits of the people he knew in adolescence. He is aided by photos and ephemera, displayed by Mr. Fitzgerald, and oddly graceful percussive scoring from Mr. Quillen, a composer and steel drum performer who also steps forward to offer his own convoluted reminiscences.
The people Mr. Gordon portrays weren’t successful or all that skilled, but they were around while he was learning what an artist is and does, and how a gay man lives and dies. By telling their stories — in alliterative, associative prose that can sound a lot like poetry — Mr. Gordon is, of course, telling his own. This is autobiography disguised as séance, masquerading as eulogy, camouflaged as performance.
As performance, it could use more order and less fidgeting. “Radicals in Miniature” works best when Mr. Gordon shakes off intellectual notions and formal concerns and quietly sings a snatch of disco.
