CHICAGO — Enter the new American Writers Museum, which opens here on May 16, and you find yourself standing under a canopy of dead trees, in the form of a rippling, color-coordinated cloud of books bolted to the ceiling.
But take a sharp right into a small gallery, and you’re standing in the middle of a small grove of exotic live ones.
“One of the things we got asked a lot when we started was whether the museum was going to be an athenaeum, with leather chairs and lots of oak,” Andrew Anway, its lead designer, said, standing near a thicket of potted palms, part of an immersive temporary installation inspired by the nature poetry (and Hawaiian garden) of W. S. Merwin.
Thoreau had his cabin; Emily Dickinson had her bedroom; and now America will have what organizers are saying is the first museum dedicated to the collective accomplishments of the nation’s writers.
But rather than a temple to solitary creation, the nearly 11,000 square feet of galleries — housed on the second floor of an office building on North Michigan Avenue, not far from top tourist draws like the Art Institute and Millennium Park — might be seen as a convivial shared apartment.
Instead of manuscripts and first editions, there are interactive touch screens and high-tech multimedia installations galore, like a mesmerizing “Word Waterfall,” in which a wall of densely packed, seemingly random words is revealed, through a constantly looping light projection, to contain resonant literary quotations.
It’s a treasure that seems perfectly matched to the museum’s populist, D.I.Y. spirit — and not just because it’s displayed near a table of vintage typewriters, loaded with paper and ready for visitors to use.
The museum is the brainchild of Malcolm O’Hagan, a retired executive from the Washington, D.C., area. He visited the Dublin Writers Museum on a visit to his native Ireland eight years ago and found himself wondering why there was nothing similar in the United States.
One crucial decision was including only dead writers in the permanent exhibitions, leaving living ones to the museum’s temporary shows and live events. Mr. O’Hagan also decided not to hire a permanent curator, instead relying on a core “content leadership team” of a half-dozen and around 50 subject experts who advised Mr. Anway’s team.
And then there was the name, which won out over the more staid Museum of American Literature.
The populist approach, and emphasis on literature’s social relevance and “relatability,” might not sit well in literary and academic circles. But Max Rudin, the publisher of the Library of America and a member of the content leadership team, said it fit the American literary tradition itself.
Bored by the parade of greats, or just looking for a quicker hit? That “Surprise Bookshelf” is just opposite, offering short glosses on a democratic jumble of 100 pieces of “memorable writing,” including Tupac Shakur’s “Dear Mama,” Susan Sontag’s “Against Interpretation” and Timex’s “Takes a licking and keeps on ticking” advertising slogan.
There’s also a wall featuring quotations about writing from Octavia Butler, Henry Miller and others, and potted writing lessons (“One snappy verb outweighs a pile of adjectives”), illustrated with interactive features like a “do-it-yourself dialogue generator.” A touch-screen grid lets you match your habits — do you prefer brownies or daiquiris as fuel? writing in hotels or in the open air? — to those of the greats.
“The idea is to inspire people to do their own writing,” Mr. Cranston said.
Visitors have to dig to get past the overall mood of inspirational uplift and moral progress and find knottier currents. Those who skip Ms. Corrigan’s video commentary on literary experimentalism, for example, may not realize that “Lolita” is more than a novel that “hinges on a road trip — a classic American genre — and riffs on motel and teen culture,” as the brief wall text dedicated to Vladimir Nabokov puts it.
And there’s little indication that literature has been the source of passionate contention — including over what literature is for, and which writers belong in a museum like this, anyway.
Mr. Anway said he would be “shocked” if the museum’s emphases and exclusions didn’t generate arguments. But it is open to revision, he said, just like American literature itself.
