As teenagers make plans for the summer, several questions pop up. What do they want to do? Do they need to make money?
To these we should add a question that might not always jump to mind: Will they have a chance to learn from a mentor?
David Cruz was 15 when he connected with a counselor at an after-school program in East Palo Alto, Calif.
Mr. Cruz, the son of a Mexican immigrant, credits his mentor, Karla Monterroso, who was a manager at the program, College Track, with making a critical difference in his life.
To try to give back, Mr. Cruz now volunteers at his local Boys and Girls Club. “I had no male role models growing up; that’s who I am now for my community,” he said.
Not every teenager needs or wants that level of mentoring, but there is evidence that mentors, even more than parents, contribute to adolescents’ self-esteem.
Teenagers can be quick to discount praise from their parents as tainted by obligation or bias. But meaningful feedback from adults outside the family can help catalyze adolescent growth, according to recent research by Belle Liang, a professor of psychology at Boston College.
Young teenagers who connect with empowering adults outside of their families — whether through volunteering, paid work, youth programs or religious communities — go on to be less reckless and enjoy higher levels of well-being. Even when previous levels of risk-taking and psychological health are taken into account, the association between early mentoring and later thriving persists.
Having a supportive relationship with an adult outside the family has also been tied to increased life-satisfaction among teenagers.
Dr. Liang recommended that teenagers making summer plans ask, “whom will I be interacting with and how will they be working with me?” They might also look into whether they will be doing the same thing all summer, or might have opportunities and support to learn new skills. “A positive mentoring experience will help teenagers move further along in figuring out what they are good at, what they love, and what they want to do,” she said.
It can also be easier for adolescents to hear hard feedback from adults who aren’t their parents or teachers. A supervisor who encourages a 16-year-old to double-check his work for errors will almost certainly run into a less defensive response than a parent offering the same suggestion. And I’ll admit that in my psychotherapy practice a decent percentage of what I say to adolescents repeats what their folks have already said to them. Few channels contain more emotional noise than those between teenagers and their parents. The comparatively neutral relationship I have with the young people in my practice simply helps my signal get through.
If as adults we ourselves happen to be in the company of other people’s teenagers this summer — or during any other season — there are deliberate steps we can take to connect with them. Dr. Spencer’s research shows that mentoring relationships flourish when adults are authentic and empathic, when they are at ease with adolescents and go out of their way to understand a teenager’s perspective.
“Listen to what they say and show them that you remember what they’ve told you,” said Peter Scales, a psychologist and senior fellow at the Search Institute, a nonprofit focusing on youth development. He added that adults should treat teenagers with the respect we would offer our own adult peers.
