Le Coucou in New York, which opened a little less than a year ago, was named Best New Restaurant on Monday at the James Beard Foundation’s annual award ceremony in Chicago.
Le Coucou’s chef, Daniel Rose, is a Chicago native with restaurants in Paris. In a three-star review of the French restaurant in November, Pete Wells of The New York Times described Mr. Rose’s sauces as dynamic, with precise and rewarding flavors. Mr. Rose owns Le Coucou with Stephen Starr, who has restaurants in New York, Paris and Philadelphia, and was named Outstanding Restaurateur.
Michael Solomonov, the chef and owner of Zahav in Philadelphia and Dizengoff in New York’s Chelsea Market, was this year’s Outstanding Chef.
From New York, Ghaya Oliveira of Daniel was named Outstanding Pastry Chef, and Blue Hill at Stone Barns was recognized for Outstanding Service. Marco Canora of Hearth won the regional award for Best Chef in New York City.
Zachary Engel of Shaya in New Orleans was named Rising Star Chef of the Year. Like Mr. Solomonov, he specializes in modern Israeli cuisine. New Orleans also took the award for Outstanding Bar Program, for Arnaud’s French 75 Bar, and for Best Chef in the South, Rebecca Wilcomb of Herbsaint.
Topolobampo of Chicago won Outstanding Restaurant, and Mark Furstenberg of Bread Furst in Washington won Outstanding Baker. Canlis in Seattle was cited for Outstanding Wine Program, and Sam Calagione of Dogfish Head Craft Brewery in Milton, Del., was named Outstanding Wine, Spirits or Beer Professional.
The award for restaurant design, in the 75 Seats and Under category, went to Single Thread in Healdsburg, Calif., designed by AvroKO. St. Cecilia in Atlanta, by Meyer Davis, took honors in the larger restaurant category. The Oyster Bar in Grand Central Terminal was named a Design Icon, and Sahadi’s in Brooklyn was cited as an American Classic. The Lifetime Achievement Award went to Nora Pouillon of Restaurant Nora in Washington.
Established in 1990, the awards also include book and journalism citations that were presented in New York on April 25. A full list of winners is on the James Beard Foundation’s website.