The last thing Joel Malizia, a co-founder of the video production company Pilot Moon Films, expected when he arrived at the airport in Austin, Tex., for the recent South by Southwest festival was the sound of live music.
Austin-Bergstrom International Airport is among over a half-dozen airports in the United States that offer travelers frazzled by bottlenecks on security lines and cramped seating on planes (not to mention pressured airport employees) a bit of a respite in the form of music.
For much of the year, several musical groups perform weekly, but during South by Southwest in March, that number swelled to more than 20, said Michael Pennock, the music coordinator for the city’s aviation department.
The city aviation department; Delaware North Companies, a food service and hospitality company based in Buffalo; and Pepsi underwrite the program. The musicians are paid $120 for two 50-minute sets on four smaller stages or $100 per musician for up to five musicians on a main stage on the secure side of the airport.
A report released in March by the Airports Council International-North America, a group in Washington representing airport owners and aviation-related businesses, said that airports estimated they would need almost $100 billion for capital projects over the next five years. Right now, they can fund only about half that on their own.
Before getting something to eat and continuing to his gate, he stopped for about 15 minutes to hear the Apollo Chamber Players. He recorded the segment on his phone and still listens to it. Later, he said, he told his colleagues about his encounter.
Matthew J. Detrick, a violinist and artistic director for the Apollo Chamber Players, said that the airport gig had helped improve the group’s performances. “It teaches us to break down barriers between audience and performer,” he said.
Maricela Kruseman, the performing arts program manager for the Houston Airport System who books talent, said that the audition process was competitive. Musicians are expected to have a college degree in music, five years of experience, two professional and two personal references, and must be performing in Houston. (Currently 10 groups perform at two Houston airports.) Other airports have their own criteria; a common requirement is for musicians to reside and have performing experience in a specific city.
Ms. Kruseman said that she had recently moved some of the performances at Bush Intercontinental to Terminal D, where passengers are expected to arrive three hours ahead for international flights. Concerts are scheduled to lead up to afternoon departures.
For all its entertainment value, music can only go so far in easing passengers’ stress. Barbara E. Lichman, a lawyer specializing in aviation at Buchalter, a law firm in Irvine, Calif., said that the airlines and the Transportation Security Administration needed to closely examine their contributions to travelers’ anxiety. She pointed to cramped and overcrowded airplanes and what she considered illogical parameters for T.S.A. searches.
