A lot of agita, but still not a lot of action this week on “The Americans.” A series of minor bombshells, building to — an explosion? Four episodes left.
Things got off to a good start in the opening credits: “And Frank Langella.” That wasn’t even the best news: It was Frank Langella and Alison Wright, Gabriel and Martha, reunited for a doleful scene in her Moscow apartment. Back in the U.S.S.R. (so much for all that defection talk, commenters), Gabriel dropped by to see how she was doing and to tell her that “Clark” was thinking about her.
How was she doing? She was jobless because her Russian wasn’t good enough, she wasn’t meeting any suitable men and, despite her access to the better supermarkets, she was eating a baked potato. Bitter and all out of illusions, she told Gabriel to leave and never come back. Maybe Gabriel will keep turning up like a bad kopeck, but it sure felt like this was how we’ll have to remember Martha — sitting alone in her dingy flat listening to Russian music on the radio.
Throughout the episode, characters saw their illusions about the Soviet Union punctured or their suspicions confirmed. Listening to a tape of Kimmy’s dad, the C.I.A.’s Afghanistan guy, Philip learned that his country was using bioweapons in Afghanistan — perhaps the Lassa fever that he helped smuggle out. Stan learned what we already knew: that there had been K.G.B. agents in Thailand when his old boss, Gaad, was killed. Oleg, after being dragged in for questioning, may have learned how high the food-fraud network reaches.
Ms. Wright and Julia Garner (who plays Kimmy) weren’t the only actresses making surprise returns: Christine Toy Johnson popped up as Gaad’s widow, Linh, and was excellent in a tough scene with Noah Emmerich as Stan. Agent Wolfe had suggested to Stan that having proof that the K.G.B. murdered Gaad was a reason to rethink their stance on Oleg (which seemed abrupt — were they really that surprised by the news?). Agonized as always, Stan went to Linh and sketched out the Oleg situation, thinking that she’d support his position that Oleg should still be left alone. But no: Gaad would want revenge, she said.
All this, and we haven’t gotten to the episode’s two biggest bombshells — one from Elizabeth and Philip’s real son and the other involving their pretend son.
In his most forceful moment in five seasons, Henry, the budding genius, announced that he wanted to follow his friend Chris and attend boarding school in New Hampshire. (It was a fictitious school named St. Edward’s which sounded a lot like the real St. Paul’s in Concord.) Once again, the master spies are completely clueless about developments in their own home. Showing quite a bit of resourcefulness, Henry had already sent in an application and solicited a recommendation from Chris’s father.
His parents were outraged at being kept in the dark, with Philip sounding father-angry and Elizabeth spy-angry. When things calmed down — and after they made fun of the school as a pretentious country club — it was Elizabeth who was more copacetic about their child leaving. But maybe she was just thinking that having him 500 miles away would make things simpler.
For evidence of how much trouble a child can be, there was Tuan. Dropping by to check up on him, Elizabeth found an empty house. When he didn’t return that night, the team — Elizabeth, Philip, Marilyn and Norm — went into full surveillance mode. (This week’s filmed-in-New York moment: the Cobble Hill Cinemas marquee in the background as Marilyn tailed him down Court Street in Brooklyn.) He was soon observed boarding a Greyhound for Harrisburg, Pa., which is almost a Simon and Garfunkel song. In Harrisburg they watched as he went into an International House of Pancakes, reason unknown.
Back at the house in Washington, Philip threw Tuan against the wall and Elizabeth put a gun in his face. He had a story: He’d been traveling out of state to make phone calls to his former foster family in Seattle, whose young son had leukemia. (Apparently he felt more tenderly toward them than he let on earlier in the season.) It sounded like a stretch, but they let him live. Elizabeth believed Tuan, her mini-me, and when Philip speculated that he might be screwing up on purpose in order to get sent home to Vietnam, she frowned and said, “That’s not who he is.” They’d better hope she’s right.