On Wednesday, Snap, the parent of the messaging app Snapchat, reported earnings that missed Wall Street expectations in almost every regard. Not only did Snap record a $2.2 billion loss for the first quarter, its revenue was lighter than expected, and the company disclosed that its user growth was decelerating sharply. Investors punished the company, sending its stock down more than 25 percent in after-hours trading.
More trouble in the traditional retail sector: Macy’s shares fell sharply when trading opened on Thursday, as the department store giant reported worse-than-expected quarterly results.
As online shopping giants like Amazon have combined with changing shopping habits, shopping mall operators and department stores have found themselves squeezed.
Macy’s was no exception — it cited high inventories and a ninth straight quarter of falling sales.
The French bank Crédit Agricole said on Thursday that its profit more than tripled in the first quarter, driven in part by strong fixed-income trading by clients in the first three months of the year and strong performance in LCL, its French retail banking business.
Profit nearly doubled in the bank’s large customer segment, which houses its corporate and investment banking operations. Profit at its French retail banking arm increased 65 percent in the quarter.
Shares of Crédit Agricole rose 1.4 percent in early trading in Paris on Thursday.
There was also some good news for Italy’s hard-pressed banks on Thursday after UniCredit, the country’s biggest bank, reported improving revenue and profit and a decline in problem loans.
UniCredit said that profit in the first quarter of 2017 rose 41 percent to 907 million euros, or $987 million, thanks in part to fees from lively trading on securities markets.
Perhaps even more important, the bank made progress disposing of its pile of troubled loans — the fundamental problem afflicting Italian banks after years of recession or near-zero growth.
UniCredit shares rose 4.5 percent in midday trading after the bank said that loans considered nonperforming fell 28 percent to 55.3 billion euros.
Britain’s central bank opted to keep interest rates steady and left its bond purchase program unchanged when its policy-setting committee met on Thursday.
The Bank of England lowered its forecast for economic growth this year (though it raised its predictions for expansion in 2018 and 2019). Inflation is expected to accelerate this year, but slow down in subsequent years.
“The wages that people are getting are not going to be sufficient to compensate for the rise in consumption prices,” Mark Carney, the central bank’s governor, said in a news conference on Thursday.
A major factor? The impact of Britain’s withdrawal from the European Union.
The Bank of England said its forecasts were based on assumptions that the adjustments to Britain’s new relationship with the European Union would be smooth.
Concerns about terrorism, immigration and the coup in Turkey, as well as the uncertainty created by Britain’s vote to leave the European Union — a year of political and economic turmoil hammered Emirates’s results, with profits falling 83 percent, the airline said.
The airline, based in Dubai, in the United Arab Emirates, said the strength of the dollar, to which the Emirati dirham is pegged, also affected its earnings.
Emirates also said moves by the Trump administration had affected demand for air travel to the United States. Heightened security vetting and restrictions on electronic devices in aircraft cabins presented a challenge to the airline in one of its “biggest growth potential markets,” it said.
• The European Commission, the European Union’s executive arm, has released its spring economic forecast for the region and projects a “largely steady pace” of growth. The eurozone economy will expand at 1.7 percent this year and 1.8 percent next year, it said.
• Finance chiefs from the Group of 7 industrialized nations meet in Italy for a three-day meeting to discuss trade, currencies and the global economy.
• An adviser to the European Court of Justice has recommended that Uber be regulated as a transportation service, not a digital platform. If the court agrees, that will have a major impact on the ride-hailing service’s global expansion plans.
