In the run-up to the new season of “Twin Peaks,” Noel Murray is helping to refresh our memory with a series of recaps covering the first two seasons. (It’s only been 26 years!) The new season debuts on May 21 on Showtime.
Click here to get started with Noel’s recap of the feature-length pilot, and click here for Season 2, Episode 1; and here for Season 2, Episodes 8-21. And if you’re just looking for a few strategies on how best to catch up with the show, Margaret Lyons has written a comprehensive guide. For “Twin Peaks” newcomers, beware that major spoilers lie just ahead.
The original run of “Twin Peaks” put such an unusual spin on serialized melodrama that even if Showtime’s coming revival has exactly the same look and feel, it’ll still be one of TV’s oddest shows. That doesn’t mean that Mark Frost and David Lynch were without influences, though. Putting a one-armed man named Philip Gerard, also known as Mike, into the series wasn’t just a random nod toward the ’60s action-adventure series “The Fugitive” (a kind of compound allusion to that show’s one-armed man and its Lt. Philip Gerard). Lynch admired that show’s model — one long story interrupted by weekly short stories — in which the wrongly accused Dr. Richard Kimble didn’t find the man who murdered his wife until the series finale. That’s how he originally wanted his own “Who killed Laura Palmer?” mystery to play out.
But ABC executives — and impatient viewers — wanted something else. So, seven episodes into Season 2, Frost and Lynch revealed their culprit: Leland Palmer, possessed by an ancient dark spirit named Bob. Answering the series’s biggest question quickly became a prime example of the need to be careful what you wish for. Afterward, “Twin Peaks” was never quite the same.
To be fair, “Twin Peaks” was beginning to suffer an identity crisis even before it put that central mystery to rest. The creative team struggled to execute Lynch’s unique vision while producing a viable weekly hour of television, with subplots and characters that viewers would want to follow.  At times “Twin Peaks” was a soap opera doubling as a searing critique of American small-town hypocrisy. At others, it was a sincere gothic romance, with supernatural elements.
Some of the more tedious “Twin Peaks” story threads and its flatter characters dissolved into a forgettable mush. But so long as Lynch remained actively involved — and he very much was at the start of Season 2 — each episode held the possibility that something might pop up that had never been seen on the small screen before.
Though it only ran for a short time, “Twin Peaks” produced a number of episodes that ’90s TV obsessives still talk about.
“Coma” isn’t one of those, which is a shame, because it may be the “purest” hour of “Twin Peaks” — and quite possibly the finest. With Lynch back in the director’s chair (working from a script credited to Harley Peyton), the second season’s second episode makes a persuasive argument for the most intensely surreal and narrowly focused version of the show imaginable. In the episodes that followed, the writers threw new characters and story lines into the mix in a creative frenzy. Some would work, some wouldn’t. But “Coma” relies almost entirely on the core cast from the pilot, and on pre-existing plot. And it’s absolutely mesmerizing.
Lynch and Peyton stage even the most routine scenes in ways that are alternately funny and alarmingly off-kilter. When Agent Cooper and Sheriff Truman arrive at the hospital to ask the newly awakened Ronette Pulaski about the night of Laura’s death, they spend a full minute trying to figure out how to adjust their chairs. When Ben and Jerry Horne debate the best way to proceed with taking over the mill after Josie’s and Catherine’s disappearances, Jerry spends the whole scene carving slices off a hunk of smoked cheese that’s shaped like a pig. Audrey’s continuing investigation at One Eyed Jacks leads her to a room where the customer likes to be bound and blindfolded, while one of the girls vacuums the floor.
In other words, there’s scarcely a moment in “Coma” that isn’t singularly weird — including scenes in which Andy gets himself covered with tape while posting “Have You Seen This Man?” sketches of Bob around town, and Major Briggs tracks down Agent Cooper to alert him to radio signals from outer space reading, “The owls are not what they seem.” This is an episode that inexplicably (but wonderfully) breaks for an extended scene of James with a guitar, cooing a dreamy retro-rockabilly ballad in the Haywards’ living room while Donna and Maddy coo backup vocals. This whole hour is in its own zone.
The most notable scene here is one that actually does follow a new plot thread involving Donna’s taking over of Laura’s “Meals on Wheels” route. While delivering a plate to Mrs. Tremond (played by the veteran character actress Frances Bay), Donna is startled by the old lady’s grandson: an aspiring magician who has the fashion sense, hairstyle and facial features of a young David Lynch. (The actor is actually his son, Austin Jack Lynch.) After snapping his fingers and warning, “Sometimes things can happen just like this,” the kid makes the creamed corn on his grandma’s plate disappear and then reappear in his hands.
What does this mean? Maybe nothing. But that handful of creamed corn looks radiant.
Still, after the fevered inspiration of “Coma,” the follow-up is something of a letdown. It offers just a few memorable images — like the pillow — as well as two Laura-specific scenes that move the mystery toward a solution while maintaining a dark whimsy. In one, Ronette nearly dies when her IV is poisoned, and when the cops rush in to save her, they find a new letter-clue from the killer under her fingernail: a “B,” cut out from “Flesh World,” to go with the “R” and “T” they already have. In the other, Leland arrives at the station with the “Have You Seen This Man” flier and insists that he once knew someone like this named Robert (as in “R … B … T”), who lived next door to his grandmother’s summer house.
Otherwise, this episode is most notable for introducing two of the season’s more entertaining new characters: an agoraphobic orchid-grower named Harold Smith (Lenny Von Dohlen) and dandyish, womanizing department store clerk Dick Tremayne (Ian Buchanan). I’ll save Harold for later, but Dick’s scene in “The Man Behind the Glass” is an absolute delight as Lucy invites him out to lunch to tell him he’s the father of her unborn child. The Lucy pregnancy (announced out of the blue at the end of Season 1) drives a lot more action in this season than one might expect, given that it’s such a standard prime-time soap type of story. But it does brings us Mr. Tremayne, with his magnificent brow and his wardrobe, which looks like a Paris runway reinterpretation of a lumberjack.
He doesn’t last long in the series, but Harold Smith is one of Twin Peaks’ more fascinating denizens: a reclusive man, made physically ill by the outdoors, who spends all of his time growing flowers in his hothouse and coaxing his rare visitors to share their deepest secrets. He claims that he weaves other people’s stories into “sort of a living novel” by placing them into a larger context that only an objective outsider could see. Like Agent Cooper, he seems to love this town. Unlike Coop, he’s so sensitive that the duplicity and viciousness of the outside world literally kills him, pushing him to commit suicide after Donna betrays his trust.
That happens later though. “Laura’s Secret Diary” is more of a piece-mover, advancing three major plot lines. Donna gets Harold to show her the titular object, which was left in his care because Laura saw him as benevolent, discreet and incorruptible. Jean Renault demands a ransom from Ben for Audrey, and in the meantime keeps his potential payday safe by killing the vacuum fetishist who’s been harassing her. And Leland Palmer confesses to murdering Jacques Renault, giving a statement to the authorities while in a spooky trance.
Also, Josie returns after a long time away, instigating what will become one of the duller subplots of Season 2: the tussle over who will control the mill. Josie’s re-emergence does lead to one of this chapter’s more compelling scenes, however, when her sexual liaison with Harry turns a little rough, at her request. Even the ramrod-straight Sheriff Truman has a kinky side, as it turns out — or at least is game enough to indulge the woman he loves.
Ever notice that when Agent Cooper wakes up at the Great Northern, he’s still perfectly coifed, save for one wild tuft of hair? In “The Orchid’s Curse,” we see his lone dishevelment when he wakes up after another restless night and prepares to do some yoga. While he’s doing a headstand, he finally finds Audrey’s note from the night he got shot and realizes she’s been trapped at One Eyed Jacks for days.
What follows is the closet this show about lawmen ever gets to an actual “good guys versus bad guys” action sequence when Cooper and Truman organize a raid on the casino-brothel. Only a last-second save from Deputy Hawk Hill gets Audrey and her rescuers out of Canada alive.
Just as season one starts to intensify and build narrative momentum in its penultimate episode, so the chapter before the big reveal of Laura’s murderer is a busy one, which picks up immediately after its predecessor left off. While James is chastising Donna for risking her life in the home of a strange shut-in, Cooper and company are rushing Audrey to safety and assessing her injuries after an imprisonment that left her bruised and doped-up.
It’s only after the dust settles a bit that “Demons” starts properly setting up the conclusion of the Palmer case, with the assistance of Agent Cooper’s boss, Gordon Cole. No longer just a voice on the speakerphone, the partially deaf Cole here is played by David Lynch in the flesh, doing a schtick that has him mishearing people and responding to them slightly out of sync (while also pronouncing certain words in a funky way, such that “Chihuahua” becomes “Chi-wow-wow”).
Cole’s a good detective though, and Lynch’s unwillingness to play a stock character straight doesn’t keep him from using his screen time to move the plot forward. He lights a fire under the case, helping to get the one-armed man to tell all he knows about the ancient “inhabiting” spirit of Bob, who feeds on fear and pleasure.
Yet as “Twin Peaks” approached the moment that fans had been waiting for all year, the show’s plot bloat was becoming noticeable. Some of the more off-topic story lines in this episode are still fairly fruitful, such as Bobby and Shelly’s insurance scam. 
Given how his story ends, the most hauntingly tragic character in the early Season 2 episodes is Leland Palmer, who has moments of lucidity followed by fits of howling despair, or spells in which he can’t stop singing. He’s fighting to stay grounded and get back to the life he once knew, but he’s clearly been seized by something he can’t control.
Still, on the whole this episode delivers closure in a way that’s satisfying dramatically while retaining plenty of Lynchian perversity. There are some hard edges to “Lonely Souls,” which feels purposeful, like a rebuke to those charmed by “Twin Peaks” at its silliest. When the Palmer family listens to Louis Armstrong singing “What a Wonderful World” while Maddy declares she’s ready to go home to Missoula, or when Lynch establishes the roadhouse location by framing its neon sign inside a muddy puddle, there’s a palpable sense of regretful resignation to what he’s building up to. He’s reminding us that life happens in the muck, and that no one can avoid getting dirty.
Lynch draws on all of his faculties as an image-maker and a poet of human despair in the last 10 minutes of “Lonely Souls,” which is as sad and horrific as anything in the series. As Leland is again possessed by Bob and stalks and kills Maddy in his living room, the Giant interrupts another beautiful Julee Cruise performance at the roadhouse to tell Agent Cooper, with a disappointed look, that “it is happening again.” The whole sequence is brutal, scary and suffused with melancholy.
That’s because after all the clue-gathering, pie-eating and widespread eccentricity, in the end the heroes fail. They meant to prevent an incarnation of malevolence from striking at another promising young woman. But Bob always gets what he wants.
• Several new characters and story elements are introduced in these episodes, some of which (like Cooper’s deranged ex-partner, Windom Earle) will become very important later, while others (like Hank Jennings’s former leadership role among the Bookhouse Boys) will be forgotten almost immediately.
• Judge Sternwood’s tipple of choice is a “Black Yukon Sucker Punch.” The “Twin Peaks” internet fan community has spent a lot of time trying to make that drink, which sounds like something the Pacific Northwest’s version of a Tiki Bar would serve.
• One great running gag from Season 1 gets even better in Season 2: the multitude of irritatingly noisy conventioneers and business delegations who stay at the Great Northern. In this batch of episodes, the lobby and restaurant are filled with barbershop singers, high-heeled Lumber Queen contestants and dozens of sailors bouncing rubber balls.
• Another great running gag from Season 1 disappears in these episodes, though. Whither “Invitation to Love”?
• Amid the pileup of subplots in Season Two, easily the strangest among them is the transformation of Nadine Hurley, who awakens from her self-induced coma, reborn as a teenager with super strength.
Season 2, Episode 1: Would You Like to Play With Fire?
An earlier version of this article misidentified the relationship between the character Mrs. Tremond and the aspiring magician. He is her grandson, not her nephew.
