WASHINGTON — Michael D. Cohen, President Trump’s personal lawyer, said on Tuesday that he was refusing to cooperate with House and Senate intelligence committee investigations into Russian election meddling. The move may prompt lawmakers to issue subpoenas, compelling him to provide documents, testimony or other records.
“To date, there has not been a single witness, document or piece of evidence linking me to this fake Russian conspiracy,” he said in a text message. “This is not surprising to me because there is none!” Mr. Cohen’s response was first reported by ABC News.
Separately, Boris Epshteyn, a Trump campaign surrogate who briefly served in the White House press office, said in a statement that he had also received a request from the House committee seeking information, a development first reported by CBS News.
The disclosures add Mr. Cohen and Mr. Epshteyn to a growing list of Trump associates under scrutiny as investigators examine whether members of Mr. Trump’s campaign colluded with Russian officials.
Representatives for the senior Republicans and Democrats on the Senate and House panels declined to comment on the requests.
Already a focus of the F.B.I.’s counterintelligence investigation into Russian interference, Mr. Cohen helped propose a peace plan between Ukraine and Russia to Mr. Trump that would allow the president to lift sanctions on Russia — an effort that, while not illegal, appeared troubling given growing questions about the Trump campaign’s ties to Russia.
Mr. Cohen’s wife is Ukrainian, and he once worked to build an ethanol business there, in addition to working on deals for the Trump Organization connected to the republic of Georgia and a mixed martial arts fighter from Russia.
Mr. Cohen was named in connection with Russian efforts to interfere in the election in an unverified dossier, paid for by Mr. Trump’s political opponents and compiled by a former British intelligence agent.
Mr. Epshteyn, a lawyer and executive at an investment firm who grew up in Moscow and befriended Mr. Trump’s son Eric at Georgetown University, became known for his combative style during television interviews as he promoted Mr. Trump’s campaign.
The congressional investigations have picked up some momentum in recent weeks, with several committees requesting materials and testimony from James B. Comey, the former F.B.I. director whom Mr. Trump fired on May 9, and several of Mr. Trump’s associates.
Last week, Michael T. Flynn, Mr. Trump’s first national security adviser, informed Senate investigators that he would not comply with its subpoena for documents, citing the Fifth Amendment’s protections against self-incrimination. He has apparently walked back that refusal and is prepared to give some business-related and personal documents to the Senate Intelligence Committee by next week, The Associated Press reported on Tuesday, citing a person close to Mr. Flynn who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
Senator Richard M. Burr, Republican of North Carolina and chairman of the Intelligence Committee, and Senator Mark Warner of Virginia, the committee’s top Democrat, responded after Mr. Flynn’s initial refusal by issuing subpoenas to two firms he owns. The committee later voted to give Mr. Burr and Mr. Warner blanket subpoena power, theoretically allowing them to speed the process through which they solicit information and testimony.
Refusing to comply with a congressional subpoena puts Mr. Flynn at risk of being held in contempt of Congress, a rare move that could subject him to a criminal citation should lawmakers choose to pursue it.