Illustrated. 348 pp. Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $16.99.
During the Holocaust, hundreds of thousands of children were transported to the murder mill that was Auschwitz. It is estimated that in 1945, only 52 under the age of 8 were liberated. Michael Bornstein was one of them.
Born in 1940, Michael was the son of an accountant and one of 3,000 Jews living in Zarki, Poland. He was among the few to survive. “Survivors Club: The True Story of a Very Young Prisoner of Auschwitz” chronicles the harrowing experience of Michael’s extended family during the Holocaust, its aftermath and into the postwar years of immigration. The arc of their journey is both moving and memorable, combining the emotional resolve of a memoir with the rhythm of a novel.
The first half of the book recounts the Bornsteins’ devastating experience in the Jewish ghetto of their hometown, followed by their internment in Treblinka, Pionki, and their eventual arrival and separation at Auschwitz. Upon arrival at the camp, Bornstein becomes B-1148, a series number he later learns was possibly recycled by the Nazis to avoid an excessively high death toll. The second portion of the book poignantly depicts the unfathomable challenges faced afterward by young survivors like Michael.
This book is published as narrative nonfiction for young readers, but the equal measures of hope and hardship in its pages lend appeal to an audience of all ages. Younger readers will appreciate the compelling chapter titles, swift pacing and unflinching descriptions of soap machine nightmares and uniforms that hang “like skin hangs from raw chicken.” The heartbreaking accounts of fathers giving final hugs “that must have carried the weight of a thousand bedtimes” and a child believing, against all odds, in the return of his mother will resonate with adults.
The authors include Hebrew terms and Jewish rituals and holidays, grounding the reader in the family’s faith and the beautiful bond they share. The stories of Michael’s family — his father, who helps many escape death; cousin Ruth, who hides in a Catholic orphanage; and dynamic Aunt Hilda, who survives Buchenwald — are rich and meaningful additions. The investment a reader develops in this family provides emotional resonance to another important survivor: the family Kiddush cup. Also included are the stories of little-known heroes who touched the lives of many, such as donors to CARE and Chiune Sugihara, a Japanese diplomat in Lithuania who risked his own family’s life to issue thousands of transit visas for Jews to flee to Japan.
Its conjuring of the power of family and the human spirit are not the book’s only strengths. Another important element, especially for young readers, is the depiction of the terrible and quiet truth that was war after war in Poland. For many Jews, the terror did not end with the liberation of the camps. Bornstein describes families — his own included — who survived, only to face anti-Semitic Polish residents who had seized their homes and further threatened them with violence. Upon arrival back in Zarki, young Michael and his elderly grandmother cannot return home but instead live in a chicken coop.
Many readers and educators will also appreciate the afterword and extensive back matter, including a moving photo album, family Who’s Who and extensive glossary section. A map would have been a welcome addition, enabling young readers to see the locations in Poland.
One of the unusual aspects of “Survivors Club” is the fact that it’s co-written by Michael Bornstein and his daughter Debbie Bornstein Holinstat, a TV news producer. She describes this collaboration with her father as the most important work of her professional life. It raises the question of why this duet-format memoir between parent and child is not more common. So many other remarkable stories must lie in hiding, waiting to be shared with the world. The Bornsteins’ important work provides an inspiring reminder: What could be more rewarding than capturing and preserving family history? Perhaps the experience of creating a true historical archive — together.