Martin Schulz, center, leader of the Social Democratic Party, spoke in Berlin on Sunday after preliminary results showed the party would lose elections in the West German state of North Rhine-Westphalia.
DÜSSELDORF, Germany — The party of Chancellor Angela Merkel scored an upset victory on Sunday in elections in Germany’s most populous state that were seen as a dress rehearsal for national parliamentary elections in September, when she will seek a fourth term.
The victory in North Rhine-Westphalia, home to 18 million people and one in five German voters, dealt a severe blow to Martin Schulz, Ms. Merkel’s Social Democratic challenger, who admitted to a bitter defeat in his home state, traditionally the leftists’ heartland. Cheers erupted at the state headquarters of Ms. Merkel’s Christian Democratic Union when early results came in.
With almost all ballots counted, the Christian Democrats had won almost 33 percent of votes cast, compared with around 31 percent for the center-left Social Democrats.
The national elections are still more than four months away — a long time in an era of febrile politics across Europe, where mainstream parties have seen their grip weaken in recent elections. But Ms. Merkel, in power since 2005, seems to be bucking the trend, buoyed by experience, a calm temperament and the exceptional economic strength of Germany, which has 4.1 percent unemployment and just last week announced record exports and tax revenues that will exceed expectations by 55 billion euros by 2020.
Mr. Schulz, reacting to the results, said that it was a “tough day” but that he and his party would now focus on winning the national elections in September.
The state leader of the party immediately resigned, in a clear effort to deflect blame for the defeat away from Mr. Schulz.
Mr. Schulz rode a wave of hype and hope to sudden popularity early this year but has fizzled badly since. By contrast, Ms. Merkel has played up her status as a world leader and savored two unexpected clear victories for her party in other state elections, last week and in late March.
In recent weeks, Ms. Merkel marshaled Europe into a joint position on negotiating Britain’s exit from the European Union and warned the British against “illusions” that it would come easy.
She dined with the Saudi king in Riyadh, the capital, and the Russian president in Sochi, days after hosting a women’s conference in Berlin with powerful figures as different as America’s “first daughter,” Ivanka Trump, and Christine Lagarde, the head of the International Monetary Fund.
In a turbulent world, Ms. Merkel’s status as an undramatic but effective problem solver seems to have won over voters at home, despite what her critics say is a lack of a clear domestic agenda.
Forty-six percent said she was the “most important reason” to vote conservative, while 28 percent said they would not vote for the party without her.
Publicly, Ms. Merkel almost never acknowledges such numbers. In private, she and her team track poll data, as any successful politician must. After appearing reluctant last winter to run again for office, she has clearly been buoyed by recent events.
Before a crowd of about 550 conservative movers and shakers in this wealthy state capital on Thursday, Ms. Merkel was almost playful with her interviewer, Michael Bröcker, the editor of the Rheinische Post newspaper.
But she was serious when asked about polls that showed the race tightening in North Rhine-Westphalia, where Ms. Merkel’s conservatives have governed for only five of the past 50 years.
North Rhine-Westphalia “is no easy terrain” for us, she said, while proceeding to pummel the center-left with charges of letting infrastructure deteriorate, tinkering with education and being lax on security.
Those themes, also important nationally, have dominated debate here, in particular the issue of security. The mass assaults on women in Cologne on New Year’s Eve in 2015 and the state authorities’ failure to detain a Tunisian terrorist who plowed a truck into a Berlin Christmas market last year, killing 12, have prompted fierce criticism of the current coalition government of Social Democrats and Greens.
The far-right Alternative for Germany, which held a fractious congress in the state in late April, is predicted to clear the 5 percent barrier for entering the state legislature but to fall short of the double digits it confidently forecast last winter.
The party’s support, for now, has been dented by outrage over a party leader’s criticism of the monument in Berlin to Jews killed in the Holocaust.
It has been similarly undercut by Ms. Merkel’s moves to reduce the refugee influx and to assuage anti-Islam activists by supporting a ban on the full veil for Muslim women. The distaste for populism as practiced by President Trump in the United States has also reduced its attraction here.
Initially, Mr. Schulz had siphoned support from the far right. He hails from the far west of North Rhine-Westphalia, which encompasses the gritty Ruhr industrial heartland, several of Germany’s most troubled and most prosperous cities, and bucolic Rhine River country.
To listen to voices from Germany’s rust belt is to hear strong echoes of Mr. Trump’s supporters in the United States.
Guido Reil, a 26-year veteran of the Social Democrats and a coal miner, quit the party in disgust last year and joined Alternative for Germany.
Susanne Neumann and Christel Wellmann, both 58, are cleaners in the Ruhr area who gained national prominence after Ms. Neumann confronted leading Social Democrats at a forum last year.
“Then perhaps they would act a little more — not just talk,” Ms. Wellmann said.
Mr. Schulz has made much of righting inequality, and his program, due only in June, may yet see him surge anew in the long months until the fall elections, scheduled for Sept. 24.
But after being chosen to lead his party’s campaign with an unheard-of 100 percent of votes cast at a party congress in mid-March, Mr. Schulz and the Social Democrats have stumbled.
Mr. Schulz, initially welcomed as a fresh face in Germany’s often dull politics, had spent most of his career in European structures in Brussels. So far, he has failed to make a lasting impact, suffering because he does not hold government office, which would guarantee him a certain amount of attention.