Our readers shared thousands of comments on Facebook, Twitter and the website of The New York Times. Some called him a danger to the United States, while others praised his actions, saying it would aid efforts to defeat ISIS.
Here are excerpts from the comments, some of which have been edited for length and clarity.
Some readers called on Republicans to scrutinize Mr. Trump’s dealings with the Russian government.
“For all the damage this ‘President’ is doing to the national interest, one positive aspect is that the Republicans’ utter hypocrisy is being laid bare. There is absolutely no question that they would have been calling for Clinton’s head if she had done anything remotely like this, or for that matter, any of dozens of outrages Trump has committed since taking office after losing the popular vote.
— David in Portland, Ore.
“Numerous times in my professional life, I’ve been drug-tested, I’ve gone through background checks and security clearances. I’ve signed legally enforcible non-disclosure agreements. I’ve had to disclose that I have been involved in lawsuits or have felonies and I don’t have any financial liens against me.
Some commenters did not believe that revealing classified information to the Russians was detrimental to national security, and could even help the United States defeat ISIS.
“Seriously? This is not news. If it’s so sensitive why make this a story? If no specific details of sources were shared and only the nature of the plot, how is that excessive disclosure?
Potential repercussions of Mr. Trump’s disclosure for the intelligence community were chief among the concerns of some commenters.
“Which ally is now going to feel comfortable sharing intelligence with the U.S.? and even the security agencies within the U.S. may have doubts about what can be shared. Nixon pointed out that whatever the president chose to do is legal.
“It seems to me that the larger story here is that the intelligence community has so little faith in Trump that it is putting stories like this out in the press. Whoever gave this story to the press may also be trying to protect other sources by letting them know what’s at risk.
— ACA in Providence, R.I.
“The White House says that sources/methods were not disclosed. Perhaps they were made discoverable by the revelation. But, we will never know if ISIS would have been aware of the intelligence but for the news clamor. And that clamor is what will likely put any source, which may or may not be human, in jeopardy. If the source is human, let’s not pretend that the media cares a whit if someone is killed if they can lay it at Trump’s door or even if they can use the disclosure to harm him in some way.
— David H. Eisenberg in Smithtown, N.Y.
Some readers were skeptical about the use of anonymous sources while others blamed the media for further bolstering Mr. Trump’s sharing of information with Russia.
“Unless these news agencies stop using anonymous sources, there is no way a rational person can believe them. If the sources identified themselves, they could then be questioned/cross-examined!
It’s quite strange that the media is giving such prominence to and broadcasting so much detail about supposedly highly secret information and its source in order to show how irresponsible President Trump is.
By contrast, all President Trump did was warn two highest-level Russian diplomats in private about an ISIS threat to global airline traffic—presumably because no one wants Russian airliners blown up any more than they want American ones blown up (although one wonders about some people on that account).
