A Chinese bank apologized for the “drunken misconduct” of two directors at a work dinner. The episode led to scrutiny of the country’s professional drinking culture.
HONG KONG — The new guy did not drink.
During a company dinner in Beijing on Thursday, his boss at Xiamen International Bank demanded that he order an alcoholic beverage. When he refused, he said, another executive slapped him.
It was the slap heard around the country, prompting broad reflection on a professional drinking culture in China that rewards excessive drinking and alienates those who do not imbibe.
The employee recounted his experience on WeChat, a Chinese messaging app. But the episode really took off on social media when the bank apologized on Monday to the employee, whom it identified only by his last name, Yang.
Screenshots of Mr. Yang’s account, alongside the bank’s response, went viral, generating thousands of comments on Weibo, the Chinese microblogging platform.
“If certain ‘cultures’ or ‘rituals’ come at the expense of health and mortality, can you still call it ‘culture?’” Xu Chao, a medical doctor based in Shandong Province, wrote in a widely shared blog post after the episode went public.
In a statement that verified the broad strokes of Mr. Yang’s account, the bank said that two directors had engaged in verbal and physical acts of misconduct while intoxicated at a private dinner, causing disturbance and harm to Mr. Yang.
The bank said it had deducted some of the pay of the two directors, from its Beijing branch, and had issued warnings to both for “drunken misconduct.” Mr. Yang’s boss, identified only by his surname, Dong, will not receive a performance-based bonus for six months, the bank added, and the branch manager will not receive a bonus for three months.
Around the globe, alcohol has long been seen as a way for workers to bond, as a catalyst for business deals and as a vital lubricant for professional connections. In South Korea, a younger generation of professionals has pushed back against late-night project discussions in bars, and the government has led a campaign against overtime culture.
Since the 1990s, alcohol consumption has increased by 70 percent in China, according to a study published in The Lancet in 2019. On average, Chinese residents drank the equivalent of seven liters of pure alcohol per year, the study found, while Americans drank 10 liters per year. But the study predicted that China’s per capita alcohol consumption would surpass American consumption by 2030.
To clamp down on opulent banquets paid for with taxpayer money, China’s top leader, Xi Jinping, banned alcohol at military functions after he came to power in 2012. In 2013, he also introduced a national guideline prohibiting expensive liquors at events held by local governments and state enterprises.
Though the bans resulted in a drop in liquor sales, some officials kept drinking together in secret. State news media reported that 20 officials were punished in Yunnan Province after binge-drinking at a government function in September 2017. A county official in Guangxi Province died of alcohol poisoning in April 2017 after celebrating his first day on the job with colleagues. Seven officials who had drunk with him were fired.
Efforts to contact Mr. Yang were not successful. But he wrote that the dinner banquet, held at a luxury hotel in the capital, had destroyed his illusions about the finance industry.
In the message he posted in a group chat on Friday, he said he had sensed that his abstinence would become an issue. He had alerted his boss before the banquet that he did not drink for personal reasons. But the boss still pressed him to swap his beverage for an alcoholic one.
Mr. Yang wrote that he apologized, but did not give in.
Then, he said, another director approached him with an expletive-laden rant for rejecting an offer of alcohol from a superior and smacked him on the cheek. As he left the banquet hall, he said, his new colleagues erupted in jeers.
Some internet users in China praised his firm stance and warned against the risks of succumbing to pressure. But the pressure to drink, and the slap, sent him in search of answers.
