Policymakers in the United States are just beginning to expand their definitions of what makes a family, as the city of Somerville, Mass., passed an ordinance in June giving polyamorous groups rights that are typically only given to two-parent couples, like the ability to share health insurance. Somerville’s City Council president said that he felt the ordinance was urgent because of the pandemic, as it would allow more residents health care coverage.
But this ordinance is an outlier. Though nonmonogamy seems to be on the rise — or at least society is more open about it than ever before — families consisting of three or more parents can face challenges that are in some ways different from, and similar to, those faced by divorced parents, single parents and L.G.B.T.Q. parents.
There’s very little research on families consisting of more than two romantically involved parents, according to Heath Schechinger, Ph.D., a co-chair of the Consensual Non-monogamy Task Force, Division 44 of the American Psychological Association. However, one study found one in five adults reported engaging in consensual nonmonogamy at some point in their lifetime. This comprises many types of relationships, including swinging, open marriages and polyamory, which involves maintaining multiple emotionally or sexually intimate relationships at once, or both.
Lori Selke, a teacher in Oakland, Calif., and her family found themselves in a similar scenario while co-parenting their twins. Selke’s partner was the biological father of the twins, but her husband at the time was automatically listed as the father on their birth certificates. It’s common in many states for the mother’s spouse to be automatically listed as the father, regardless of what the parents say.
It was not a big issue for the family until Selke and her husband decided to get divorced. She wanted to marry her partner. At that point, it seemed more important to protect her partner’s rights as the biological father and also maintain her husband’s status as a dad.
By this time, California had passed a law allowing more than two parents to adopt a child. So for Selke and her family, it was as simple as finding a lawyer and scheduling a court date that worked for everyone.
California is one of at least 12 states that has recognized families with three or more parents in some capacity, making it easier for nonmonogamous families to gain legal parenting protections.
For parents who don’t live in one of those states, writing out a co-parenting agreement can help. These delineate what is expected of each parent in terms of child care, financial assistance and other day-to-day logistics. They also can create contingency plans in case a parent leaves the relationship, becomes ill or dies.
Before Avary Kent got pregnant, she created a co-parenting agreement with her husband, Zeke Hausfather, and their co-parent, David Jay, who identifies as asexual and is not involved with Kent and Hausfather romantically and sexually. Their agreement outlines how they will deal with conflict, discipline, health care and what constitutes a loss of parenting status. The three also went through the process of legally becoming co-parents in California.
These agreements are not legally binding, but they can help in situations like custody battles or if family members like grandparents object to the co-parenting agreement, according to Jonathan Lane, a Washington, D.C.-based attorney who specializes in family law.
Lane also said that in custody and child-dependency cases, nonbiological parents may be able to apply for “de facto parenthood” depending on the state they live in and if they can show that they have a day-to-day caregiver role in the child’s life. If granted, de facto parenthood can allow for a person to file for custody of the child, even if they are not the biological parent or on the birth certificate.
That leads to the question of whether or not to come out as a nonmonogamous family. Dr. Schechinger said that it can relieve the stress of living in secrecy, but it can also make things worse. Whether the family is poly, L.G.B.T.Q. or another minority, such as a religious one, coming out is very much a personal decision.
Coming out to family is another matter. Grandparents, in particular, can be a bit a challenge for families to navigate, depending on their current relationship with the parents and their own beliefs about nonmonogamy.
Early on, Kent said that her husband’s parents seemed to feel some tension around his status as father with Jay in the picture as well. But once his parents got to know Jay and he earned their trust and things got a little easier.
If nonmonogamous parents do decide to come out, it can affect their day-to-day life in some ways — particularly in fielding common questions over the stability of nonmonogamous relationships and how their family structure might affect the children.
But Dr. Sheff said that, generally speaking, kids are resilient to loss — and most children experience a lot of it growing up.
Amy Moors, Ph.D., a co-chair of the nonmonogamy task force with Dr. Schechinger, also said that concerns over the children are often ways to enforce prejudice over minority groups. Some family members may raise moral concerns over nonmonogamous parents raising children.  This can include how to handle prejudice from family, schools and the judgment their children may face from classmates.
Cynthia McKelvey is a health journalist focusing on science and sexual health.