Sunday Review|America Could Control the Pandemic by October. Let’s Get to It.
America Could Control the Pandemic by October. Let’s Get to It.
The solutions to combating the coronavirus are no mystery. It’s time to do this right.
It’s also no surprise where the country is headed. Unless something changes quickly, millions more people will be sickened by the virus, and well over a million may ultimately die from it. The economy will contract further as new surges of viral spread overwhelm hospitals and force further shutdowns and compound suffering, especially in low-income communities and communities of color.
Scientists have learned a lot about this coronavirus since the first cases were reported in the United States earlier this year. For instance, they know now that airborne transmission is a far greater risk than contaminated surfaces, that the virus spreads through singing and shouting as much as through coughing, and that while any infected person is a potential vector, superspreading events — as in nursing homes, meatpacking plants, churches and bars — are major drivers of the pandemic. By most estimates, just 10 to 20 percent of coronavirus infections account for 80 percent of transmissions.
We’re developing a coronavirus vaccine with historic speed, but we can’t skip steps.
You can’t rush a vaccine. Hi guys. I’m Jeneen Interlandi. I am back in New York City. And I’m here to give you an update on the coronavirus pandemic. So here’s where we’re at this week, we are getting close to the 5 million mark on national case count, and we have almost 160,000 coronavirus deaths. The daily average of new cases is actually down from just two weeks ago. But the daily death toll is still quite high. And we have to keep in mind that the virus is still spreading uncontrolled through too many parts of the country. But there’s still some cause for hope. “We hope that as the time we get into the late fall and early winter, we will have, in fact, a vaccine that we can say would be safe and effective.” A couple months ago, I was actually not that optimistic about the prospects for a coronavirus vaccine this year. But now I’m actually inclined to agree with Dr. Fauci. No. 1, there’s so many candidates moving through the pipeline. No. 2, several of those candidates are already in late-stage clinical trials. And No. 3, there’s already production facilities being planned for and built so that if one of these vaccines does prove safe and effective, we’ll be able to manufacture it very quickly. This is really actually quite extraordinary, right? If we get a vaccine within the next several months. It’s going to be one of the fastest vaccine development projects like in human history if not the fastest. It normally takes a long, long time to develop a vaccine. We test it in a small batch of humans, then a larger group of humans and then an even larger group of humans. So some people have begun to suggest that we should potentially perhaps skip these Phase 3 trials and just make the vaccine available to anybody who wants it right now, you know, while the Phase 3 trials are being done in the background. That’s a terrible idea. We cannot skip Phase 3 trials. Phase 3 is especially important for detecting, like, rare side effects. Right? So if it’s very rare, it’s only going to show up in a small portion of the population. That means you have to test a lot of people to detect it. And then the other problem is vaccine hesitancy, which is if you start skipping steps now, when you do have something that works and you try to get people to take it, you’re increasing the likelihood that people are not going to trust it later on. And that’s a problem. While I do feel optimistic about a vaccine, and that’s certainly a bright spot, everything else is still pretty grim. A thousand people or so are dying every single day in this country. We’re still not doing all of the things that we can and should be doing to stop that from happening, to stop the virus from spreading and to get it under control. Sorry to end on a depressing note, guys. But that’s where things are. In the meantime, mask up, stay safe.
Experts have also learned a lot about what it takes to get a coronavirus outbreak under control. Most of the necessary steps are the same ones public health experts have been urging for months.
Just because America has largely bungled these steps so far doesn’t mean it can’t turn things around. The nation can do better. It must.
President Trump and his closest advisers have repeatedly contradicted the scientific evidence, and even themselves, on the severity of the pandemic and the best ways to respond to it. They’ve sown confusion on the importance of mask wearing, the dangers of large gatherings, the potential of untested treatments, the availability of testing and the basic matter of who is in charge of what in the pandemic response.
Such messaging works best when it comes from the very top, but state and local leaders don’t have to wait for federal leaders to step up.
As Dr. Tom Frieden, the former director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, has noted: The United States has a glut of data and a dearth of information.
Data on who is getting sick and where is not being used to guide interventions, and crucial figures like test result times and the portion of new cases that were found through contact tracing are not consistently or routinely reported. If scientists had better access to such figures, they could use it to forecast Covid-19 conditions the same way they forecast the weather: warning when a given outbreak is spreading and advising people to adjust their plans accordingly. State and local leaders can make all their data public, and the C.D.C. ought to help them get that data into a usable form.
In places like Melbourne, Australia, and Harris County, Texas, health officials have created numerical and color-coded threat assessments that tell officials and citizens exactly what to do, based on how extensively the coronavirus is spreading in their communities. The highest alert levels call for full-on shelter in place, while the lowest call for careful monitoring of high-risk establishments.
Smarter shutdowns may also mean closing bars and indoor dining in many places so schools there can reopen more safely; closing meat processing plants until better protections are in place; and tightening state borders in a sensible, as-needed fashion.
The most consistent mantra of experts trying to get the coronavirus pandemic under control has been that the nation needs much better testing, tracing, isolation and quarantine protocols. Despite examples across the globe for how to achieve all four, the United States has largely failed on these fronts. Testing delays make contact tracing — not to mention isolation and quarantine — impossible to execute.
To resolve the crisis, federal officials need to commandeer the intellectual property of companies that have developed effective rapid diagnostics and utilize the Defense Production Act to make and distribute as many of those tests as possible. As testing is brought up to speed, officials also need to expand contact tracing and quarantine programs so that once outbreaks are brought under control, states are prepared to keep them in check.
The causes of America’s great pandemic failure run deep, exacerbated by innumerable longstanding problems, from a weak public health infrastructure to institutional racism to systemic inequality in health care, housing and employment. If the pandemic forces the nation to meaningfully grapple with any of those issues, then perhaps all this suffering will not have been in vain. But that work can’t really begin until Americans solve the problem that’s right in front of them, with the tools that are already at their disposal.