The president held what was billed as a news conference. But there was almost no news, he again said the virus would disappear and his audience seemed at times less the nation than his golf club members.
Though it’s unclear whether he has the authority to do so, President Trump said on Friday that if Congress did not reach an agreement, he would act unilaterally to extend a coronavirus economic aid package.
If Democrats continue to hold this critical relief hostage, I will act under my authority as president to get Americans the relief they need. And what we’re talking about is deferring the payroll tax for a period of months till the end of the year, and I can extend it at a certain period.  We’re going to do the job. We’ve been doing a job like nobody could — nobody would actually. And so we’re going to have the payroll tax go till the end of the year and it’ll be retroactive to July 1. We’re going to enhance unemployment benefits through the end of the year. So unemployment benefits will be — that’s a big one — will be brought out to the end of the year and defer student loan payments and forgive interest until further notice. So students who are paying student loans, and in many cases they’re not even allowed to go back into their colleges. Extend the eviction moratorium, we will be extending that. So people aren’t evicted. Not their fault.
WASHINGTON — After spending a day huddled with his campaign advisers at his private club in Bedminster, N.J., President Trump emerged on Friday night for a surprise “news conference” that seemed at times to be as much a benefit for his loyal club members as it was about making any news or addressing the crisis facing the nation.
As millions of Americans faced threats of eviction and a loss of income or benefits without a deal in Congress, and with the Washington dysfunction Mr. Trump promised to solve reaching new levels, the president rambled, bludgeoned, vowed to take action by presidential fiat and insisted again that the virus was already disappearing — all from the confines of a gilded room beneath chandeliers, far from Washington, ensconced in his private club.
“It’s disappearing, it’s going to disappear,” Mr. Trump falsely said of the coronavirus, a return to the kind of dismissive attitude his aides have tried to convince him is hurting his re-election chances. Just weeks ago, the president, trying a pivot, conceded that it would “get worse before it gets better.” But cases nationally remain at elevated levels and, by many measures, the United States is faring worse than most other big nations.
On Friday night, Mr. Trump threatened to sign executive orders to sidestep the gridlock on Capitol Hill over a coronavirus relief bill, but he did not offer any specifics about when he would do so, or precisely what the orders would say.
“I will act under my authority as president to get Americans the relief they need,” the president said, noting that he would be willing to extend a national moratorium on evictions, defer student loan interest and payments “until further notice,” and enhance unemployment benefits through the end of the year. He avoided questions about how he could legally circumvent Congress.
“You always get sued,” he said.
The president, accompanied by just a few White House aides for a weekend that is to include fund-raisers in Southampton, N.Y., and Deal, N.J., was emerging from a difficult week, during which his mood was so foul that aides were warning one another about eruptions, according to multiple people familiar with what took place.
Earlier in the week, Mr. Trump had a tense phone call with the casino magnate Sheldon G. Adelson, whom the president upbraided for not donating more to support his re-election, according to a person familiar with the call. Mr. Adelson and his wife donated $10 million to a super PAC supporting Mr. Trump in 2018, and have each written checks for nearly $600,000 during this cycle.
Spending the day with his political advisers in the comforts of his club helped improve Mr. Trump’s mood, and by the evening, he was eager to get some attention. Aides rushed to put together a news conference, complete with the club members cheering him on.
But after almost an hour, even Tucker Carlson of Fox News, a frequent booster of Mr. Trump, cut away for a story about Kanye West’s curious presidential run.
Annie Karni reported from Washington, and Maggie Haberman from New York.