She is adding sizzle, bringing in lots of cash, carving out an anti-Trump role and seemingly confounding the Republican opposition.
When Joseph R. Biden Jr. dialed up Senator Kamala Harris on a videoconference call and asked her The Question — “You ready to go to work?” he said, to which she replied, “Oh my God, I am so ready” — his choice as vice president was a well-kept secret but hardly a surprise.
Almost from the start of the 2020 campaign, the possibility of a Biden-Harris ticket had loomed large in the imagination. Voters would bring it up unprompted on the campaign trail, sometimes to the annoyance of Ms. Harris, and Democratic strategists pictured it as they dreamed up an ideal alliance to take down President Trump.
Harris’s early plaudits spanned the ideological spectrum.
A wave of news coverage heralded Ms. Harris’s nomination as groundbreaking, but it could easily be lost just how rare it is that Black women are elevated to positions of political power in America. Ms. Harris is only the second Black woman ever to serve in the United States Senate, and the first South Asian-American woman. No Black woman has ever served as the governor of a state. Before Ms. Harris, no Black woman had ever been on a major party’s presidential ticket.
And yet the choice of Ms. Harris can, at the same time, fairly be described as conventional and even the most expected pick, not just because of her ideological alignment with Mr. Biden but also because of her ability to draw support from so many corners of the Democratic coalition. During her own primary bid, that fact sometimes left her without her own base, as she oscillated between explicit appeals to the left (her pre-candidacy embrace of “Medicare for all”) and moves toward the middle (she promised a middle-class tax cut as her top priority).
But plopped into the heat of the general election, her lack of ideological definition may prove a net advantage. Her choice won plaudits from both the billionaire Michael R. Bloomberg and Senator Bernie Sanders (who notably praised her on health care).
Republicans tried to foment some frustration but were left with thin gruel among prominent Democrats. The same history-making potential of Ms. Harris’s candidacy that is driving excitement may also help mute the opposition.
She infuses the ticket with some history-making sizzle.
Stability and steadiness. Those messages have been at the core of the Biden message since the start of his campaign, and never more so than during the pandemic that has engulfed the nation in the last five months. But sizzle? That hasn’t been the Biden calling card.
Enter Ms. Harris, at 55 a comparatively youthful politician who, at her best, can be one of the Democratic Party’s most engaging speakers.
Ms. Harris and Mr. Biden, 77, engaged, both onstage and later at a small-dollar fund-raiser, in some back-and-forth banter that showed their deep familiarity. “With your permission, madam vice president,” Mr. Biden gently butted in at one point.
This is no political shotgun wedding but a yearslong relationship that dates to Ms. Harris’s days as California’s attorney general, which overlapped with the tenure of Mr. Biden’s son Beau Biden as attorney general in Delaware. Ms. Harris said Beau, who died in 2015, had been on her mind since the elder Mr. Biden asked her to join the ticket.
The Harris pick is spurring a wave of cash.
The choice was announced around 4:15 p.m. on Tuesday. The Biden campaign promptly broke the donation-processing site ActBlue’s record for the most money ever raised in an hour. By early evening the campaign had achieved its biggest single day of grass-roots online fund-raising.
On Wednesday, Ms. Harris made her debut speech to the nation as part of the ticket. It was carried live on all the cable and broadcast news networks. The Biden campaign promptly broke ActBlue’s hourly record again.
By the end of Ms. Harris’s first full day on the campaign trail, the Biden campaign war chest had swelled, according to the campaign, by well over $34 million — and that is probably just the start. One official with the campaign said it had sold $1.2 million worth of yard signs since her announcement.
What makes the Harris choice unique — and what was one of her potential appeals as a candidate herself — is the senator’s ability to lure both traditional big donors and waves of smaller supporters online.
Jon Henes, a lawyer who had served as Ms. Harris’s national finance chairman, called her “the perfect choice” for Mr. Biden and said her selection had spurred requests to assist the new ticket. “The immediate outpouring of support with people asking how they can help is so meaningful and confirms that Vice President Biden made the right choice with Kamala,” he said.
Other donors, from Silicon Valley to Wall Street, echoed the sentiment. “Everyone loves her,” said Marc Lasry, a hedge fund executive and top Democratic fund-raiser.
Harris will ‘prosecute the case’ against Trump.
Playing the attack dog is fairly standard fare for vice-presidential picks, and Ms. Harris is well suited to the role. A former prosecutor, she made some of her biggest splashes in her three-plus years in the Senate grilling Trump administration appointees: Brett M. Kavanaugh. Jeff Sessions. William P. Barr.
Prosecutorial skills were a centerpiece of her own presidential appeal, and for Mr. Biden, having her by his side — even virtually — could free him to more forcefully make the proactive case for his own presidency, even as his advisers see the 2020 race chiefly as a referendum on Mr. Trump.
The Republican response was a muddle of contradictions.
Ms. Harris’s selection was hardly a shock.
Commentators on Fox News and other right-wing outlets mispronounced her name, some seemingly on purpose. “Whatever,” snapped Tucker Carlson, the Fox News host, when a guest tried to correct him. Others questioned if she could truly claim to be Black.
In a fund-raising email about Ms. Harris’s selection, Vice President Mike Pence cast the Biden-Harris ticket as a “radical duo,” and minced no words in dividing America.
“The stakes have never been higher, and we need your help to send a message that this is YOUR Country, NOT THEIRS,” he wrote.
Ms. Rye sighed about the ugly messaging in the race.
