A meaningful percentage of Americans are living in a collaborative fiction, built one conspiracy theory at a time.
Mr. Warzel is an Opinion writer at large.
This article is part of the Opinion Today free newsletter. You can sign up here to receive it every weekday.
One of the biggest lessons I’ve learned covering the daily information wars of the Trump era is that a meaningful percentage of Americans live in an alternate reality powered by a completely separate universe of news and information.
Some are armed with their own completely fabricated facts about the world while others, as the journalist Joshua Green wrote in this section in 2017, rearrange our shared facts “to compose an entirely different narrative.” There is little consensus on the top story of the day or the major threats facing the country. You will have noticed this if you’ve ever watched a congressional hearing and flipped between CNN or MSNBC and Fox News. The video feed is the same but the interpretation of events is radically different.
Personally, I’ve never seen a clearer demonstration of the Two Universes phenomenon than this week’s Republican National Convention.
For three nights, in a shameless display of loyalty to President Trump, the party has conjured up what my colleague Frank Bruni described as an “upside-down vision” of the world. Theirs is a universe in which the coronavirus pandemic is largely in the rear view (on Aug. 25, 1,136 Americans died from the virus) and where, according to Representative Matt Gaetz, radical Democrats threaten to “disarm you, empty the prisons, lock you in your home and invite MS-13 to live next door.” A universe where the existential dangers of climate change pale in comparison to those of cancel culture — even as the West is ravaged by blackouts and wildfires and the Gulf Coast is slammed by a devastating hurricane.
The comparison is apt, as Fox News has been extremely successful in crafting and selling an alternate reality to its viewers each night for well over a decade. The trick is to evoke two dueling emotions — fear and devotion — one conspiracy theory at a time. Fox News has mastered this and so has the R.N.C.
It’s why the convention paraded out Patricia McCloskey — one half of the St. Louis couple who went viral for wielding guns at Black Lives Matter protesters. Her message was designed to provoke feelings of victimhood and racial fear.
That threat is far more potent when it’s paired with a second alternate reality: that Donald Trump is the one and only competent protector, the “bodyguard of Western civilization,” as the R.N.C. speaker Charlie Kirk put it on Monday evening.
The power of a conspiracy theory is to offer an easy explanation for something uncomfortable, which is why conspiracy theories thrive during times of alienation or social change. But while one conspiracy theory can be dangerous on its own, it is not a worldview. It’s when you stitch enough of them together that an alternate reality forms.
My colleague Paul Krugman recently pointed out similarities between the conspiracy movement and Mr. Trump’s campaign effort, though he doesn’t think the “desperate strategy” will work.
If you’d like more analysis on how that strategy played out in Night 3 of the R.N.C., my colleagues offer their views on the highs and lows here. My only prediction is that, no matter the outcome in November, I doubt we’ll be returning to shared reality anytime soon.
