The Trump administration is ordering schools on Native American reservations to reopen. California’s chief health officer has resigned. The pandemic has now sickened more than 20 million people, according to a Times database.
Trump considers a rule that would block Americans thought to have the virus from returning home.
Britain’s push to open schools may force it to close pubs.
Kentucky’s governor asks schools to delay the start of in-person classes.
The chief health officer in California is out after the state’s virus data tracking system breaks down.
As U.S. schools reopen, a study finds at least 97,000 children were recently infected.
Still, if Mr. Trump approves the change, it would be an escalation of his government’s longstanding attempts to seal the border against what he considers to be threats, using the existence of the coronavirus pandemic as a justification for taking actions that would have been seen as draconian in other contexts.
The rule notes the prevalence of the coronavirus in Mexico as evidence of the need for the modified rule, citing the death on Aug. 2 of the health minister in the Mexican border state of Chihuahua, who the order says died of Covid-19 after a two-week hospitalization.
‘What will happen, nobody knows’: Worries grow in parts of the world where cold weather is approaching.
School begins in New York City, with some in-person instruction.
Heath advisers in Britain warn of a six-month battle against the virus as cases rise.
As schools debate how to safely reopen while the virus continues to spread, Gov. Andy Beshear of Kentucky, a Democrat, on Monday said he recommended schools delay the start of in-person classes until Sept. 28.
His comments comes as some schools have reopened, only to quickly order quarantines or close their doors. North Paulding High School in Georgia, which drew attention after images of its crowded hallways, with few wearing masks, circulated on social media, said that it would switch to online instruction for Monday and Tuesday after reporting at least nine cases.
President Trump has been urging all schools to reopen and did so again at a news conference on Monday, claiming children do not catch the virus easily or get very sick.
In contrast to Mr. Trump’s claims, studies show that children carry high amounts of the virus once infected — perhaps even exceeding virus levels documented in adults. While children do seem less likely to become severely ill, experts have repeatedly said they are worried that they could be a significant source of transmission in close-knit environments like schools.
Gov. Gavin Newsom of California said on Monday that he had accepted the resignation of the director of the state’s Department of Public Health.
She resigned, she wrote a resignation letter, and I accepted her resignation. We’re all accountable in our respective roles for what happens underneath us. I don’t want to air any more than that. But if it’s not obvious, then I, well, encourage you to consider the fact that we accept the resignation. We appreciated her work. We all have a role and responsibility as relates to what happens within our respective departments. None of this is easy. Technology is always stubborn and challenging, and all of these things being assessed, all of these things being considered in relationship to what we’re doing going forward with our acting interim D.P.H. director and as it relates to our long-term strategies. And so that’s what I can say on this. That’s what I think is appropriate to say. And I think that’s very clear. And to the extent that someone does resign, we accept that resignation if we feel it appropriate. I accepted that resignation.
Gov. Gavin Newsom of California said Monday that the head of the state’s Department of Public Health had resigned amid “personnel judgment questions” that contributed to the breakdown of the state’s disease reporting system.
On Monday Mr. Newsom said that despite testing delays and the problems with the disease reporting system, there were encouraging signs in the state’s fight against the virus. He cited a 19 percent decline in hospitalizations over the past two weeks. Last week the state had reported a 10 percent decline. Hospitalizations are counted using a separate system unaffected by the data problems.
More than 47,000 cases and more than 530 deaths were announced across the United States on Monday, according to the Times database. The global caseload also surpassed 20 million, 43 days after it hit 10 million.
Gov. Lourdes Leon Guerrero of Guam said on Twitter on Monday that she had tested positive. Ms. Guerrero said in a statement that she discovered on Wednesday that she had come into close contact with a relative who had tested positive for the virus.
As schools face the daunting challenge of reopening while the virus continues to spread, at least 97,000 children around the United States tested positive in the last two weeks of July, according to a new report from the American Academy of Pediatrics and the Children’s Hospital Association. It says that at least 338,000 children had tested positive through July 30, meaning more than a quarter tested positive in just those two weeks.
The report comes as some schools have tried to reopen, only to quickly order quarantines or close their doors. North Paulding High School in Georgia, which drew attention after images of its crowded hallways circulated on social media, announced on Sunday that it would switch to online instruction for Monday and Tuesday after reporting at least nine cases.
States in the South and West accounted for more than seven out of 10 infections in the new report, which relied on data from 49 states along with Washington, D.C., Puerto Rico and Guam. The count could be higher because the report did not include complete data from Texas and parts of New York State outside of New York City.
Missouri, Oklahoma, Alaska, Nevada, Idaho and Montana were among the states with the highest percentage increase of child infections during that period, according to the report.
The report comes as a study in Chicago found that infected children carry at least as much virus in their nose and throat as adults do. Several studies from other countries have also suggested that children under 10, in particular, are much less likely to spread the virus to others.
In the latest such report, from South Korea, researchers tracked the household members of 107 infected children between ages 10 and 17 from Jan. 20 and April 6, when schools were closed. They confirmed 41 cases of infection among the children’s 238 household contacts. But 40 of those 41 people were exposed to the same source of infection as the child was, suggesting that shared exposure may have been the source of their virus.
The researchers were only able to identify one 16-year-old who had returned from the United Kingdom and transmitted the virus to her younger sister.
Deaths in India top 1,000 a day for the first time.
India’s health ministry said the country had recorded more than 1,000 virus deaths on Sunday, the first time the daily death toll had been that high.
Some health experts said the high number is likely to be seen again, as state-run hospitals are still overflowing with sick patients, and private hospitals are mostly out of reach for many Indians.
The high count has some Indians questioning the government’s seeming failure to capitalize on the gains made during its initial moves to contain the virus.
In late March, Prime Minister Narendra Modi implemented one of the most severe lockdowns anywhere, ordering all Indians to stay inside, halting transportation and closing most businesses.
But as the ailing economy started contracting, officials lifted some of the restrictions, hoping to ease the economic suffering. People soon thronged markets, maintaining little social distance.
In some of the congested localities, there was an explosion of new infections.
As of Sunday, India had more than 2.2 million infections and 44,386 deaths, according to a New York Times database. The country’s caseload is the world’s third-largest, after those in the United States and Brazil, and India has recorded at least 800 deaths a day in the past week.
Indian officials said on Monday that more than 80 percent of the new cases were being reported in 10 of India’s 29 states, and that the number of recoveries exceeded 1.5 million.
Some public health experts have linked the country’s rising infection toll to its spread in densely populated areas of major cities, which have crowded marketplaces and almost no social distancing.
England will overhaul its contact tracing program.
The changes were the clearest acknowledgment yet by Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s government that its centralized, privatized system for tracking down the patients’ contacts has come up short.
England’s centralized program has repeatedly stumbled since its rushed launch in late May — one of many missteps that have contributed to Britain having the worst outbreak in Europe.
Inside a Houston hospital’s battle with the virus.
A Chinese company begins human trials for a coronavirus vaccine in Indonesia.
A private Chinese company began a late-stage human trial of its coronavirus vaccine candidate on Tuesday in Indonesia, where the number of cases continues to grow.
The trial by the company, Sinovac Biotech, will enlist as many as 1,620 Indonesian volunteers to test the efficacy and safety of the vaccine candidate, CoronaVac. It is one of several trials by private and state-owned Chinese companies that are underway around the world in the race to develop the first vaccine.
Human trials of CoronaVac have already begun in Brazil and may soon start in Bangladesh. It was not practical for Sinovac to conduct them in China, where the virus first emerged, because the country now has too few cases.
Indonesia, the world’s fourth-most-populous country, has reported more than 127,000 cases, including nearly 14,000 in the past week, and nearly 6,000 deaths. Mainland China has had nearly 92,000 cases confirmed cases, but fewer than 400 were reported over the past week.
The Chinese company’s efforts may be complicated by the problems and scandals that have long plagued the country’s vaccine industry, including the revelation two years ago that ineffective vaccines for diphtheria, tetanus and other conditions had been given to babies.
Indonesia’s president, Joko Widodo, who attended a ceremony on Tuesday in the city of Bandung to mark the start of the human trials, has been frustrated by the damage the pandemic has caused to the economy and is eager for the development of a vaccine.
On Tuesday, Mr. Joko said he hoped that the Sinovac trials would be successfully completed in six months and that production could begin in Indonesia in January. “The threat is not over until the vaccine can be given to everyone in the country,” he said.
Vietnam, which did not record its first Covid-19 death until July 31, reported four on Tuesday, its highest daily number since the start of the pandemic. All 15 of the country’s fatalities so far have been linked to an outbreak that began last month in the central city of Danang and infected nearly 400 people. The country now has 847 confirmed cases.
England will overhaul its faltering coronavirus contact-tracing system, officials said on Monday, shifting some control from private contractors to local public health teams and cutting the jobs of thousands of call center workers who had complained of having no one to call. The changes were the clearest acknowledgment yet by Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s government that its centralized, privatized system for tracking the patients’ contacts had come up short.
Mexico is battling one of the worst outbreaks in the world, with at least 53,000 confirmed deaths, the third-highest toll of the pandemic. And its struggle has been made even harder by a pervasive phenomenon: a deeply rooted fear of hospitals.
Antonio Banderas has tested positive for the virus, the actor announced on Twitter on Monday, his 60th birthday. In a message that originally appeared in Spanish, he reassured his followers that while his celebrations would be tempered by an isolation at home, he still felt relatively well and was “confident” that he would recover soon.
The mayor of Mexico City, Claudia Sheinbaum, announced on Monday that she would self-quarantine after coming into contact with the city’s interior secretary, José Alfonso Suárez del Real y Aguilera, who announced on Twitter on Monday that he had tested positive for the virus.
India’s health ministry said the country had recorded more than 1,000 virus deaths on Sunday, the first time the daily death toll had been that high. Some health experts said the high number is likely to be seen again, as state-run hospitals are still overflowing with sick patients, and private hospitals are mostly out of reach for many Indians.
Most N.Y.C. families in public schools say they will send their children back to school.
About a quarter of New York City families in public schools have said they want to opt out of in-school learning and start the school year remote-only, Mayor Bill de Blasio said Monday, while most families are still tentatively planning to send their children to classrooms part-time starting in September. Those numbers could change over the next month, because families could choose later to switch to remote-only.
Mr. de Blasio seized upon the numbers as evidence that the city should forge ahead with its plan to reopen schools on a hybrid model, with children attending school in-person one to three days a week. Monday’s announcement seemed partly intended to rebuff the leader of the city’s powerful teachers’ union, who has spent the last few weeks saying that teachers and parents were unwilling to send their children back to school.
The mayor also said that about 15 percent of the city’s public school teachers have applied for medical exemptions that would allow them to work remotely, but that not all requests would be granted. The city had originally anticipated that about 20 percent of teachers would apply to work remotely. Teachers over 65 and those with pre-existing medical conditions will likely be granted accommodations to work at home.
Asked about concerns that many of the city’s aging school buildings would not have proper ventilation to combat an airborne virus, Mr. de Blasio said the city was upgrading ventilation systems but would not reopen any classrooms that did not have proper ventilation.
Though indoor dining, gyms and museums remain closed in New York City, the governor said Monday that city schools can reopen because students won’t be “in the immediate company of hundreds of people.” When schools reopen, students will be split into smaller cohorts, which the governor said limits their potential to spread the virus to a large population. “It’s fundamentally different than a museum because it’s a much more controlled circumstance,” he said.
Many Americans won’t set foot in a hospital during the pandemic, but their pets are seeing vets.
Many New Yorkers are avoiding the subway, fearful of jostling with strangers in crowded cars. Masks and social distancing are essential, but good air flow is also key to reducing the risk of exposure to the coronavirus.
Reporting was contributed by Alan Blinder, Emily Bobrow, Luke Broadwater, Troy Closson, Emily Cochrane, Stacy Cowley, James Dobbins, Sheri Fink, Thomas Fuller, Christina Goldbaum, Kevin Granville, Jenny Gross, Mika Gröndhal, Andrew Higgins, Winnie Hu, Sheila Kaplan, Natalie Kitroeff, Sarah Kliff, Hari Kumar, Mark Landler, Ron Lieber, Apoorva Mandavilli, Sarah Mervosh, Benjamin Mueller, Ivan Nechepurenko, Richard C. Paddock, Azi Paybarah, Amy Qin, Alan Rappeport, Emily Rhyne, Erin Schaff, Nate Schweber, Ed Shanahan, Eliza Shapiro, Michael D. Shear, Jeanna Smialek, Mitch Smith, Kaly Soto, Muktita Suhartono, Eileen Sullivan, Lucy Tompkins, Paulina Villegas, Mark Walker, Jeremy White, Jin Wu, Katherine J. Wu, Sameer Yasir and Karen Zraick.