Researchers in South Korea found that roughly 30 percent of those infected never develop symptoms yet probably spread the virus.
The new study is among the first to clearly distinguish between these two groups.
The new study measured the virus’s genetic material in the patients; the researchers did not follow the chain of transmission or grow live virus, which might have more directly confirmed active infections.
Dr. Cowling was more circumspect. Because asymptomatic people do not cough or sneeze, he said, it is possible that they are less efficient at expelling the virus than those who are clearly unwell.
On the other hand, Dr. Gaglia offered, people who feel ill tend to take to the bed or couch, whereas the infected but unaware may carry on with their business, sickening others along the way.
The South Korean team analyzed samples taken between March 6 and March 26 from 193 symptomatic and 110 asymptomatic people isolated at a community treatment center in Cheonan. Of the initially asymptomatic patients, 89 — roughly 30 percent of the total — appeared healthy throughout, while 21 developed symptoms.
The study’s estimate that 30 percent of infected people never develop symptoms is in line with findings from other studies. In a television interview on Wednesday, Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, tendered 40 percent as the figure.
“Both groups had similar amounts of virus pretty much throughout the entire course of infection,” Dr. Kindrachuk said. Asymptomatic people became virus-free a little sooner: around Day 17, compared with Day 19 or 20 for those with symptoms.
Both estimates are much longer than the period of isolation required in most countries, Dr. Gaglia noted. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recently decreased the recommended isolation for infected people without symptoms to 10 days from 14.
Several studies have suggested that infected people shed — or pass into the environment — live coronavirus for only about a week, even though the tests may pick up viral fragments in their bodies for much longer.
Dr. Cowling also noted that the study was retrospective, meaning the researchers looked at samples collected from people who had tested positive earlier, instead of following a group of people over time, identifying everyone who became infected as well as their contacts, and assessing their symptoms and virus levels.
“It would still be valuable to design a study like that,” he said. Still, he conceded that comparing people with symptoms and without was challenging because infected people are found in varying ways.
Most testing plans focus on people who need medical care, and rarely whole groups regardless of symptoms — especially in places like the United States, where tests are often scarce to begin with.
A lack of testing can also influence how much asymptomatic people contribute to the size of an outbreak.
With enough testing, everyone found to be infected could be separated from others. But if the testing is barely enough to catch the visibly ill, then asymptomatic people — particularly the young and social — may fan out into society and keep the virus circulating at high levels.
Many other viruses can be spread by people without symptoms, usually at negligible levels, Dr. Kindrachuk said.
It’s still unclear whether the new coronavirus is unusual in this respect, able to spread widely from asymptomatic people, he added, or whether it just seems so prolific because of the scale of the pandemic. Studies addressing those questions are underway.
“There are all these small nuances about this virus that are coming to light each day,” Dr. Kindrachuk said.