Lady Red Couture, a comedian, singer and talk-show host who called herself “the largest live-singing drag queen in captivity,” and who became a mentor to younger drag performers, died on July 25 in Los Angeles. She was 43.
The cause was complications of cyclic vomiting syndrome, a condition thought to be related to migraines, said Jonny McGovern, her co-host on “Hey Qween!,” a popular L.G.B.T.Q. talk show that began on YouTube and is now also available on Amazon Prime.
Though she was never chosen for “RuPaul’s Drag Race,” Lady Red cut a radiant figure within the Los Angeles drag scene, performing in clubs like Hamburger Mary’s and the District and on “Hey Qween!,” where she served as a vivacious Ed McMahon to Mr. McGovern’s bearded Johnny Carson.
Lady Red Couture was born in Los Angeles on May 30, 1977. Her mother, Kathleen Barnes, was a nondenominational Christian minister, and the two did not see eye to eye.
“She’s a wonderful person — to other people,” Lady Red said on her “Drag Race” audition reel in 2017.
Her father left the family when she was young and was not a part of her life, said Krystle Butler, Lady Red’s younger sister. Her sister and her mother survive her.
At George Washington Preparatory High School in Los Angeles, Lady Red acted in plays and played trombone and tuba in the marching band, performing in the Tournament of Roses Parade. But she was also picked on by her peers and fought with her mother.
The arguments escalated until, Lady Red said, her mother told her, “If you want to be a girl, go be a girl,” and threw her out of the house. “It hurt me a lot,” she added.
Lady Red received an associate degree from the Salt Lake Community College Culinary Institute in Utah and worked briefly as a chef with Amtrak. After returning to Los Angeles, she held a variety of jobs, including “security diva” at Gym Sportsbar and “budtender” at a MedMen cannabis dispensary, both in West Hollywood.
She started performing in drag in 1995, according to her Internet Movie Database profile. Mr. McGovern, a comedian and actor, saw her in clubs and tapped her to be his co-host on “Hey Qween!” The show, which began in 2014, rose in parallel with “RuPaul’s Drag Race,” becoming a go-to spot for cast members to “spill some tea,” or tell some truth.
During the first season, Mr. McGovern learned that Lady Red was living in a transient hotel and invited her to move in with him. He was among the few who ever saw her without full makeup, he said.
She never brought her hardships to the stage. The drag queen Jackie Beat recalled one tour when she and Sherry Vine, another drag queen, were in a bad mood before a show. 
