President Trump was asked by an interviewer to reflect on the late congressman’s contributions to the civil rights movement. He talked up his own record instead.
President Trump played down the accomplishments of Representative John Lewis, the recently deceased civil rights icon, and criticized him for not attending the Trump inauguration in an interview conducted while Mr. Lewis was lying in state at the Capitol.
The comments from Mr. Trump, which aired on “Axios on HBO” Monday night, were unsurprising, given his penchant for grievance. But they were nonetheless stunning for the degree to which Mr. Trump refused to view Mr. Lewis’s life and legacy in terms beyond how it related to Mr. Trump himself.
When asked to reflect on Mr. Lewis’s contributions to the civil rights movement, Mr. Trump instead talked up his own record.
Mr. Trump declined to say whether he found Mr. Lewis’s life story “impressive.” He seemed indifferent to renaming the Edmund Pettus Bridge in Selma, Ala., after the congressman. The bridge, named after a former Confederate general, Grand Dragon in the Ku Klux Klan and senator, was the site of a turning point in the civil rights movement that became known as Bloody Sunday.
On that day, March 7, 1965, Mr. Lewis suffered a cracked skull during a march across the bridge when a state trooper clubbed him and beat him to the ground. The moment was a defining one in his life and in the civil rights movement. Mr. Trump, in the Axios interview, suggested there “were many others also” whose work should be praised.
Mr. Trump did not attend the events honoring Mr. Lewis at the Capitol last week, though Vice President Mike Pence visited to pay his respects, as did former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., Mr. Trump’s presumptive November opponent.
The president and the congressman were at odds since before Mr. Trump’s inauguration, when Mr. Lewis questioned the legitimacy of Mr. Trump’s election and said he would not be in attendance when the president-elect traveled to the Capitol to be sworn in.
“They are dying. That’s true,” Mr. Trump said in the interview, which was recorded on July 28.
Mr. Trump repeatedly played down the virus throughout the spring, and did so again in the interview, insisting that cases are falling in places where they aren’t.
Mr. Trump was also asked about his recent well wishes for Ghislaine Maxwell, the former girlfriend of Jeffrey Epstein, who has been charged by federal officials with trafficking underage girls. Mr. Trump said he hoped nothing “bad” happened to her in prison.
Attorney General William P. Barr has said that Mr. Epstein definitely killed himself as he was being held in a Manhattan jail last year. But conspiracy theorists have continued to question the death.