When the Canadian musician was in a dark spot, a friend jokingly suggested she change paths. It ended up being the detour she needed to find her way back to songwriting.
Edwards, 42, wasn’t speaking about something as mundane as a nagging errand. “That’s how it felt when I was like, I just don’t want to play music anymore,” she explained.
Edwards’s music always had something of an outlaw sensibility: She once released a single called “One More Song the Radio Won’t Like.” But in 2012, she seemed to be becoming more of an insider. Her career surged with the release of “Voyageur,” her first to crack the Billboard Top 40 in the United States, and shortly after divorcing her longtime guitarist Colin Cripps, she began dating the album’s co-producer, Justin Vernon of Bon Iver — a relationship that made her one half of a kind of indie-folk power couple.
But Edwards was struggling privately in ways she couldn’t yet articulate. Her divorce had been “a lot more destabilizing” than she had initially realized, she said. And Vernon’s skyrocketing career put added strain on their budding relationship. They had initially bonded over their shared experiences as no-frills folk musicians; suddenly, it was becoming difficult to find common ground.
For a while, it was a hilarious running joke. Then, one day after she had moved back home to Ottawa and settled in the sleepy suburb of Stittsville to recover from her depression, a for-rent sign went up in front of an old building she’d always loved, and suddenly the joke wasn’t so funny anymore.
“I almost bawled,” Edwards said.
Quitters has a crew of regulars, a number of whom are retirees. Recently, a woman wrote Edwards a letter telling her that she had come out as transgender to her partner at the coffee shop, because she had seen it as a “meaningful and safe place to navigate this incredible change.” It’s hard to quantify that sort of success on the Billboard charts.
Though her first job out of school was working in a cafe, becoming a small-business owner was a welcome invitation to “put my big-girl pants on and learn how to handle what a lot of professional people deal with every day,” Edwards said. It got her out of her head, her funk and the “bubble” of musicians she’d been ensconced in since her early 20s. She felt so far from that world that, when someone broke into her home and stole her ’57 Les Paul Junior, it took her weeks to even notice it was gone.
Every so often, a fan would drive from Vancouver or Texas to tell the woman making their latte that her records had changed their life. She would look at her staff and shrug: “Yeah, that’s a little weird, right?” One day in late 2017, a message came from a fan with a more direct request. It was Maren Morris, asking if Edwards wanted to co-write a song.
This perspective has allowed Edwards to write the most thematically panoramic album of her career. Yes, there are love songs and a few breakup songs (“Hard on Everyone” is a scorching recollection of an “emotionally abusive” relationship Edwards extricated herself from a year and a half ago). But there are also tracks that vividly evoke quieter experiences that don’t show up as often in songs, like watching the years pass with a lifelong friend (“Simple Math”), or adopting a stray dog and drinking too much whiskey (“Who Rescued Who”), or taking a long, peaceful break from life’s busy thrum before jumping back in (“Birds on a Feeder”).
The pandemic has halted Edwards’s plans to tour, but it’s also given her an opportunity to fuse the two halves of her professional life: She and her band have recorded a few live performances from Quitters, and she’s considering hosting a pay-per-view concert series from the cafe.
