Malawi’s Thuma Forest Reserve.
Malawi leaves a lasting impression not because of its location or aesthetics, but because of its people, writes the photographer Marcus Westberg.
Malawi’s Thuma Forest Reserve.Credit...
At the onset of the coronavirus pandemic, with travel restrictions in place worldwide, we launched a new series — The World Through a Lens — in which photojournalists help transport you, virtually, to some of our planet’s most beautiful and intriguing places. This week, Marcus Westberg shares a collection of images from Malawi.
When I stepped off the plane in Lilongwe as a 23-year-old, I had no idea of what to expect, though I was excited about the prospect of my first solo trip to Africa. I spent the first few days wandering around the city — it felt more like a small town than the nation’s capital — before deciding that it was time to see more of the country.
A landlocked country in southeastern Africa, Malawi is often overshadowed by its more better-known neighbors: Tanzania, with its abundant wildlife; Zambia, home of Victoria Falls; and Mozambique, with its picture-perfect beaches.
The sun rises over Lake Malawi, shared between Malawi, Tanzania and Mozambique, as fishermen return after a night of hard work.
But Malawi — roughly the size of Pennsylvania — has plenty of natural beauty of its own: the clear waters of Lake Malawi (close to 365 miles long and 52 miles wide, it’s sometimes called the “Calendar Lake”); the magnificent cliffs of Mount Mulanje; the unique highland plateau of Nyika; and its wildlife reserves, including Liwonde and Majete, where cheetahs, lions, elephants and rhinos have been reintroduced.
Still, it was never the country’s natural charms that kept drawing me back. It was the people.
The Chewa are Malawi’s largest ethnic group, accounting for approximately one-third of the total population. Singing, dancing and drama are important aspects of their culture, and educational programs on topics such as hygiene are often performed as plays.
As a photojournalist and travel writer, I am wary of clichés and generalizations. But few countries have been awarded a more appropriate slogan than Malawi, which is known as the “Warm Heart of Africa.” While I have rarely been made to feel unwelcome anywhere during my travels, in Africa or elsewhere, Malawi has always felt different.
Students on their summer break peer in through the gate to the Hampton Safe Haven, a primary school founded by the Hampton School in England.
Of course, it would be unfair to gloss over the country’s many challenges. Crime has risen dramatically since my first visit. Sexual abuse of minors remains a significant problem, especially in more traditional, rural settings.
A ranger looks over Thuma Forest Reserve at sunrise. Like the rest of his team, he comes from a village on the border of the reserve. Ranger jobs helps mitigate conflict over the use of natural resources, which is common in many protected areas.
In addition to being one of the world’s poorest countries, Malawi has also been afflicted by severe deforestation, overfishing, high levels of infectious diseases, low levels of school attendance and election irregularities, although the newly formed government is receiving much credit for its crackdown on corruption and embezzlement of state funds.
Access to clean, safe water is a challenge in much of Malawi. In the village of Neliyapi, until a borehole was constructed in 2018, many women would spend 3 or 4 hours per day walking to and from the river — and cholera was a serious risk.
Clean, safe water is a commodity often taken for granted by those who have easy and consistent access to it. But hundreds of millions of people worldwide lack access to improved drinking water.
The coronavirus pandemic has brought much of the country, including its international tourism, to a standstill, adding uncertainty to an already precarious existence for many.
At dawn, people from neighboring villages make their way to Senga Bay to buy fresh fish directly from the fishermen.
Early morning is a busy time in Senga Bay. Once the fishing boats have returned, the fish needs to be carted off and the nets dried and repaired.
Lake Malawi sardines laid out to dry in Senga Bay.
On that first visit 14 years ago, I eventually ended up at a small guesthouse in the fishing village of Senga Bay. Initially intending to stay for a night or two, I didn’t leave for more than a week.
Much like the country itself, the appropriately named Cool Runnings made a lasting impression not because of its location or aesthetics, but because of the people I met there. Half a dozen visits later, I never fail to be amazed by the ingenuity of the proprietor Samantha Ludick and her small team, all of whom come from this small lakeside community.
The latest in their seemingly never-ending list of projects, ideas, and initiatives is Swop Shop, where plastic collected in and around Senga Bay is exchanged for points, for which a wide array of goods can be obtained. These range from biscuits and stationery (paid for from the proceeds of selling the plastic to a recycling plant in Lilongwe) to donated clothes, tools and soccer balls.
Two local boys waiting for the plastic they have collected to be weighed at Swop Shop in Senga Bay. Plastic and glass is converted to points, which can either be used immediately for a small purchase, such as pens, or accrued to pay for something more valuable, like soccer balls or shoes.
An astonishing 40 tons of plastic, and thousands of non-reusable glass bottles, have been collected in the two years since the project’s inception. This includes 180 pounds of plastic brought in during my most recent trip by the Senga Boys under-12 soccer team, in exchange for new uniforms. Despite playing barefoot, they comfortably trounced the group of visitors I had brought from Sweden in an impromptu match — aided in small part by the cows that kept wandering onto the field and in large part by being the far better team.

Experiences like that have colored virtually all my visits to Malawi. Whether planned or spontaneous, on assignment or while going to the market for vegetables, time and time again I have found myself staying far longer than intended. As is true everywhere, mutual respect, curiosity and trust — and knowing when not to take yourself too seriously — go a long way to establish genuine connections and create meaningful relationships, whether they’re are fleeting or last for a lifetime.
Sunset in Mtalimanja village.
As a mzungu, the ubiquitous name for a white person in much of southern and eastern Africa, my obvious foreignness and my earnest, if seemingly hopeless, attempts to communicate in Chichewa tend to create enough curiosity to dissolve any awkwardness or tension, especially when accompanied by a big smile and an apparent appreciation of the rather complex local handshaking culture.
Lunchtime at Mtalimanja’s community-based childcare center. The meal, provided by the school through a collaboration between U.S.A.I.D., Feed the Children and Nu Skin Enterprises, consists of a nutrient-enriched maize and soy porridge.
Bath time in the village of Mtalimanja.
Bicycles are a common way of transportation in much of Malawi — and on the soft sand, sometimes easier to park upside down.
Like anywhere else, Malawi is a complex a society, full of contradictions and complications. How could it not be? And yet, if you were to ask me where in the world I would feel the most comfortable walking up to a stranger — any stranger — to start a conversation, my answer, simultaneously recognizing and ignoring my own subjectivity, would unhesitatingly be Malawi.
The Shire River, teeming with hippos and crocodiles, marks the natural (though not actual) boundary for Liwonde National Park, one of Malawi’s top wildlife areas.
