The Sagaponack, N.Y., house was (sort of) affordable, but it needed a lot of work — and there wasn’t a lot of time.
For many years, Matthew and Jennifer Miller had an idyllic Hamptons escape for summer weekends away from their sweltering apartment in Manhattan: a quaint, 400-square-foot studio above a detached garage at the Bridgehampton, N.Y., home owned by Mr. Miller’s mother.
But when they added two growing children to the mix — Sophie, now 7, and Miles, now 4 — the small apartment began feeling cramped, and the arrangement seemed a little less ideal. “We realized that if we were going to continue to come out, we needed our own space,” Mr. Miller said.
When they began hunting for a place of their own in 2018, their goal was to find a house for less than $1 million. But they were dismayed to discover that even homes in rough shape, with few redeeming features, were well beyond their budget.
“Even a teardown was north of a million dollars,” added Mr. Miller, who, despite being a designer who doesn’t flinch at the idea of demolition, worried about how they could afford to both buy and build a new home.
Eventually, they found a house in Sagaponack that looked promising: a 1985 saltbox of about 1,400 square feet with a pool, on about 1.3 acres of forested land. The asking price was $1.1 million, but the seller’s agent told them there was already an offer on the home. Rather than engaging in a bidding war, the Millers saved the listing to their Zillow account and moved on.
Over the following weeks, as they received Zillow alerts indicating that the property was still on the market and the seller was gradually dropping the price, they sensed opportunity, and negotiated the price down to $900,000.
Mr. Miller’s plans included clearing much of the forest to create a lawn for his children to play on, and expanding the home’s size to 3,100 square feet. He did so by retaining most of the original house as one wing containing three bedrooms and a playroom; mirroring its shape with another wing containing the kitchen, dining room and master suite; and connecting the two spaces with a third volume in the middle — a double-height living room.
To make enough space, he designed a new pool for the freshly cleared backyard, and used a hole left by the old pool to hold the foundation for his addition. He also designed a simple, detached two-car garage.
Outside, he kept the detailing clean and crisp, with a minimalist color palette: white cedar-shake siding punctuated by black windows and doors. Inside, the home has a bright, airy feeling, with whitewashed white-oak floors and plenty of white-painted shiplap paneling.
To keep costs down, Mr. Miller served as the general contractor and managed all the subcontractors himself. He also called in favors from suppliers, getting discounts on materials like the white-oak flooring and tile, as well as the plumbing fixtures and a concrete sink for the powder room.
Eight months after closing, on the way to spending a total of roughly $750,000 on the project, Mr. Miller had achieved his goal of building the house in time for the summer of 2019 — sort of.
By late June 2019, the house was largely complete, but the furniture was still in boxes. And there was no kitchen, because the cabinets were delayed. Intent on getting the place ready for his family to move in for the Fourth of July weekend, Mr. Miller drove out a few days early and took matters into his own hands.
The furnishings Mr. Miller screwed together and arranged in the house included a mix of affordable pieces from retailers like Ikea, Pottery Barn and West Elm, as well as a few, more expensive statement pieces the couple had long coveted, like a CH25 lounge chair by Hans J. Wegner for the living room.
While waiting for the kitchen, which would be installed that August, they cooked most of their meals outside on the grill and washed dishes with the garden hose.
Although they imagined doing more elaborate entertaining in 2020, the house has served other functions since the pandemic struck in March, when the family settled in for a long-term stay.
