In stats lingo, “priors” are your prior knowledge and beliefs, inevitably fuzzy and uncertain, before seeing evidence. Evidence prompts an updating; and then more evidence prompts further updating, so forth and so on. This iterative process hones greater certainty and generates a coherent accumulation of knowledge.
In the early pandemic era, for instance, airborne transmission of Covid-19 was not considered likely, but in early July the World Health Organization, with mounting scientific evidence, conceded that it is a factor, especially indoors. The W.H.O. updated its priors, and changed its advice.
With a new disease like Covid-19 and all the uncertainties it brings, there is intense interest in nailing down the parameters for models: What is the basic reproduction number, the rate at which new cases arise? How deadly is it? What is the infection fatality rate, the proportion of people with the virus that it kills?
A textbook application of Bayes’s theorem is serology testing for Covid-19, which looks for the presence of antibodies to the virus. All tests are imperfect, and the accuracy of an antibody test turns on many factors including, critically, the rarity or prevalence of the disease.
Now suppose the prevalence of cases is 10 percent (that was so in New York City in the spring), and you have a positive result from a test with accuracy of 87.5 percent sensitivity and 97.5 percent specificity. Running numbers through the Bayesian gears, the probability that the result is correct, and that you do indeed have antibodies is 79.5%. Decent odds, all things considered. If you want more certainty, get a second opinion. And continue to be cautious.
An international collaboration of researchers, doctors and developers created another Bayesian strategy, pairing the test result with a questionnaire to produce a better estimate of whether the result might be a false negative or a false positive. The tool, which has won two hackathons, collects contextual information: Did you go to work during lockdown? What did you do to avoid catching Covid-19? Has anyone in your household had Covid-19?
“It’s a little akin to having two ‘medical experts,’” said Claire Donnat, who recently finished her Ph.D. in statistics at Stanford and was part of the team. One expert has access to the patient’s symptoms and background, the other to the test; the two diagnoses are combined to produce a more precise score, and more reliable immunity estimates. The priors are updated with an aggregation of information.
“As new information comes in, we update our priors all the time,” said Susan Holmes, a Stanford statistician, via unstable internet from rural Portugal, where she unexpectedly pandemicked for 105 days, while visiting her mother.
That was the base from which Dr. Holmes refined a preprint paper, co-authored with Dr. Donnat, that provides another example of Bayesian analysis, broadly speaking. Observing early research in March about how the pandemic might evolve, they noticed that classic epidemiological models tend to use fixed parameters, or constants, for the reproduction number — for instance, with an R0 of 2.0.
But in reality, the reproduction number depends on random, uncertain factors: viral loads and susceptibility, behavior and social networks, culture and socioeconomic class, weather, air conditioning and unknowns.
With a Bayesian perspective, the uncertainty is encoded into randomness. The researchers began by supposing that the reproductive number had various distributions (the priors). Then they modeled the uncertainty using a random variable that fluctuates, taking on a range of values as small as 0.6 and as large as 2.2 or 3.5. In something of a nesting process, the random variable itself has parameters that fluctuate randomly; and those parameters, too, have random parameters (hyper-parameters), etcetera. The effects accumulate into a “Bayesian hierarchy” — “turtles all the way down,” Dr. Holmes said.
The effects of all these up-and-down random fluctuations multiply, like compound interest. As a result, the study found that using random variables for reproductive numbers more realistically predicts the risky tail events, the rarer but more significant superspreader events.
Humans on their own, however, without a Bayesian model for a compass, are notoriously bad at fathoming individual risk.
Much of the information that guides our behavior in the context of Covid-19 is probabilistic. For example, by some estimates, if you get infected with the coronavirus, there is a 1 percent chance you will die; but in reality an individual’s odds can vary by a thousandfold or more, depending on age and other factors. “For something like an illness, most of the evidence is usually indirect, and people are very bad at dealing with explicit probabilistic information,” Dr. Gopnik said.
