Technology|Start-Ups Braced for the Worst. The Worst Never Came.
SAN FRANCISCO — Getaround, a car sharing start-up, started the year by laying off 150 employees and scaling back some operations after it spent too much on a rapid expansion.
But in May, something unexpected happened: Business bounced back when people began using the start-up’s cars to get on the road again. Getaround’s revenue in the United States for the year is now 40 percent above where it was a year ago. Last month, it brought back all of its furloughed employees and started hiring again.
When the coronavirus pandemic first hit in March, many technology start-ups braced themselves for The End, as business dried up, venture capitalists warned of dark times ahead and restructuring experts predicted the beginning of a “great unwinding” after a decade-long boom. Five months later, those doomsday warnings have not translated into the drastic shakeout that many had expected.
Funding for young companies has stayed robust, particularly for the larger start-ups. Some of them, like the stock trading app Robinhood and Discord, the social media site, have pulled in hundreds of millions of dollars in new capital in recent months, boosting their valuations. And initial public offerings of tech companies have come roaring back, alongside a surging stock market.
The stabilization has created a surreal disconnect between tech start-ups and the broader economy. While retailers, restaurant chains and many other companies are filing for bankruptcy and are dealing with one of the worst downturns on record, the tech industry has largely sidestepped the worst of the destruction.
Demand has surged for start-ups that offer virtual learning, telehealth, e-commerce, video games and streaming, and software for remote workers. Start-ups in areas like fitness or children’s activities also quickly adapted their offerings to go virtual.
That doesn’t mean tech start-ups have escaped unscathed. Some — like those providing travel services, restaurant software or tickets to events — watched revenue disappear. Stay Alfred, a luxury hospitality start-up in Washington, recently began winding down its operations, blaming the virus. ScaleFactor, an accounting start-up in Texas, and Stockwell, an office vending machine start-up that was previously known as Bodega, did the same.
But over all, the money has continued flowing. Start-ups in the United States raised $34.3 billion in the second quarter, down slightly from $36 billion a year earlier, according to PitchBook and the National Venture Capital Association. Much of the financing went to the largest companies, with the number of “mega-rounds” (deals larger than $100 million) on a pace to top last year’s total.
“People are trying to focus on who they believe the winners are, on companies that have pivoted successfully to meet the new norm,” said Heather Gates, a managing director at Deloitte who advises start-ups.
Across Silicon Valley, the start-up panic began dissipating around May. That was when layoffs slowed to a trickle, according to Layoffs.fyi, a site that tracks start-up layoffs. Just 5 percent of the hundreds of companies that did layoffs went out of business, according to the site.
Hiring is now picking back up. Job openings posted to a network run by Drafted, a recruiting company, increased 30 percent in the last month, said Vinayak Ranade, its chief executive.
Start-up expenditures also began rising again. Brex, which provides corporate credit cards to roughly 10,000 start-ups in the United States, said spending on items like software, servers and ads is now more than a third above February levels — though spending on business travel and office snacks remains depressed.
Robinhood, the online trading start-up, raised $280 million in May and added $320 million in July as day trading surged while people were quarantined. Canva, an online design software provider, saw its growth accelerate as more people worked remotely, and it doubled its valuation to $6 billion in June. Discord, a social media chat service whose use increased roughly 50 percent in the pandemic, raised $100 million in June in a matter of weeks.
Ruben Flores-Martinez, founder of Cashdrop, an e-commerce start-up, said he had struck out trying to raise funding for his company in January. But the virus pushed local merchants to move online, leading hundreds of them to try Cashdrop’s software.
“Covid just came and accelerated stuff exponentially,” said Mr. Flores-Martinez, who ultimately raised $2.7 million in funding for his start-up in July.
He said he didn’t meet any of the investors in person, an increasingly common trait of start-up deal-making in the pandemic. In a June survey of more than 150 venture capital firms conducted by OMERS Ventures, more than two-thirds said they were willing to do deals remotely. Half said their pipeline of new deals was the same as or more robust than it was before the pandemic.
Cyan Banister, a start-up investor who put money into Cashdrop, said she had expected new deals to dry up in the pandemic. But she said her firm, Long Journey Ventures, had met so many new companies over Zoom calls that she and her partners instead became concerned that they were investing too quickly. The firm has done five deals, and Ms. Banister has made six personal investments in the pandemic.
Even some of the hardest hit start-ups are recovering. Sonder, a home rental start-up, laid off or furloughed 417 employees in March. Three months later, its chief executive declared that it had returned to “growth mode” with 100 employees returning or having their hours restored. In June, it raised $170 million, above a target of $150 million, said Chris Arsenault, a venture capitalist at Inovia Capital, which has invested in Sonder.
The home-rental company Airbnb, which initially lost more than $1 billion in revenue from travel cancellations, has also seen bookings improve to pre-pandemic levels as people look for getaways within driving distance of their homes.
In a recent virtual meeting with employees, Brian Chesky, Airbnb’s chief executive, expressed surprise at the rebound.
