He was a Marxist revolutionary and minister in Afghanistan’s short-lived communist government. But Sulaiman Layeq spent the last decades of his life writing an epic poem about an Islamist insurgent.
KABUL, Afghanistan — As the Afghan poet and former leftist revolutionary Sulaiman Layeq was suffering from blast wounds that never healed, his verses dried up.
In the final months before his death, his children would bring Mr. Layeq the incomplete draft of his magnum opus that had occupied him for four decades.
In 800-pages of rhyming verse, the poet wrestles with the thoughts of the epic’s main subject: a young member of the Islamist insurgency that would eventually topple the communist government in which Mr. Layeq served as a minister into the early 1990s.
In verse after verse, chapter after chapter, the poem examines the life and thoughts of the insurgent, friends who had heard accounts from Mr. Layeq said. But the epic is also a treatise on why Afghanistan’s tribal and feudal injustices were never solved either by Marxist ideology or by Islamist militancy. Each ideology briefly held the country in its thrall, only to leave behind a legacy of chaos and blood.
But Mr. Layeq was unable to finish his masterpiece before dying.
“Nothing comes to mind,” Mr. Layeq would tell his son, Zmarak, on his deathbed, pushing aside the manuscript and returning to the little he was still capable of doing after the blast: reading.
Mr. Layeq died at 90 in late July of wounds he had suffered in a Taliban bombing last September, after months of treatment in Kabul, India and Germany.
At his hilltop burial in the capital, Kabul, on Tuesday, as relatives, friends and a few dozen old “comrades” of a long-dead leftist revolution gathered for a final farewell, it almost felt fitting that Mr. Layeq had left his poem about the insurgent incomplete. The war Mr. Layeq and his colleagues helped start with a bloody coup in 1978 remains an unfinished chapter in the country’s history. An insurgency still rages, and today Afghanistan’s future is probably at its most uncertain.
Mr. Layeq’s comrades were left wondering what might have been.
Mr. Popal said he had spent time in jail with Mr. Layeq right before the coup. What he liked about Mr. Layeq was his unwavering honesty, which meant he was often marginalized in the early years of the government he helped bring to power — and even jailed by it.
Crouched at the edge of the grave as Mr. Layeq was lowered into it, Mr. Popal wept. “Your books, your poems will remain with me,” he said.
Mr. Layeq was an unlikely early champion of the leftist movement in Afghanistan. He came from a lineage of religious leaders and was trained in Islamic seminaries. He was a journalist and editor before helping the communist People’s Democratic Party violently seize power.
He reached prominence during the final years of the communist government when, as the minister of tribal and border affairs, he played a key role in pushing for reconciliation with the C.I.A.-backed insurgents seeking to overthrow President Najibullah.
When the Soviets withdrew in 1989, Mr. Najibullah’s government tried for three years to moderate its policies and reached out to the United States to balance the rivaling Cold War powers. But it was too late. His administration was overrun in 1992, and he was later hanged. Mr. Layeq fled Afghanistan, eventually settling in Germany.
A photograph provided by the family of Sulaiman Layeq showing him in his youth.
In recent decades, Mr. Layeq, who returned to Afghanistan in 2005, became deeply reflective about the past, and critical of it.
In interviews, he said the politics of the government he joined had been misguided — becoming so extreme in its ideas, and going so deep into how people lived their lives, that it simply wasn’t acceptable. He even proposed submitting himself to justice if it would help heal the wounds of the victims of the four decades of war.
His son, Zmarak, said Mr. Layeq left behind about 70 volumes of unpublished political diaries. He was such a disciplined archivist that he would stay up late into the night during his provincial assignments as a party leader to record the events of his day.
His soldiers brought before him a young man — “so well proportioned, it was as if his body had been carved from marble,” — on charges that he was a “counterrevolutionary,” what they called the guerrillas.
The young man, whose “face spoke of strength and power beyond the imagination,” lived and grew in Mr. Layeq’s imagination for 40 years and many thousands of lines of verse, as the poet aged and looked for answers to Afghanistan’s suffering.
Last September, Mr. Layeq left his small Soviet-built apartment and was on his way to his office at the Academy of Sciences when he was wounded in a Taliban car-bombing — a young insurgent of a different generation ramming his explosive-packed vehicle into one carrying American and NATO soldiers, the moment captured on camera.
During a reporter’s visit to the hospital days later, Mr. Layeq was still dazed. In his mind, this had been an assassination attempt on a lifelong revolutionary. Perhaps forgetting, because of the blast, some of his own contrition, he kept repeating how proud he was that his convictions, his beliefs, still had assassins out to get him at his age.