Cosmetic surgeons say business is booming after elective surgery opened up, with quarantine proving a time to heal in secrecy from renovation of face and body.
At a time when many medical fields are reeling from lockdowns when lucrative electives work was postponed, cosmetic surgery procedures are surging, practitioners say, driven by unexpected demand from patients who have found the coronavirus pandemic a perfect moment for corporeal upgrades.
The trend is, in many ways, surprising in a tough economy. Cosmetic surgery generally isn’t covered by insurance, so procedures can cost as much as $25,000 for a full body makeover — tummy, breasts, face — and less for piecemeal work, like $3,300 for eyelid surgery and $10,000 for breast lift and enhancement. Patients say they’re diverting funds they might have spent on travel, concert, sports tickets, or other pleasures in their pre-pandemic lives.
Before Covid-19, invasive cosmetic procedures like face-lifts had been declining in favor of more minimal enhancements, like Botox injections, fillers and other skin-tighteners. Since 2000, the number of injectable procedures has risen by 878 percent, according to the plastic surgeons society, while the number of eyelid surgeries has fallen by 36 percent and face-lifts by 8 percent in that period.
Colleen Nolan, executive director of the American Academy of Cosmetic Surgery, another professional organization, said she’d heard from surgeons around the country that patients were opting for more invasive procedures now than in the recent past.
The solitude of quarantine was precisely what motivated Patrice Solorzano, 62, who spent $20,000 on a procedure known in the business as a “mommy makeover” — a tummy tuck, and breast lift and enhancement. She underwent surgery on June 26, followed by a two-week recovery in her home outside Dayton, Ohio.
She spent another $10,000 on a breast lift and enhancement for her daughter, Jena Solorzano, 24, who said she was heading off to law school and thought this moment was ideal to tackle a body-image issue that has nagged at her for years. She partly blamed social media for wanting the work done.
The loneliness of quarantine has also motivated some people. A second patient of Dr. Alexander in Atlanta said that she got a face-lift not only because she had time to recover but also because she had come face-to-face during Covid-19 with a solitary life.
Some plastic surgeons said some patients tell them that they want their faces now to match newly in-shape bodies since they’ve had time, for instance, to take 10,000 steps each day. Other surgeons said that they’ve gotten a lot of interest from people who spent the early part of the pandemic sitting inside and snacking on junk food.
