Over the past six months, the Works in Progress feature has documented projects across New York City as they slowly come to life. We’ve watched workers build a new skate park in Fort Greene, Brooklyn; witnessed the beginnings of the 60-story Ferris wheel on Staten Island; and spoken with artists and writers as they hammered out the details of their latest masterpieces.
For some, the work is done or nearly so. Some have moved on to new projects. But for a few, 2016 was an incredible challenge.
Mr. Montandon is now exploring ways to produce both the new web episodes and the half-hour pilot that Ms. Haran and he wrote for networks or streaming services. He has been sending those scripts and other material to producers, writers, actors and friends to keep “Ocean Parkway” going. HBO had considered developing the series, but it passed on the project before Ms. Haran’s death.
Edward R. Murrow High School, where we spent the day in Midwood, Brooklyn, watching the crew and tech team put together the sets and costumes for a production of “Into the Woods,” finished its five-show run in mid-December, selling over 2,500 tickets. “Everyone absolutely loved the set and costumes,” said Gayle Zeitlin, the coordinator of the Studio Theater Program at Murrow.
Then, after weeks of labor, the set was struck shortly after the last performance. “It is back to a completely empty and black stage,” Ms. Zeitlin said. The students have already moved on to designing the set for their next big show, “West Side Story,” which runs May 10 to 13.
Sen Sakana, an ambitious 190-seat Peruvian and Japanese restaurant on West 44th Street, whose menu we watched being built through a series of tastings and discussions, was expected to open in September. But because of delays in inspections and gas service, the opening has been pushed back. With some luck, Sen Sakana should be opening within weeks.
Gulliver’s Gate, a miniature version of the world that will soon be on display near Times Square, is still being assembled, and has managed to stay on schedule and within its $40 million budget. Many of the models — created by artists in eight countries across the globe — are completed and heading to their new 49,000-square-foot home. The Parthenon, the Colosseum and the Great Wall of China are just a few of the landmarks featured in the display. Previews begin in April, and the grand opening is planned for May.
Bronx River House, the greenest building in the borough and soon to be the base for the Bronx River Alliance, will be drilling two geothermal wells starting this month. That work should take about two months. The organization expects the building to be completed by June and opened over the summer — about eight months behind schedule, owing to late permits and delays in prep work for the drilling. In addition to the group’s offices and storage for canoes, the building will feature a moss wall, solar panels, community space and a lab to study the environment.
“Lucky Penny,” a one-man show featuring the actor David Deblinger, finishes its latest run on Jan. 28 at the Harold Clurman Lab Theater Company at the Stella Adler Studio of Acting on West 27th Street and is looking for a longer run. Mr. Deblinger, a founder of the Labyrinth Theater Company in Greenwich Village, has hired a publicist for his project, which tells the story of growing up in Queens, his relationship with his father and becoming a father himself.
The 110-ton pedestals for the 60-story New York Wheel on Staten Island arrived on site in December from Montreal. Soon, its legs — which have been kept at the South Brooklyn Marine Terminal since their arrival from Italy in October — will be delivered as well. The $590 million project has been progressing on schedule and within budget, and is expected to be complete in 2018. When it’s finished, the wheel will include 36 glass pods that can each hold up to 40 people for a 38-minute ride.
Back in the fall, Helen Lee of the developer F&T Group, deconstructed her family’s food court at the Shops at Queens Crossing in Flushing. She vowed to move it from dumplings and noodles to more upscale fare to match the quickly gentrifying Chinese neighborhood. Last month, several of the restaurants opened for business, including serving the Hawaiian dish poke and Japanese shabu shabu and curries. Still to come are two Korean spots — one featuring fried chicken, the other, tofu-based soup.
Golconda skate park in Fort Greene opened in November and has been filled with skateboarders of all skill levels from all over the city. The park, once called Fat Kid Spot, is the size of a football field and is beneath the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway near Gold and Concord Streets (hence the name Golconda). Because of the highway running overhead, it had been a popular spot for skaters in all types of weather. And it is again. The new park was developed by the Transportation Department and designed by Steve Rodriguez, known as the city’s mayor of skateboarding.