Henry Yeung, 29, is a sensory analyst at Driscoll’s in Watsonville, Calif.
Q. What do you do as a sensory analyst?
A. I look at how people perceive Driscoll’s berries and what they like or dislike about them. I also interpret the results for our R&D group and our breeders to use. The goal is to find out why people purchase our strawberries, blueberries, raspberries and blackberries more than once. We want to reproduce the consistency and also develop even better varieties.
How do you learn what consumers think?
We use moderator-led focus groups of about 10 people where we ask about preferences relating to taste, packaging, berry appearance and so on. We also use central location testing, where up to 200 people sit in booths, taste several varieties of a berry and answer more open-ended questions. We’re after the most unbiased results possible. About 80 Driscoll’s employees serve as our initial filters. Each morning, a technician places berries on their desks, and employees note their reactions on a score card.
How did you get interested in food science?
I’m a millennial, so I’ve always been interested in healthy eating and why certain foods are good or bad for me. At the University of California, Davis, I got a bachelor’s in nutrition and two masters, one in nutritional biology and the other in food science and technology. Christine Bruhn, my food science professor, was a big influence. She inspired me to continue with food science in grad school.
Do you work mostly in your office or a lab?
I’m not in my office much, but when I am, I’m designing studies and writing reports about what the test data indicates. A lot of days I travel to the locations where the central testing is taking place.
What is one of your challenges?
Understanding what someone is trying to say. There’s a lot of what we call “noise” in people’s reactions, or nebulous comments, so I have to dissect a lot of the information.
What are some unexpected reactions from focus groups?
Blueberries often have a white coating, and some participants thought that should not be there. They didn’t realize it’s a natural sunscreen. Also, the tops of the blueberries have different shapes, and we wondered if people would have a preference. They didn’t.