Hidden in homes across Iraq are gifts and mementos given to Iraqis by American friends. Medallions. Certificates. Toys. Guns. Letters. Countless photographs.
“One of my best memories was that there was an American officer who used to remember the birthdays of my three children and he used to bring them gifts,” said Yasir Khaleel, who lives in Baquba, in eastern Iraq, and used to work as a translator for American troops.
But he has another memory, too, equally poignant.
“My worst memory was the killing of my nephew, who was just a kid, who had been shot by an American patrol,” Mr. Khaleel recalled, evoking the close but painful personal relationships that have developed over the recent history between the two countries.
Now, with the inauguration of President Trump, and particularly after his plan to bar citizens of Iraq from visiting the United States, Iraqis are asking: Will this new chapter in this long story be one of betrayals and insults?
For more than a quarter-century, since the first Persian Gulf war in 1991, the United States military has been involved in Iraq. Tens of thousands of Iraqis signed up to help the American cause, and their own, by working to achieve democracy and stability in a country that had never experienced either.
Through the most difficult times — when sectarian violence was tearing the country apart, when revelations came of torture by Americans at the Abu Ghraib prison — there were always the personal interactions between Iraqis and Americans, nurtured against the backdrop of war.
But in his first days, he also insulted Iraqis, saying that the United States should have taken their oil, and may do so yet. And, perhaps most painfully, he announced a new set of restrictions that would bar Iraqis from resettling in the United States, and even visiting, at least for a time.
Mr. Trump has explained his executive order as a way to keep America safe from terrorism, but officials and analysts say that it is likely to hinder his efforts to wipe out the Islamic State, also called ISIS or ISIL, given that the United States is leaning on the Iraqis to do most of the fighting.
“It is going to alienate the whole of Iraq against the man, to say to all Iraqis, ‘You are not welcome in our country,’” said Mouwafak al-Rubaie, a member of Parliament and a former national security adviser in Iraq.
The issue could also become a political liability for Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi, who has spoken optimistically about expanding cooperation between Iraq and the United States under Mr. Trump in the fight against ISIS. It will be difficult, Mr. Rubaie said, for Mr. Abadi to justify to the Iraqi public a close relationship with the United States when the country is closing the door on Iraqis.
“This is going to be a huge embarrassment for the prime minister,” Mr. Rubaie said.
On Monday, Iraq’s Parliament voted to ask the government to respond by barring Americans from the country. It was unclear whether the government would do so, and in a statement issued on Monday the Foreign Ministry was more cautious, asking that the United States reconsider the policy.
Other leaders, including the Shiite cleric Moktada al-Sadr, and the spokesman for Iraq’s paramilitary units that have been fighting the Islamic State, said that Americans should be barred from Iraq.
Mr. Abadi’s spokesman took a more measured approach, saying that the executive order should not affect security cooperation between the countries.
Henri J. Barkey, the director of the Middle East Program at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, said that the barring of Iraqis from the United States would work against American efforts to stabilize Iraq once the Islamic State was defeated.
“When you are trying to rebuild Iraq, it is important to get Iraqis to study in the United States, to get training,” Mr. Barkey said.
He gave the example of the American University of Iraq, Sulaimani, in Iraqi Kurdistan, which receives American funding and on whose board he sits. “Kurdish-Iraqi academics will have a very hard time to visit the United States, which defeats the purpose of setting up these institutions,” Mr. Barkey said.
Mr. Trump’s new restrictions were particularly heart-rending for the thousands of Iraqis who had worked closely with American troops and made many friends among the Americans. There was no guarantee, but signing up to join the American cause came with an implicit promise: a chance at a new life in the United States, through a special immigration program that Mr. Trump seems intent on ending.
Two Iraqis, including one who had worked as an interpreter for the United States Army, were detained on Saturday at Kennedy International Airport in New York. With the intervention of lawyers, the former interpreter was released on Saturday afternoon and the other Iraqi was released later that evening.
Anas Nasir, who worked for an American security contractor in Baghdad, said that the new restrictions had shattered his hopes. His job brought a steady paycheck, but, facing many death threats, he quit and applied for asylum in the United States. His dream was a simple one: to open a restaurant in Los Angeles serving Iraqi food.
Facing long waits for an answer to their applications, Iraqis have spent hours learning English and researching life in the United States.
“I was waiting for the day when I would leave Iraq and start over with a new life, free of problems and fear and sadness, and where I can protect the lives of my wife and daughters,” said Haider al-Kadhimi, who has worked for an American news outlet and who applied for resettlement in the United States five years ago after being threatened by a militia. He said he hoped to move to Utah, a state he had learned about on the internet.
“Unfortunately, Trump has decided to not welcome us and has left us as easy prey for those who consider America as an enemy and occupant in Iraq,” he added.
Strict American immigration procedures had already divided many Iraqi families, as some members were approved for entry while others were left waiting, or denied. For a long time Iraqis hoped the separation was temporary, but now many are fearful that it will be permanent.
Namo Abdulla, a Kurdish journalist who moved to the United States a few years ago but recently returned to marry, worries that his new wife, who has been waiting for months for a visa to the United States, will be barred from joining him.
