The events leading up to the collapse of Dewey & LeBoeuf, once one of New York’s most prominent law firms, are about to be relived for a second time in a Manhattan state courtroom.
Prosecutors will again try to secure convictions of two former Dewey executives — Stephen DiCarmine and Joel Sanders — nearly 15 months after a state judge declared a mistrial in an earlier criminal case and almost five years since the law firm filed for bankruptcy.
So much time has passed between the two trials that Zachary Warren, who was a low-level employee at Dewey, had the criminal charges against him dismissed this month under the terms of a deferred prosecution agreement. A third defendant in that first trial — Steven H. Davis, the firm’s former chairman — is already one year into a five-year deferred prosecution deal.
Yet prosecutors working for Cyrus R. Vance Jr., the Manhattan district attorney, remain undaunted and continue to argue that Mr. DiCarmine and Mr. Sanders were architects of a huge accounting scheme that enabled Dewey to defraud its lenders and creditors during much of the financial crisis.
Jury selection began Monday in New York State Supreme Court, and prosecutors have suggested that the second trial may not be much shorter than the earlier proceeding, which stretched out over five months. It ended with jurors unable to reach a unanimous verdict after 21 days of deliberations.
Some jurors from the first trial said the length of the proceedings and the number of charges — over 100 counts against the three defendants — had made it difficult to reach a unanimous verdict.
This time around, prosecutors are expected to introduce much of the same evidence and call the same witnesses. But at least jurors will have to consider fewer charges against Mr. DiCarmine, Dewey’s former executive director, and Mr. Sanders, the firm’s former chief financial officer.
The case against both men — announced with much fanfare by Mr. Vance in March 2014 — has been whittled back to just two felony counts and a misdemeanor. The trial judge, Robert M. Stolz, tossed out the most serious grand larceny charges against the two defendants in February.
The jury in the first trial acquitted the men on a number of lower-level charges before deadlocking on the remaining counts. Prosecutors subsequently dismissed some charges on their own.
But even with the pared-back case, Mr. DiCarmine, 60, and Mr. Sanders, 58, could face up to four years in prison if convicted of the most serious charge — a securities fraud count.
The second trial is taking place with much less attention than the first, which was closely watched by the New York legal community. The prosecution of the former Dewey executives was one of the first watershed white-collar cases brought by Mr. Vance, whose office has a mixed record in high-profile trials.
The criminal proceedings have put a hold on a parallel lawsuit that the Securities and Exchange Commission filed against Mr. DiCarmine and Mr. Sanders, which contends that the two men and others at Dewey misled investors in a bond offering that Dewey used to fund its operations.
The new trial is likely to feature testimony again from several former employees of Dewey’s accounting department who pleaded guilty to misdemeanor charges in the early stage of the investigation. And once again the star witness for the prosecution is expected to be Frank Canellas, the firm’s former finance director.
Mr. Canellas testified about conversations he had with Mr. Sanders in late 2008, including a dinner at a Manhattan restaurant, about ways to jigger the firm’s financial books. But Mr. Canellas also testified that he had never directly told Mr. DiCarmine or Mr. Davis of any improper accounting maneuvers being used at the firm.
As part of his cooperation agreement, Mr. Canellas pleaded guilty to a felony charge of grand larceny and prosecutors agreed to recommend a sentence of two to six years in prison. But in October, prosecutors allowed Mr. Canellas to renegotiate and enter a new plea to a charge of scheme to defraud, a much lower felony count, and they agreed to cut in half the recommended time in prison.
Lawyers for Mr. DiCarmine and Mr. Sanders had argued that they should be allowed to question Mr. Canellas about his revised plea during cross-examination. Justice Stolz on Monday agreed with the defendants’ motion.
Mr. DiCarmine and Mr. Sanders, who did not testify at the first trial, are not expected to take the stand this time, either.
Mr. Davis, who did not testify at the earlier proceeding, is unlikely to be called as a witness by either side. He is living in London, outside the court’s jurisdiction.