Music|There’s Halftime. Then There’s ‘Showtime.’ Welcome to the Battle of the Bands.
There’s Halftime. Then There’s ‘Showtime.’ Welcome to the Battle of the Bands.
ATLANTA —People in the crowd at the Georgia Dome held their smartphones out, ready to record, before a single note of music floated through the air on Saturday afternoon. They weren’t anticipating the arrival of Beyoncé, or Migos, the hometown group celebrating its recent No. 1 hit; they were waiting for 200-plus members of the Marching Wildcats of Bethune-Cookman University to snap into action.
The band — one of eight outfits from historically black colleges and universities (known as H.B.C.U.s) competing in this year’s Honda Battle of the Bands Invitational Showcase — stood still in the end zone, the tips of their patent leather shoes gleaming under the stadium lights and the white plumes attached to their hats pointed straight to the sky. Suddenly, they started to play the Universal Pictures theme music — a fitting, dramatic selection that heralded the tour de force performance that would follow.
The band advanced, stopping on the 30-yard line. The Five Horsemen, drum majors tasked with leading the band, marched in lock step to the 50-yard line, then began a series of moves including spins, splits, a body roll (or two, but who’s counting?) and a backbend so low their hats touched the ground — deliberately, of course.
In case there was any confusion, an announcer made things clear, booming, “It’s showtime!” For roughly the next 12 minutes, the band played a set that spanned decades of popular music, from the Isley Brothers to the Sugar Hill Gang. On the field, band members assembled into the formation of a falcon — a nod to this city’s Super Bowl-bound team — which the group scrambled to put together three days before the show, drawing nearly deafening applause. Then they bounced back and forth, swag surfing in perfect unison. The dance move swept the field and made its way into the stands.
In its 15th year, the Battle of the Bands remains an important celebration of black musical expression and band culture of H.B.C.U.s. In this simultaneous Ping-Pong match of the eye and the ear, there’s no shortage of entertainment: Dance lines like the Honey Beez of Alabama State University execute high-energy routines while the musicians advance and swerve around the field forming complex formations. There’s no formula for choosing which songs to perform, but most bands blend current hits with “old school” tunes that have strong beats and melody lines.
Historians trace America’s black marching bands to some of the country’s earliest wars, including the Civil War, where they were tasked with boosting the morale of soldiers and giving signals, among other tasks. As the bands shifted from military organizations to educational institutions, the musicians have played an important role as a “nonviolent weapon in an epic struggle for civil rights,” Crystal A. deGregory, a historian and executive editor of the advocacy initiative HBCUstory.org, said in a telephone interview. In their early days, the bands gave black performers a crucial outlet outside of the minstrel and vaudeville roles to which they had been relegated.
Over the years, black marching bands have been depicted onscreen in movies like “Drumline,” which highlighted the groups’ musical creativity and emphasis on audience interaction.
“The core style of marching band that you find at predominantly white universities is very much in the vein of military showmanship, where there’s harsh angles and limited movements,” said William Lewis, the author of “Marching to the Beat of a Different Drum: Performance Traditions of Historically Black College and University Marching Bands,” in a telephone interview.
This year was the first that the Benedict College Marching Tigers Band of Distinction competed in the Battle (finalists are selected via a variety of methods, including online voting and committees), and its performances of Beyoncé’s “Crazy in Love” and the viral hit “Juju on That Beat” were warmly received by the crowd.
For Darrell Smith, a senior and an Atlanta native who regularly attends the showcase, it was a homecoming of sorts.
Though a formal winner is not selected, Honda awards $200,000 in grants to participating schools. And for the band directors and the students, the Battle of the Bands is about much more than dazzling performances and school pride.
