The period of “reform and opening up” that began in December 1978 under the Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping is widely seen as the foundation of today’s China, with its socialist market economy. The influence of Western economists on Chinese experiments at that time is a little-known aspect of the history. Julian Gewirtz’s “Unlikely Partners: Chinese Reformers, Western Economists, and the Making of Global China,” published this month by Harvard University Press, looks at some of the ideas and relationships that paved the way for China’s transformation. In an interview, Mr. Gewirtz, who is a Rhodes scholar and doctoral candidate in history at the University of Oxford, discussed the lessons for China and the United States today.
Which foreign scholars had the most influence on Chinese policy makers in the Deng era?
The Chinese engaged with an extraordinary range of foreign economists. Some of the most influential had grown up in socialist systems and knew firsthand about transitions away from central planning. These people included the Hungarian Harvard professor Janos Kornai, the Czech émigré Ota Sik and the Polish-born Oxford don Wlodzimierz Brus. But Deng Xiaoping also called for the study of “the successful experiences of capitalist countries.” Thus, economists such as the American Nobel laureates James Tobin and Milton Friedman were also invited to China for high-level engagements.
The Chinese learned a great deal from these foreign economists, but they did not seek simply to copy Western ideas. So-called “influence” in this period was a process of constantly negotiated receptivity and debate about new ideas. And the Chinese side was firmly in charge.
Which personal relationship between foreign and Chinese thinkers in this period did you find to be the most interesting?
I was particularly interested in the close relationship between Kornai and the leading Chinese reformer Wu Jinglian. They met at a conference in Athens in 1981, the year after Kornai published his seminal book “Economics of Shortage.” Wu was immediately impressed by the relevance to China of Kornai’s ideas about chronic shortages and how the “investment hunger” of state-owned enterprises distorts an economy.
They continued to meet and share ideas, and Wu used Kornai’s ideas to shape the policies of the mixed system that still governs China’s economy today, dubbed a socialist market economy.
These personal stories remind us that people operating under real-life constraints, rather than disembodied ideas or historic “forces,” are what make history. Kornai and Wu remain friends and even celebrated their birthdays together in Beijing in 2008.
A large part of your narrative centers on a 1985 cruise down the Yangtze River on board the S.S. Bashan. What happened there?
The S.S. Bashan was the deliberately secluded setting of a weeklong conference that brought together many of those tasked with leading China’s reforms and an intellectually diverse array of foreign economists, including Kornai, Brus, the Scottish economist Sir Alec Cairncross and the American Nobel laureate James Tobin. The World Bank and Chinese officials planned the conference at the direct orders of Premier Zhao Ziyang, who met with the group in Beijing before they headed off on the cruise.
Tobin taught what was essentially Macroeconomics 101. Kornai proposed that China build an economic system in which enterprises would respond to market pressures but the state could still manage macroeconomic policy and regulate the market. The cruise also offered the Chinese officials — few of whom had lived in a modern market economy — a chance to see how prominent international economists thought about problems and advised on policy. It was perhaps the single most important of the many intensive intellectual exchanges that Zhao oversaw and was frequently referenced in deliberations at the time. It’s an event that’s emblematic of the broader pragmatic, eclectic open-mindedness of this period.
How much credit should historians give to Deng for the economic transformation that took place in China starting in the 1980s?
Deng has deservedly received a great deal of credit for China’s extraordinary transformation, but historians are showing that this account is incomplete. One figure who doesn’t get the credit he deserves is Zhao Ziyang, who was premier and then general secretary of the Chinese Communist Party. Zhao oversaw and directed the development of many market-oriented policies that powered growth, and he set out a vision of a system in which, as he put it in 1987, “the state manages the market, and the market guides the enterprises.” But Zhao was removed from power in 1989, just before the Tiananmen tragedy, because he opposed imposing martial law. Today, his name almost never appears in print in China. The party takes credit for his achievements or attributes them to Deng.
Of course, we should never forget that while these policies and leaders mattered greatly, the engine of China’s transformation was the ingenuity and hard work of the Chinese people.
You note that the Chinese state and Communist Party under Xi Jinping have promoted hostility toward Western ideas and values. What perspective does the history you examine lend to this?
Xi’s regime has taken deeply troubling steps to wall off academia, the media, the professions, the internet and much of society. This history suggests that the costs of these policies may be high. Over the past 40 years, the exchanges between the U.S. and China have not just been in economic goods and services, but also in economic ideas. That openness to new ideas from around the world has greatly benefited China’s quest for greater wealth and power.
Without that openness, China will miss out on exactly the kind of interchanges that Deng and reformers of his era believed were essential to China’s success. Worst of all, it intensifies the chilling effect on thinking and policy making within China, discouraging experimentation and innovation when it is urgently needed.
Xi’s recent remarks at Davos presented China as the world’s new champion of “openness” and “globalization.” But, in fact, China’s leaders are not encouraging Chinese openness to foreign ideas. And China’s economy is still far less open to foreign investment than the U.S. and many other countries.
On the other side, we have seen harsh criticism of China from Donald J. Trump and his appointees, particularly Peter Navarro, the trade council director. Does history have lessons to apply to this?
Recent history certainly suggests that stronger measures are overdue to help correct economic imbalances and especially the lack of access to many segments of the Chinese market that U.S. companies experience. But the worst-case scenario is a series of drastic measures that devolve into a mutually catastrophic trade war. The U.S. should seek to remedy China’s unfair trade practices and destabilizing security provocations while projecting strength and protecting its interests and values in the Asia-Pacific, but not in a spirit of demonizing China or undermining important cooperation between our two countries.
Even after President Trump’s withdrawal from the Trans-Pacific Partnership, the U.S. should seek to develop its role in Asia’s regional economy, but not in a spirit of excluding China. The United States needs to work with China to solve nearly every major global problem, and our prosperity is still inextricably intertwined, even if some in President Trump’s circle would prefer to think otherwise.
One of the basic assumptions underpinning U.S.-China relations has been that, on the whole, openness and interconnection lead to stability and prosperity. The Trump presidency seems to be fundamentally challenging that. As we discuss China’s tightening environment, I think it would be wrong not to acknowledge that Americans are also facing an unprecedented challenge to our own commitment to openness and interconnection. So we must make the case for those values at home at the same time that we make it around the world.