Arthur Blank, the Atlanta Falcons owner and Home Depot co-founder, has committed millions of dollars to a neighborhood ravaged by poverty. But critics say it’s still a raw deal.
ATLANTA — As fans stream into the Georgia Dome on Saturday to watch the Falcons play the Seattle Seahawks, they will pass a construction site next door.
There the team owner and home improvement magnate Arthur Blank is building the Falcons’ new home, Mercedes-Benz Stadium, a $1.5 billion palace with eye-popping features: a 30-story-high retractable roof shaped like petals, the N.F.L.’s largest video board and enormous windows that face the Atlanta skyline.
The view through the windows at the other end of the building tells a very different story, one that many fans go out of their way to avoid: English Avenue and Vine City, two of the poorest neighborhoods in the Southeastern United States. Home to drug dealers, swaths of empty plots and abandoned houses, they are part of the Westside, where 42 percent of the households are in poverty and the unemployment rate is twice that of the rest of Fulton County.
The Falcons have been no different, getting a minimum of $200 million in hotel-motel taxes out of the city for the construction of the stadium, and potentially hundreds of millions more for its upkeep.
But rarely does such public investment do much good for the areas around these mammoth stadiums. Such venues effectively blot out a part of the neighborhood when not in use, reducing foot traffic and fraying the fabric of the community. Even when stadiums do draw big crowds, ticket holders spend little of their money at local businesses.
While some owners try to offset these problems by donating money to local charities or buying land to make way for new homes and shops, Blank wants to rebuild the neighborhoods where the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., Julian Bond and other civil rights leaders once lived.
Blank's plans are ambitious not only because of the neighborhood’s history and decay, but also because he said he hopes to effect real change in the lives of his neighbors — though critics say it will be on his terms.
So far, his foundation, the Arthur M. Blank Family Foundation, has donated $20 million to pay for, among other things, a job training center called Westside Works, new parks, a youth leadership program called American Explorers, and homes for police officers willing to live in the area. Blank’s investments have been matched by groups including Invest Atlanta, the city’s development arm, more than doubling the amount raised.
And Blank has also committed to spending millions more while also getting the team’s sponsors to strengthen their ties to the community.
Stadiums and arenas on their own are rarely economic engines, though some are part of larger developments, like Barclays Center in Brooklyn. Teams like the Philadelphia Eagles and San Francisco Giants are also very involved in their communities. Blank, though, is using philanthropy on a large scale as a development tool, something that could make the Westside safer and more prosperous, but could also benefit his stadium.
While Blank’s spending on the Westside so far is significant, it is still just a fraction of what the city is spending on the stadium. Although some residents appreciate his efforts to create jobs and fight crime, others fear they will ultimately be pushed out.
Indeed, speculators have bought up hundreds of parcels of land hoping to turn a quick profit, and rents have risen by about 20 percent since the stadium plan was announced in 2012, according to a Georgia Tech study.
The chief community liaison for the Blank Foundation, Frank Fernandez, said that a community benefits plan “was developed from a very deliberate process of public hearings and community meetings” and would provide a road map for development after the stadium was completed.
But Fort and other critics of the stadium say that Blank and the city dictated the terms of their efforts to help the Westside, and have not agreed to a binding community benefits agreement, common in other big developments.
“Instead, it’s like, we’re going to develop it the way we want to develop it and develop it for who we want to develop it for,” said Tim Franzen, who works at the Housing Justice League in Atlanta.
Carrie Salvary, who bought a home in Vine City in 1993, said she was concerned that Blank and others trying to revitalize the Westside had not done more to protect historic buildings, including King’s home on Sunset Avenue.
She said that lawmakers have also failed to hold absentee landlords accountable for the condition of their properties and done nothing to protect residents from rising rents.
The troubles on the Westside date at least to the 1970s, when new highways isolated poor neighborhoods. In preparation for the 1996 Olympics, the city built the Georgia Dome — construction that created another barrier between the Westside and downtown. In 2002, rainstorms overwhelmed the area’s aging sewage system, wiping out entire blocks that were never rebuilt.
Blank became aware of these problems that same year, when he bought the Falcons for $545 million. (The value of the team has nearly quadrupled, to $2.125 billion, according to Forbes, and will surely rise once the stadium opens.) His foundation made incremental investments in the Westside, but he truly began to focus on the neighborhood after 2013, when the team chose to build on the 18 acres just south of the Georgia Dome for the new stadium, which will open in July. The Georgia Dome, which opened in 1992, played host to two Super Bowls but was deemed unworthy as the venue for another one and will be torn down to make way for parking.
Despite some challenging topography, Blank picked the spot because it was next to two commuter rail stations and an easy walk from downtown and some 10,000 hotel rooms. But the Atlanta Falcons Stadium Company paid nearly $20 million to one church to move out, while the state bought out another church. He also hired Fernandez, a former football player at Harvard who helped disadvantaged families in Austin, Tex., to work with the community on a development plan.
Fernandez was surprised at the scale of the problems on the Westside and the apprehension of the residents who remember the unmet promises of the past.
Given the depths of the problems, Blank and Fernandez acknowledge that it will take decades to revitalize the Westside. But they point to some early successes.
Lloyd Foster, a former tattoo shop owner with a criminal background, learned how to use hand tools, read blueprints and follow safety standards at Westside Works. He now operates a freight elevator at the stadium and hopes to continue working there once the construction is complete.
Rolanda Gardner, another Westside resident, graduated from a culinary arts class in May and has landed a job as a baker at the convention center. She lost 30 pounds during the eight-week program, she said, because of the hectic schedule and a better understanding of nutrition. She also started her own catering business, which provides gluten-free meals to a preschool program.
Blank has also used the stadium itself to help; among other ways, by building a 680,000-gallon cistern to capture rainwater that might otherwise flood the local streets. Some of the team’s construction partners have also contributed money or expertise: SunTrust has introduced low-cost check cashing in the area; IBM has donated software to neighborhood nonprofits; and employees from other sponsors are mentoring Westside residents to improve their job skills.
With his window down — all the better to smell if drugs are being used by those he passes — Officer Taylor shined his spotlight into backyards where drug dealers and prostitutes often work. Uber drivers and pizza deliverymen are routinely mugged here, and construction workers who park near the stadium have had their cars broken into, he said.
But he also sees potential, if it seems distant. People are starting to buy homes to fix up — not just to resell, but to live in, he said. And thanks to the construction of the stadium, more people are starting to realize that the worst may be over for the area.
