Updated, 6:57 a.m.
Good morning on this springlike Thursday.
But here’s the lesser-known, yet important, New York story behind them.
In walked a woman — dressed to the nines — presumably for an autograph from the 29-year-old civil rights activist. But hidden beneath her lovely outfit were a letter opener and a loaded .25-caliber pistol.
The woman, Izola Ware Curry, approached Dr. King, drew the letter opener from her purse and stabbed him in the chest.
Dr. King could not immediately remove the blade; it was too close to his heart. He was told not to move an inch, not to speak. He was rushed to Harlem Hospital for emergency surgery.
The doctors later told him that any sudden movement — so much as a sneeze — could have cost him his life.
The frightening, near-fatal New York episode later became a point of inspiration in Dr. King’s “I’ve Been to the Mountaintop” address, which he delivered on April 3, 1968, in Memphis, the day before he was assassinated.
We’re looking at a high of 58 and the chance to give our winter coats a rest. We don’t even mind the morning drizzle or the cloudy sky: It’s warm.
Friday looks to be sunny and above freezing as well.
You could really get used to this weather. But don’t. The snow is set to return on Saturday.
• Scoreboard: Panthers scrape past Islanders, 2-1. 76ers nix Knicks, 98-97.
• Looking ahead: WNYC hosts a celebration of Dr. King, with a panel on the future of social justice movements, on Sunday at the Apollo Theater in Harlem.
• Nets host Pelicans, 7:30 p.m. (YES). Knicks host Bulls, 8 p.m. (TNT). Devils at Oilers, 9 p.m. (MSG+).
• Alternate-side parking: in effect until Jan. 16.
Dr. King was born in Atlanta, but he was an honorary New Yorker in a very official capacity.
On Dec. 17, 1964, Mayor Robert F. Wagner invited Dr. King to City Hall and, on behalf of eight million New Yorkers, awarded him the city’s Medallion of Honor for his relentless civil rights work and leadership.
“We welcome you, Dr. King, as you return to your mission to help all of us finish the unfinished business of democracy,” the mayor continued.
