WASHINGTON — In a sign of abortion opponents’ newfound clout in the capital, Kellyanne Conway, the Republican strategist who led Donald J. Trump to victory and will serve as his White House counselor, will speak at a major anti-abortion march here the week after his inaugural.
Neither Ms. Conway nor Trump transition officials responded to requests for comment on Wednesday. But Jeanne Mancini, the March for Life president, hinted in an interview Wednesday that Mr. Trump or Mr. Pence, or both, might attend.
No president or vice president has attended the march, though Ronald Reagan sent a video in 1988, and George W. Bush addressed marchers from the East Room of the White House in 2008.
Quick-witted, confident and comfortable on television, Ms. Conway, a mother of four, was a powerful force in driving women to vote for Mr. Trump; in one election surprise, 53 percent of white women did, according to exit polls. As the highest-ranking woman in the new administration, she holds powerful appeal for Republicans in general, and women especially.
“I don’t think it can be underestimated how significant her presence on the Trump campaign was in terms of motivating and mobilizing the pro-life vote,” said Charmaine Yoest, a longtime anti-abortion advocate here, in an interview.
Abortion foes are looking to make big policy gains in Washington under Mr. Trump, who as a candidate signed a letter agreeing to four of the movement’s central demands, including appointing conservative Supreme Court justices and enacting a permanent ban on taxpayer-financed abortions. Already, states like Ohio are rolling back abortion rights.
Ilyse Hogue, the president of Naral Pro-Choice America, said in a recent interview that abortion rights advocates see themselves “standing on the edge of a very dark time.” Ms. Musgrave happily agreed; she said she spent Wednesday on Capitol Hill, at a closed-door conference with Republican leaders who are planning strategy, including stripping funding from Planned Parenthood.
“It’s a great time to be pro-life,” Ms. Musgrave said.
But, short of Mr. Trump or Mr. Pence, Ms. Conway is the march’s biggest “get.” She is a well-known figure here in Washington who tends to arouse the ire of liberal women who consider themselves feminists — and has been caricatured on “Saturday Night Live” — which is one reason anti-abortion women like Ms. Yoest find her both sympathetic and effective.
At the time, Mr. Romney, the former governor of Massachusetts, was promising a “pro-life presidency.” But in 1994, while running for Senate, he said he thought abortion should be “safe and legal,” and in 2002, as a candidate for governor, he had sought the backing of abortion rights advocates. Ms. Conway wasted little time in calling him out on the inconsistencies.
