THE final deadline for enrolling in health insurance for 2017 under the Affordable Care Act is on Tuesday. But with so much turmoil and uncertainty surrounding the law’s future, should consumers bother to shop for coverage?
Yes, say policy experts and consumer advocates. Health plans — and subsidies to help low-income consumers pay for premiums — are in place for this year. Healthcare.gov and the state-based insurance marketplaces are open for business, for consumers who do not have job-based coverage and are seeking individual policies.
“They absolutely should sign up,” said Sabrina Corlette, a research professor at Georgetown’s Center on Health Insurance Reforms. Unless something drastic happens, she said, consumers should have coverage and, for those who qualify, help with premiums through the end of the year.
The outlook after that is murky, to say the least. President Trump and the Republican-controlled Congress are working to dismantle former President Barack Obama’s signature health law, known as Obamacare. But “repealing and replacing” the law, which has expanded health insurance to an estimated 20 million people through individual marketplace plans and the expansion of state Medicaid programs, is complicated. Several proposals have been floated, but it’s not yet clear which, if any, will prevail. And Congress has yet to confirm Tom Price, Mr. Trump’s nominee to lead the Department of Health and Human Services, which oversees Healthcare.gov.
Advertisements for the enrollment deadline were to have run over the next few days, but the Trump administration pulled them back, which presumably could dampen the number of people who take advantage of the option.
While Republican lawmakers want to do away with the Affordable Care Act, doing so without offering an alternative for people covered under the law is politically perilous. So there is likely to be some sort of transition period from the current system to its successor — whatever that may be.
“A key question will be how to move from the Affordable Care Act to a new system without threatening coverage for people who have already gotten it,” said Larry Levitt, a senior vice president at the Kaiser Family Foundation, a health research group.
All that will play out in the coming months. But currently, coverage is available. “If people need coverage now, they should get it,” Karen Pollitz, a senior fellow with the foundation, said.
Some consumers have complained that premiums and out-of-pocket costs for marketplace plans are high, and doctor choices are limited. Still, the federal government estimates that nearly three-quarters of marketplace customers can find plans for less than $75 a month. And most marketplace shoppers qualify for financial help with their premiums.
“It’s a good idea to take advantage of the opportunity to enroll now,” said Elizabeth Hagan, senior policy analyst with Families USA, an advocacy group.
If I sign up by Tuesday, when will my coverage begin?
Coverage will begin March 1.
What if I don’t sign up by Jan. 31?
You can’t enroll in marketplace coverage or change plans after the deadline, unless you have a special circumstance, like losing job-based coverage, marrying or having a child.
Is there any chance that marketplace health coverage could be disrupted this year?
One outside possibility that health care experts are closely watching comes from a lawsuit known as House v. Burwell. The suit, filed by Republican members of the House of Representatives in 2014, challenges federal payments made to insurers to help low-income people pay for health coverage under the Affordable Care Act. Under certain situations, the suit could lead to a dismantling of the “cost sharing” payments, causing insurers to pull back from marketplace coverage this year. The suit is delayed until Feb. 21.