Leslie W. Dunbar, a soft-spoken civil-rights activist who used his influence at private organizations to support black voter registration in the South, programs to reduce hunger among African-American children and the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.’s Poor People’s Campaign, died on Jan. 4 at his home in New Orleans. He was 95.
His son, Tony, said the cause was complications of a stroke.
Mr. Dunbar, a white West Virginian, was not a well-known figure in the constellation of civil-rights leaders like Dr. King, Ralph Abernathy or Roy Wilkins. But he found a way to wed his liberalism to the cause of racial equality by pushing the Southern Regional Council, a politically moderate biracial civic and business group in Atlanta, into a more aggressive civil-rights role.
Historians compared him to other leading white liberals like Ralph McGill, the anti-segregation publisher of The Atlanta Constitution.
Mr. Dunbar joined the Southern Regional Council as research director in 1958 and became executive director three years later. He was a reliable source of information — and strong opinions — for the news media.
Most important, he played a critical role in the creation of the Voter Education Project, whose goal was to register disenfranchised black voters in the Deep South.
By the time the Voting Rights Act passed in 1965, the Voter Education Project had registered nearly 700,000 black voters.
Leslie W. Dunbar in 1996.
Leslie Wallace Dunbar was born on Jan. 27, 1921, in Lewisburg, W.Va., the youngest of 10 children of Marion Leslie Dunbar, whose real estate and saw mill businesses were wiped out during the Great Depression, and the former Minnie Lee Crickenberger.
In 1933, young Leslie, his parents and his four surviving siblings (five others had died between ages 1 and 21) moved to Baltimore, where his father worked for the water company and his mother operated a boardinghouse.
He attended the University of Maryland and went to work at the Glenn L. Martin bomber factory in Middle River, Md., during World War II.
Although he did not have all his undergraduate credits, he was admitted to graduate school at Cornell University, where he earned a master’s degree and a Ph.D. He taught political science at Emory University, was the head of community affairs at the Atomic Energy Commission heavy water plant in Aiken, S.C., and returned to teaching at Mount Holyoke College before joining the Southern Regional Council.
Mr. Dunbar had a cleareyed view of racism in the South and its need to reform.
Mr. Dunbar’s first year as the leader of the council coincided with the beginning of John F. Kennedy’s presidency and the anticipation of a more active role by the federal government in civil rights. While Mr. Dunbar saw the need to cooperate with the Justice Department, he voiced his frustration with the government’s refusal to intervene in the arrests of black protesters in Albany, Ga., who were seeking desegregation in 1961 and 1962.
He left the council in 1965 to run the Field Foundation, a liberal philanthropic organization, where he continued to fund civil-rights causes like the Poor People’s Campaign, as well as groups like the Children’s Defense Fund, the Head Start program in Mississippi and the Food Research and Action Center.
But he resigned in 1980, under pressure from the foundation’s board as it reassessed its grant-making policies. He later taught at Xavier University, worked at the United Negro College Fund and the Ford Foundation, wrote several books and took an active role at the Watts Street Baptist Church in Durham, N.C., where he organized communitywide events on political issues and brought in speakers like civil rights leaders Vernon E. Jordan Jr. and Representative John Lewis.
In addition to his son, Mr. Dunbar is survived by two grandchildren. His wife, Peggy, died in 2009, and his daughter, Linda Kravitz Knox, died in 2005.
Mr. Jordan said that he was always certain of Mr. Dunbar’s role in the civil-rights movement.
