At least six journalists were charged with felony rioting after they were arrested while covering the violent protests that took place just blocks from President Trump’s inauguration parade in Washington on Friday, according to police reports and court documents.
The journalists were among 230 people detained in the anti-Trump demonstrations, during which protesters smashed the glass of commercial buildings and lit a limousine on fire.
The charges against the journalists — Evan Engel, Alexander Rubinstein, Jack Keller, Matthew Hopard, Shay Horse and Aaron Cantu — have been denounced by organizations dedicated to press freedom. All of those arrested have denied participating in the violence.
Carlos Lauria, a spokesman and senior program coordinator for the Committee to Protect Journalists, called the charges “completely inappropriate and excessive,” and the organization has asked that they be dropped immediately.
“Our concern is that these arrests could send a chilling message to journalists that cover future protests,” Mr. Lauria added.
The arrests and charges were reported by The Guardian.
The Metropolitan Police Department in Washington declined to comment Wednesday on why the journalists had been charged along with protesters.
Mr. Engel, a Brooklyn-based journalist who writes for Vocativ, a media and technology outlet, was among those charged with felony rioting and released. He said by email on Wednesday that he was unable to comment on the case since it was active, but that he was looking forward to the day he could say more.
The document charging Mr. Rubinstein, who wrote for RT America, an affiliate of the Russian state-run television network, is identical to that charging Mr. Engel: While it says that protesters carrying “anarchist flags” were observed smashing large plate-glass windows at businesses and setting a limousine on fire, it does not accuse any individual journalist of criminal activity.
Court documents for Mr. Keller — who works on the documentary series “Story of America” — and for Mr. Hopard, Mr. Horse and Mr. Cantu — who are independent journalists — included similar information.
Mr. Lauria, of the Committee to Protect Journalists, said it was all the more alarming that journalists had been arrested. “A car set on fire, windows broken in downtown businesses: I think that this is important information that the public needs to be informed about,” he said.
All those actions were seen to contribute to a threatening climate for journalists covering the election.
The committee had sought to meet with Vice President Mike Pence during the transition, Mr. Lauria said, but that meeting never took place. “We’ve been in touch with aides, and we’re talking about the possibility of having this meeting in the future,” he said.
Ms. Nossel, of Pen America, also linked the charges to a climate fostered by Mr. Trump.
Representatives of Mr. Trump did not immediately respond to an email seeking comment on Wednesday.