Forty years later, the Big Sky area is in the midst of a building boom, with an estimated $1 billion in development set to go up over the next decade.
Big Sky has “this enormous ski area with only 500,000 skier visits a year versus Vail at more than two million,” said Matthew E. Kidd, a principal in CrossHarbor Capital Partners, a Boston-based private equity firm that bought the nearby Yellowstone Club out of bankruptcy in 2009. After getting the Yellowstone Club, which runs its own private ski operation, on solid footing, CrossHarbor saw an opportunity to develop luxury real estate outside the club. In 2013, it bought two other struggling Big Sky developments: Spanish Peaks Mountain Club and Moonlight Basin. CrossHarbor formed the Lone Mountain Land Company to oversee its real estate development outside of the Yellowstone Club.
Some of Big Sky’s growth reflects what’s happening in the region. Bozeman’s population has more than doubled to 43,000 since Mr. Kircher’s first visit. Bozeman Yellowstone International Airport now has more than a dozen direct flights, including the recent addition of flights from Dallas-Fort Worth. Nearly a million cars pass by Big Sky every year; much of that traffic is bound for Yellowstone National Park. Big Sky Resort, for its part, has steadily grown in skier visits, adding roughly 100,000 per decade.
The recession delayed many plans, he said, but it also gave the unincorporated community an opportunity to gear up for growth. “This is a huge area and it straddles two counties,” Mr. Simkins said. Rather than having a mayor or a city council, Big Sky is governed through special-purpose districts that make decisions about such things as transportation, parks, sewers, schools and development.
The Yellowstone Club is relatively self-contained. Many of its owners don’t want or need to leave the club, and new owners are often friends or acquaintances of existing members. The success of Spanish Peaks and Moonlight Basin, however, is closely linked to the town and the mountain resort. The amenities and services of Town Center are a selling point for would-be buyers, as is access to skiing. Both developments offer residents ski-in and ski-out access to Big Sky Resort. (Moonlight Basin operated its own ski area until 2013; its ski terrain is now part of Big Sky Resort.) Likewise, prospective buyers initially learn about the developments after visiting Big Sky Resort.
The Lone Mountain Land Company has focused its attention on bringing more visitors — and potential buyers — to Big Sky. That entails building hotels and bringing more foot traffic to the still-nascent downtown. The developer has three commercial projects in the works in Town Center: Construction will start this spring on a hotel, and two mixed-use buildings will house retail, restaurant and residential space, as well as development and sales offices.
Back on the mountain, Big Sky Resort unveiled two new high-speed chairlifts this ski season, including one six-person chair with heated seats and plexiglass bubbles to block the wind. It is also opening new restaurants. These are early steps in a decade-long plan to inject a more European experience into an area, which Mr. Kircher likens to the Alps. The resort will move forward with its plans regardless of what happens elsewhere in Big Sky, he said. Nevertheless, more real estate near the slopes and better services in town make his vision more attainable.
