RIO DE JANEIRO — At least 10 prisoners have been killed in a prison riot in northeastern Brazil, the latest in a wave of fatal uprisings in the country’s overcrowded prisons that have killed nearly 100 this year — with many of the victims decapitated and mutilated.
The riot began around 5 p.m. Saturday at the State Penitentiary of Alcaçuz, near Natal in the northeastern state of Rio Grande do Norte, said Juliska Azevedo, a spokeswoman for the state government.
In a statement, the authorities said that the riot was caused by a fight between prisoners from two wings and that at least 10 had been confirmed dead.
Late Saturday, the police had yet to regain control of the entire prison. Crowds of desperate relatives had gathered outside, and some had even fought with the police in attempts to get inside.
The authorities are examining images circulating on social media, including one of three decapitated heads in a prison yard, Mr. Bezerra said.
“We are verifying if that happened at Alcaçuz,” he said.
Television reports from the scene described gunfire and showed images of inmates on the prison roof.
“There was the sound of shots and a riot,” Ms. Azevedo said.
Killings and decapitations are common in Brazil’s prisons, where conditions are sometimes described as medieval, but violence has exploded this year — the latest uprising followed the massacre of 56 prisoners during a 17-hour riot at a jail near Manaus in the Amazon state of Amazonas on New Year’s Day. Many of the dead were decapitated and dismembered. Four more prisoners were killed in a nearby prison the next day.
The state authorities ascribed blame for the Manaus deaths to the Family of the North, an Amazon drug gang that had attacked prisoners connected to a rival gang, the São Paulo-based First Capital Command. The gangs were believed to be fighting for control of lucrative drug smuggling routes.
Four days later, 33 prisoners were killed and many were dismembered at a prison in Boa Vista in Roraima State, in the far north of Brazil. The state authorities said the First Capital Command was behind the killings. Then four more prisoners were killed in a third Manaus prison after being moved from the site of the first massacre.
Ms. Azevedo said that the gang, known by its Portuguese acronym, P.C.C., and a Rio Grande do Norte gang called the Crime Syndicate were involved in the riot on Saturday. The prison has a capacity of about 620 prisoners but was holding 1,100, she said.
Mr. Bezerra said the involvement of the gangs would be confirmed only after investigations were completed.
The Estado de São Paulo newspaper published photographs on its website of prisoners climbing over a wall and running through a prison yard. It quoted a Natal judge, Henrique dos Santos, who said that some cells in the jail had no bars.
A report on the Tribuna do Norte website quoting the president of the state prison agents’ union said the riot began when weapons were thrown over the walls of the prison from “support cars” and one gang invaded a wing controlled by another.
Ms. Azevedo said that it was unlikely that riot police officers could retake control of the jail until daylight, and that the final death toll could be much higher.
The wave of prison killings and riots has developed into a political crisis for President Michel Temer. On Saturday, the justice minister, Alexandre de Moraes, said in a television interview that the country had 650,000 prisoners — almost 300,000 more than its capacity.
He has released a preliminary plan to build more high-security federal prisons and to reduce drug crime and homicides.
