Updated, 9:20 a.m.
Good morning on this mild Thursday.
Although Edgar Allan Poe was born in Boston and buried in Baltimore, we like to think that he was a New Yorker, through and through.
The poet lived in apartments and houses across the city, and spent most of his final years in a cottage in what is now the Bronx.
To celebrate the 208th anniversary today of his birth, we honored Poe with a tour of his New York.
We then walked west, only about 50 paces, to a competing site, now an Aldo shoe store, which bears a plaque that also claims to be the farmhouse’s original location.
He fits right in.
Seeking a less disputed link to the author, we headed north to Columbia University.
 The mantel found its way to Columbia after a history buff paid $5 to haul it away before the farmhouse was demolished.
So we arranged a trip north.
The librarians let us ring the metal object, turning green with age, to verify its authenticity. We must say, the sound was less “jingling” and “tinkling,” and more deep-clanging.
This week, you can learn about Poe’s history at the Bronx Library Center on Saturday, attend performances and readings of his work near his cottage in the Bronx the same day, or take a walking tour of his life in Greenwich Village on Sunday.
A day to make even make the most morose poet grin.
As far as winter days go, this one is tops: A bright sun, only a touch of wind, and a high of 51.
We’re looking at a stretch of mild winter days (with some rain), at least through the weekend.
• Mayor de Blasio, Alec Baldwin, the Rev. Al Sharpton and others will demonstrate in front of Trump International Hotel at 6 p.m.
• Islanders host Stars, 7 p.m. (MSG+). Rangers at Maple Leafs, 7:30 p.m. (MSG). Knicks host Wizards, 8 p.m. (TNT).
J, Z, L and 7 trains are running with delays.
• Alternate-side parking: in effect until Jan. 28.
Donald J. Trump is set to become the 45th president on Friday, but New Yorkers still can’t get enough of his former opponent Hillary Clinton.
During recent outings in the city, Mrs. Clinton has been met with hugs, applause and adoration from a crush of fans.
But for those supporters who haven’t yet been able to snap a coveted Clinton selfie, may we suggest another souvenir: a taste of one of Mrs. Clinton’s signature cookies.
A gallery on the Lower East Side is offering the baked goods, displayed in a giant cookie jar in the shape of a pantsuit.
A brouhaha ensued when Mrs. Clinton made the comment during her husband’s first presidential campaign, and the magazine Family Circle responded by sponsoring a bake-off between her and the first lady at the time, Barbara Bush.
The winning recipe: Mrs. Clinton’s oatmeal chocolate chip cookies.
You can sample the treats (baked by the artist) and other works at the solo exhibition “Housewife,” at Sargent’s Daughters through Feb. 26.