LOS ANGELES — In a loft studio in Venice Beach here, Tom Binns is rebuilding. Most of the world knows him as a jeweler, and a small subset of the world — the fashion world — spent many years celebrating him as one of its favorites. He was showered with awards, sought as a collaborator (early on, he worked with Malcolm McLaren and Vivienne Westwood, and many more after) and had his creations worn by the first lady. But most of the fashion world doesn’t call anymore.
Mr. Binns has been making jewelry for 40 years, as he tells it, long before the business that bore his name was founded or the art school he attended taught him the proper way to do it. But he first came to success with a eureka moment: that there is enough jewelry about already, and that he didn’t need to make more. He haunted flea markets to buy up stalls’ worth of old jewelry, junk and treasure alike, and remade it into assemblages that were more Dada than decorous.
“I’ll never forget the first time I walked into his showroom,” Ikram Goldman, the Chicago boutique owner, said. “I was dumbfounded, my mouth was open, I couldn’t even speak.” It was 17 years ago, and Ms. Goldman was preparing to open her store, long before she counted Chicago’s stylish women — Michelle Obama among them — as clients. She bought Mr. Binns’s jewelry and has stocked it ever since.
The jewels found an eager audience, but the pieces Mr. Binns made by hand were costly and laborious to produce. Moreover, his ragtag, magpie exuberance had been easy to knock off as he had risen to prominence. Then, in 2007, he entered a partnership to create a more commercial-friendly collection than his handmade pieces. “I might as well cash in on it rather than everybody else,” he thought.
Though the commercial collection was exclusively costume jewelry, Mr. Binns celebrated the fakeness of his pieces rather than try to pass off rhinestones and paste as gems, playing up wild colors and oversize volume.
Ms. Volandes traced his influence to the brightly colored costume jewelry that still abounds today. Ms. Goldman went further.
But after years and a store on Perry Street in New York, Mr. Binns’s company foundered, choked by competition, his lack of interest in commercializing his designs and his own admitted thorniness. (“Artists should be rebellious,” he said, “but, alas, rebellion isn’t what it used to be.”) Lawyers were called, and Mr. Binns spent two years in litigation to get his name back. “I paid off the ransom,” he said. He still has an archive of thousands of old pieces and has been selling them privately to make ends meet — “barely,” he added.
Jewelry doesn’t interest him as much these days as art, in any case. It is often seen as “less than,” wearable art rather than art, a little sibling to fashion, a mere “accessory.” He fumed about the press coverage that attended the president and Michelle Obama’s state visit to Britain in 2011, where, at a dinner at the American ambassador’s residence, she wore a Binns necklace of tangled chains. The coverage fawned over her dresses.
He has not yet exhibited the works, but he hopes to. And he has continued to make a few jewelry pieces for longtime supporters, including Ms. Goldman, and recently sent a few others off to Colette in Paris.
Mr. Binns said he found jewelry limiting as a medium and wasn’t keen to return to it full time.
