Early on Tuesday evening, as a shivering rain fell, Nelini Stamp stood outside the headquarters of Goldman Sachs on West Street in Lower Manhattan in a waterproof poncho, her sleeping bag, protected by plastic, close at hand. An alumna of Occupy Wall Street who currently holds the position of national membership director for the Working Families Party, Ms. Stamp had helped to organize an encampment of protesters outside the investment bank, who intended to take up residence there until the end of the week, when Donald J. Trump would be sworn in as the country’s 45th president.
The group had been larger in the afternoon but a core remained, undeterred by the weather, to denounce a government that would in a short time, presumably, be run by the banking class that Mr. Trump, while the Republican nominee, had enthusiastically maligned. One of the participants in the action, a Vietnam veteran named Richard Robinson who had flown in from Utah, voted for Mr. Trump but became quickly disillusioned by his reliance on Wall Street to supply his cast of advisers.
Mr. Robinson is part of a group called MH Action, which fights to protect the rights of mobile home owners who have faced skyrocketing land-use fees in recent years as corporate conglomerates and real estate investment trusts, exploiting opportunity in the declining fortunes of the middle class, have bought up trailer parks. “I felt Trump made promises about draining the swamp and doing things differently in Washington and that is not happening,” he said.
The “movement,” of course, is Trump resistance, which is essentially a movement against everything — the potential repeal of the Affordable Care Act, climate-change denial, the omnibus threats to the pursuit of equality (racial, economic, gender), a general erosion of civility, modesty, nuance, logic. How to counter it all? Even if the answer to that question is still taking shape, the intensity of the desire to fight back, made evident in part by the Women’s March on Washington taking place on Saturday, is producing what will probably turn out to be one of the most fertile periods of activism on the left in decades.
Right now in New York City, the nation’s capital of bubbledom, it is possible to join in an act of opposition to the New World Order nearly every day. On Sunday, writers marched from the New York Public Library in support of free speech; other actions like it took place around the country. At roughly the same time, in a move coordinated by the anti-Trump group Rise & Resist, 15 people sat down to brunch at the Jean-Georges and Nougatine restaurants, both in the Trump International Hotel at Columbus Circle. They hadn’t come for frittatas; they had made reservations to disrupt brunch. At a certain point they stood up and began coughing loudly in unison, then chanting for the right to health care. Some in the group had chronic illnesses, including H.I.V., and feared the loss of insurance that has been provided under the Affordable Care Act.
Generally speaking, progressive activists believe that the complacency and will to compromise that has characterized a dominant faction of the left has now been shaken to a point where few can easily regard the course as a tenable one. Extremism incentivizes. And unifies. “The hottest fire makes the strongest steel — and so far, that is what is happening,” Charles Khan, a leader in a six-year-old activist group based in New York called Strong Economy for All, said.
It is common to hear this current breed of revolutionary talk about the wish to create a Tea Party of the left. This has been prompted in part by the recent online publication of the Indivisible Guide, a playbook for grass-roots advocacy by a group of former congressional aides, who have distilled the successful tactics deployed by the Tea Party in blocking so much of the Obama administration’s agenda and offered them up to Trump antagonists.
When I met Ms. Raymond-Tolan she was overseeing a group that met weekly to pursue this vein of dissent, and persuade friends and relatives in other states — Maine, New Jersey, Wisconsin — to take the same measures with their own representatives. No staff member for a member of Congress representing an exurb in Wisconsin wants to hear from an orthodontist in Cobble Hill, Brooklyn, about what’s wrong with Rex Tillerson, Mr. Trump’s pick for secretary of state. (Other groups meeting in the same synagogue that evening as part of the Get Organized BK movement, and spilling out of the rooms in which they had been assigned, were targeting women’s health initiatives, or working to develop projects to help schools expand student activism, or talking about how to hold the news media accountable for its coverage of the Trump presidency.) Ms. Raymond-Tolan’s group had already delivered over 2,500 letters to the offices of Senators Kirsten E. Gillibrand and Chuck Schumer, Democrats of New York, asking that they obstruct Mr. Trump’s cabinet appointments.
Outside Mr. Schumer’s prewar building on Prospect Park West in Brooklyn, there have been two actions this month in which hundreds of ordinary people convened, letting the senator, who is the minority leader, know that they are keeping watch, and, by implication, that they will work to install some other Democrat in his place if he concedes, or gets lazy.
Despite the city’s long history of radicalism — during the Progressive movement of the 19th century, in the Communist fervor leading up to World War I, or the social upheavals of the 1960s and ’70s — there is always a strain of skepticism that greets the expression of certain political ideals. Cynicism animates the city as much as hope and conviction. To what extent are activists engaging in self-soothing? To what extent are they merely trying to establish their own relevance? It is always tempting to see the absurdity in theatrical gestures. One woman I met, who had been part of a group devising possible boycotts, announced that the group had come up with the idea of a Dump Trump event. A trash bin would be placed in Grand Army Plaza, in the heart of Park Slope, where people could dispose of their Trump merchandise — shoes by Ivanka, say — which accumulate in brownstone Brooklyn the way collected volumes by Max Weber pile up at Disney World.
The new wave of activism taking hold in New York and perhaps around the country owes a debt to the Occupy Wall Street movement even as its success continues to be debated. Since the emergence of the New Left in the 1960s, which reoriented the focus of social reform away from its historical roots in Marxism and labor and toward what we have come to call (and criticize as) identity politics, the relationship between college-educated activists and union members, who often have dissimilar agendas, has hardly been seamless.
Occupy in many ways helped bridge that divide. It got involved in a fight on behalf of art handlers — represented by the Teamsters union — who had been in long and trying contract negotiations with the auction house Sotheby’s, and things were resolved successfully. More to the point, many battles that gained prominence in the wake of the movement — the fight for a $15 minimum wage was ultimately supported by Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, a Democrat — tightened the bonds between mainstream activism and members of service-employee and health care unions. In October 2011, Occupy held a rally in Foley Square specifically in order to showcase its forged hands with labor.
When members of the Occupy movement first took over Zuccotti Park in fall 2011, it was easy to make fun of the drumbeating and the dancing, the sense of carnival-like anarchy and lack of direction. What the movement was asking for wasn’t clear. But Occupy Wall Street created a foundation upon which politicians and causes have flourished, and built, and demanded power. And power, in the words of Frederick Douglass, concedes nothing without a demand.