Mutual Funds|A Trillion-Dollar Question: Why Don’t More Women Run Mutual Funds?
A Trillion-Dollar Question: Why Don’t More Women Run Mutual Funds?
If you stop to consider who runs the thousands of mutual funds in America, you might conjure up an image of offices full of men. Then your brain might auto-correct to include some fund managers who are women.
But how many? Perhaps you’d estimate that about 30 percent to 35 percent of fund managers are female — which is similar to the number of doctors and lawyers who are women, according to the Census Bureau.
In fact, a paltry 9.4 percent of American mutual fund managers are women, according to a 2015 report by Morningstar. That’s lower than in the rest of the world, where one in five fund managers is female on average, according to a follow-up study of 26,340 funds in 56 countries, which Morningstar published in November. The 2015 study did not include exchange-traded funds; the recent one did.
Equally astounding: Whether here or overseas, the numbers have scarcely budged since 2008.
This isn’t a gender gap; it’s a chasm. And it would be startling in any field in 2017, but in finance it’s almost mystifying. A substantial body of research has shown that having more women in leadership roles — whether in corporations or asset management — seems to improve performance.
In fact, the 2015 Morningstar report found that funds run by mixed-gender teams had better returns than those run by only men or only women. “This data suggests that diversity leads to better results for fund investors,” said Laura Pavlenko Lutton, head of fund research for North America Morningstar. “It makes sense that when you mix backgrounds and experiences, you generate better ideas and better returns,” Ms. Lutton said, echoing similar comments of many people in the industry.
So, in a field where every fraction of a percentage point counts, why would this disparity persist?
“We think of ourselves as a meritocracy in finance, but this begs some hard questions,” said Katherine Collins, chief executive of Honeybee Capital, an independent research firm in Boston.
You may be tempted to blame the usual suspects (like industry bias and old-boys’ networks), but there’s no single culprit here. For women, the pipeline into investment management needs repairs and upgrades from start to finish.
Based on extensive interviews with people in the industry, it appears that women in college and graduate school would benefit from: greater awareness of asset management jobs and what they entail; better recruitment, clearer entry points; and a culture that supports and rewards the talents women bring to the table.
There may even be ways that women can put on their hard hats and help with the pipeline’s construction.
Let’s start with awareness. If you’re a young woman in college or getting your M.B.A., how do you set your sights on investment management as a career?
Many women simply don’t know these roles are open to them. Men may lack that awareness as well, but there is a specific domino effect here that has an impact on women: The dearth of women in asset management means there are very few role models for young women, which means there are few connections to bring women into these roles, which perpetuates a lack of visibility.
“It’s pretty hard to say, ‘I want to get my M.B.A. and then go into asset management,’ when you don’t know that option exists,” said Mandana Hormozi, co-manager of the Franklin Mutual Beacon Fund at Franklin Mutual Series, an investment group under Franklin Templeton Investments.
Many people are trying. Lakshmi Bhojraj, executive director of the Parker Center for Investment Research at the Samuel Curtis Johnson Graduate School of Management at Cornell, started a Women in Investing conference for M.B.A. students and a similar conference last year for undergraduates. “We just weren’t seeing enough applicants for our investment management track,” she said.
When women realize how male-dominated investment management is, she said, “it can be a bit daunting for them.” The Cornell conferences are meant to give women the opportunity to talk to other women about these jobs, without feeling self-conscious.
Why are some women daunted by the idea of pursuing a career in asset management? One possible reason: Few people know what asset managers do. Women in particular may be surprised to learn that the job is just as much about seeing the world, as it is sitting at a desk crunching numbers, said Noriko H. Chen, an equity portfolio manager with the Capital Group in San Francisco. She co-manages its American Funds New Perspective Fund and the American Funds Developing World Growth and Income Fund.
Ms. Chen entered college with a nonfinancial career in mind; she was a pre-med major. But her father had always encouraged her to invest, she says, and she had a natural interest in picking stocks. With the money she earned from a part-time job, Ms. Chen invested small amounts in companies whose products she knew well, like computers and ice cream. She gravitated toward jobs with financial companies during the summer. After she graduated, Ms. Chen decided to forgo medicine and move into finance.
Many portfolio managers start as research analysts, where they’re assigned to a cover a specific industry. At Capital Group, Ms. Chen began as an infrastructure analyst in Asia, evaluating companies that produced building materials. “I saw a lot of cement plants,” she said, laughing, but said she found the details of the work fascinating. She walked through factories, talked to workers, and met with management teams, distributors and customers to decide whether to recommend buying shares of a company.
“You really have to get out there and kick the tires,” she said. “But it’s also a relationship job.” Analysts can cover an industry for years, she said, building connections that help them dig up insights about a company.
Back at her desk, Ms. Chen would build a financial model of each company, helping her decide whether to recommend that portfolio managers invest in it. Once she became a portfolio manager herself, she relied on similar skills, but took on more responsibility. “You become more of a generalist,” Ms. Chen said, often overseeing many industries and evaluating the recommendations of different research analysts in deciding whether to buy stock for a fund.
Unfortunately, many women seem reluctant to enter a field that constantly tests their ability to weather setbacks — or perhaps they need practice. Stock-picking contests are common at the M.B.A. level. They’re designed to help students practice quantitative assessment in a low-stakes environment. Yet many women just won’t do them, Ms. Chen said.
Elissa Sangster, executive director of the Forté Foundation, a nonprofit that helps women start careers in business and finance, speculated that some women may harbor “concerns about their quantitative readiness,” and thus avoid not only stock-picking competitions, but the financial track altogether.
One of Forté’s missions is to encourage women to flex their quantitative muscles. “We want women managing more capital, and we know that results are being left on the table because they aren’t pursuing these careers,” she said.
It almost makes you wonder if STEM programs need to add an “F” to the acronym, to encourage girls to consider Science, Technology, Engineering, Math and Finance.
In addition to building more entry points into the job pipeline, some companies are striving to improve recruitment — a wonky process in asset management. Because companies in this field typically do not hire as many candidates annually as investment banks do, asset management firms often lack a strong presence on M.B.A. campuses, or start their recruiting after students have already accepted other jobs. So even if you’re interested in asset management, it can be tricky to figure out how to land a job.
Although Ms. Martinez did land an asset management job in New York in 2008, she says it was difficult to find a similar job when she relocated to North Carolina in 2013.
To remedy the erratic recruitment process that women in particular face, Capital Group, Franklin Templeton, Vanguard and other companies have created programs to attract undergrads, mentor women transitioning from other fields and reach out to female M.B.A.s several years after they graduate.
The CFA Institute, which offers the chartered financial analyst credential held by many portfolio managers, started the Alpha and Gender Diversity conference in 2015; it’s now an annual event. Vanguard even offers an onsite internship program with portfolio management groups “so an employee can try it on for size,” Tim Buckley, chief investment officer at Vanguard, wrote in an email.
But there is still that elephant in the middle of all this: the reputation of Wall Street itself as a culture that’s unfriendly to women. “Historically, money management has had a reputation for being a tough environment for women,” Mr. Buckley said.
Still, many people say that the boys’ club of Wall Street is alive and well, and — despite all the research on women’s investing acumen — the financial world isn’t always set up to value women’s skills. “There is a tendency to reward aggression,” said Ms. Collins of Honeybee Capital, formerly a top portfolio manager at Fidelity for 11 years.
For men and women, these are high-paying jobs. The starting salary for a portfolio manager can be in the mid six figures, but a significant chunk of a fund manager’s compensation is paid as a bonus, and that’s where big differences can emerge. Many fund managers are paid on the basis of one-year performance, which can reinforce short-term strategies that go for the big win.
In effect, some of the qualities that may make many women successful asset managers — keeping a cool head, being calculated about taking on risk, taking a long-term view — can work against them. “Women often get left out of the limelight, and the dollars follow,” Ms. Collins said.
Those creative efforts are emerging at many points along the hiring pipeline. Take Girls Who Invest, a nonprofit founded in 2015 by Seema R. Hingorani, a former chief investment officer of New York City’s pension plan.
The program places college sophomores and juniors in a 10-week summer training program in asset management that builds awareness of the field, allowing them to make connections, acquire technical investment knowledge and get a feel for what these careers are like.
Ultimately, the bottom line is truly about the bottom line — for financial companies and investors. All-female and mixed-gender teams combined now oversee nearly $3 trillion of mutual fund assets in America, Morningstar says. Considering that greater gender diversity seems to improve performance, it appears that closing the gender gap isn’t just good for women. It’s a potentially terrific investment for everyone.