President-elect Donald J. Trump’s choices to lead the Treasury and Energy Departments faced sharp questions over issues and ethics in their Senate confirmation hearings, but neither seemed to lose any support from Republicans.
■ Rick Perry, the former Texas governor, nominated to be Energy Secretary, said he no longer wants to eliminate the department.
■ Mr. Perry also reversed an early position and said he now believed that humans had contributed to climate change.
■ He also vowed to “protect all of the science” in the Energy Department from budget cuts.
■ Mr. Perry also showed a lighter side in an exchange with Senator Al Franken, Democrat of Minnesota. Scroll down for the video of the exchange.
■ The hearing for Steven T. Mnuchin, Mr. Trump’s choice for Treasury secretary was far more heated as he came under attack for failing to disclose $100 million in assets.
■ Senator Ron Wyden, the ranking Democrat on the Finance Committee, said Mr. Mnuchin’s work in finance represented the worst in banking practices.
■ Mr. Mnuchin said he did not use offshore accounts for his investments to avoid taxes, an assertion Democrats challenged aggressively.
■ Senator Chuck Schumer of New York said he expected a handful of Mr. Trump’s cabinet selections to be confirmed by the Senate on Friday.
Mr. Perry made his case before the Senate Energy Committee that he was qualified to run the agency he vowed to abolish when running for president in 2012.
The former Texas governor addressed his awkward history on the issue up front in his testimony.
Mr. Perry, perhaps more important, said he had learned about the department’s mission, most notably its oversight of the nation’s nuclear arsenal.
“This confirmation process has been extremely informative and beneficial for me,” Mr. Perry said, noting his conversations with the current energy secretary, Ernest J. Moniz, a nuclear physicist who played a crucial role in negotiating the Iran nuclear weapons agreement.
With a broad smile, Mr. Perry said he enjoyed the visit. “I hope you are as much fun on that dais as you were on your couch,” he said.
The laughter that had rocked the room subsided, and Mr. Franken said, “Let’s move on,” asking a question about the role of the Energy Department in helping to develop fracking technology and its role in the shale gas boom.
In an opening volley, Senator Maria Cantwell, Democrat of Washington, asked Mr. Perry where he stood on an early move by the Trump transition team to determine who in the Energy Department had responsibilities related to climate change — an effort resisted by department officials and later disavowed by the incoming administration.
Senator Mazie K. Hirono, Democrat of Hawaii, asked Mr. Perry to comment on an article in The Hill newspaper describing “dramatic cuts” planned by the Trump transition team that would not only return funding for nuclear physics and advanced computing research to 2008 levels, but would also eliminate the Energy Department’s Office of Electricity, its Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy and the Office of Fossil Energy, which works on technologies like carbon capture and storage that reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
In an earlier question related to the news report, Mr. Perry had suggested that something might not be true just because it appeared on the internet. In response to Ms. Hirono’s return to the question, he joked, “Maybe they’ll have the same experience I had and forget they said that.” The line got a laugh, but the question went unanswered.
One by one, Mr. Trump’s choices have given their views on climate change. What they have said often differs substantially from their past statements — but is also inconsistent with the current state of science.
Similarly, Rex W. Tillerson, Mr. Trump’s choice to become secretary of state, said that humans were one of the causes of warming, but that “we cannot predict with precision” where it is going. That is consistent with the position he has long taken as the chief executive of Exxon Mobil.
The straddling sounds more moderate, but does not reflect the state of the science of climate change — which has grown overwhelmingly conclusive on the role of humans as the prime cause — and it hedges on the need for action.
For those who remember the Nixon years, this might be called a “nondenial denial:” It moves the nominees from Mr. Trump’s much-criticized statement that climate change was a Chinese-created hoax, a comment that he, too, distanced himself from.
Mr. Mnuchin has broad experience with banking, finance and even the movie industry, but Democrats did their best on Thursday to paint him as incompetent when it comes to running the country’s finances.
The pick for Treasury secretary was peppered with questions about how he would keep Medicare solvent and how he would use the department’s resources to clamp down on the financing of terrorism. Mr. Mnuchin largely kept his answers general and vague on those subjects, but promised to work “diligently” to get up to speed in areas that are outside of his expertise.
He said he did not use offshore accounts to avoid taxes in the United States, an assertion that several Democrats challenged.
Before Mr. Mnuchin had a chance to speak, Senator Ron Wyden, Democrat of Oregon, tore into his business résumé and painted him as a symbol of the banking industry’s worst practices.
Mr. Wyden also aggressively questioned Mr. Mnuchin about his view on Social Security taxes, and Mr. Mnuchin conceded that he needed to give the issue more study.
Democrats continue to complain that they are not being given enough time to question cabinet choices.
Mr. Schumer said that he anticipated a small handful of cabinet selections to be confirmed on Friday — just after President-elect Donald J. Trump’s inauguration — but vowed to continue resisting several other selections of Mr. Trump indefinitely.
Mr. Schumer said that the two most likely to be confirmed were selections for national security: Gen. John F. Kelly, Mr. Trump’s choice to lead the Department of Homeland Security; and James N. Mattis, his pick for secretary of Defense.
