In one of countless displays of cultural counterprogramming to Inauguration Day across the country, Broadway’s biggest stars — a group generally disheartened by the election of Donald J. Trump — performed show-tunes-with-a-message on Friday afternoon at Town Hall in Manhattan to raise money for social justice organizations. With Mr. Trump celebrating the start of his presidency, the singers celebrated art as a comfort, an inspiration and a rallying cry for the coming months and years.
“We think of it as a giant antidepressant,” said Seth Rudetsky, a Broadway talk-show host and musician who, with his husband, James Wesley, produced the “Concert for America,” the first in a series of monthly shows in different cities to raise money for the N.A.A.C.P., Planned Parenthood and other groups.
Musicians organized protest concerts in several cities, including an “Anti-Inaugural Ball” in Los Angeles that featured Rage Against the Machine. But others sought to honor Mr. Trump’s inauguration: The Newseum, a Washington museum dedicated to promoting and defending the First Amendment, organized a day of events billed as a “celebration experience” — even though Mr. Trump has had a rocky relationship with the news media.
So, how creative were artists in reckoning with the start of the Trump era? Here is a sampling of Inauguration Day in culture.
Glen Roven is no stranger to presidential inaugurations. He was the conductor of the opening ceremonies for Bill Clinton and George W. Bush, gathering performers like Barbra Streisand, Fleetwood Mac and, yes, the Rockettes. Earlier this year, he thought he might get the call for Hillary Clinton’s, too.
When Mrs. Clinton lost, Mr. Roven decided to draw on her candidacy to create a counterpoint to the actual inauguration. At National Sawdust in Brooklyn on Friday, Mr. Roven presented the premiere of “The Hillary Speeches,” a 25-minute video recital that featured two of Mrs. Clinton’s speeches set to music. The video includes a diverse group of artists — including the opera singers Isabel Leonard, Nathan Gunn and Lawrence Brownlee, the actress Annie Potts and Chilina Kennedy (currently starring in “Beautiful” on Broadway) — singing excerpts from Mrs. Clinton’s initial declaration of candidacy and recent concession speech. The video was also livestreamed.
The music largely conveyed optimism and empowerment instead of failure. “Hillary’s words are beautiful — they should live on in music,” Mr. Roven said before the event, which drew Ms. Potts, Ms. Kennedy and the soprano Camille Zamora, among others.
A funereal feeling hung in the crisp mountain air in Park City, Utah, as attendees at the ardently liberal Sundance Film Festival trudged into the 1,300-seat Eccles Theater for Friday’s first big screening. At least they would be in a darkened movie theater when Mr. Trump took the oath of office.
Two hours later, many of the same people came tumbling out of the Eccles with grins on their faces, having just received an unlikely message of optimism — from none other than Al Gore, a guy who knows a thing or two about losing elections.
“An Inconvenient Sequel: Truth to Power,” about the former vice president’s ongoing crusade focused on climate change, would not seem like much of a picker-upper. But the documentary has surprisingly upbeat messages both personal (when you are dealt a blow, regroup and keep going) and political (Mr. Trump will have a difficult time wreaking environmental havoc because of the economic momentum behind clean energy).
Mr. Trump campaigned on threats to limit First Amendment protections for the news media while also routinely criticizing the press, singling out and insulting journalists, and rarely holding news conferences. The Newseum shrugged that off, though, as it held a $500-a-head party, a more expensive affair than the similar events it had held during the past two inaugurations.
“Bad presidents make for great music,” the veteran rabble-rousing guitarist Tom Morello has said. Fortunately for Mr. Morello’s career, then, he is never quite satisfied with those in power.
As a member of Rage Against the Machine, Mr. Morello protested the second presidential inauguration of Bill Clinton 20 years ago with a guerrilla-style radio show featuring Noam Chomsky and Beck; his band also demonstrated — loudly — at the Democratic National Convention in 2000 and the Republican one in 2008. Last year, for the R.N.C. in Cleveland, Mr. Morello assembled a political supergroup, Prophets of Rage, featuring Chuck D of Public Enemy, for a series of on-the-ground shows and marches.
The resistance was set to continue on Friday night in Los Angeles, where Prophets of Rage was expected to headline the “Anti-Inaugural Ball” at the Teragram Ballroom, with a lineup including Jack Black (as the master of ceremonies); Jackson Browne; the rapper Vic Mensa; the Los Angeles Freedom Choir (made up of union members, military veterans, Muslim students and more); and the reunion of Audioslave, with the singer Chris Cornell. The show will be streamed live on Facebook.
In an interview before the concert, Mr. Morello listed five “concrete suggestions” for action under President Trump: Show up, join up (“a union, a band”), stand up (“for those who are targets of bigotry”), read up (“don’t just pick a news channel that confirms your prejudices”) and rise up.
The call by artists and critics for an “Art Strike” on Inauguration Day led to so many galleries being closed in Los Angeles that one of the city’s busiest art destinations, the block of La Cienega Boulevard south of Venice Boulevard, looked like a ghost town late Friday morning.
In all, 11 of the 15 galleries on the block were closed, including Luis de Jesus, Anat Egbi, Cherry and Martin, Edward Cella Art+Architecture, Samuel Freeman, Paul Kopeikin and Zevitas Marcus.
About two miles north, from his home office near La Cienega, the contrarian private collector-dealer Stefan Simchowitz vowed to continue business “per usual,” which often involves heavy Instagram and Facebook use to promote artists. He also used Facebook this week to criticize the “hypocrisy” of galleries planning to close.
