Increasingly, everything we do seems to be in the company of others — and on a regimented schedule.  In an essay on “The End of Relaxation,” the writer Sadie Stein pointed out that trendy wellness retreats appeal, in large part, by offering the ultimate luxury: freedom from having to make any decisions, since the itineraries are decided for you. And in our day to day, we’re more likely than ever to spare ourselves the agony of having to decide where to go or what to do — and just stay in (lest our choices disappoint us). The writer Molly Young explored the phenomenon for T (“Is Staying In the New Going Out?”), offering as explanation that staying in is low-risk, reliable, easier. She writes about going out, on the other hand: “We do it for the possibility of encountering the spectacular. This rarely happens.” Or, it could happen all the time — if you venture out to a magical place where spectacular encounters are the fabric of everyday life, as they are at Greyfield Inn on Cumberland Island.
I’ve tried to embrace the communal approach to fulfillment. Last year, when I noticed that even the personal art of meditation had morphed into a communal affair, I binged. I chased mindful silence in rooms full of endlessly disruptive bodies (grumbling tummies, persistent coughs, fumbling latecomers) and gratefully ate the three organic, vegetarian meals given to me each day on a retreat, despite my personal preference for smaller, more frequent snacks. I was perpetually dissatisfied and irritated. Instead of being lifted up by the community, I was weighed down by not being able to express or fulfill my own wants and needs. So when I went to Cumberland, a barrier island off the coast of Georgia, most widely known as the faraway and secluded site of John F. Kennedy Jr.’s wedding, I didn’t bring anyone with me.
Getting to Greyfield Inn from Manhattan is almost too easy. A direct flight to Jacksonville is less than two hours; and the short drive up I-95 and across A1A to Fernandina Beach is just 45 minutes. After another 45 minutes by water, on a private ferry, you arrive at the inn’s dock, and set out on foot under a mossy canopy of fern-covered oak trees toward the house. It was built in 1900 as a home for Margaret Ricketson, the daughter of Lucy and Thomas Carnegie, and is run today by descendants of the Carnegie family, Mitty and Mary Ferguson.
In the inn’s kitchen, stacks of real picnic baskets are stuffed with lunch and labeled with guests’ names. The most exciting thing about arriving by the 12:15 p.m. ferry (there are only three ferries each day, in the morning, the afternoon and at night) is finding your basket, and choosing where to eat your lunch. And if you have arrived alone, you end up exactly where you want to be, eating salad (of lettuce picked from Greyfield’s garden), nibbling homemade cookies and enjoying a glass of wine from the inn’s bar, where you help yourself and leave a tally of your drinks during your stay. Even in January, most guests bring their lunches outside like I did — the weather hovered around 60 degrees during the MLK holiday weekend — to fuel up for a bumpy bike ride down the main road.
Very few people are actually allowed to live on the island, as most of it is preserved and protected by the National Park Service, so there is no traffic. The path that runs the length of the island is unpaved, wide enough for just one vehicle and trekked mostly by campers on foot, Greyfield guests on bicycles and wildlife. To travel it south from Greyfield brings you to Dungeness, a 19th-century Carnegie estate that has since been reduced to ruins (which are also neatly kept by the National Park Service). It alone is a spectacular encounter: grand, erect, nostalgic. But so, too, is the quiet, marshy beach that runs the length of its backside, where fossilized bones and shark teeth are ripe for the picking. Armadillos scatter across the empty, expansive lawn. Around the corner, a lonely marble statue stands tall behind the old structure of what was once a pergola. Finding it is like stumbling onto a secret.
If my boyfriend had been in tow, we would have hooted and hollered and marveled at the novelty, talking excitedly the rest of the way back. But alone, my eyes welled up. I laughed at myself. I cried again. I decided my spirit animal is a horse, and that this one was a sign — a sign that I should get out more, and remain open to spectacular encounters. And bonus points on doing it alone.
During my stay, the other guests each arrived with a significant other in tow, many for a special occasion: a pregnancy, a 39th wedding anniversary and a Christmas present. It would be easy to imagine that the best of Greyfield might be easier for most to enjoy with a partner in crime, including the extra-long porch swings and especially dinner — a semiformal, three-course affair served at communal tables and preceded by a cocktail hour. I don’t have many friends who enjoy walking into a party alone, dressed up and not knowing a soul. But luckily I’m only moderately socially awkward and, by the end of my short trip, could work the room. I’d float in and catch up with my new friends, whom I’d met earlier in the day. There was the man who had fallen out of his kayak on our tour (after we saw an alligator — which perhaps only I considered to be a spectacular encounter — and before I helped drag him out by his life vest); the woman who told me at breakfast about her son’s Japanese lover; and the couple whose mysterious children were still, forever, hiding in their room (even during the oyster roast we enjoyed on Saturday). We discussed career changes, the day’s adventures, the enduring appeal of old trees and the tiny hairs that peak out under an armadillo’s armor. Weeks later, I still wonder how they’re doing and hope to see them again.
On my last morning, I rose very early, tied on one of the inn’s oversize robes and walked downstairs for coffee. The kitchen was empty. And as I made my way back toward my room, I heard small, syncopated popping sounds, growing louder and louder. The sun had barely begun to rise, and yet someone had already made a fire in the living room. I curled up in a chair beside it, and sipped coffee while maintaining eye contact with Lucy R. Ferguson, the daughter of the woman for whom the home was built. It was she who turned the home into an inn. Her portrait depicts her in a head scarf, with a knife affixed to the belt around her waist. She seldom left home without those accessories, which were as practical as they were good looking. She was beautiful. And something tells me she didn’t travel in packs — or hide away from spectacular encounters. She chased them.