Two days after the presidential election, Eliot A. Cohen — military historian, former counselor to Condoleezza Rice at the State Department and impassioned Never Trumper — wrote an essay in The American Interest intended to console his anxious friends. Yes, he conceded, the notion of a Donald J. Trump presidency was far from ideal (“dreadful” was the precise word he used), but he’d still advise fellow Republicans to work for the new president, so long as each kept an unsigned letter of resignation just a file drawer away.
Shortly thereafter, one of Mr. Cohen’s friends in Mr. Trump’s circle reached out to him, asking for names. Mr. Cohen provided them. Then things took a nasty turn.
His message was retweeted nearly 14,000 times.
That’s what you get for provoking someone who’s made a careful study of the uses of hard power. Mr. Cohen knows all too well the impact of a carefully timed smart bomb.
Had Hillary Clinton won, it’s doubtful that Mr. Cohen’s new book, “The Big Stick: The Limits of Soft Power & the Necessity of Military Force,” which he clearly finished well before the election, would receive the attention it now surely (and quite deservedly) will. For all of Mr. Trump’s chest-pounding about the Islamic State, it was Mrs. Clinton, ultimately, who was viewed as the more interventionist, even hawkish, of the two candidates.
But it was her rival, the erratic isolationist with a mysterious affection for Vladimir V. Putin and a worrying contempt for NATO, who won, which makes Mr. Cohen’s book both an implicit critique of the president-elect’s worldview (to the extent that he has one) and a toothsome snack for those who despise Mr. Trump. Even if you disagree with Mr. Cohen — and I did, often, scribbling violent objections in the margins as I read — it’s easy to spend time in his company. He writes thoughtfully, methodically and with unfussy erudition. His chapters are organized with the pleasing precision of a bento box.
The main argument of “The Big Stick” is encapsulated in its subtitle and its sly cover image, a close-up of a pair of boots on the ground. He makes an unfashionable, unabashed and — above all — unwavering case for the use of force in the service of American security and ideals. To shy away from hard power, in Mr. Cohen’s view, would come at great moral and mortal cost in a world of irrational regimes, religious revolutionaries, cyber guerrillas and bellicose competitors like China and Russia.
“The chances are growing that the United States will find itself using military power chronically, and at varying levels of intensity, throughout the early decades of the 21st century,” he writes in his introduction.
It is perhaps an occupational hazard in Mr. Cohen’s line of work to see the world in light of its dangers. (He also has a son who’s done two tours of duty in Iraq, and a daughter in the Navy — two facts he admirably never mentions, let alone exploits, in “The Big Stick.”) Those with dovish inclinations will doubtless propose very different solutions to the problems he identifies. But he does a very good job of identifying them, providing a thorough if disconcerting tour d’horizon.
At the time Mr. Cohen wrote that sentence, he was referring to the governments of Hungary and Greece, which have both shown themselves to be sympathetic to Mr. Putin. Who would have imagined adding the next American president to the list?
This is a tall order for any elected official. For Mr. Trump, who made “We are going to win so big” a rallying cry, it seems higher than the moon.
These may not be the most practical or, to many, desirable suggestions. Mr. Cohen is well aware of the contemporary arguments arrayed against America’s interest, or competence, in waging war, which he addresses in Chapter 1. But they’re one response to an increasingly dangerous — and nuclearized — globe. To read Mr. Cohen is to realize that he thinks for a living about terrible things: Pakistan’s lobbing a nuke at India; Israel’s lobbing a nuke at Iran; the United States’ launching a nuclear weapon at North Korea; China’s threatening to launch one at us.
Just before Christmas, Mr. Trump tweeted that the United States “must greatly strengthen and expand its nuclear capability.” What that meant we do not know. It could have meant that he will violate existing nuclear treaties. It could have meant nothing specific — just another inchoate emanation from his head.
Mr. Cohen notes that all presidential candidates’ views of national security change once they’re in office, because they’re forced to confront the world as it is, not the world as they wish it to be. The problem is that Mr. Trump apparently does not sit still for the intelligence briefings that try to describe the world as it is. And if that’s the case, the future may not be as dark as Mr. Cohen foresees. It may be darker.