An Arizona man who prosecutors said helped a college student from New York City join ISIS, sending him “down that trail to terror” — and to his eventual death — was convicted Monday of terrorism charges.
The man, Ahmed Mohammed el-Gammal, 44, was found guilty after a three-week jury trial and faces up to 55 years in prison, according to a spokesman for Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York.
In a statement, Mr. Bharara hailed the verdict as a vindication of the role of civilian courts in such cases, which some Republicans lawmakers have argued should be tried in military courts instead.
“Once again, we have shown that terrorists and terrorist enablers can be brought to justice fairly, openly and swiftly in the crown jewel of our justice system: civilian courts,” Mr. Bharara said in the statement. He also described Mr. Gammal as an “ambassador” for the Islamic State.
Prosecutors argued during the trial that, on Aug. 14, 2014, Samy el-Goarany, a 24-year-old resident of New York City, had reached out to Mr. Gammal after learning of his support for the Islamic State. Within an hour, Mr. Gammal had shared a documentary film that described the kind of training the Islamic State provided.
The two kept in touch in the ensuing months until, in October 2014, Mr. Gammal traveled to the city to meet with Mr. El-Goarany, according to the prosecutor’s office. Once there, Mr. Gammal provided Mr. El-Goarany with the phone number of a contact in Turkey who could help him cross the border into Syria. In January 2015, Mr. El-Goarany embarked for Turkey.
Mr. Gammal later asked Mr. El-Goarany about the prospect of joining him in Syria, but was ultimately arrested in Avondale, Ariz., in August 2015, according to prosecutors.
That November, Mr. El-Goarany’s brother received a message from an Islamic State member with a letter attached from Mr. El-Goarany, the authorities said.
“If you’re reading this, then know that I’ve been killed in battle and am now with our Lord, inshallah,” or God willing, it read.
Mr. Gammal was convicted of one count each of providing material support to a designated foreign terrorist group, conspiring to provide material support to such a group, receiving military-type training from such a group, and conspiring to receive military-type training from such a group. A sentencing date has not been set.
Sabrina Shroff, Mr. Gammal’s lead defense lawyer, declined to comment on the case.
As of Monday, 114 people had been charged in the United States on offenses related to the Islamic State since the first such arrest in March 2014, according to Seamus Hughes, deputy director of the Program on Extremism at George Washington University. Mr. Gammal is the 63rd to have pleaded or been found guilty, he said.
Mr. Hughes, who followed the case closely, said Mr. Gammal’s lawyers were particularly fervent in their defense.
