WASHINGTON — Advisers to President-elect Donald J. Trump’s transition team, facing complaints from Democrats that they are trying to jam nominees through confirmation hearings, said on Sunday they were confident all the appointees would be approved by the Senate, perhaps even with Democratic support.
Being the minority party, the Democrats would face long odds in trying to derail any of the nominations. They are, however, seeking to delay Republicans’ plans to open hearings on Tuesday until the nominees have completed F.B.I. background checks.
Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, signaled on Sunday that he was unwilling to reschedule any confirmation hearings, which are set to begin with sessions for John F. Kelly, Mr. Trump’s choice to be the secretary of Homeland Security, and for Senator Jeff Sessions of Alabama, the nominee to be attorney general. Five more hearings are scheduled for Wednesday.
“All of these little procedural complaints are related to their frustration at having not only lost the White House, but having lost the Senate,” Mr. McConnell said.
The majority leader said that while the vetting process for some nominees might not be completed in time for their hearings, he was optimistic it would be finished before the Senate votes on each of the nominees.
Among those who will likely face tough scrutiny are Mr. Sessions and Rex W. Tillerson, the nominee to become secretary of state, whose hearing is scheduled for Wednesday.
Mr. Sessions will no doubt have to answer questions that have dogged him for 30 years about his racial attitudes while serving as a federal prosecutor in Alabama. Mr. Tillerson, a former chief executive of Exxon Mobil, will face concerns about his company’s deep economic ties to Russia — particularly in light of the intelligence report released last week concluding that Moscow sought to interfere in the election.
The Trump transition team, seeking to create an air of invincibility before the hearings, said in a statement on Sunday that the nominees have spent some 70 hours participating in “mock” hearings, have answered more than 2,600 questions from aides and volunteers posing as senators, and have met with 87 senators — including 37 Democrats.