It is time to write yet another chapter in the nearly eight-year legal journey of Sergey Aleynikov, the former Goldman Sachs programmer whose arrest in summer 2009 helped put high-frequency trading on the map.
An appeals court in New York on Tuesday reinstated Mr. Aleynikov’s conviction in 2015 on a single charge of stealing confidential computer code for Goldman’s high-speed trading business just before leaving to take a job with a hedge fund.
The decision overturned a state trial judge’s decision to throw out the jury’s verdict after determining the 1967 law under which Mr. Aleynikov was convicted was inapplicable because it was written before the advent of much of the digital age.
But the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court, First Judicial Department ruled the trial judge had overstepped in tossing out the conviction because the law was drafted broadly enough to cover the taking of computer code, even if that technology did not exist at the time.
Tuesday’s decision, however, may not be the final chapter. Mr. Aleynikov’s lawyer, Kevin H. Marino, said an appeal to the New York Court of Appeals, the highest state court, was likely.
Cyrus R. Vance Jr., the Manhattan district attorney, issued a statement applauding the appellate court decision. Mr. Vance said if the trial judge’s ruling had been allowed to stand, it would have sent a message that theft of intellectual property is not a crime.
“No company wants to do business in a market where someone can steal its work product without consequences,” Mr. Vance said.
The case of Mr. Aleynikov, a Russian-born American citizen, began in the federal court system only to end up in New York state court after a federal appeals court ruled that Mr. Aleynikov was wrongly convicted. The federal appeals court in 2012 threw out Mr. Aleynikov’s conviction and ordered him to be released from federal prison, where he had served one year of an eight-year sentence.
Mr. Vance then filed state criminal charges against the former Goldman employee.
When Mr. Aleynikov was originally arrested in 2009, high-frequency trading — the rapid-fire trading of stocks, bonds and commodities driven by algorithmic computer programs — was just gaining prominence on Wall Street. Today, such trading is commonly used by Wall Street firms and hedge funds and drives much of the daily trading in the stock market.
Mr. Aleynikov’s trial in state court was a bit unusual. The jury deliberations were interrupted when one juror said another juror had tampered with her food because an avocado was missing from her sandwich. The complaining juror was removed and the proceedings continued.
In May 2015, the jury convicted Mr. Aleynikov on one count, acquitted him on another and deadlocked on a third. But in early July, Daniel P. Conviser, an acting justice in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, issued a 72-page ruling throwing out the conviction.