WASHINGTON — In comments that are likely to create fresh tensions with the United States’ closest European allies, President-elect Donald J. Trump described NATO as “obsolete” in an interview published on Sunday and said other European nations would probably follow Britain’s lead by leaving the European Union.
Mr. Trump has made similar comments before. But the fact that he made them in a joint interview with two European publications — The Times of London and Bild, a German newspaper — and did so days before assuming the presidency alarmed European diplomats.
Mr. Trump also said that Britain’s decision to leave the European Union would “end up being a great thing” and predicted that other countries would follow. “People, countries want their own identity, and the U.K. wanted its own identity,” he said.
He criticized Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany over her decision to welcome more than one million migrants.
On Russia, Mr. Trump said he hoped to strike a deal with President Vladimir V. Putin to reduce nuclear weapons stockpiles. He suggested that such an agreement could be part of a broader easing of tensions that would include lifting economic sanctions imposed after Russia seized Crimea from Ukraine in 2014.
Strikingly, however, Mr. Trump painted Ms. Merkel, the leader of a staunch American ally, and Mr. Putin, the president of a country who has often had adversarial relations with Washington, with the same brush. He described them as leaders he would trust at the beginning of his presidency, but noted that this could quickly change.
During his hourlong interview with the European publications at Trump Tower in Manhattan, Mr. Trump sought to temper some of his criticism of NATO by noting that the alliance “is very important to me.” Still, his characterization of it as divorced from the fight against terrorism was challenged by NATO experts, who noted that the alliance had joined the United States in Afghanistan.
Mr. Trump’s comments on NATO were also striking because his nominee for secretary of defense, James N. Mattis, a retired Marine general, described the alliance as essential for Americans’ security in testimony to Congress just three days ago.
Asked about Mr. Trump’s previous criticism of NATO, General Mattis said he had spoken with him about the value of the alliance.
In the interview, Mr. Trump also expressed an eagerness to reach a fair trade deal with Britain “very quickly,” saying he planned to invite Prime Minister Theresa May to visit him right after he takes office.
Others in Europe, however, were less hopeful. Two European officials, who asked not to be identified because they did not want to add strain to the United States’ relations with Europe, expressed frustration with Mr. Trump’s remarks.
The diplomats said they had heard him sound off during the campaign. But with the inauguration less than a week away, there is a growing realization in European capitals that Mr. Trump’s acerbic criticism of NATO and the European Union was not just an attempt to win votes.