The Metropolitan Correctional Center, the rust-colored fortress in Lower Manhattan where hundreds of federal inmates are housed, was described as less hospitable than Guantánamo Bay by one inmate who had been incarcerated at both. The highest risk half-dozen inmates — or at least the ones facing the most severe charges — are housed in conditions so isolating that some have blamed them for deteriorating eyesight.
This is where federal agents brought Joaquín Guzmán Loera, the drug lord known as El Chapo, when he was extradited to the United States last week after two escapes from high-security Mexican prisons.
The Metropolitan Correctional Center, which held Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, the mastermind of the 1993 bombing of the World Trade Center, and Bernard L. Madoff, who orchestrated a $20 billion Ponzi scheme, has a reputation for stringent security measures. Even so, several inmates over the years have tried to escape, and a few have succeeded.
The most sensational attempt occurred in 1981, when an inmate was nearly plucked off the rooftop recreational center by confederates in a hijacked helicopter. And in 1990, two inmates disappeared out a second-story window, lowering themselves with an electrical cord from a machine used to buff the floors. One is still on the United States Marshals Service’s list of most wanted fugitives.
In 2009, Anthony Boyd, a serial bank robber, was released from the Metropolitan Correctional Center as a result of what appeared to be an administrative error.
Whether there have been other successful escapes or missing prisoners in recent years is unclear. Officials at the Metropolitan Correctional Center did not return a phone call or respond to an email message seeking comment.
The jail, opened in 1975, holds about 795 inmates. It is wedged between the Church of St. Andrew and the United States Court House. From the upper floors of the courthouse, inmates can be seen playing basketball in the rooftop recreation area.
It is unlikely Mr. Guzmán will be permitted to join them. The inmates deemed most dangerous are housed in a half-dozen cells in a small wing known as 10 South, where they are held in solitary confinement and prohibited from calling out to one another. The lights are on 23 or 24 hours a day, according to court records, interviews with lawyers and written accounts. The frosted glass windows offer no view of the outside world. Even the slot on each cell door is kept shut, meaning that inmates see little beyond their solitary cell.
But guards can see inside, by way of a camera directed at the shower stall and another above the toilet or bed, according to a published account by Uzair Paracha, who was held there for two years until 2005, when he was convicted of providing support to Al Qaeda.
Mr. Paracha said it was not unusual for inmates to notice their eyesight deteriorating while in 10 South, and to request eyeglasses for an onset of nearsightedness.
This litany of severe conditions, known generally as “Special Administrative Measures,” requires the approval of the attorney general. In 2011, Amnesty International wrote to Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr., expressing concern that the conditions amounted to cruel and inhuman treatment.
The 10 South unit is reached by a stairway from the ninth floor, a secure area known as the “Special Housing Unit,” which has its own stringent security measures. Even so, getting into 10 South, from the unit on the ninth floor, requires passing through two locked metal doors, the first of which is controlled electronically and the second of which requires a key, according to testimony.
In 2000, an inmate suspected of terrorism stabbed a guard in the eye with a sharpened plastic comb on 10 South. That attack, which caused the guard severe brain damage, led to a tightening of security restrictions in the wing and a sense of vigilance that remains.
Whether Mr. Guzmán will end up being held in 10 South or even in the Metropolitan Correctional Center while his case is pending in Brooklyn remains unknown. Most inmates facing federal charges in Brooklyn are held at a larger federal jail in Sunset Park, Brooklyn, but a few are held at the Metropolitan Correctional Center, which is where Mr. Guzmán was returned after his arraignment on Friday.
The Bureau of Prison’s online directory of inmates does not indicate his whereabouts. Mr. Patton declined to discuss Mr. Guzmán’s location or the case.