Business|I’m Here to Work. Not to Be Your Friend.
I’m Here to Work. Not to Be Your Friend.
I have a co-worker with whom every interaction can best be described as running your body up against sandpaper.
I am new to the company, and she has been here for more than 10 years. I would love to have a cordial, even friendly, relationship with her, but I am unsure how to make that happen. Not only do her actions make the workplace uncomfortable, but she refuses to respond to email or complete tasks assigned to her.
The Workologist hears quite a bit about unpleasant colleagues, often (as with this inquiry) expressed in language that suggests just how visceral workplace antipathy can become. Sometimes I wonder if Jean-Paul Sartre’s oft-quoted phrase that “hell is other people” could be narrowed down: Maybe hell is mainly colleagues.
That doesn’t mean you should be rude or unprofessional, but rather that it’s healthier to think of colleagues as what Dr. Hakim calls “friendlies” — relationships that neither require nor assume everything that goes with a true friendship. This mentality will help you separate the personal and the professional. In this case, perhaps you can let everyday coldness slide (you don’t have to be best pals) — but not unanswered email or ignored tasks, which are tangible work problems.
Next, Dr. Hakim says, “Let the boss deal with it.” Trying to win over this person can easily morph into managing her — which is not your responsibility. So bring the genuinely job-related problems to your supervisor or human resources department, and “explain how her behavior is impacting your team,” she says. If you’re worried about coming across as a troublemaker, preface the conversation with something like, “I hope this doesn’t seem inappropriate, but I think it’s better to share it with you than not.” But be clear about the specific actions that are causing issues and how they affect the organization.
In her consulting practice, Dr. Hakim says, many interpersonal problems boil down to a failure to communicate directly about the real problem with someone who can actually resolve it. Instead, we talk about it with everyone else, until it festers into loathing. That’s not good for anybody — especially you.
I need to find a way to conceal my revulsion about a colleague. When he joined our small company, we all welcomed him with enthusiasm, despite his initial cloying, overzealous demeanor. Since then, he has revealed himself to be very crude.
His behavior regularly includes belching or sneezing loudly and widely, and wearing spandex shorts and flip-flops to the office (no one else dresses this way). Meanwhile, he is still learning to do things he claimed were already in his skill set.
Once you’ve eliminated the possibility that this guy is actually Will Ferrell doing covert research for a new workplace comedy, you should start with some of the advice above. Depersonalize the way you’re thinking about this. Loud sneezing may be annoying, but the absence of necessary skills is a much more legitimate issue. The dubious oversharing is more ambiguous. Whether it was a one-off incident could make a difference. If he’s regularly making comments that offend women, management should want to know. So zero in on the real problems that need to be articulated to higher-ups.
Meanwhile, adopt a more stringent definition of “professional courtesy.” Maybe you have to tolerate random interruptions about personal nonsense from your friends. But you don’t have to do so for co-workers. Dr. Hakim suggests a variety of day-to-day escape tactics. If he approaches you at your desk, stand up to project that you’re not hanging around and don’t have time for distraction. At the water cooler, nod and say hello, then move purposefully back to your desk. Break eye contact, look at your phone or your watch, and move on.
