Ivanka Trump is an avid, adventurous collector of contemporary art who often shows off pieces from her collection on Instagram by blue-chip artists like Dan Colen, Christopher Wool and Richard Prince. But one of those works has suddenly, and unexpectedly, become a piece of political art.
Mr. Prince, one of the most revered artists of his generation and a provocateur who sometimes rattles people by freely borrowing imagery from pop-culture sources, can be a prankster on Twitter, playing a kind of fictionalized version of himself, using social media as a form of performance art. But in this case, he appears to be playing it straight. In the interview, he said he decided recently that he could no longer countenance a piece of his residing in the collection of the Trump family.
The piece that Mr. Prince made was part of a highly publicized, and later controversial, series in which he turned screenshots of Instagram posts into printed paintings — a body of work that functioned as a social-media-age update of influential earlier work that he did rephotographing advertising shots and magazine pages and radically recontextualizing them in galleries and museums.
Mr. Prince said that in 2014 he was approached by an art adviser, whom he declined to name, with a request that he make a painting based a post from Ms. Trump’s Instagram feed.
Ms. Trump, through a spokesman, declined to comment on Thursday. But a person in her circle, who was not authorized to speak about the matter because of the personal nature of her art purchases and collection, said the money was in the process of being returned by Mr. Prince.
There is ample historical precedent for artists declaring works null and void, but not much evidence that they have the power to withdraw a work once it has fully entered the public realm. In 1963, for example, the sculptor Robert Morris, angered that the architect Philip Johnson was late in paying for a work, wrote a kind of affidavit negating the “aesthetic quality and content” of the piece. But both the piece and the manifesto are now in the collection of the Museum of Modern Art as Morris works.
Joshua Holdeman, a Manhattan art adviser and a former vice chairman at Sotheby’s, said he believed Mr. Prince’s excommunication of the work would probably not cause collectors or museums to treat it as illegitimate in the long run and he added that it might indeed increase its value.
