CHICAGO — A growing number of economists have found that many cities and states have considerable room to raise the minimum wage before employers meaningfully cut back on hiring.
Mr. Horton, working with the platform, was able to impose a minimum wage at random on one-quarter of about 160,000 jobs posted over roughly a month and a half in 2013. If a worker proposed an hourly wage that was below the minimum, the platform’s software asked him or her to raise the bid until it cleared the threshold. In some cases the minimum wage was $2 per hour, in some cases $3, and in some cases $4.
The traditional way most studies determine if employees are hiring a different kind of worker after the minimum wage rises is to consider certain characteristics, like race, age and education level.
The problem is that one worker can be much more productive than another with the same demographic profile, potentially masking the productivity upgrade that Mr. Horton documents. He was able to overcome this problem because the platform gave him access to precise data reflecting productivity, like past wages.
When the minimum wage increased, employers tended to hire workers who had earned higher wages in the past, suggesting that they were looking for a more productive work force.
If the pattern Mr. Horton identified were to apply across the economy, it would raise questions about whether increasing the minimum wage is as helpful to those near the bottom of the income spectrum as some proponents assume. The higher minimum wage could cost low-skilled workers their jobs, as employers rush to replace them with somewhat more skilled workers.
Some economists are skeptical that employers would respond the way Mr. Horton describes if an entire city or state increased its minimum wage, as opposed to just a single employer or subset of employers.
This year, 19 states took matters into their own hands and raised the minimum wage.
“I think the way to relate this result to the real world labor market is to consider what would happen if Walmart had to raise wages,” said Arindrajit Dube, an economist at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst, who has studied minimum wage laws.
Walmart has said that after it increased wages in 2015, it was able to attract more productive workers.
When the minimum wage goes up for everyone, it is not so easy for employers to substitute better-skilled workers because the new minimum would not offer a more attractive wage. In many cases, more highly skilled workers see their wages rise after minimum-wage increases to keep them above the new minimum, making it all the more difficult to lure them away.
Mr. Tankel argued that differences in the productivity of low-level workers in his industry are not very big. “It’s just a lot more money for the exact same job description,” he said. He is accelerating automation in his restaurants, including tablet devices for ordering certain items and payment, to offset the costs of the higher minimum.
Mr. Horton is quick to acknowledge that there are many reasons his experiment might not capture employer behavior in the wider economy. But he says a higher minimum wage could attract more highly skilled workers who were not previously in the labor market — say, college students. At the same time, less-skilled workers might lose their jobs and drop out of the labor force.
More broadly, he said, the contribution of his paper is to show that one impulse of many employers in the face of a minimum-wage increase will be to find more productive workers, even if there are limits on how much they can follow through on this desire.
A second study presented at the conference suggests another way that employers may respond to a rising minimum wage: simply going out of business.
The husband-and-wife research team of Michael Luca of Harvard Business School and Dara Lee Luca of Mathematica Policy Research identified the ratings of tens of thousands of restaurants in the San Francisco area on the website Yelp and found that many poorly rated restaurants tend to go out of business after a minimum-wage increase takes effect.
By contrast, highly rated restaurants appear to be largely unaffected by minimum-wage increases, and over all, there is no substantial rise in restaurant closings after a minimum-wage increase.
The results are broadly consistent with a 2013 study by the economists Daniel Aaronson, Eric French and Isaac Sorkin, showing that a sizable minimum-wage increase in New Jersey resulted in many lost jobs as numerous businesses closed, but an almost offsetting number of new jobs as other businesses opened, which the authors argue were more productive.