But there are fewer people around who are captivated by lion tamers and wire walkers. Costs are rising — Ringling’s two troupes, known as the Blue Unit and the Red Unit, rumble from city to city on mile-long trains. And ticket sales are flagging. Opposition from animal rights groups led to the erasure of the show’s signature elephants last year.
Given those challenges, Ringling will play four more months, including a run in Brooklyn starting in late February. It will hold its final performance on May 21 at the Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum in Uniondale, N.Y., on Long Island, before lapsing into memory.
For such a nomadic operation, Ringling has an elongated history with New York, stretching back to that indelible huckster, P. T. Barnum. Born in Connecticut in 1810, he moved to New York in 1834 and was soon pitching preposterous hoaxes. The first was Joice Heth, a blind slave who was supposedly the 161-year-old nursemaid of George Washington. New Yorkers paid to listen to her fanciful stories about young George.
 Then, in 1870 at age 60, Barnum, in collaboration with partners, started P. T. Barnum’s Grand Traveling Museum, Menagerie, Caravan and Hippodrome. It made its debut on a Brooklyn lot in April 1871. Attractions included elephants, camels, yaks, an armless girl, a perpetual motion machine and Admiral Dot, a performer who had dwarfism. It later merged with the circus of James Anthony Bailey to become the Barnum and Bailey Circus.
One night in 1884, P. T. Barnum paraded 21 circus elephants, including the storied Jumbo, and 17 camels across the Brooklyn Bridge to prove its strength, which made for great publicity for the circus.
Once the Ringling brothers, who had their own circus, bought the Barnum and Bailey circus and merged them, the first combined performance was in 1919 at Madison Square Garden.
Those were other days, and these days, longtime circus fans in and around the city have been feeling bereft.
Mr. Yodice, 70, is a retired manager for a textile company, who now lives in Queens. His parents did not drive, and in the early 1950s, entertainment options were scarce. So the family rode the subway to see the circus year after year. Two circus experiences altered the itinerary of his days. In 1959, when he was 13, he again saw the circus. The next year, the Cecil B. De Mille circus movie, “The Greatest Show on Earth,” was re-released and he saw that.
The combination unlocked something in him. He began building teeny cardboard replicas of the Ringling circus. In the 1970s, he increased his ambitions. He undertook the creation of a scale model of the circus at the Madison Square Garden that existed on 49th Street. He’s still working on it.
The basement level is finished, with the sideshow and the menagerie quarters. Much remains to do on the main floor. He has the big parade of floats and performers done and the trapeze rigging up, but needs to make all the acts. Some 10,000 seats are in place, though they have to be painted. The model fills a four-foot-by-eight-foot board.
Right now, it is packed away because there is no room in his hopelessly clogged basement. But he keeps going on the unfinished portions.
He has a ticket to Ringling’s final sold-out show, for which he paid six times as much as the list price. After the show, then what?
Gary Payne serves as the president of the Circus Fans Association of America, when he is not selling fences in Connecticut. He has seen Ringling maybe 300 times, in addition to other circuses, starting when he was 5. He believes he owns the chair he sat in at his first circus performance. “As long as I live, I’ll never get enough circus,” he said.
His third date with the woman he married three years ago was to the Ringling show. Its purpose was to test her circus fandom. It would have been ideal if she loved it. It would have been acceptable if she at least tolerated it. She tolerated it.
Mr. Payne has gotten to know many circus performers. He recalls once chatting idly with the wife of the Human Cannonball when she dropped into the conversation that her husband was going to dial up the act by lighting himself on fire before being fired from the cannon. “I’ll never understand the man who is the Human Cannonball,” Mr. Payne said.
Don Horowitz was on his way to Wisconsin, but he pulled off the road to talk circus devotion. Mr. Horowitz, 61, is an owner of a greenhouse and flower shop in East Hampton, N.Y., on Long Island. He first saw the Ringling show in New York when he was 8, and fell in love with its circumscribed world. By now, he has seen it hundreds of times. For years, he took vacation time in January and drove to Florida to watch the first show of the new season.
His Ringling friends are so numerous they include cooks in the Pie Car, the dining car for the performers.
He befriended the trainmaster for the Blue Unit, and served as his best man when he married a woman who was in the motorcycle act. It was natural that he made trips to Baraboo, Wis. The city is a mecca for circus fans because it was where the Ringling brothers grew up, it was the original winter quarters for Ringling and it is the home of the Circus World Museum.
In 2013, along with the trainmaster and his wife, he bought the red stone mansion in Baraboo once owned by Al Ringling to preserve it as a place for tours. A bed-and-breakfast will open there by this summer.
