A giant ancient sequoia with a hollowed-out tunnel that drew thousands of visitors each year in California toppled over on Sunday during heavy rains, according to a nonprofit group.
The Pioneer Cabin tree was “barely alive,” according to a volunteer at the Calaveras Big Trees State Park, about 90 miles east of Sacramento, and it was not immediately clear what would become of the sequoia.
The base of the tree (there was no immediate information on its height) was carved out in the 1880s, and it became a tourist attraction. Cars, once they became common, were allowed to drive through it, but in recent years, the tunnel was accessible only to hikers on a 1.5-mile loop through the park, according to the United States Forest Service.
“The storm was just too much for it,” the nonprofit group, the Calaveras Big Trees Association, said in a Facebook post that included two photos of the fallen tree.
Jim Allday, a park volunteer who took the photos, told SF Gate, a website operated by The San Francisco Chronicle that the tree fell around 2 p.m. on Sunday and “shattered” as it hit the ground.
“It was barely alive; there was one branch alive at the top,” Ms. Allday told SF Gate.
A storm system dropped nearly four inches of rain on Northern California over the weekend, leading to severe flooding and at least three deaths.
Mr. Allday told SF Gate that he saw water flooding around the remains of the tree on Sunday.
There was no immediate confirmation of the tree’s age. Many in the park were more than 1,000 years old, and sequoias can live more than 3,000 years, according to the National Park Service.
The Pioneer Cabin tree was one of several “tunnel trees” that had been carved out and served as human amusements. The Wawona tree, in the Mariposa Grove at Yosemite National Park, was cut open in 1881. It fell down during a winter storm in 1969 and has been known as the Fallen Tunnel Tree since then. It was more than 2,000 years old when it fell, the park service said.
In Leggett, Calif., the Chandelier tree lives in a private Redwood grove north of San Francisco, where people drive through its carved-out opening for a fee. It is one of three such redwoods along Highway 101 that belong to private parks, the Forest Service said.