1 hr. and 15 min.
Public Theater - Martinson Theater, 425 Lafayette St.
The vibrant performer Marga Gomez pays loving, funny tribute to her father, a comic performer and songwriter named Willy Chevalier (the Chevalier was a bit of invention), in her latest solo show, “Latin Standards,” being presented through Sunday as part of the Under the Radar festival.
With the aid of slides projected onto a large screen looming above her, Ms. Gomez draws an engrossing portrait of her father and his work. He appeared with Celia Cruz and Tito Puente and, intriguingly, the first transgender celebrity, Christine Jorgensen.
Ms. Gomez had a warm relationship with her father, although he had previously had two other wives, and children by them. Ms. Gomez’s mother was an entertainer, too — in photos, she’s the dictionary picture of a blond bombshell — who sometimes worked with her father and at other times fought with him or ignored him.
The show’s title refers to the songs that Mr. Chevalier wrote, many of which were recorded and made the Latin charts, and most of which were soulful laments about the trials of love. Ms. Gomez confesses that she’s no singer, but she recites the lyrics as recordings play in the background.
“What about your brand, Marga?” Gwyneth says scoldingly, noting the club’s seediness. But Ms. Gomez persevered, and though she had to buy the chairs herself, she gradually gained a following and the grudging admiration of the club’s owner. But the year was 2012, and the forces of gentrification were already swallowing up sections of the largely Latino Mission District. The club closed.
The toggling between the stories of her father’s career and her own can sometimes be abrupt, but she uses her father’s songs as transitional material. Still, under the brisk direction of David Schweizer, the show’s momentum never flags, even when Ms. Gomez makes the occasional standup-style diversion, as when she talks about attending an Adele concert and only paying attention during the patter because, fundamentally, she doesn’t like music.
Ms. Gomez’s natural instincts as a performer are comic, but here she occasionally allows herself to wade into real feeling, as she recalls with some regret that she withdrew from her father as she concentrated on her career.
And as “Latin Standards” underscores with winning heart and humor, Ms. Gomez clearly owes her own love of performing, and her ability to plow over the speed bumps that are inevitable in show business, to her father, who took it all in stride and kept striving. Sometimes Willy had to take a restaurant job to make money, but even then he was planning for his next comeback. When business at the restaurant was slow, he’d fill the down time writing jokes and songs on the checks. That’s a trouper.