One January weekend in 2014, the choreographer and dancer Gillian Walsh could be found eating rotisserie chicken at Abrons Arts Center in Adrienne Truscott’s “Too Freedom”; writhing on the stage of New York Live Arts in Luciana Achugar’s “Otro Teatro”; and, with the performance artist Neal Medlyn, working a late-night crowd at the Public Theater while covered in fake blood. All in less than 24 hours.
At any other time of year, that grueling schedule might seem surprising. But during early January in New York, such marathons aren’t unusual for dancers. The reason — or the culprit, some might say — is the phenomenon known as APAP. While that acronym technically stands for the Association of Performing Arts Presenters, a 60-year-old national organization that convenes each January in New York, it has become shorthand for the ever-expanding constellation of festivals and showcases surrounding the association’s conference.
The conference, which begins on Friday, brings together hundreds of performing arts producers and curators from around the country and world for a frenzied five days of networking, talent-scouting and shopping for live performance. The proceedings include industry-specific meetings and discussions, along with ample opportunities to roam the Expo Hall at the Hilton in Midtown, a maze of booths where artists, agents and managers can pitch their work or their clients’ to presenters.
But the flurry of performances mainly happens elsewhere. Coinciding with the convention are dozens of artist showcases across the city, and, increasingly over the past decade, festivals of contemporary dance, theater and music that support longer, more fully produced works. These include PS122’s Coil festival, Under the Radar at the Public Theater, Prototype at the Here arts center and American Realness at Abrons Arts Center.
For Ms. Uprichard, a curator at the Contemporary Arts Center New Orleans and a former director of Danspace Project and the Dublin Dance Festival, it’s not unusual to see work by 10 artists in a day during APAP. But being busy, she said, doesn’t mean that she can’t see clearly. “I rely on my instincts, and I truly believe that work that’s really strong sticks with you, and work that’s really awful sticks with you, and the medium stuff fades away,” she said.
Yet for dancers, the intense schedule — which often calls for abbreviated rehearsal and tech time — can take a greater toll.
The dancer and choreographer Molly Lieber, who has often taken on a heavy workload in January, said this year she chose to focus on the premiere of “Basketball,” her duet with Eleanor Smith, which opens on Saturday at the Baryshnikov Arts Center. “I’m learning that I prefer to not be totally crazy,” she said.
One note sounded by Ms. Lieber and other choreographers was that they could think of few colleagues whose APAP gigs have led directly to bookings. But it happens. After showing her trio “Polly Pocket” at American Realness in 2014, the choreographer Jillian Peña was invited to take it to Vienna, Berlin and, more locally, Danspace Project and the American Dance Institute. With her latest project in its early stages, she is taking this January off.
Even the showcase format works for some. David Parker, who has been presenting his percussive dance experiments at APAP since the ’90s, once showed a short excerpt on a mixed bill and landed an evening-length show at the Actors Theater of Louisville, a big step early in his career.
Ms. Uprichard said that for her, APAP was an opportunity to deepen or begin relationships, not necessarily make “consumer decisions” on the spot.
