Business|Will a ‘Slap in the Face’ From Voters Revive Davos Agenda, or Daze It?
Will a ‘Slap in the Face’ From Voters Revive Davos Agenda, or Daze It?
NEW YORK — In the battle for global economic supremacy, is Davos Man any match for Donald J. Trump?
If anything, the outlook for the American economy is better than it was at this time last year. Most experts expect growth to surpass 2 percent on an annual basis this quarter, more than twice as fast as the pace in the first quarter of 2016.
While a stronger dollar and the interest rate increases that the Federal Reserve has signaled will come in 2017 could be a drag, both result from more economic strength, not less.
Sentiment is high among businesses and consumers in the United States, he said, and if Mr. Trump follows through on his plans to raise infrastructure spending, that could serve as an important stimulus after years of slow growth.
Mr. Behravesh, who will attend the Davos conference this year, said the fallout from the voter backlash against globalization would depend on just what kind of populist policies were implemented in its wake.
“It all depends on whether it’s pro-growth populism or more protectionist populism,” Mr. Behravesh said.
The protectionist variety would mean stiff tariffs on goods imported into the United States, and retaliatory action by major trading partners like Mexico and China. That would hold down growth throughout the global economy, he said.
Pro-growth populism would amount to moderate tax cuts and deregulation, along with an infrastructure investment plan big enough to actually move the economic needle.
That combination — minus the tariffs and trade wars — could boost estimated annual economic growth to 2.6 percent or more in 2018 from 2.3 percent this year and 1.6 percent in 2016.
Over the long term, there is more to worry about economically, especially if other nations in Europe follow Britain’s lead in moving away from a common market, or if the Trump administration prompts a global re-evaluation of the benefits of free trade.
