Most are issued by three nonprofit groups — the American Humane Association, Humane Farm Animal Care and A Greener World — that set their own standards for the practices needed to win certification. Food companies pay fees to use the labels; more than one billion of the more than nine billion animals raised for food each year in the United States are covered by a certification program.
In addition, Whole Foods established the Global Animal Partnership, a five-step certification program it requires its suppliers to use; it is also used by a few small meat companies and small retailers.
But the phrases on the labels have no set meaning; the federal government has no rules for the use of words like “humane.” The term “free-range” on a product, for example, does not necessarily mean that an animal had access to pasture.
The Agriculture Department does offer guidelines to meat producers, and requires them to submit applications and get permission before using terms like “humanely raised” or “raised with care” on packages. But it does not send out inspectors to test those claims.
That may be a one-sentence affidavit declaring something like, “I take good care of my animals,” she said. In some cases, meat companies submit their certifications from the labeling organizations; Ms. Jones’s group would like the federal government to require that all companies do the same.
Mr. DeCoriolis and many other animal welfare advocates say it’s no wonder the largest of the certifying groups is the American Humane Association, the group behind the “American Humane Certified” seal. Many of its standards, the advocates say, are less rigorous than other groups’, and therefore preferred by meat companies.
The advocates noted that a number of the group’s standards are similar to those used in the meat industry. For instance, American Humane allows the level of ammonia in chicken houses to reach 25 parts per million — the standard the chicken industry recommends, and higher than the maximum level set by some other certifiers. High levels can render the birds sluggish and less likely to move, and even kill them.
The group also allows farmers to wean piglets at 21 days, an industry standard that is a week less than what is permitted by two other certifiers, and half the time a piglet must suckle under standards set by Animal Welfare Approved, the certification program of A Greener World, which works to change agricultural practices.
While other certifying groups require complete compliance with their standards, American Humane requires only that its clients achieve 85 percent of the total points possible for award during an audit (although they are asked to comply fully at some point).
In May, American Humane stirred concern among other animal welfare groups by hiring as its director of marketing a lobbyist from Berman and Company, a public relations firm that is waging a forceful campaign against the Humane Society of the United States and People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals.
Robin Ganzert, the chief executive of American Humane, did not respond to emails or texts requesting an interview.
Such nuances make parsing the various labels difficult for shoppers. “I don’t think many consumers understand that there are these differences in certification standards,” said Temple Grandin, the animal scientist and noted champion of animal welfare. Ms. Grandin is on American Humane’s scientific advisory board and advises other certification groups. She acknowledged that the organization’s standards are not as rigorous as others’, but said it played to a special segment of the meat industry.
Perhaps that explains why the labels have become such a point of contention. Last year, a class-action lawsuit was filed against Foster Farms, a large poultry producer, questioning the “American Humane Certified” label on packages of its chicken. “The A.H.A. standards that Foster Farms purports to follow in order to attain ‘humane certification’ from the A.H.A. permit and even necessitate inhumane treatment on their face,” asserted the plaintiffs, who are consumers.
In a lawsuit filed in May, Handsome Brook Farm, an egg company, sued Adele Douglass, the founder of Humane Farm Animal Care, after she sent a letter to some of the company’s customers contending that claims on its cartons that the hens were organic and pasture-raised could not always be verified.
The Organic Consumers Association has sued Handsome Brook over those claims. Betsy Babcock, a founder of Handsome Brook, declined to comment on any litigation. But she said the company had chosen American Humane to certify its eggs after considering all of the certification groups.
