Ms. Dell performing a split in a family photo.
Paula Dell, whose acrobatic feats made her a Muscle Beach star in Santa Monica, Calif., and a pioneering and fearless Hollywood stuntwoman — for one film, she was shot out of a cannon — died on Jan. 9 at her home in Santa Monica. She was 90.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, her son, Randy Boelsems, said.
Muscle Beach was already a physical fitness haven for weight lifters, stuntmen and gymnasts when Ms. Dell, at age 7, moved to Los Angeles from Colorado with her parents and her older sister, Rosalie, in the early 1930s. That first sight of Muscle Beach enchanted her.
Early on, a gymnastics coach there did a trick that she already knew. She asked if he would do it with her.
She became known for flying off one side of a teeterboard after a man jumped onto the other side, and for being tossed into the air and caught, by muscular men, in a trick called the adagio.
Paula Dell, a gymnast and early film stuntwoman, with Bob Gordon at a California beach in an undated photograph.
Ms. Dell performed at the DeWayne Brothers Circus, along with Russell M. Saunders, another Muscle Beach star and stuntman, who became her acrobatics partner.
Her acrobatics were a natural fit for stunt work, but few women were doing it in the early 1960s. Most often, men dressed as women performed stunts for actresses.
“Even when a woman was hired, someone on the set would think or pretend the stunt was too hard for her, and they ought to get a man in there,” Mollie Gregory, author of “Stuntwomen: The Untold Hollywood Story,” said.
In the scene, Ms. Dell is shown emerging from the cannon (no gun powder was used) just before the camera cuts quickly to Ms. Channing, playing the nightclub singer Muzzy Van Hossmere, “flying” onto a stage full of acrobats.
Ms. Dell was also the stunt double for Julie Andrews (who had also starred in “Millie”) in the 1968 musical film “Star!” Around that time, she became part of a group that formed the Stuntwomen’s Association of Motion Pictures to represent the women in dealing with stunt coordinators and casting executives.
Paula Adele Unger was born in Longmont, Colo., on Nov. 15, 1926. (She later adapted her middle name to create her professional surname.) She was one of three daughters of Ralph Unger, a candy distributor, and the former Clayton Tilles, a homemaker. One sister died before the family moved to Los Angeles.
After graduating from the University of Southern California, she taught high school gymnastics and dancing in Los Angeles until the 1970s. Her husband, Harold Boelsems, a hardware salesman, died in 1998.
In addition to her son, she is survived by two grandchildren and a sister, Rosalie Cloud.
Ms. Dell did stunt work in disaster films like “The Poseidon Adventure” (1972), in which she fell when the ocean liner in the title capsized at sea, and “Earthquake” (1974), in which she took a 40-foot tumble onto a rubber mattress.
Mr. Boelsems said that his mother had stayed in shape long enough to take her last leap from a teeterboard at age 80.