Communist East Germany held thousands of women as political prisoners. In this animated film, two of them tell their story.
We were inspired to make this film while writing a graphic novel, in which one of our characters was an East German swimmer who tried to escape the German Democratic Republic by swimming across the Baltic Sea to Denmark. She never arrived, as she was caught by the secret service (the “Stasi”) and sent to prison.
This story was representative for many East German women, who were simply trying to flee a repressive regime for the relative freedom of the West and often sent to Hoheneck, the notorious women’s prison. A scriptwriter for this film, Max Mönch, had an aunt who was a political prisoner, and she told us more about the harrowing experience of women there.
The general themes of repression in East Germany were not new for us. But as we did our research, we were surprised and enraged to learn that the thousands of women imprisoned at Hoheneck were forced into what seemed akin to slave labor, producing goods that were sold to the West for significant profit. For us, the relationship between East and West Germany suddenly became more complicated than we had previously understood.
We decided to make a short film about forced labor in Hoheneck, and connected with Birgit Willschütz and Gabriele Stötzer, two former prisoners, who explained what Hoheneck meant to them.
For Ms. Willschütz, telling her story was extremely difficult. Although her time at Hoheneck was more than 30 years ago, she still hasn’t recovered. The hardest part, when she was suddenly taken to jail, was leaving behind her 3-year-old daughter. In the middle of her interview, she started to break down, so Max ended it and they simply drank vodka together, resuming the interview a few weeks later when she had recovered.
Gabi Stötzer coped with her memories not through tears but rather sharp-minded analysis — she used it like a knife to stab away her nightmare in prison, writing books and essays about it. We are grateful that both women allowed us to record their memories for this film.
We ended up with more than 100 pages of interviews, every syllable containing the story of a life. So rather than create a traditional story with a beginning, middle and end, we decided to make something more conceptual, a film that seemed more like a painting. The result is the interviews, set in fragments against Volker’s haunting images. Each depicts in excruciating detail the pain and sadness of the women’s stories.
