Illustrated. 224 pp. Yale University Press. $25.
As writer-for-hire on “Steven Spielberg: A Life in Films,” the pioneering feminist movie critic Molly Haskell is such a counterintuitive choice of contract employee that she acknowledges the weirdness of the situation upfront, confessing her qualms about taking on the project.
The pairing is the work of imps, apparently, who preside over the Jewish Lives series, billed as “interpretive” biographies, now rolling out steadily from Yale University Press. A publisher’s note alongside the robust catalog explains that the editorial matchmaking is done based on the ability “to elicit lively, deeply informed books that explore the range and depth of Jewish experience from antiquity through the present.” And by those standards, done and done: The exploration here is lively, the critic is deeply informed, and she approaches her mandate with a calmness of inquiry that is a gift often bestowed on the outsider anthropologist impervious to tribal influences.
The result is a fascinating jumble of messages — a study of a critic inevitably analyzing herself as she considers the life (Jewish and otherwise) of Steven Spielberg. Haskell seems to have done no primary research; she was told that her subject has a policy of not granting interviews to biographers. (Or is it, she wonders, because of harsh reviews she and her cohort have given his movies in the past?) Instead, she draws on secondary sources for factual grounding, giving much credit to the legwork done by Joseph McBride in his own Spielberg biography. She devotes her sharpest insights to close readings of the moviemaker’s work for clues to the soul of the (Jewish) man within. Somewhere, she says, Spielberg once declared that “everything about me is in my films.” Haskell takes him at his word and rewatches everything.
Such stinging observations may have little to do with her subject’s Jewish journey, but they make for tasty, tart little treyf surprises to offset the lulls where the author appears enervated by the story she has been assigned to tell. Suitably attentive to the importance of “Schindler’s List” both in the world and in its creator’s soul, she starts to flag as she tries to synthesize a dozen big mature-phase Spielberg projects — including “Saving Private Ryan,” “A.I.,” “Munich,” “Lincoln” and “Bridge of Spies” — in some 40 barreling final pages.
“The wimp dads of the early films are all but gone,” Haskell notes approvingly of Spielberg’s post-“Schindler” output, before setting down for good her burden of contemplating a Jewish life. The director has future projects “for as far as the eye could see,” she says in farewell, packing to return to the cinematic turf she likes best, where adult women and men grapple with the vagaries of love, unmoved by the sight of a little kid cycling across the moon with E.T. in a basket.