It was a spring afternoon in Istanbul, and I was talking with a woman in beige pumps and pearls who was angry about her government. It was taking the country in the wrong direction, she said, and she had come out with thousands of other people to protest. People from poor areas who supported the government were going against their self-interest. “They’re only being manipulated,” she said.
Fast-forward 10 years to 2017. I am standing in a crowd of women wearing fleeces and sensible shoes in Washington, D.C. Everything feels oddly familiar. They were angry about the election and worried that it would take the country in the wrong direction. Many people who supported the new president had voted against their interests, they said.
I have covered political divides in Turkey, Russia, Pakistan and Iraq. The pattern often goes like this: one country. Two tribes. Conflicting visions for how government should be run. There is lots of shouting. Sometimes there is shooting.
Now those same forces are tearing at my own country.
Increasingly, Americans live in alternate worlds, with different laws of gravity, languages and truths. Politics is raw, more about who you are than what you believe. The ground is shifting in unsettling ways. Even democracy feels fragile.
President Trump has brought out these contrasts, like colors in a photograph developing in a darkroom.
If that Friday felt like a wedding, that Saturday, the day of the women’s march, was a feisty funeral.
Fifteen years later, when I moved back to America, swaths of my own country were soaking in the same bitter mix. I became obsessed with these places. But their stories were hard to sell to editors. The grievances were not new, the result of years of economic decline and unmet expectations that left powerful resentment.
In Russia and the United States, those forces eventually punched their way into politics and were harnessed by two skilled populists — Mr. Trump and Vladimir V. Putin. It was a revolt against elites, who were seen as having driven the country into the 2008 financial crisis without paying a price. Elites, who lived in isolated islands of economic opportunity and sneered at people who didn’t — for not having a passport, for liking Donald Trump.
“The vibe I get when they talk to me is they know the world is round and the earth orbits the sun — they understand that — but they think that I think the earth is flat,” Larry Laughlin, a retiree from Ham Lake, Minn., who voted for Mr. Trump, said of liberals.
Jonathan Haidt, a social psychologist at New York University, calls it the clash between globalists and nationalists. The globalists, who tend to be urban and college educated, want a world like the one described in John Lennon’s song “Imagine” — no religion, walls or borders dividing people. The nationalists see that as a vision of hell. They want to defend their culture and emphasize the bonds of nationhood — flag, Constitution, patriotism. They also want to limit immigration, an instinct that globalists are often quick to condemn as racist.
It is one of the most profound fissures of the modern political era and has upended politics in Europe, too.
Nationalists love it.
Divides change. They can eventually cause social upheaval, political turmoil and even violence. In Turkey, the protesting crowds turned out to be right. The government did take their country in the wrong direction.
What will happen here? Social psychologists like Mr. Haidt say the best way to ease polarization and reduce anxiety among the nationalists is to emphasize our sameness. But in the crowds a week ago, no one seemed to be in the mood.
