Here are the top 10 comments of the week on our digital platforms, as selected by our readers and the journalists who moderate nearly every comment.
1. “Mary Richards” was my idol, as she was for a lot of Gen X women growing up in the 1970s. As a little girl, I remember watching her on TV and would often throw my knit hat into the air, wishing to be the Mary Richards character she played on the Mary Tyler Moore Show.
I deeply admired the pioneering, single career woman who ventured off to the city on her own, eventually found love, and had a daughter a little later in life. As it turned out, my own life ended up imitating her art in many ways. RIP, Mary Tyler Moore.
— Martha Woodcock on The Times’s Facebook page, responding to an article about the death of television icon Mary Tyler Moore Wednesday.
2. In the late 70s, in the spine tingling cold of upstate New York, my immigrant family, from Pakistan, would gathered around our TV to watch CBC’s reruns of Mary Tyler Moore every evening at 7. The show became the glue for a family experiencing the jolts and disorientation of being in a new country and its alien culture.
On the show, Americans were kind, friendly, funny and lovable. We loved Ms. Moore because she represented something wonderful about our new country. We never saw people like us on her show but we were sure that if we ever ran into her she would be kind and wonderful. My entire family, especially my dad became life long fans. We will miss you Mary Tyler Moore.
— Rooney Papa in New York.
This comment received more than 290 reader recommendations.
3. So … black actors received more nominations due to pressure to nominate. Some truth to that for sure, but how about there were three very good movies that showed off black actors who gave terrific performances? After all, you cannot develop and be considered for awards if you do not get the opportunity.
— Luxembourg in New York, reacting to an article about this year’s Oscar nominations. Six black actors were nominated, a record, while “La La Land” received 14 nominations including Best Picture.
4. “La La Land” is poised to become another “The Artist”; a cute, fluffy, unchallenging homage to a bygone era of Hollywood that wins big at the Oscars only to be forgotten afterward.
— Rajah Hayn on The Times’s Facebook page.
The best experience I had was when I struck up a conversation with a woman. We proceeded to talk about where we agreed and disagreed about abortion and found out that we both had adopted children. It turned out she and her family are legal immigrants.
We started a conversation on immigration, our views differ in some ways. I believe that we all need to get past blaming each other or being dismissive of each other and start finding out where we can find common ground and support one another.
— Jennifer Q. in Placerville, Calif., reacting to an article about the hundreds of thousands of women who marched in events across the United States and around the world one day after President Trump’s inauguration.
6. Oh, I don’t know, this photo made me take a look at myself and check my self congratulatory ways a bit. The black woman with the lollipop is in it for the long haul. She is used to the fight and still shows up. The white ladies are pink and new. They showed up this time when it was new and fun.
But will they still show up when it isn’t about them? I need to be challenged like that to grow. This photo makes me uncomfortable and it makes me better.
7. At such a perilous moment in history, we need to be able to rely on trusted institutions like the New York Times to reassure us of their objectivity. Using the word “lie” in the story headline doesn’t do that. It not only fuels suspicion about the liberal media but it also appeals directly to Trump’s conspiracy-minded supporters.
— HC45701 in Virginia, reacting to an article about President Trump’s lying about illegal immigrants costing him the popular vote.
8. Perhaps Donald Trump thought that Obama’s adoration came with the office? He has spent his adult life surrounded by sycophants who reinforce his opinion that he wins and is the bestest ever at everything. He is a bully who is now complaining about the press being “mean” to him by finally holding him to account and reporting facts.
He is woefully insecure about his victory, and is trying to convince others of an alternate reality. What he will soon learn if he he hasn’t already is that America is not in his employ. He is our public servant. We have nothing to gain by telling him water isn’t wet. Just as he taunted President Obama with the birther conspiracy as was his want and his right, the general public, lawmakers, others can criticize him too.
He can repeat lies and send Spicer out to do bizarre, Orwellian pressers all he wants. But there is strong opposition to his con. We won’t be silent, nor will we accept alternative facts. Best he get used to dissent.
— Jen Rob in Washington.
This comment received more than 1,900 reader recommendations.
9.  They trade one responsibility for another. Ms. Stevenson is filling in gaps of our societal neglect.
— Anna in Greensboro, N.C., reacting to an article about the reasons women leave the work force, and how their reasons for doing so differ from men’s.
10. I’m so sorry for the Turners for the loss of their son to this unforgiving disease.
I have read and reread this story, looking for some glimmer of reason for why they continue to watch and participate in the game that killed their son. I hope this gives them peace in some way that I may never understand.
The closest I can come is a heart-wrenching story about a Sandy Hook victim’s parent who went to a gun range over several months to learn about the weapon that killed her child. I don’t think she did this to torture herself, and probably not to understand the senseless tragedy, either, but maybe just to face head-on the evil that destroyed her family and countless others.
Football and guns: why our nation continues to worship these tools of death and pain is beyond me.
— Carrie in Albuquerque, reacting to an article about the family of Kevin Turner, a former N.F.L. star who died after contracting brain disease linked to his football injuries.