
The decision, by Judge Richard M. Gergel of Federal District Court, was an unsurprising but crucial echo of a separate ruling in late November, when Judge Gergel said that Mr. Roof did not meet the legal standard to be deemed incompetent. Monday’s ruling, announced after a lengthy closed hearing, was another setback for the court-appointed defense lawyers whom Mr. Roof does not intend to use during the sentencing proceedings.
“After fully considering all of the evidence presented, the court ruled from the bench that Defendant remains competent to stand trial and to self-represent,” the judge wrote in an order, one of a handful of court filings on Mr. Roof’s health that have been made public. The motion that prompted Monday’s hearing was submitted under seal.
Taken together, Judge Gergel’s ruling and Mr. Roof’s apparent resolve to act as his own counsel mean that the sentencing phase will open Wednesday, one day later than scheduled, with an air of uncertainty and a measure of worry. Mr. Roof has said that he will deliver an opening statement — it is not clear what he intends to say — but that he will not call witnesses or present any evidence to the jurors who will decide whether he is sentenced to death or to life in prison.
Last month, the same jurors took about two hours to find Mr. Roof guilty on 33 counts, including 18 that carry the death penalty, for the June 2015 massacre at Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church.
In the trial’s guilt phase, prosecutors used witnesses, photographs and autopsy reports to prove the gruesome aftermath of the Wednesday night when Mr. Roof pulled a semiautomatic handgun and opened fire at the end of a Bible study session in the church’s fellowship hall.
Mr. Roof has said little about how, or even whether, he will urge the jurors to spare his life, but he has said he will not offer a mental health defense of the kind that his lawyers wanted to present. Mr. Roof’s lawyers, including the noted death penalty litigator David I. Bruck, will serve as standby counsel, meaning that they may advise Mr. Roof but cannot address the jurors or call or cross-examine witnesses.
Last week, before Mr. Roof had another psychiatric examination, the sidelined lawyers said his strategy raised “the question of whether the defendant is actually unable to defend himself.” The lawyers have declined to comment during the trial.
If Mr. Roof is sentenced to death, the dispute about his mental health is likely to be central to any appeals.
