SANTIAGO, Chile — A series of wildfires has devastated homes, farmland and livestock in a large area of southern and central Chile over the past week.
A prolonged drought and high temperatures have worsened the blazes, which have so far destroyed more than 700,000 acres of forestland and killed 10 people, mainly firefighters and police officers. The government has declared a state of catastrophe in four regions, deployed 1,200 troops to support the efforts of firefighters and appealed for help from other countries.
As of Friday morning, about 130 active fires remain, 51 of which have been contained, according to the National Emergency Bureau of Chile. They cover an area of about 920 square miles.
More than 2,700 people have lost their homes, and thousands have been evacuated from the affected areas.
At least 10 people have been arrested in connection with the fires, as some are being investigated as having been intentionally lit.
Fierce winds and smoldering ash have complicated the challenge of containing the blazes, which on Wednesday destroyed the small hamlet of Santa Olga in the Maule region.
The town of Pumanque, in the central region of O’Higgins, has also been hit especially hard. Many residents have seen their possessions and livelihoods destroyed. Heavy machinery has been deployed to help clear the carcasses of livestock killed in the fires. Firefighters — who are all volunteers in Chile — have dropped water from helicopters and dug trenches to try to quell the flames.
In total, 4,000 people — including firefighters, troops and national forestry bureau officers — and 46 aircraft have been deployed to combat the fires, according to the National Emergency Bureau.
Some residents, lacking any training or protective gear, have used tree branches and bottles of water to try to douse the flames.
The fire has provided an eerie, almost apocalyptic, backdrop to areas where the blazes have raged.
Colombian firefighters arrived on Thursday to offer assistance, and the Russian government offered Chile a supertanker, which can hold 42 tons of water. Mexico, France, Portugal and other countries have also provided assistance.
On Wednesday, a supertanker arrived from the United States to help put out fires in some areas. It had been paid for with a $2 million donation from the foundation of Lucy Ana Avilés, a Chilean who lives in Denver and is married to Benjamin Walton, a Walmart heir.
For thousands of Chileans, the ferocity of the fires has left few options other than to try to get to a safe place and wait for the flames to pass.
