Related Article | Related LessonCredit...Illustration by Other Means. Clinton: Justin Sullivan/Getty Images. Pizza: Jeff Schear/Getty Images.
Back in 2015, when we published our lesson plan Fake News vs. Real News: Determining the Reliability of Sources, we had no way of knowing that, a year later, the Oxford Dictionaries would declare “post-truth” the 2016 word of the year; that fake news would play a role in the 2016 presidential election; that it would cause real violence; and that the president-elect of the United States would use the term to condemn mainstream media outlets he opposes.
Back then, to convince teachers that the skill was important, we quoted Peter Adams of the News Literacy Project on the “digital naïveté” of the “digital natives” we teach. Now, however, we doubt that we need to convince anyone.
These days, invented stories created in a “fake news factory”— or by a 23-year-old in need of cash — go viral, while articles from traditional sources like The Times are called “fake news” by those who see them as hostile to their agenda.
Fake news, and the proliferation of raw opinion that passes for news, is creating confusion, punching holes in what is true, causing a kind of fun-house effect that leaves the reader doubting everything, including real news.
As always, we welcome your ideas; please post them in the comments.
An exercise given to students by the Stanford History Education Group.
After they answer, explain that this is one of the problems that the Stanford History Education Group recently posed to thousands across the United States that resulted in their conclusion that students — from middle school through college — are shockingly ill-equipped to manage the emerging media landscape.
Nearly four in 10 high school students believed, based on the headline, that this photograph of deformed daisies provided strong evidence of toxic conditions near the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant in Japan, even though no source or location was given for the photo, The Wall Street Journal wrote in an article about the research. How did your students do in comparison?
• What does the phrase “fake news” mean?
As they share their thoughts with the whole class, collect and record as many answers and examples as you can, since these responses will probably anticipate many of the issues raised in the exercises below. As you and your class discuss and read further, you can return to your list and add more.
Finally, invite them to read about the Stanford Group’s research. How many of the issues raised in this piece were also on your class’s list?
Narrowly defined, “fake news” means a made-up article with an intention to deceive, often geared toward getting clicks. But the issue has become a political battering ram, and in the process, the definition of fake news has blurred, writes Sabrina Tavernise in this article.
Are some of these forms of unreliable news more dangerous than others? Which? Why?
What happens when mainstream media is labeled “fake news” by those who see certain stories as hostile to their political agenda?
What if the president-elect spreads fake news himself? Below, a tweet with one of the best-known examples, but here are nine more.
How did Eric Tucker, a man in Austin, Tex., with only about 40 Twitter followers, fuel a nationwide conspiracy theory about demonstrations against Mr. Trump — one that the president-elect joined in promoting?
In order to overcome the threat of fake news, it’s important to know where it comes from and what makes it tick. Read this case study, “How Fake News Spreads,” with your students, and invite them to annotate as they go. What factors contributed to the spread of this news? What insights did they gain from the case study?
In the span of a few weeks, a false rumor that Hillary Clinton and her top aides were involved in various crimes snowballed into a wild conspiracy theory that they were running a child-trafficking ring out of a Washington pizza parlor. The fast evolution of the false theory revealed how a powerful mix of fake news and social media led an armed North Carolina man to investigate the rumors about the pizza place.
Finally, try this exercise, created by the journalist Andrew Revkin for his graduate class in making the most of online communication at Pace University. In light of the role that fake news played in the election, he recently updated his idea on the self-publishing site Medium. He walks through examples for you to follow there.
Each week, determine the path one bit of information took to get to you. If it was a powerful photo of a drowned refugee child, did it come via Facebook? Twitter? If so, was it forwarded by a friend from some other friend or feed? Who created the content? Try to trace how information MOVES.
As he points out, this exercise shows the ways in which information moves through social media and how easily its origins can become obscured.
What “disinformation” have your students noticed this election season?
The fake-news phenomenon is not the result of personal failings. And it is not limited to one end of the political spectrum. Rather, Americans’ deep bias against the political party they oppose is so strong that it acts as a kind of partisan prism for facts, refracting a different reality to Republicans than to Democrats.
Does this ring true for your students? Do they think they believe “a wildly different sets of facts” than someone on the other side of the political aisle? How, according to the article, can that become a vicious cycle that leads to more and more political extremism?
After they have read and discussed, challenge your students to revisit the question we posed originally — “Why does it matter if we can’t tell real news from fake news?” — and add to their list anything they gleaned from the article or discussion.
If there was any doubt, the uproar this week over BuzzFeed’s publication of unverified allegations about President-elect Donald J. Trump made clear that the gatekeeper role once played by major news media organizations has vanished in the digital age.
This poses a deep danger for legitimate, aggressive journalism, especially from the president-elect, who has been consistent in his heavy-handed demonization of any and all media whenever he dislikes critical but accurate stories about him.
Is Mr. Trump “encouraging the public not to believe reporting by responsible news organizations that are striving to hold the government accountable,” as this writer asserts? What evidence can you offer for your argument? And, if so, what will that mean for our democracy? What role does a free press play in protecting a free society?
— Have them work in small groups to take the front page of the print New York Times or any other traditional American newspaper and, with red markers, put an X over any article or image that they feel would probably not be published in a country without a law guaranteeing freedom of the press.
Have them share their results, perhaps using this activity sheet to take their analysis further. What can they conclude?
— Or invite them to look at this cartoon by Patrick Chappatte. What is it saying? How does it relate to the discussions they have had so far?
Though one could argue, as this writer does, that the internet has loosened our grip on the truth, it also provides us with the tools to seek the truth.
Pose our Student Opinion question to your students, and invite them to post their responses: How do you know if what you read online is true? Before you hit “share,” what questions should you ask?
After they answer, you might share On the Media’s 11 guidelines shown in the image above. Listen to the whole show here for more detail, and find additional chapters in the group’s clear and helpful “Breaking News Consumer’s Handbook” here.
• Who made this?
• How was this made?
• Why was this made?
• When was this made?
• What is this missing?
• Where do I go from here?
Another great set of questions that elaborate on some of these is A Finder’s Guide To Facts from National Public Radio.
These three nonpartisan sites below investigate the truth of various claims, including whether a zoo really named a baby gorilla Harambe McHarambeface and whether Ruth Bader Ginsburg is retiring from the Supreme Court.
And to check the authenticity of images, teach your students to reverse-Google them to find their origins.
Invite students to spend 48 hours keeping track of the news articles they click on, read and share. Have them write down the source of each. Once they have finished, have them use Wordle to create a visual representation of where most of their news comes from.
Then ask students: “Where do you get most of your news? Is this source trustworthy? How do you know?” Ask students to do an internet search on their most-viewed news sites for some insight into their trustworthiness, using some of the questions we posed in the “Ask the Right Questions” section.
After discussing what students have learned, ask them to curate their Twitter and Facebook accounts to ensure that they are getting their news from reliable sources in the future. At the same time, ask them to think about their “filter bubble” and make sure that they follow a mix of news from different perspectives and trustworthy sources.
To go even deeper, you might help them understand the concept of confirmation bias and ask them to think about ways that they, like all of us, have been vulnerable to it.
Our friends at the Center for News Literacy have developed a Massive Open Online Course, or MOOC, offered through Coursera, called Making Sense of the News.
The organizers say the six-week course will give learners tools that teach you not what to read and consume, but rather how to critically consume information and make yourself more informed and engaged.
Every week in our News Quiz, we save the 10th question for news literacy — and most weeks it is the question the fewest students get right.
We list four recent news headlines — three from The Times and one from a satirical site like The Onion — and ask which is which. Though we often feature wacky news as “distracters,” these are not trick questions. Close reading should reveal fairly quickly which headline just can’t be true.
How are you fighting fake news in your own life and social media feeds? Teachers, what are you doing in your classroom? What resources have you found to add to our collection? Please post in the comments.
Article | Researchers Created Fake News. Here’s What They Found.
