On the same day that the Trump Organization announced its appointment of two ethics monitors to advise on potential conflicts of interest, it faced a new ethical quandary: Is it right to double the price of the initiation fee at Mar-a-Lago, the Trump family’s private club in Florida, or would that be seen as cashing in on President Trump’s arrival in the White House?
The question emerged after Bernd Lembcke, the managing director of the 118-room club in Palm Beach, Fla. — which Mr. Trump recently labeled the Winter White House — confirmed on Wednesday that the price of new memberships had increased to $200,000 from $100,000, and that applications had surged since Mr. Trump won the election in November.
Mr. Lembcke’s acknowledgment came hours after the Trump Organization announced that it had named Bobby Burchfield, a longtime Republican Party lawyer and corporate litigator, as an “independent ethics adviser.” The Trump Organization pointed to the move as a sign of its commitment to addressing questions about potential conflicts of interest.
“We take our role and the responsibility we have to our company, and our thousands of employees, very seriously,” Eric Trump, one of the president’s sons and an executive vice president of the Trump Organization, said in a statement announcing the appointment of Mr. Burchfield.
“We have had a sudden surge in requests,” he said, adding that new members must be recommended by a current member, as is the case at many private clubs.
The new initiation fee went into effect on Jan. 1, although he said the annual $14,000 dues remained the same. The club has 482 members, Mr. Lembcke said, but has a cap of 500 members.
Mr. Trump made a number of appearances at the club during the campaign, and he spent the holidays there last month. He has indicated he intends to be a familiar face at Mar-a-Lago during his presidency.
Members are already noticing differences at the club, particularly when Mr. Trump is in town.
Another member, Jeff Greene, a billionaire developer who ran for a Senate seat in Florida in 2010, said Mar-a-Lago was now a “much more interesting” place.
The Trump administration faces a particularly daunting task in confronting potential conflicts of interest, or the appearances of such, given the president’s refusal to legally separate himself from his business. He has instead handed it to his children — a decision that has drawn the ire of ethics experts.
In addition to Mr. Burchfield’s appointment, the Trump Organization also announced on Wednesday that George Sorial, a longtime executive, would be its chief compliance counsel.
Mr. Burchfield served for decades as a Republican Party legal adviser, with clients that included former Representative Tom DeLay, Republican of Texas, when he was investigated on allegations of campaign finance violations and money laundering. Mr. Burchfield also serves as the chairman of Crossroads GPS, the so-called dark money group founded by Karl Rove, the White House adviser during the administration of former President George W. Bush.
Mr. Burchfield declined to comment on Wednesday. A partner in the Washington office of the law firm King & Spalding, he will continue with his practice, and the Trump Organization will essentially serve as a client. His corporate clients have included United Airlines and the N.F.L., and he has at times offered ethics compliance advice to major corporations and individuals, a lawyer at his firm said.
Back at Mar-a-Lago, Mr. Lembcke said that given the growing interest by potential members in joining the club, “We are very careful in vetting them.” But he declined to release a list of new members, saying membership was private.
