Chuck Close and other artists used to sit around bars like the Cedar Tavern and Max’s Kansas City and talk about art. “I have more conversations today over what we’re going to do to protect our spouses, our children, our work,” Mr. Close said.
At 77, Mr. Close is among a critical mass of prominent — and profitable — artists in their twilight years (including Claes Oldenburg, 88; Ed Ruscha, 79; and Gerhard Richter, 84) facing important decisions about how to secure their creations and provide for their heirs just as the exploding market has significantly increased the value of their work. And the art world hopes to cash in on it.
Sotheby’s just hired Christy MacLear, the chief executive of the Robert Rauschenberg Foundation, in an attempt to start managing artists’ careers, estates and foundations, a role historically played by galleries.
And dealers, for their part, have stepped up their efforts to hold on to aging artists they represent — or to lure them away from competitors.
Brice Marden, 78, for example, just announced that after more than 20 years with Matthew Marks, he was leaving for Larry Gagosian. William Eggleston, 77, left Gagosian for David Zwirner in June. And while Mr. Richter has long been with Marian Goodman — herself now 88 — that doesn’t mean he couldn’t eventually move his holdings to another gallery or an auction house, although Ms. Goodman said that Mr. Richter had resisted many such overtures over the years.
The potential revenues in managing artists can be substantial in fees for services, in sales and in business worth hundreds of millions of dollars; the Cy Twombly Foundation, for example, has assets of $1.5 billion. Handling artists not only allows for control of their remaining unsold work, but it also offers access to their catalogues raisonnés, a thorough accounting of every piece by the artists and who owns them — which can lead to future sales.
Christie’s has yet to develop a similar venture, though Jonathan Laib, a 17-year veteran of that auction house, successfully reintroduced the artist Ruth Asawa to buyers before she died in 2013 and handled her estate afterward.
Mr. Laib recently left Christie’s for the David Zwirner gallery — bringing the Asawa estate with him — partly because he said that he saw greater possibilities for an artist in a gallery context.
“What we were able to do through Christie’s, I don’t know if that can be replicated for every artist,” he said.
Several art experts point out that efforts to merge the skill sets of galleries and auction houses have failed in the past, namely the 50 percent interest Sotheby’s bought in the gallery Deitch Projects in 1997, and its purchase of the André Emmerich Gallery in 1996, as well as Christie’s acquisition of the gallery Haunch of Venison in 2007.
Even Brett Gorvy, who just left Christie’s after 23 years to join forces with the dealer Dominique Lévy — this year Ms. Levy took on the painter Pat Steir, 74, and the Korean sculptor Lee Seung-taek, 84 — said that what galleries do for artists cannot be replicated by an auction house.
Sotheby’s executives disagree, saying that galleries are not necessarily well equipped for the long-term planning required by today’s successful artists, whose holdings can include land, or foundations that give philanthropic grants.
But many artists consider auction houses the enemy, because they can inflate prices and hurt an artist’s reputation if something fails to sell.
This new model also raises ethical questions: Couldn’t the auction house show preferential treatment to its artists by putting them on catalog covers, for example, to increase their value, and by steering an artist’s work into auction sales, rather than into prestigious museum collections?
