Demonstrators outside of the Department of Homeland Security’s detention center in Elizabeth, N.J., on Sunday. President Trump issued a statement defending his travel ban at 4:30 p.m.
Protesters outside the White House. Reince Priebus, the chief of staff, tried to soften the president’s immigration order.
From left, Anfal Hussain, Iman Alknfushe and Efal Hussain after Ms. Alknfushe was detained at Kennedy Airport in New York.
Demonstrators prayed in the baggage claim area of Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport.
Protesters near the White House. People amassed in large numbers in public spaces and at airports to oppose the president’s order.
Khulud Fidama outside Detroit Metropolitan Airport.
Haider Alshawi, an Iraqi man who was detained at Kennedy Airport in New York on Saturday night, flew on Sunday to Houston, where he was greeted by his son and wife.
Demonstrators at San Francisco International Airport.
A group amassed at Battery Park in Lower Manhattan.
Hamdiyah Al Saeedi, center, at Kennedy Airport with two volunteer lawyers, Kayla Green, left, and Molly Lauterback.
Izzy Berdan protested in Boston.
Zabihollah Zarepisheh celebrated after being released from detainment at Kennedy Airport. Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York said his office would offer legal help to those detained at airports in the state.
Demonstrators gathered at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport.
Demonstrators turned out in force and on short notice at rallies across the country on Sunday to condemn President Trump’s executive order restricting immigration.
Protesters amassed in public spaces and at airports to oppose the order, which they assailed as un-American, even as the administration defended it as crucial to improving national security. The executive order, signed on Friday, stranded travelers around the world over the weekend and caused widespread confusion.
In Washington, protesters gathered by the thousands outside the front lawn of the White House to show their disgust with Mr. Trump’s decision and their solidarity with Muslims.
“Shame,” they chanted, hoisting homemade signs toward the Executive Mansion, where Mr. Trump was scheduled to spend part of the day making telephone calls to foreign leaders and later hosting a private screening of “Finding Dory,” an animated film about a fish who travels the ocean in hopes of reuniting with its family.
Among the protesters were some former Obama administration appointees.
Matt Nosanchuk, who served as the White House’s liaison to the Jewish community under President Barack Obama from 2013 to 2016, said on Sunday that he had been in touch with several former colleagues as they made plans to attend the hastily arranged protest and ran into others in the crowd.
“What Trump may not realize is you have a whole cadre of Obama appointees who are really good organizers, who have been activated and who are not going to stand by,” he said.
Security fencing and reviewing stands still in place from Inauguration Day kept crowds at a distance from the White House but did not stop the numbers from swelling through the afternoon, when the protesters left to march to Capitol Hill.
As marchers passed the Trump International Hotel in Washington, boos and profanities filled Pennsylvania Avenue. Elsewhere in the city, protesters carrying signs and candles marched up the sidewalk opposite the vice president’s house, most walking silently and many with children.
At a rally in Battery Park in Lower Manhattan, thousands gathered in protest as nearby ferries shuttled visitors to the Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island.
Asma Shuaib, 22, a student from Jackson Heights, Queens, and a Muslim, said she had come to resist the president’s executive order.
As they did elsewhere in the country, lawyers stood in the international arrivals terminal of San Francisco International Airport, holding up signs offering free assistance to those awaiting the arrival of family members from countries affected by the Trump administration’s order.
In Arizona, which has taken more Syrian refugees than any other state, a few hundred protesters greeted travelers arriving at the busiest terminal at Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport, their signs facing the street, visible to anyone who drove in. Many motorists honked, some to the beat of whatever slogan the crowd was chanting at the time.
