But a review of Neurocore’s claims and interviews with medical experts suggest its conclusions are unproven and its methods questionable.
Ms. DeVos, whose appointment as education secretary is expected to be voted on Tuesday morning by a Senate committee, had said she would leave Neurocore’s board, but would retain her investment in the company, which she valued at $5 million to $25 million, according to documents filed this month with the Office of Government Ethics.
Last Friday, a group of Democratic senators sent Ms. DeVos a letter saying that her financial disclosure raised questions about potential conflicts. The senators were skeptical of the DeVos family trusts, and also raised questions about Neurocore, which called itself educational in a trademark dispute. The lawmakers asked Ms. DeVos if she would commit that she and her family members would not “benefit financially from actions” she could take in her new role.
At Neurocore’s clinics, children and adults with A.D.H.D., anxiety, depression, autism and other psychological and neurological diagnoses sit before monitors watching movies or television shows ranging from “Frozen” to “Mad Men,” with sensors attached to their scalps and earlobes.
Whenever they become distracted or anxious, the video automatically freezes. That feedback, known as conditioning, leads the vast majority of clients, company officers say, to experience improvements in their disorders after 30 45-minute sessions costing about $2,000. Some insurers cover the treatments, while others have denied payment.
One denial concerned a 50-year-old woman with anxiety and migraines. The insurance company noted that it covered biofeedback for only a few conditions. An outside review commissioned by the Michigan insurance department supported the decision that biofeedback was not, in her case, an established therapy or medically necessary.
Experts said that thus far, studies of neurofeedback for attention deficit disorder were unconvincing. It “isn’t shown to be better than placebo, and the effects are not long-lasting,” said Sandra K. Loo, director of pediatric neuropsychology at the David Geffen School of Medicine at the University of California, Los Angeles, who has written about neurofeedback and quantitative EEG, a brain-wave test that Neurocore performs as part of its diagnosis.
He and other experts warned of potential side effects including headaches and disrupted sleep.
Federal oversight of the field is minimal. “When it comes to treatments like this, there’s no formal body,” said Scott O. Lilienfeld, a professor of psychology at Emory University. “This has been a big problem. We don’t have an F.D.A. for psychotherapies,” he said, referring to the Food and Drug Administration.
At Neurocore, patients range from young children with A.D.H.D., to older adults who are concerned about memory health, to athletes wanting to improve their performance. Neurocore promotes its ties to the Orlando Magic, which is owned by the DeVos family, and other professional athletes have appeared in advertisements for the company.
Dr. Fotuhi, Neurocore’s chief medical officer, said that there were no physicians on site at the clinics, but social workers supervise lower-level technicians, who administer the neurofeedback. Employment ads show that Neurocore’s social workers are offered less than $20 an hour to start, yet are responsible for diagnostic assessments of patients with complex problems.
Amanda Farmer, who said she worked as a technician at a Neurocore center in Okemos, Mich., for eight months in 2012, watched potential clients get a hard sell.
“A lot of people were skeptical, and they gloss over any of the real questions: ‘Are you sure? This seems like a lot of money. What happens if it doesn’t do anything?’” Ms. Farmer recalled. Other current and former employees expressed similar misgivings.
Experts say there is not much standardization in the field of biofeedback, and techniques vary.
Dr. Fotuhi has impressive credentials: an M.D. from Harvard and Ph.D. in neuroscience from Johns Hopkins. However, his short-lived previous venture, NeurExpand Brain Centers in Maryland, folded after Medicare refused to reimburse services and demanded repayment for lack of scientific evidence of their effectiveness, Dr. Fotuhi said in 2015 to Bethesda Magazine.
In an interview, Dr. Fotuhi said Neurocore’s chief executive, Mark Murrison, who has been at the company for about two years, “has an emphasis on research and development and using science-based protocols.” He said the company would be publishing its results in peer-reviewed scientific literature soon.
“We are proud that our clients are highly satisfied with the care they receive and that we are able to help transform the lives of our clients for the better,” Dr. Fotuhi added in a statement.
Ms. DeVos maintains her interest in Neurocore even as she said she would divest from 102 companies and investment funds, including a family vehicle that backs business start-ups. Ms. DeVos and her husband are invested in Neurocore through the Windquest Group, their family office.
Experts said that Ms. DeVos, as a result of the investment, might have to recuse herself from discussions about the efficacy of using brain-training strategies to help school-age children. A spokesman for Ms. DeVos, however, disagreed that her stake in Neurocore was problematic.
“We reject the notion that the judgment of the Office of Government Ethics is incapable of identifying potential conflicts of interests, or that the judgment of the professionals who work there should be supplemented or supplanted by personal opinions and partisan recommendations,” said Ed Patru, a spokesman for Ms. DeVos.
Ms. DeVos is expected to receive enough votes from the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee — and eventually the full Senate — for confirmation. The nomination of Ms. DeVos, an outspoken critic of public education who favors charter schools, has antagonized supporters of public schools and prompted some protests.
Neurocore is the creation of Timothy G. Royer, a licensed psychologist with a master’s degree in theology, who served as division chief of pediatric psychology at the Helen DeVos Children’s Hospital in Grand Rapids, Mich.
Originally called Hope 139, after Psalm 139 from the Bible, the company marketed itself to schools — especially religious ones — in Michigan to help children improve academic scores and lessen the need for medication to treat certain ailments.
Ms. DeVos and her husband began supporting the company in 2008, for a time hosting the company in the offices of Windquest.
