WASHINGTON — Droves of men, women and children opposing abortion swarmed the National Mall on Friday in a demonstration that served not only as a rallying cry for their movement, but as a peaceful act of support for the new president they have embraced as their improbable champion.
The crowd gathered just a few blocks from where hundreds of thousands of women marched last weekend to protest President Trump — a striking and symbolic juxtaposition for a country cleaved by its most recent election.
The contrast was not lost on the marchers or the speakers, who were optimistic that their cause would benefit greatly from having anti-abortion Republicans in control of Congress, the White House and, they hoped, eventually the Supreme Court.
As much as the march on Friday spoke to the divided politics of the moment, it also pointed to a sweeping shift in policy under the new administration. Mr. Trump, who has committed to rolling back abortion rights and naming anti-abortion justices to the Supreme Court, sent two of the highest-ranking White House officials to address the crowd. It was a gesture of solidarity that march organizers said went further than any Republican administration had gone.
The two officials, Vice President Mike Pence and Kellyanne Conway, a counselor to the president who has been a leading figure in the anti-abortion movement for two decades, told the marchers of the White House’s dedication to their cause.
“Life is winning again in America,” Mr. Pence said to cheers from the tens of thousands of people amassed at the foot of the Washington Monument. Mr. Pence’s appearance was a first for the March for Life, which has taken place every year since the Supreme Court legalized abortion in 1973, but had never before been attended by a vice president. Republican presidents have spoken to the march before, but by video or audio.
Endearing himself to social conservatives in a way that many did not think possible, Mr. Trump has cast himself as the most unflinchingly anti-abortion president in at least a generation, breaking with previous Republican nominees who generally took a more tepid approach when discussing the issue. President George W. Bush insisted that he would apply no “litmus test” to his Supreme Court nominees on any issue, including abortion. His father, President George Bush, said the same thing, using the same language, reinforcing the mistrust of many social conservatives.
But Mr. Trump not only insisted that he would pick an anti-abortion justice to replace Antonin Scalia — whose seat has been vacant since he died last year — he signed a four-part pledge to take policy steps considered vital to the movement, including a commitment to sign a ban on abortion after 20 weeks of pregnancy, if such legislation reaches his desk.
It has been a remarkable turnaround for a man who spent much of his life as a supporter of abortion rights and who once described himself as “very pro-choice.” Yet during the campaign, Mr. Trump spoke more vividly and more forcefully on the issue than any recent Republican nominee, disregarding years of established practice from conservatives who believed that it was political suicide to sound too radical.
Shortly after he was elected, Mr. Trump said women might have to cross state lines to have an abortion because his goal was to see Roe v. Wade overturned. He graphically characterized Hillary Clinton as someone who would tolerate abortion up until the point a doctor could “rip the baby out of the womb of the mother just prior to the birth.” He also said at one point that he believed women who had abortions should be punished, a statement he later had to walk back after even anti-abortion groups said he had gone too far.
Not all in the crowd were always with him. Rebecca Klein, 48, of Lakeland, Fla., was attending her first March for Life on Friday. “I was never a Trump supporter, but I’ve been a Trump voter ever since it came down to two candidates,” she said, describing her vote for him the way many social conservatives have — transactional and dispassionate.
Annette Saunders, 60, drove five hours with her husband from Norwalk, Conn. Though she voted for Mr. Trump, she said agonized over the decision. One factor swayed her: the Supreme Court.
Many marchers spoke hopefully about the change of power in Washington and what it could mean for their cause.
“I feel empowered. I feel positive. I feel encouraged about the future,” said Anne Nudi, 49, a nurse and college professor, who flew from her home in Kenosha, Wis., to attend the march. “And I feel blessed that I have a president who is supportive of our cause,” she said, shivering as she recalled some of Mr. Trump’s promises and actions, like his order this week prohibiting foreign aid to entities that discuss abortion as a family-planning option.
Marchers traveled to Washington in church groups, on high school class trips and in family minivans. Many noted with a hint of disapproval that they could not be more different from the anti-Trump Women’s March last Saturday — culturally or politically.
