BEVERLY HILLS, Calif. — Here near the heart of Hollywood, up a canyon at a compound lined with enough contemporary art for a respectable museum, Tamara Mellon, a founder of Jimmy Choo, is trying her hand at life in Los Angeles. The city represents a new beginning for Ms. Mellon, who has been, in various incarnations, a fashion editor, a fixture of tabloid fascination and a queen of shoes. Late of New York, and before that, of London, Ms. Mellon arrived here after a bankruptcy shuttered her first attempt at a Tamara Mellon label. Now she is giving the label another try.
“I’m starting again,” she said, undaunted. As for before, she said, she had screwed up — though the actual wording she used was more colorful.
After years on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, Ms. Mellon, 49, moved into the palatial home of her partner, Michael Ovitz, a founder of CAA, the talent and entertainment agency. Coming with her out west, besides her teenage daughter, Minty, and Minty’s stable of puffball dogs, is her team: her chief executive, Jill Layfield, who is also a founder of the second label; her chief design officer, Tania Spinelli, the previous creator of her own namesake collection; and a stylist-confidant in skintight shredded denim, Keegan Singh.
With the Mellon brand, Ms. Mellon aimed to shake up the industry by delivering shoes and, for the first time, clothes closer to the time one may conceivably want to wear them: winter clothes in the winter, spring clothes in spring. It was, in other words, an early version of the “buy-now, wear-now” model. When she used that phrase in 2013, “People looked at me like I had an alien growing out of the back of my head,” she said, and the company foundered. She filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in 2015.
Los Angeles has been magnetizing designers with a stronger pull lately. Tommy Hilfiger, Rebecca Minkoff and Rachel Comey will each move their usual New York Fashion Week shows here next month. Tom Ford will introduce his next collection here, just as he did in 2015. And Maria Grazia Chiuri, the new artistic director of Dior, will present her cruise collection here in May. But Ms. Mellon envisions her operation less as a fashion brand than as a tech company, albeit one in stiletto heels, just like so many others sprouting up along Los Angeles’s growing Silicon Beach.
In her quest to be fashion’s premier direct-to-consumer luxury brand, she has been buoyed by investment from the venture capital firm NEA, which has stakes in such digital-forward properties as Goop and Moda Operandi, and by her connection with Mr. Ovitz, who is now a private investor and consults with companies in Silicon Valley.
Ms. Mellon’s new label will effectively test whether luxury consumers, raised on high-end department stores, will warm to an online-only model where success stories tend to center more often on items like T-shirts (Everlane) and mattresses (Casper) than on $975 stretch-leather thigh-highs. Not everyone is convinced.
In Ms. Mellon’s favor are her long track record making (and marketing) hits. Jimmy Choo was an early proponent of celebrity placements, and Ms. Mellon continues to charm red carpet stylists and the celebrities they need to shoe. An article on Observer.com clocked Ms. Mellon’s breakout style, the Frontline sandal, which featured clear plastic straps, on celebrities including Jennifer Lopez, Cindy Crawford, Gigi Hadid and Kylie Jenner.
For his sake, Ms. Mellon has also adopted a new custom. Mr. Ovitz won’t allow shoes to be worn in the house.