This in-demand star has been deeply involved with the film, a story of representation that he cares about profoundly.
Wherever he goes and whatever he may be doing, Pharrell Williams can’t help calling attention to himself. At the start of a typical week in early December, this musician and producer was modeling in a Chanel show in Paris. By Thursday evening, he was in New York, talking to Jimmy Fallon on “The Tonight Show” and performing “I See a Victory,” one of his new songs from the film “Hidden Figures,” with the gospel singer Kim Burrell.
That Friday morning, he and Ms. Burrell were playing that song on the “Today” show, and that afternoon, he was stretched across the couch of a suite at a luxury hotel in Midtown Manhattan.
But by the end of this itinerary, Mr. Williams was looking to shine the spotlight on “Hidden Figures”: The film, directed by Theodore Melfi, tells the story of the real-life mathematicians Katherine Johnson (played by Taraji P. Henson), Dorothy Vaughan (Octavia Spencer) and Mary Jackson (Janelle Monáe), black women who worked at NASA during the space race of the 1960s, a period of racial segregation and open bias.
“Hidden Figures” is a story of representation that Mr. Williams cares about profoundly, and he has been deeply involved in the project. In addition to writing and performing new songs for its soundtrack, he is a composer of its score (with Hans Zimmer and Benjamin Wallfisch) and is also a producer of the film.
He has always been an in-demand guy — even more so since the success of songs like “Blurred Lines” (which he wrote with and produced for Robin Thicke); “Get Lucky” (which he helped write and performed on for Daft Punk); and “Happy,” the infectious global crowd-pleaser he contributed to the soundtrack of “Despicable Me 2.” These days he can have the effect of a living billboard, one who spent roughly a year drawing attention simply for wearing a Mountie-style hat designed by Vivienne Westwood.
Mr. Williams, 43, who has a gentler demeanor than his flashy showmanship might suggest (and who, at this conversation, was wearing an unassuming knit cap), said he is used to the many obligations that go hand-in-hand with the increasing opportunities coming his way.
But as he sees them, Mr. Williams said in even, enigmatic tones, the duties of producing and promoting movies do not have to feel like burdens at all; he compared them to a favorite hobby, like collecting comic books.
The screenplay for “Hidden Figures,” which is adapted from Margot Lee Shetterly’s book, was circulated to Mr. Williams and his producing partner, Mimi Valdés, early in the film’s life cycle, even before Mr. Melfi had signed on to direct.
The project had another layer of resonance for Mr. Williams, who was raised in Virginia Beach, not far from the NASA Langley Research Center in Hampton, where “Hidden Figures” takes place.
Growing up, he said, he had a kind of mystical reverence for the NASA facilities. “We knew the bigger questions were being answered there,” he said.
Mr. Williams’s new music for “Hidden Figures” includes “Runnin’,” a snappy song that accompanies Ms. Henson’s character on her lengthy cross-campus sprints to and from NASA’s segregated bathrooms, and the inspirational “I See a Victory,” which he explained in cosmological terms.
His songs for “Hidden Figures” have the simple pop structures of music that might have been written in the 1960s, but the unmistakable instrumentation and production value of tracks made in the modern day.
Mr. Zimmer, who worked with Mr. Williams on “Despicable Me” and “The Amazing Spider-Man 2,” said that his ways may be esoteric, but once he becomes motivated by an idea or concept, he commits to it fully.
For the “Hidden Figures” score, Mr. Zimmer said he and Mr. Williams were trying to follow the “American patriotic tone” established by space-exploration films like “The Right Stuff” and “Apollo 13,” with music that is rousing and full of brass instruments.
Ms. Monáe, a newcomer to acting who also appeared this year in “Moonlight,” said Mr. Williams was a daily presence on the “Hidden Figures” set and a reliable source of moral support.
Having committed himself to putting women and African-Americans at the forefront of a film industry often accused of neglecting diversity, Mr. Williams said he was optimistic that recent shifts in the nation’s politics were not going to compromise those goals.
