■ Former President Barack Obama, virtually silent since leaving office, spoke up on Monday, praising the surge of activism against his successor and opposing religious tests.
■ United Nations says 20,000 refugees have been frozen out by President Trump’s immigration executive order.
Former President Obama boarded Marine One after his successor’s swearing-in on Jan. 20 and seemed to disappear.
On Monday, he re-emerged, pleased with the activism that has blossomed since his departure and pretty displeased at the policies that elicited that response.
Mr. Lewis also let it be known that Mr. Obama never, ever supported a ban on Muslim immigration. He helpfully sent out this quote from November of 2015, as Congress was moving to legislate a ban on Syrian refugees.
The United States got its second America First committee on Monday afternoon.
The first was created in 1940 to keep the nation out of World War II, with its best-known associate being Charles Lindbergh, the aviator who was a vocal supporter of Nazi Germany.
The latest one was created by Mr. Trump’s allies and former advisers, the America First Policies committee, an outside group that will support the president, pushing back on opposition to his stances and eventually running advertisements to support him.
The group is being led by strategists Nick Ayers and Rick Gates, as well as Marty Obst and Brad Parscale, who led Mr. Trump’s digital efforts during the campaign. Two other strategists who worked with the Trump campaign, David Bossie and Katrina Pierson, will work with the group.
“President Trump campaigned on a bold but basic concept: America First,” the statement from the group said.
The group appears to be officially sanctioned by the Trump apparatus, and came together after bitter debate among factions during the campaign. It is expected to be funded in part by the father-daughter donors Rebekah and Bob Mercer, two supporters of Mr. Trump’s chief strategist, Stephen K. Bannon, and his counselor, Kellyanne Conway.
The phrase “America First” was used by Mr. Trump after he won the New Hampshire and South Carolina primaries. He used it again in his inauguration address. Mr. Trump has said he was familiar with the negative connotations of the phrase. But he has said it captured his approach to governing.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees said an estimated 20,000 refugees from all over the world would be impacted immediately by the executive order that freezes refugee resettlement for 120 days. Many more Syrian refugees are affected by the indefinite suspension of resettlement of Syrians.
The statement pointed to a provision in international law that prohibits discrimination on the basis of religion or nationality. The executive order bars nationals of seven countries, including Syria. “The High Commissioner underlines once again” the organization’s “position that refugees should receive equal treatment for protection and assistance, and opportunities for resettlement, regardless of their religion, nationality or race,” the statement read.
It didn’t help that the United Nations high commissioner for human rights, Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, is a Jordanian — and Jordan’s king, Abdullah II, is in Washington.
The refugee agency is mandated to protect the rights of refugees. It also relies on the United States for 40 percent of its funding.
The agency said it was “alarmed at the impact” of the executive order.
United Nations officials in charge of preparing refugees for resettlement were told by the State Department on Sunday morning to plan on halting medical screenings, travel schedules and orientation sessions for all refugees in the pipeline for resettlement to the United States.
The guidance went on to explain that nationals of seven prohibited countries would not be allowed to board planes for the United States.
Iran has banned visas for Americans. Iraq’s Parliament appears to be following suit.
Unintended consequences have a way of getting out of hand when policies are made a bit hastily.
The reaction to President Trump’s executive order on immigration was unusual by at least one standard — it attracted more comments than any article in nytimes.com history.
Judge Blocks Trump Order on Refugees Amid Chaos and Outcry Worldwide received 10,363 comment submissions. Of those, 8,448 were approved by the journalists who moderate comments and posted on The Times’s site.
The story, which was opened for reader submissions on Saturday morning, narrowly outpaced an October 2016 article about James Comey’s surprise letter to Congress announcing that emails from Hillary Clinton’s private server had been found on Anthony Weiner’s computer.
That comment attracted 324 comment replies and was recommended by 9,178 registered readers of The Times.
The Supreme Court — cosseted, cordial and militantly untelevised — is going prime time on live TV, with Mr. Trump announcing on Twitter that he will announce his pick to replace Justice Antonin Scalia at 8 p.m. on Tuesday.
“I have made my decision on who I will nominate for The United States Supreme Court. It will be announced live on Tuesday at 8:00 P.M. (W.H.),” Mr. Trump wrote on his personal Twitter account at 8:43 a.m. — timed perfectly to catch the top-of-the-hour news roundups.
The president had originally planned to make the announcement on Thursday, but he had a rough weekend after protests over his executive order temporarily banning migrants from seven predominantly Muslim countries forced the Department of Homeland Security to decree that permanent residents would, for the most part, be exempted from the crackdown.
Mr. Trump’s shortlist of three federal appeals judges, culled from media accounts and confirmed by people close to the process, is: Neil M. Gorsuch of Colorado, Thomas M. Hardiman of Pennsylvania and William H. Pryor of Alabama, who was originally favored to be the pick.
The president has never shrunk from the theatrical aspects of his job.
Defense Secretary Jim Mattis plans to send the White House a list of Iraqi citizens who have served with American forces with the recommendation that they be exempt from President Trump’s temporary ban on visitors from seven predominantly Muslim countries, administration officials said on Monday.
The Pentagon list is intended to address a major criticism of Mr. Trump’s executive order on immigration: that it will stop the flow of former Iraqi interpreters and cultural advisers who have sought special visas to move to the United States for their own protection.
Some Iraqi military officials with family in the United States, who have also reportedly been affected by the decree, could also benefit from the Pentagon list, which will also be sent to Homeland Security.
Mr. Mattis was not consulted by the White House during the preparation of the executive order on immigration, which temporarily blocks Iraqi citizens from entering the United States for 90 days. Six other predominantly Muslim countries are covered by the edict: Syria, Yemen, Libya, Somalia, Sudan and Iran.
The White House has argued that the temporary ban is needed so that the United States can develop procedures for the “extreme vetting” of travelers from nations that have been stricken by terrorism. Officials said that the Iraqis who will be put on the Pentagon list have already undergone a stringent form of vetting: serving with the United States military in combat.
Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, approached his new job as the anti-Harry Reid: Yes, he would fight President Trump where he needed to, but he made it clear he really wanted to find areas of cooperation.
That may not be happening.
Driven by the executive order on immigration and by the vociferous demands of the increasingly activist Democratic base, Mr. Schumer announced on Monday that he would oppose President Trump’s nominees pretty much across the board: No on Betsy DeVos for education secretary, Rex Tillerson for secretary of state, Senator Jeff Sessions for attorney general, Representative Mick Mulvaney for budget director, Representative Tom Price for secretary of health and human services, Steven Mnuchin for treasury secretary, Scott Pruitt for E.P.A. chief and Andy Puzder for labor secretary.
Cooperation, it seems, is over.
It might not have helped that Mr. Trump mocked Mr. Schumer for his tearful denunciation of his immigration order.
Besieged by criticism, with chaos at international airports mounting and protests proliferating, Mr. Trump defended the aftermath of his executive order halting immigration from the seven countries, saying that problems at airports were the fault of a Delta Airline computer error.
Delta said it fixed its system problems after a few hours on Sunday night. The chaos lasted the whole weekend.
Also, if there ever was a Mr. Nice Guy, he is no more.
And, the president said, he had to spring the order on the world — the element of surprise keeps the nation safe. Also, he seems to have acknowledged that it is a “ban,” a term the Trump administration has denounced as hyperbole.
That swipe at Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, was a reference to the senator choking up on Sunday as he recounted his family’s immigrant experience.
The Republican Jewish Coalition and the Zionist Organization of America have tried really hard to stay on Mr. Trump’s good side.
During the campaign, when Trump supporters unloaded vicious anti-Semitic invectives on journalists, the Republican Jewish Coalition condemned expressions of hate by supporters of all candidates. The Zionist organization latched on to Mr. Trump’s America First program and backed his conservative, pro-settler pick to be ambassador to Israel, David M. Friedman.
When the White House released a statement on Friday commemorating International Holocaust Remembrance Day without mentioning Jews, they were pretty quiet, even as the Anti-Defamation League condemned the omission.
Reince Priebus, the White House chief of staff, did not sound all that apologetic on NBC’s “Meet the Press”: “I mean, everyone’s suffering in the Holocaust, including obviously all of the Jewish people affected, and the miserable genocide that occurred is something that we consider to be extraordinarily sad and something that can never be forgotten,” he said.
Oh, and he mentioned that some members of Mr. Trump’s family — alluding to Ivanka, his daughter, and Jared Kushner, his son-in-law — are Jewish.
Mr. Trump said during the campaign that he had a secret plan to fight the Islamic State. Eight days into his presidency, he seems to have revealed a small part of it.
Call it ISIS.
An executive memorandum that Mr. Trump signed in the Oval Office on Saturday afternoon repeatedly referred to the Islamic State as ISIS — not ISIL, as former President Barack Obama and the rest of the federal government called the terrorist group; and not Daesh, the Arabic acronym for the group, as British Prime Minister Theresa May called it while standing next to the president last week in the East Room of the White House.
“This is the plan to defeat the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, in other words, ISIS,” Mr. Trump said as he signed the memorandum, which called on the Pentagon to devise a “comprehensive plan” within 30 days.
In fact, the former president thought the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant was more delegitimizing than the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, which denoted the territory the group holds.
Well, elections have consequences.
Democratic lawmakers greeted Mr. Trump’s executive order barring visitors and immigrants from the seven Muslim countries with unmistakable broadsides.
As protests mounted and criticism grew, Republicans slowly began to speak out, but most of the coordinated response seemed to be, We like what the president is doing, and maybe he could have done things a little differently.
Richard J. Durbin and Tammy Duckworth, Illinois’ two Democratic senators, demanded an independent investigation by the inspector general of the Department of Homeland Security into the way it carried out Mr. Trump’s executive order on immigration.
The call came amid reports that Customs and Border Protection repeatedly ignored judicial orders to release travelers from detention facilities at airports across the country.
“We are particularly alarmed by allegations that C.B.P. officers and potentially other department personnel failed to comply with a temporary restraining order,” they wrote.
Jordan’s king, Abdullah II, is scheduled to have breakfast on Monday with Vice President Mike Pence at the vice president’s residence a few miles from the White House. He would certainly like to get a little closer than that.
Amid turmoil over Mr. Trump’s order to halt entries from seven predominantly Muslim countries, the king probably has issues he would like to bring up with the man signing the executive orders. But Mr. Trump does not appear keen to host Abdullah II at the White House, certainly not before Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, pays a visit.
Jordan’s king will also be meeting with leaders on Capitol Hill. They are likely to get an earful.
Maybe senators are so scared of Mr. Trump that they need a friend for support.
First, on Sunday, Senators John McCain, Republican of Arizona, and Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, released a joint statement condemning Mr. Trump’s executive order blocking refugees, visitors and immigrants from seven predominantly Muslim countries. Of course, those two are practically their own political party — called McGraham by some, Jindsey by others.
Then Senators Tim Scott, Republican of South Carolina, and Marco Rubio, Republican of Florida, released their own buddy-gram, positing “unanswered questions and concerns” and some general “uneasy” feelings.
Of course, teaming up hasn’t stopped the president from taking his shots, as he did to Mr. McCain and Mr. Graham.
But maybe it doesn’t hurt as much when you have a friend.