Santa Monica, Calif. — Donald Trump: freak or geek?
Who better to answer that question than Judd Apatow, the executive producer of “Freaks and Geeks” and the comedian, producer, director and writer who has been in a spiral over the ascent of his fellow TV big shot and Twitter addict?
“Geek,” he replies.
I have come to Apatow’s office — decorated with photos of jazz greats and the casts of “Freaks and Geeks” and “Girls” — to see how he’s doing.
I ask him if there’s a danger he could lose himself to the Trump monster.
All of Hollywood is in a lefty swivet, of course. Barbra Streisand phoned Chris Matthews on air Monday, in the middle of getting her teeth cleaned, to call Trump “disgraceful” for attacking Meryl Streep after Streep brushed back Trump in her Golden Globes speech.
When Trump tweeted that the nonpareil Streep was “overrated,” after naming her one of his favorite actresses in 2015, he once more showed that his opinions are tethered, in a scary, erratic way, to his highly sensitive ego.
But Apatow has been particularly outspoken and agitated — as he was over Bill Cosby. He has joked that maybe Trump’s election is his fault because he helped Jon Lovett write a belittling “Celebrity Apprentice” dig for President Obama’s speech at the 2011 White House Correspondents’ Association dinner — a humiliating evening for Trump that some think sparked his desire to avenge himself by running for president.
As we dig into some spinach omelets with hash browns and hot sauce that he has picked up after dropping off his daughter at school, Apatow cops to stress eating and shows off his Fitbit.
He wasn’t as surprised by the election results as most people because he had been saying that the funnier candidate always wins.
I ask if he can fathom Trump’s transcendentally weird bromance with Vladimir Putin. Apatow recalls meeting Trump in Atlantic City when he was a young comedian doing standup (which he has been doing again because he loves the immediate connection with an audience).
Did he ever watch “The Apprentice”?
I note that Apatow seems to have a soft spot for Melania in his tweets.
What does he think of the fight against “normalizing” Trump (most recently fueled by Democratic Congressman John Lewis saying that Trump is “not a legitimate president”)?
