Caked in dust and dating back to 1674, the written records of a growing city are headed to new homes, to be preserved and made accessible to researchers.
On the upper floors of the grand courthouse, above the Corinthian columns chiseled from granite and the lobby with sweeping marble staircases peeking out from scaffolding, the rows of shelves, barely shoulder wide, form a maze that never seems to end.
Caked in dust on the shelves are leather-bound volumes and stacks of parchment that, in a way, sketch out the story of New York City. Some of the early records swear allegiance to King George III, and the names of historic figures like Alexander Hamilton and Aaron Burr pop up in documents from when they were working as lawyers in the city.
The rows, on the seventh and eighth floors of the Surrogate’s Courthouse in Manhattan, include the condemnation records of the properties taken to make way for Central Park and the city’s grid system of streets. In one room, shelf after shelf is filled with the immigration documents of Europeans who sought to become citizens of the United States.
The vast collection, once part of a bureaucracy aptly named the Division of Ancient Records, is visited occasionally by researchers, like historians and genealogists (both academic and amateur). It is mostly the province of the staff members who tend to the documents, many of which predate the Declaration of Independence.
Geof Huth, the chief records officer for the New York State Unified Court System, maneuvered through rows filled with pages that have been tattered over the centuries and gnawed by rodents, particularly those that had been sealed with wheat paste.
The records were from criminal prosecutions and civil court proceedings, like divorces, property and contract disputes and contests over wills and estates. But perusing the shelves can feel like time-traveling through the history of New York and seeing a capital of commerce and culture take root.
Many of the records had been stored in the Surrogate’s Courthouse, originally known as the Hall of Records, since the early 1900s. At the time, the building, at 31 Chambers Street, was regarded as state of the art. The records were stored in steel file cases that better protected them, and the rooms were illuminated by electric light instead of gas.
The courthouse, with its magisterial rooms, is often seen in the background on television shows and in movies; “Law & Order: Special Victims Unit” was there filming on a recent day. But for the records, the building has become anything but cutting edge. And soon, thousands of boxes of documents will be moved in an effort to preserve the records and make them more easily accessible. Some records, which had moved no more than a mile over hundreds of years, will be transported in the coming weeks to the New York State Archives in Albany. Many others are expected to head to the city’s Department of Records, moving downstairs in the courthouse to more modern accommodations in the Municipal Archives.
On a recent afternoon, Mr. Huth pulled a protective box from a shelf and opened it on the ledge of a window. “There’s nothing older than this first page,” Mr. Huth said. It was the minutes from what was called the Mayor’s Court, from 1674, written in swoopy calligraphy in ink that had aged to a caramel color.
In another room, he took a scroll out of a cabinet and the parchment uncoiled like a python in the Everglades, stretching some 20 feet, with a roll call of lawyers from 1828 to 1847. There were also decisions handed down from higher courts on minuscule slips that had to be intricately rolled and sealed. Some records, bound in red tape, had not been opened in over a century. 
There were files from Lemmon v. New York, a case that arose after slaves from Virginia were brought to New York en route to Texas and freed because slavery had been abolished in the state. The papers included the name C. A. Arthur, otherwise known as Chester A. Arthur, a lawyer arguing for the slaves’ release, who would become president nearly three decades later.
Mr. Huth and Ronald Younkins, the executive director of the Office of Court Administration, flipped through the pages of another case where the name Aaron Burr appeared not as a lawyer but as a defendant.
His younger and much wealthier wife, Eliza Jumel, had filed for divorce. Burr, a vice president under Thomas Jefferson now mostly remembered for fatally shooting Alexander Hamilton in a duel, was burning through her fortune, according to historians’ accounts.
The divorce was completed on the day Burr died in 1836.
Last week, a team from the State Archives arrived in blue smocks and dust masks to begin packing. A roll of Bubble Wrap the size of a tractor tire waited by the elevator.
The team will take 1,100 boxes of records, close to 900 volumes that are not in boxes and about 500 rolls of microfilm. “But who’s counting?” Ms. Holden said as she returned to the stacks and got back to packing.