Like hundreds of young dancers before her, Phoebe Pearl dropped everything to become a Rockette.
Ms. Pearl was 19 when she quit the Boston Conservatory in 2009 to join the elite group of dancers — strong, athletic and poised — who are as emblematic of New York City as the Empire State Building and the yellow taxi cab.
For eight years, she was proud to be a Rockette, and the company treated her well, with generous pay and health insurance. But in mid-December, when management announced that the dancers would perform at the inauguration of Donald J. Trump, Ms. Pearl did something that a Rockette is never supposed to do. She stepped out of line, breaking with the silent, smiling solidarity that defines the 92-year-old institution, to denounce the idea of celebrating a man with a well-established history of objectifying women.
In a rare collision of presidential politics and a venerable arts organization, current and former Rockettes find themselves in a new kind of spotlight — a position both painful and empowering — as they take sides over the inauguration, a split illustrating the cultural divide that President-elect Trump has cleaved through the country.
But Patty DeCarlo Grantham, the president of the Rockette Alumnae Association, which has about 550 members, said that many of them are upset about the furor and support the Rockettes performing at the inauguration, as they did in 2001 and 2005.
The individual Rockettes had no say in the inauguration booking: It was ultimately the decision of James L. Dolan, the executive chairman of the Madison Square Garden Company, which manages the Rockettes. Mr. Dolan is a longtime friend of Mr. Trump and donated to his campaign; he has supported both Democrats and Republicans in the past. A company spokesman, Barry Watkins, declined requests for interviews with Mr. Dolan and current leaders and members of the Rockettes.
This article is based on interviews over the last three weeks with Ms. Pearl, who was a Rockette until this month, and nine former Rockettes, as well as others in the extended Rockette organization. Several people spoke anonymously for fear that if they were to speak publicly, the Madison Square Garden Company would take legal action against them.
The backlash over the inauguration performance began on Twitter and Facebook after Ms. Pearl wrote a private Instagram post. “I am speaking for just myself, but please know that after we found out this news, we have been performing with tears in our eyes and heavy hearts,” Ms. Pearl wrote. She believes a friend of hers shared her photo with the celebrity gossip blog Perez Hilton.
She and her fellow performers would later learn that their performance at the inauguration would not be mandatory, as some feared, but it was too late to stop criticism from strangers who took to social media to tell her to shut up and dance. Supporters wondered whether she and her fellow dancers were under a gag order. A news crew, Ms. Pearl said, showed up at her Harlem apartment.
That sort of attention came as a shock within the world of the Rockettes, which is devoted to a particular kind of team-driven synchronicity, where no one person dominates the stage.
A Radio City Rockette is a specialist in precision dance technique, a rare, regimented and intricate style that requires both athleticism and artistry. Rockettes must stand between 5-foot-6 and 5-foot-10-and-a-half and uphold a standard of elegance, along with an expertise in tap, modern dance, jazz and ballet. They must hit positions with military exactitude. It’s a style that requires a dancer to step into a line — not to take over and not to be left behind. It takes fortitude and humility.
Under the leadership of Linda Haberman, who began directing and choreographing touring productions of the “Christmas Spectacular” in 1993, the Rockettes gained artistic respect and became modernized with more challenging choreography. Ms. Haberman left the organization in 2014 and declined a request for comment. Despite requests, the Madison Square Garden Company did not make the troupe’s current director, Karen Keeler, available for interviews.
The rigors of performing and traveling as a company often allow dancers to form close and lasting bonds, according to Ms. Grantham, the alumnae president, who was a Rockette from 1959 until 1970.
Ms. Grantham said that the Rockettes have a long history of performing for presidents and at events in New York City hosted by both Republicans and Democrats.
This wouldn’t be the first time the Rockettes performed for a controversial president, but the volatile media climate surrounding Mr. Trump’s inauguration is unusual. Rhonda Malkin, a former Rockette who worked as a personal trainer to Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner for two years, said that the Trump and Kushner families were supportive of her career as a Rockette. Once, they attended a performance to see her dance.
Ms. Malkin, 38, said that several of the current Rockettes she knows are upset that a crew of 13 full-time Rockettes were initially told by their union, the American Guild of Variety Artists, that they would be forced to perform.
Ms. Malkin, who was a Rockette for 12 years, said Ms. Pearl “took a real risk” for speaking out, but she doubts that the controversy surrounding the inauguration has caused any lasting damage to the brand.
While the Rockettes are an American symbol — as much as Radio City Music Hall or Mr. Trump and his branded buildings — the group’s individual dancers remain fairly anonymous. They don’t speak unless deemed interview-appropriate by the Madison Square Garden Company, which has fiercely protected them against criticism surrounding the inauguration.
Mr. Dolan has been criticized for making the inauguration deal and guarding the Rockettes from media requests, but several former dancers praised his management style, which include generous benefits. Being a Rockette is among the most lucrative jobs a dancer can get in New York, complete with year-round health insurance even though the company performs on a seasonal basis.
Cheryl Cutlip, who danced as a Rockette for 15 years and left the company in 2008, said that benefits were ushered in quickly after the TV company Cablevision bought Radio City Music Hall in 1997.
For other former Rockettes, the current controversy reminded them of clashes between the dancers, their union and their corporate employer. Lora Pavilack, a former Rockette, said she had been locked out of the building twice, once for talking to the news media and, another time, during contentious negotiations over a union contract.
Ms. Malkin said that she was also locked out with Ms. Pavilack during contract negotiations in 2005.
Madison Square Garden officials declined to comment for this article, but they have said in the past that no one had been locked out during contract negotiations.
Ms. Pearl is one of them. On a recent evening, she ended weeks of silence by taking part in a toast to the First Amendment presented by the Bessies, or the New York Dance and Performance Awards.
Many in the dance world, including Yvonne Rainer, the postmodern giant who was part of the toast, and several former Rockettes, including Ms. Kakuk, have voiced enthusiasm for Ms. Pearl’s action and her talent as a dancer.
With the latest holiday season behind her, Ms. Pearl has decided to leave the organization and forge a path in film and television. She found inspiration in the actress Meryl Streep, who spoke out against Mr. Trump at the Golden Globes.
But stepping out of the line is just not the Rockettes’ way.
