Ms. Lázaro had just spent the morning watching a rehearsal of her new play — her first to be produced professionally — “Tell Hector I Miss Him,” which is now in previews and opens Monday, Jan. 23, at the Atlantic Theater Company. The cast includes two stars of the hit Netflix series “Orange Is the New Black,” Selenis Leyva and Dascha Polanco, as well as Ms. Lázaro’s fellow writer-performer Lisa Ramirez, in whose work “To the Bone” she acted two years ago.
Before the company broke for lunch, two other actors, Flaco Navaja and Luis Vega — playing a luckless cocaine enthusiast named Hugo and a clown-like figure called El Mago in Old San Juan — ran a scene in which they have drug-induced visions. The dialogue is gritty but lyrical, sprinkled with Spanish and pocked with profanity.
Ms. Lázaro drank it in, plainly still tickled to hear her words read back to her by pros. As Mr. Vega patted down and shook out his jacket, pretending to look for Hugo’s fix, she bent over laughing. She then stared, rapt, as El Mago shed his joyful mask and addressed a spirit from his past.
Stephen Adly Guirgis, a Pulitzer Prize-winning playwright who mentored Ms. Lázaro as she earned her M.F.A. from Columbia University in 2013, remembers when she first approached him after a panel: “Her head was down. She couldn’t look me in the eye.” Mr. Guirgis still recognized a “kindred spirit” in Ms. Lázaro, even before reading her thesis play, called “Contigo.” He recommended her for a summer ensemble program at Labyrinth Theater Company, with which he has a long affiliation. “It helped save my life,” Ms. Lázaro said.
The community represented in “Tell Hector” would seem more disenfranchised than the one that produced Ms. Lázaro, whose parents are both professionals; Ms. Lázaro lived with them in a suburb of San Juan before moving, at 17, to study at the State University of New York at Purchase.
But the plot has echoes in her personal experience, including a character with fetal-alcohol syndrome inspired by her uncle.
In “Tell Hector,” mind you, love can blossom when the guys aren’t around. Ms. Polanco’s Malena — “the hottest woman in the neighborhood,” Ms. Lázaro noted — is coveted by Isis, a breathless teenage girl.
She paused. “They’re the people you can come to and say, ‘I want to kill myself.’” Her eyes were warm as she uttered the last sentence, offering reassurance, telling you not to worry.
Neil Pepe, Atlantic’s artistic director, first met Ms. Lázaro during readings of Mr. Guirgis’s “Between Riverside and Crazy,” which had its debut at the theater in 2014.
