The drinking water in Flint, Mich., is now in compliance with federal regulations on lead and copper content, officials said on Tuesday. But they cautioned that it could be a year or more before it is safe for residents to drink from their faucets, because lead-tainted pipes need to be replaced.
“We are not out of the woods yet,” Mayor Karen Weaver said in a statement. She called the results of water tests “encouraging” but said residents should continue to drink bottled water or use filters.
She said that the city was making progress toward its goal of removing an estimated 20,000 lead-tainted water pipes and that it hoped to replace 6,000 of them by the end of the year.
“We still need help and support from the state and federal government so that all of the estimated 20,000 lead-tainted pipes remaining in the city will be replaced,” Ms. Weaver said. Until then, free bottled water and filters will continue to be available at distribution points around the city, she said.
The Michigan Department of Environmental Quality said the test results came from residences that were monitored from July through December and had service lines or copper plumbing that contained lead installed from 1983 to 1988. The lead value of samples taken from those homes was 12 parts per billion, below the federal guideline of 15 parts per billion, the department said.
A year ago today, Gov. Rick Snyder declared a state of emergency in Flint, Mich. Officials have since said the filtered water is safe, but Keri Webber describes the health issues her family and other residents still face.CreditCredit...Brittany Greeson for The New York Times. Technology by Samsung.
“The Flint water system is one of the most monitored systems in the country for lead and copper, and we remain committed to continuing work in Flint as the city recovers,” the department’s director, Heidi Grether, said in a statement.
Michael J. Steinberg, the legal director of the American Civil Liberties Union in Michigan, said the test results were a good sign, but added that the city and state remained in violation of the Safe Drinking Water Act.
The water crisis in Flint has been tied to the lead poisoning of children and the deaths of 12 people from Legionnaires’ disease. It began in 2014, three years after the state placed the fiscally distressed city under emergency management, stripping city government of authority and putting state appointees in charge.
In an effort to save money, those appointees changed the source of the city’s drinking water from the Detroit water system to the polluted Flint River and did not enact proper corrosion control, causing lead to leech from the city’s pipes into its water supply. Last month, two managers, Darnell Earley and Gerald Ambrose, who had been appointed by Gov. Rick Snyder, were charged with felonies in connection with their role in the crisis.
