1 hr. and 10 min.
Stella Adler Studio Theater, 31 W. 27th St.
“Lucky Penny” is an autobiographical show, written by and starring the actor David Deblinger, but while Mr. Deblinger unfolds the story of his life, he disappears so often into the other colorful characters in the tale that he himself almost seems to be a supporting player.
But their relationship was not always a simply loving one. Although his father would sentimentally tell his young son how much he loved his mother, his parents were often engaged in simmering fights that Mr. Deblinger was naturally pulled into — once to the extent of drawing a knife on his father, who dared him to use it.
He didn’t, of course, but it’s clear where he got his flair for drama. Also his seemingly effortless ability to slip into the voices of other people: His father had an affection for mimicry, and would stage scenes with his son with their new video camera — including one about a German child molester in which the young Mr. Deblinger was cast as the child. Ahem. Clearly not your average upbringing, but perhaps good early training for Mr. Deblinger’s career.
 In a particularly moving passage, he recalls in sharp detail his father’s story of visiting the grandfather in an institution. Instinctively recoiling from seeing him in such an alarming state, Mr. Deblinger’s father shunned the penny his father was trying to give him, and never forgave himself for it.
A few passages seem completely tangential, such as Mr. Deblinger’s recounting of his first love, a girl he met in Spain when he was 20. (This is particularly odd since his wife, Tomoko, is only casually alluded to a couple of times.) But Mr. Deblinger’s high-voltage energy, his gift for vocal and physical impersonation and his snappy delivery of the narration enliven even the less compelling moments.
Unusually, for what is essentially a solo show, Mr. Deblinger is not the only person onstage. Providing musical accompaniment is Fred Johnson, who sits in a back corner of the stage and plays percussion and, briefly, a singular West African stringed instrument. He also sings, with a rich voice, snatches of songs including “God Bless the Child” and “Pennies From Heaven,” and plays a small role in the show. His contributions provide delicate emotional texture that enhances the production, but just as important, they give Mr. Deblinger some much-needed down time to catch his breath before diving into the next story.