An anti-abortion group released a video this week purporting to show that Planned Parenthood does not offer comprehensive prenatal services, an accusation that the women’s health organization said deliberately misrepresented its mission.
The group, Live Action, said that of 97 Planned Parenthood centers it had contacted, only five said they provided prenatal care, one of the many medical services offered by the organization, which has approximately 650 health centers operated by 57 affiliates across the country.
According to an annual report published in 2015, the most recent period for which information was available, eight Planned Parenthood affiliates of the 59 that existed at the time reported that they had provided 17,419 individual prenatal services.
Ms. Carter said that “100 percent” of the organization’s health centers would provide what would be considered an initial prenatal visit, which would include a referral for further prenatal services that would be available elsewhere.
In July 2015, the Center for Medical Progress, another anti-abortion group, set off a congressional investigation of Planned Parenthood after publishing secretly recorded videos that it claimed showed the organization’s affiliates illegally profiting from selling tissue from aborted fetuses.
A private research company found that those videos had been manipulated and were unreliable.
The latest video was released days before a planned anti-abortion march was to take place in Washington. Organizers of the march on Friday, which will feature a speech from a close adviser to President Trump, Kellyanne Conway, expect to draw tens of thousands of demonstrators, according to a spokeswoman, Kate Bryan.
Live Action, whose website asks visitors to sign a petition asking that taxpayer funds for Planned Parenthood be cut off, has targeted the organization for nearly a decade. Live Action’s founder and president, Lila Rose, who has said she started campaigning against abortion when she was 15 years old, has worked hand in hand with James O’Keefe, whose undercover videos helped to bring down Acorn, once the nation’s largest grass-roots community organizing group, after a sting operation.
Information on the Live Action video — when it was shot and by whom, for instance — was not immediately clear. A representative for Live Action could not be reached by phone on Tuesday.
Planned Parenthood provides medical services to women in 49 of the 50 states. The organization, which supports women’s reproductive rights, saw a surge in donations — about 40 times more than in a typical week — from nearly 200,000 people in the week after the presidential election.
Planned Parenthood has long been under attack by anti-abortion groups and members of the Republican Party. Some lawmakers were willing to shut down the federal government last fall because a spending bill did not include language that would cut off funding for the organization.
Mr. Trump’s proposed cabinet is filled with opponents of abortion, including Vice President Mike Pence — who has fought to deny federal funds to the group — and Representative Tom Price of Georgia, Mr. Trump’s choice to lead the Department of Health and Human Service.
On Monday, Mr. Trump reinstated a policy that prohibits American foreign aid from going to any health providers abroad that offer abortion counseling or advocate that patients seek an abortion.
Mr. Trump himself had once supported abortion rights, but changed his mind during the campaign, saying that women who received abortions should be dealt “some sort of punishment,” a statement that he later retracted.
