In an interview, Richard de Kerbrech, a marine engineer based on the Isle of Wight who has written two books on the Titanic disaster, said that the fire would have damaged the ship’s bulkhead, a wall of steel within the ship’s hull, and made it more vulnerable after it was pierced by an iceberg. An official British inquiry, in 1912, mentioned the fire, but the judge who presided over it, whom critics saw as sympathetic to shipping interests, played it down.
“This discovery is a revelation and could change our knowledge of the history of what happened,” Mr. de Kerbrech said.
Mr. Molony contends that the ship’s owners knew about the fire but chose to let it go, since delaying the ship’s journey would have been financially ruinous. At the time of departure, the ship was berthed so that the marks caused by the fire were facing the sea, away from the dock, and therefore concealed from passengers.
The Titanic disaster has long fanned conspiracy theories, among them that it was not the Titanic that sank on April 15, 1912, but, rather the Olympic, its sister ship; that the Titanic was torpedoed by a German U-boat; or that the ship was brought down by a sarcophagus containing an Egyptian priestess’s mummy. Popularized by Hollywood, the story of the Titanic continues to exert a hold on popular culture. Construction of a full-size replica recently began at a theme park in China.
Mr. Molony said his fascination took root when he was 12 and was gripped by “A Night to Remember,” Walter Lord’s 1955 book recounting the Titanic’s final night. He said he was so captivated that he finished the book in two hours and 40 minutes, the same time it took the Titanic to sink.
Now the political editor at The Irish Daily Mail, Mr. Molony, who has also written a book called “The Irish Aboard Titanic,” was also drawn to the social divisions reflected on the ship, where first-class cabins hosted millionaires while hundreds of working-class passengers, many of them Irish, stayed below.
Mr. Molony said he believed the fire had been played down, in part because death by iceberg was a more dramatic explanation. “The ship was seen as a heroic unsinkable ship and, as a result, people focused on explanations that fed that narrative,” he said.
David Hill, a former honorary secretary of the British Titanic Society, who has been studying the cause of the sinking since the 1950s, argued that, while the damage caused by the fire to the steel walls protecting the hull may have hastened the disaster, the blaze was not the decisive factor.
