The problem wasn’t that this actor’s actor, revered by her peers, had lost interest. The problem was that she was nearing 60 and the playwright just didn’t offer big roles for older women.
So she turned to his men.
Since 2012, Ms. Walter has played Brutus in “Julius Caesar,” the title monarch in “Henry IV” and now Prospero in “The Tempest.” Directed by Phyllida Lloyd, these productions originated at London’s Donmar Warehouse before limited runs at St. Ann’s Warehouse in New York — “The Tempest” is there until Feb. 19.
Ms. Walter and Ms. Lloyd had been looking for another project after their hit collaboration on “Mary Stuart,” which earned them Tony nominations in 2009. They decided to do Shakespeare, but with a twist. Unlike, say, Deborah Warner’s recent “King Lear” with Glenda Jackson in the West End, their show would feature only women. It would also be set in a contemporary prison.
“Julius Caesar” did so well that it begot “Henry IV” and “The Tempest,” all of them following the same concept.
Ms. Walter, who has just published the book “Brutus and Other Heroines” about her experience doing Shakespeare, was powerfully drawn to the idea of tackling issues he usually saves for men, like honor, war, power and betrayal. But as she sees it, their productions have also become a narrative about incarcerated women. She explains that she’s not playing Brutus nor King Henry, but rather an inmate named Hannah, who herself plays those grand parts. In effect, Ms. Walter handles two roles at once in each show.
In the late 1970s she joined the experimental company Joint Stock, which hatched its works collectively. Throughout her stage career, Ms. Walter has remained open to both trying new approaches and selflessly melding into an ensemble.
Those who have seen her command a stage would be surprised by her calm demeanor, her voice as soft as her cheekbones are sharp. It’s hard to imagine how this slender, unprepossessing woman could possibly project to the last rows of a theater — but she does. This is someone who does not need to shout to project authority, and whose whispers can cut deep.
