The mayoral election fight of 2017 may be slowly gearing up, with Mayor Bill de Blasio facing his stiffest challenge so far from a Republican real estate developer with deep pockets but little name recognition among New Yorkers.
The developer, Paul J. Massey Jr., raised more than $1.6 million in contributions in the last six months, according to campaign filings made public on Tuesday. Mr. Massey, who is running on the Independence line and hopes to prevail in a Republican primary, has also put in more than $1.2 million of his own money so far, and has vowed to eschew the city’s generous campaign finance matching system.
The mayor, a Democrat, raised less money in the latest filing period, which ended last week and covered the last six months of 2016. But he did so from a broad array of New Yorkers, collecting contributions from 3,261 individuals, more than any other mayoral candidate during a single filing period in recent years.
Mr. de Blasio reported contributions of just over $1 million during the six-month period. That was slightly less than he raised in the previous six months, but it came from more than double the number of donors and includes significantly more money eligible to receive matching funds.
Mr. Massey received contributions from 826 donors.
The mayor’s potential Democratic challengers lagged far behind in fund-raising. The city comptroller, Scott M. Stringer, who is said to be considering a run, raised $346,385 from 457 contributors, according to his filing. Tony Avella, a state senator from Queens, raised $725 from seven contributors.
The potential match between Mr. de Blasio and Mr. Massey could bolster one of the central claims of the mayor’s campaign: that moneyed interests and “powerful forces” are bent on booting him from power. It also offers a textbook case in two approaches to running a campaign in a city where small donations carry a premium — under the city’s system, the first $175 given to a candidate by city residents is matched six-to-one with public funds.
That match did not exist in 1993, the last time an incumbent Democratic mayor, David N. Dinkins, ran for office. That, along with state and federal inquiries into Mr. de Blasio’s fund-raising practices, appears to be reshaping the way he is raising money. In recent weeks, his campaign has solicited donations as low as $3 after having had few small donations in his campaign filings a year ago.
Based on eligible contributions reported by the mayor for this filing period, he could receive an additional $1.1 million in city matching funds.
Mr. de Blasio also received more than 90 donations at the $4,950 maximum, which accounted for more than 40 percent of his total fund-raising during the filing period. Funds came from some of the city’s richest residents, like Barry Diller; celebrities, like Cynthia Nixon; and labor unions.
Mr. Massey, a real estate sales executive who sold his company about two years ago to Cushman & Wakefield, said that although he has no political experience, he is the kind of manager the city needs.
He criticized Mr. de Blasio’s handling of the homelessness crisis and said he could do a better job creating affordable housing because of his real estate experience.
Mr. Massey refused to say how much of his own money he would spend on the campaign.
His plan to spend outside the limits could ultimately allow Mr. de Blasio to spend more as well. Under the city’s matching funds system, candidate spending is normally capped at a combined total of about $14 million for the primary and general elections. But if a candidate who refuses matching funds exceeds certain spending levels, the cap for those receiving the funds can be raised or lifted completely.
For the mayor, that would require a whole lot of $3 donations.