Vodafone has dialed for backup in its India fight. The Britain-based telco is talking with Aditya Birla Group about an all-share merger of its Indian business with Idea Cellular, which is part-owned by Aditya, a cement-to-retail conglomerate. It could feel the benefits beyond the subcontinent.
The two firms confirmed the talks in separate statements on Monday, but financial details were limited. Vodafone said that any merger would take effect through the issuing of new Idea shares to Vodafone, and that it would deconsolidate its Indian subsidiary. Idea’s statement said that “equal rights” between Aditya Birla Group and Vodafone in the combined entity were a “fundamental premise” of discussions.
The strictest interpretation of this is that Aditya Birla Group’s equity stake in the new company would equal the equity value of Vodafone India. That seems unlikely. Berenberg’s estimates from early January put the equity value of Vodafone India at 9.2 billion euros, or about $9.8 billion, while Idea’s market capitalization is about €4.8 billion, or about $5.1 billion.
Alternatively, Aditya Birla Group might have equal control just in terms of voting rights in the new company. Another workaround could be that Vodafone India sells some of its equity to Aditya Birla Group in order to equalize their stakes, or that it receives an equalizing cash payment.
Either way, the combined entity should have the financial firepower to match an assault begun last year by India’s richest businessman, Mukesh Ambani, through Reliance Jio, which has sparked a price war in the Indian telecommunications market through aggressive offers on mobile data. A Vodafone-Idea tie-up would create an operator with around 390 million subscribers and roughly 40 percent market share by revenue before any antitrust concession, according to Bernstein estimates, with synergies equal to around 13 percent of the combined companies’ cost base.
Another plus for Vodafone is that it could increase its options for deals back home in Europe. With a daily market price for the Indian business, Vodafone’s European assets would be much easier to value based on the company’s share price. That could mean a reawakening of M&A activity back home — including talks with Liberty Global.