Usually, when a new president takes office in Washington, the only immediate issue involving Canada is whether the leader’s first foreign trip will be to Ottawa or Mexico City.
But after the inauguration of President Trump, Canada quickly became embroiled in more substantive matters.
While much remains to be resolved before any pipe layers get to work, Mr. Trump has resurrected the Keystone XL pipeline, which is intended to move diluted, tarlike bitumen from the oil sands in Alberta to American refineries on the Gulf of Mexico.
Coincidentally, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau and his cabinet were meeting in Canada’s oil center — Calgary, Alberta — when Mr. Trump signed the pipeline’s reprieve on Tuesday. And they were quick to welcome the reversal of former President Barack Obama’s decision to refuse a permit for Keystone XL on environmental grounds. Now, however, Mr. Trudeau may be experiencing a bit of buyer’s remorse.
Long before he became prime minister, Mr. Trudeau developed a consistent stance on the energy industry and the environment. Canada can’t deal with environmental issues like climate change without a strong economy, he has repeatedly said. And in Canada, the energy sector is a major part of the economy.
Mr. Trudeau’s recognition of the energy industry’s importance appeared to be a key factor in Alberta’s decision, under Premier Rachel Notley, to adopt a carbon tax. But, as Clifford Krauss and I found this week, the return of Keystone XL may upset Canada’s plans to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Extracting oil from the tarlike bitumen in the oil sands burns up a lot of fuel and generates substantial quantities of greenhouse gases. If Keystone XL goes ahead, many analysts, captains of industry and environmentalists say it will increase production at the oil sands and, thus, the amount of carbon they release into the air. When that is combined with increased emissions from two other pipeline projects Mr. Trudeau approved late last year, it’s not clear how the government will be able to meet its carbon-reduction targets.
Negotiating Also high on Mr. Trudeau’s to-do list is resolving the future of the North American Free Trade Agreement. Wilbur L. Ross, the billionaire whom Mr. Trump has nominated to be commerce secretary, told the Senate that the new administration’s top priority would be making substantial changes to Nafta.
Exactly what that means for Canada remains unclear. Mr. Trudeau, whose advisers were quick to reach out to Mr. Trump’s aides after the presidential election, has been playing down the effects on Canada, suggesting by extension that Mexico is the new administration’s target.
“The administration has made it very clear, both to us and publicly, that they are not overly preoccupied with Canada in terms of much of their protectionism and much of the rhetoric they’ve put out,” Mr. Trudeau said in Saskatchewan.
In The Upshot, Neil Irwin looked into what Mr. Trump could do and what new talks might produce.
Survivor Chick Webster had a modest career as a National Hockey League player with the New York Rangers. In fact, he never scored a goal. But he has recently become a bit of a sports celebrity. Mr. Webster, who turned 96 in November, is believed to be the oldest living N.H.L. player.
Your thoughts Mr. Trudeau’s vacation on the Aga Khan’s private island and his participation in Liberal Party fund-raisers have attracted a lot of attention from the news media in Canada. Last week, many readers of this newsletter responded to my request for their thoughts on this. Most wrote that it either wasn’t an issue or wasn’t a significant problem.
Other readers said that while they would like to see fund-raising rules changed, they didn’t think the sessions impaired Mr. Trudeau’s fitness to govern. And several people said that while the vacation should have been disclosed in advance, it still wasn’t an important transgression.
But there were a few readers who did find Mr. Trudeau’s actions improper.
— Presidential approval is just one piece of what it will take to actually build the Keystone XL pipeline.
— Hooked on cigarettes? Blame the Neanderthal in you.
— Harold Hayes, “the last surviving member of a band of airborne American medics and nurses who crash-landed in Nazi-occupied Albania in 1943 and survived German attacks, blizzards and horrific privations on a 600-mile trek to their rescue on the Adriatic coast,” died at the age of 94.