Slowdive, which reunited in 2014, doesn’t rush with its first new song in 22 years. There’s nearly a full minute of instrumental introduction, long enough to re-acclimate to the shoe-gaze realm of the 1990s: a turbulent haze of countless guitars, effects and echoes washing around a metronomic beat as the music cycles through four chords. The mix is even denser and more diffuse than Slowdive’s albums from the 1990s, reveling in the analog blur and sounding glad to be back. J.P.
Songs for ads always raise the question of who’s using whom; the songwriter gets money and exposure, the company buys some cool. “I do not compromise — not today, not tomorrow, not ever,” FKA twigs declares in her narrated intro to the Nike commercial that also introduces "Trust in Me," a song she wrote (apparently before the Nike connection) with the producer Oneohtrix Point Never. FKA twigs also choreographed the ad with female dancers and athletes striking lithe, exotic pose: a show of power, solidarity, grace and logos. As audio, the song is more ominous, scalloped with sudden dissonant crescendos and menacing gaps, with the singer quietly commanding, "I need you to trust in me." Given her past videos (like "Pendulum"), FKA twigs might have come up with something darker and wilder without the endorsement deal. J.P.
"My stomach hurts/because it’s hard to be a punk while wearing a skirt," Alex Luciano sings in "Tummy Ache," a surge of earnest aspiration laced with self-questioning from an album due April 7. Diet Cig is a duo — Ms. Luciano on guitar and vocals and Noah Bowman on drums — but the production of "Tummy Ache" breaks away from the bare-bones strum-and-thump of its gigs and past recordings. Layers of fuzztone, feedback and backup vocals expand the soundstage and raise the stakes: "Finally it’s time to make my words count/in a way I haven’t quite figured out," she sings. The music insists she will. J.P.
As a producer and a partner in the label Fade to Mind, Kingdom — born Ezra Rubin — has pushed R&B toward spooky, startling places behind singers including Kelela and Dawn Richard. "Tears in the Club" is the title track of his debut album, due in February. It’s an instrumental with a vaguely Asian keyboard motif, drum syncopations that clarify and recede into quiet thuds, one-syllable vocal snippets, rhythmic breathing and a constantly recalibrated sense of tension. The track could have backed a rapper or singer — it has enough space — but the music tells its own story. J.P.
The Minimalism of Laetitia Sadier’s longtime band, Stereolab, carries over into her new Source Ensemble, which releases its debut album in March. Repetition, layering and melodies that hopscotch through the patterns are still her modus operandi, along with lyrics to encourage political action: “Power to the people now,” she sings, to a nicely counterintuitive melody. But her Source Ensemble has set aside Stereolab’s fondness for retro styles like German krautrock, French ye-ye and American bachelor-pad lounge music. And it has picked up a charming assortment of mostly acoustic instruments — vibraphone, accordion, steel drum, flute — that make all the intricacy sound homespun. J.P.
Margaret Chardiet, who records as Pharmakon, makes primal, confrontational noise as music. “Transmission,” from an album due in March, calmly, ominously gathers most of its arsenal: a crash, a repeating bass tone, a midrange buzz, a distant whistle. Then, suddenly, it cranks up and speeds up everything. The bass tone becomes a relentless throb, the buzz moves in like an approaching chain saw, the crashes happen more often. And then her raspy screams join in. There’s order — voice and bass are in 4/4 — but no refuge, just relief when it finally subsides. J.P.