FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla. — Looking frail and meek, Esteban Santiago, the man accused of fatally shooting five people and wounding six others at the airport in this South Florida city three days ago, made a brief appearance on Monday in a federal courtroom here and was assigned a public defender because he cannot afford a lawyer.
Shackled, bearded and wearing a red jumpsuit, Mr. Santiago, 26, an Iraq war veteran who grew up in Puerto Rico, took several deep breaths and jiggled his legs nervously as he waited for the judge. Federal marshals towered over him when he stood.
Speaking with a slight Spanish accent, Mr. Santiago told Magistrate Judge Alicia O. Valle that he had $5 or $10 in his checking account, owned no property and had not held a job since November. That was the same month that he walked into an F.B.I. office in Alaska carrying an ammunition clip — leaving a pistol and his infant son in his car — to complain about a C.I.A. plot against him. F.B.I. agents called the local police, who took him to a psychiatric center where he spent a few days.
Before November, Mr. Santiago said he had spent nearly three years working security for Signal 88 in Anchorage, Alaska, where he earned $2,100 a month. He also spent about 10 years in the Army, where he earned $15,000 a year in his last three years of service.
At his first appearance in court, the judge ordered that Mr. Santiago be detained. He now faces federal murder charges and possibly the death penalty or life in prison, if convicted. His arraignment is scheduled for Jan. 23.
Law enforcement agents said they still do not know why Mr. Santiago opened fire on Friday at the baggage claim area of Terminal 2 of the Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood International Airport or why he chose that airport. He had boarded a flight from Alaska to Fort Lauderdale, having checked his handgun.
After arriving, he picked up baggage containing his handgun, loaded the weapon in a restroom and then began randomly shooting as travelers waited for their luggage. When he ran out of ammunition, Mr. Santiago lay on the ground and surrendered to the police, law enforcement officials said. It was all over within 70 seconds.
But the chaos lasted many hours after that when rumors of a second gunman led to a shutdown of the airport and a mad scramble by passengers and airport workers. The case has raised questions about airport security and gun laws regarding the mentally ill. It has also prompted airports to revisit their protocols on dealing with active shooters.