La MaMa Experimental Theater - The Club, 74A E. 4th St.
Watching “David’s Friend,” a feisty and funny one-woman show written and performed by Nora Burns, is a bit like sitting down, slightly tipsy, and playing a bunch of your scratched but beloved 45s from the late 1970s and early 1980s on your record player — if you’ve kept yours or joined the blooming back-to-vinyl movement.
Although its focus is the story of her fast (in all senses) friendship with the man named in the title, whom she met when they were teenagers in Boston, Ms. Burns’s show, performed only through Feb. 5 at the Club at La MaMa, is also a heady dip into the years when New York night life was at its dizzying, decadent height; when Bianca and Andy and company were thronging Studio 54 and Xenon and Danceteria; when Details was a magazine printed on unglossy paper and filled with, well, details about anything and everybody that was cool.
If you lived through even a part of it, you’ll be swimming merrily alongside her in memories — although, as Ms. Burns ruefully recalls, many of those wild, unforgettable nights may have been fogged to the point of obscurity by the ingestion of illicit substances. Oh well, clearly for Ms. Burns, it was worth it — and fortunately she kept a diary.
“From school,” she adds, perhaps unnecessarily.
Skinny as a sylph, clad in sleek black, her blond hair doing a bit of disco dancing of its own, Ms. Burns, a founding member of the comedy troupes Unitard and the Nellie Olesons, flips through her memories in roughly chronological order. She is aided only by a necessary companion — a D.J. spinning disco classics, Billy Hough, who occasionally takes part in the show — and vintage photographs of New York in her (and its?) night-life heyday, and, of course, of herself and David, whom she accurately describes as a man of uncommon beauty.
Directed by Adrienne Truscott, Ms. Burns’s delivery is crisp, wry and dry. And while her story takes a few meandering digressions, that’s only natural, considering the gleefully reckless way she and David careered through their 20s, without much thought given to a future career.
It is not spoiling much to reveal that David did not survive the AIDS epidemic. After just a few descriptions of their scrappy, joyful, sex-and-drug-fueled sorties, you can pretty much tell where this ride will end. But if the unhappy conclusion of David’s foreshortened life can be foretold, the retelling of it is a continual pleasure.
By coincidence, the night David died in 1993, Ms. Burns was dancing on a speaker on Fire Island. You can be sure he would have appreciated it.