Throughout this year, ambitious projects will be unveiled all over America — from an artistic jungle gym in Miami to a pirate ship docking in Northern California — and they don't cost anything to see. Here, a guide to the best public art coming to cities across the country.
This February, the artist Carlos Cruz-Diez plans to bathe Savannah residents and visitors in color. In the courtyard of the SCAD Museum of Art, he’ll erect a new work, part of his “Chromosaturation” series, which will entail visitors walking into a massive shipping container flooded with different hues of light. Cruz-Diez will adorn the outside with an Op-Art painting, engaging with his themes of pattern and color in another way.
The Barnes Foundation will celebrate more than 50 artists’ engagement with different communities in “Person of the Crowd: The Contemporary Art of Flânerie,” opening Feb. 25. The artists Tania Bruguera and Sanford Biggers will organize performances in the city streets, and the Guerrilla Girls collective will create billboards. Additionally, Monument Lab (a group of curators, scholars, students and artists who aim to ask what kind of monuments the city needs) will mount a temporary work by the Chinese artist Ai Weiwei. In May, the Association for Public Art will bring the artist Martin Puryear’s largest public sculpture to date, “Big Bling,” to the city for six months.
The curator Neville Wakefield is about to hit the music festival crowd with a heavy dose of visual art. This spring, he’ll organize “Desert X,” an exhibition of site-specific works in the Palm Springs area. The exhibition and affiliated programming will end just after the Coachella music festival hits the valley. Ed Ruscha is on the board of directors and Hank Willis Thomas (who started the first artist-run super PAC last year) and Doug Aitken (who won last year’s Americans for the Arts “Outstanding Contributions to the Arts” award) are set to install pieces.
Aurora, just outside of Denver, is adding a little excitement to residents’ commutes. This year, they’ll install new windscreens, installations and nine sculptures along the city’s newest light-rail line. At the 13th Avenue Station, the artist Christopher Fennell’s “Bike Train” will comprise 40 locally donated bicycles mounted on steel pipe. At the Peoria Station, the artist Blessing Hancock’s 23-foot-high illuminated sculpture, “Biota,” will prompt viewers to reconsider the patterns and structures of their own environments.
Just as Minneapolis starts to thaw, the Walker Art Center will reopen the Minneapolis Sculpture Garden adjacent to the museum. The 19-acre campus will feature 16 new artworks by artists including Sol LeWitt (known for his geometric work), Robert Indiana (responsible for the iconic “LOVE” sculpture) and Katharina Fritsch (whose giant blue rooster now sits atop the National Gallery in D.C.). The artist Theaster Gates is creating his first permanent outdoor commission ever, a structure in the form of a small, circular Renaissance temple that he hopes will serve as a sanctuary for the community.
A benevolent pirate ship is about to settle in Redwood City, thanks to the curator Lance Fung. Instead of looters, the artists Ilya and Emilia Kabakov’s large-scale boat installation (with the word "IMAGINE" nearby) will bring a new emphasis on public art to the area. Fung — who is best known for curating a show of snow-based installations at the 2006 Olympics in Turin — is working on many public projects for the Bay Area with his partner, John Talley. Within the next year, he hopes to commission works from the artists Kiki Smith, Daniel Buren and Robert Barry, and continue his “Migrations” project, a series of ongoing exhibitions along the San Francisco Bay Trail.
Leave it to New York to roll out not just a sculpture or two, but an entire cultural plan. Spearheaded by the city’s Department of Cultural Affairs, new legislation (which will go to City Council for a vote in July) will address how public art and artists are selected and aim for inclusivity and diversity. The city’s most prominent nonprofit organization dedicated to the cause, the Public Art Fund, will also celebrate its 40th anniversary with a digital art show — watch as artists hijack a Times Square billboard and phone-charging kiosks around the city.
At UC Berkeley Art Museum and Pacific Film Archive, you can relive the wild public art of the 1960s and 1970s. This spring, “Hippie Modernism: The Struggle for Utopia” will celebrate works from the past, including the Emeryville mud flats sculptures between Berkeley and Oakland and the radical actions of the Dutch group the Provos. An app, specially created for the exhibition, will encourage exploration around the Bay Area to sites critical to the counterculture movement. It “creatively brings together cutting-edge technology, a utopian vision of society and playful expressions of love,” according to BAMPFA’s director, Larry Rinder.
Public art has a long and celebrated history in Chicago — more than 700 works are on view throughout the city, including Anish Kapoor’s Millennium Park selfie-bait sculpture “Cloud Gate.” Mayor Rahm Emanuel has gone so far as to designate 2017 as “The Year of Public Art,” and the city is investing $1.5 million in artist-led community projects this year. Plans include a new Public Art Festival and the 50x50 Neighborhood Arts Project, which allocates $1 million to new public art and celebrates Chicago’s 50 wards and the 50th anniversary of two seminal local works (the Picasso in Daley Plaza and the Wall of Respect mural).