Early in André Aciman’s first novel, “Call Me by Your Name” (2007), the narrator expresses his belief that “we are not written for one instrument.” There may be no better mission statement for Aciman’s entire oeuvre since then — and especially for his new novel, “Enigma Variations,” which borrows its title from the Elgar orchestral work. How futile to restrict a character to a single melody line: Wouldn’t it make more sense to think we’re composed for cello, horn, clarinet and more, played simultaneously to make an astringent chord?
“Enigma Variations” isn’t a conventionally linear novel. Though it first appears to contain all the delights of that form — the immersiveness, the shocks of plot — it has too many gaps and intentional omissions. Instead, this book wants to be music in words, giving the reader a cellular sense of how it feels to move through time.
In the opening, Paul, the narrator, visits the Italian fishing community where his family abandoned their summer house after it burned down. He starts: “I’ve come back for him.” The pronoun feels deliberately ambiguous: Here for whom? Is it his father, who is said to be “made from the same mold”? Or Paul’s younger self, now that he has become unrecognizable to others with his “bushy reddish beard”? The villagers are wary, hard. If anyone is friendly, it’s “kindness dipped in venom.” Paul is remotely aware he might be missing cues. But how could that be, when he’s so good at naming pauses, shrugs, the unspoken codes of human interaction?
Soon the purpose of Paul’s visit becomes clearer. He’s here to ask after his parents’ craftsman and friend, Giovanni, who disappeared years back. Giovanni was also Paul’s first love — but that isn’t spacious enough a term: mentor, brother, father, maybe. The book reminisces about the days when the 20-something Giovanni was life itself to the adolescent Paul, who loved the way the older man’s green eyes “hovered over my face and eventually landed on my eyes like the hand of a holy man who is about to touch your eyelids, your forehead, your whole face, because his eyes kept swearing I was the dearest thing in the world.” Paul’s attachment lies close to humiliation, given all the ways love could go wrong. (Does he need it to go wrong?) There’s no consolation from self-knowledge. He doesn’t understand himself as a person drawn to men, who might therefore be drawn to others. It is the beloved or nothing: the story of all great loves. In this realm love happens only once in a life “and thereafter is never quite spontaneous or impulsive.” These words come from Paul’s father, and they haunt him to his bones.
The wound festers. If it’s surprising to learn the adult Paul is with a woman, it’s more surprising he’s lost all traces of sweetness and warmth. Anger whittles him to a bone. He’s hungry for hurt; he will likely bring on his own hurt if he can. He’s full of chilled outrage, fury refining his perceptions: “Maud is cheating on me, my Maud in bed with another man, doing things she doesn’t, can’t, won’t, do with me because he knows how to lead her there.” He’s shorn of his past, just as Maud is shorn of context. He doesn’t quite see her when he walks into the restaurant to find her laughing, leaning toward another man. She’s simply the subject of his self-harm. The dinner party that follows might take its nourishment from Paul’s bile. Everyone at the table competes; every word has an edge as if that’s the only way to get under the skin. Anyone who’s ever been to a dinner party that pretended to be friendly while feeling like open-heart surgery will read this in awe.
Then the book is home again, by which I mean it’s back to the body. That’s not to diminish the previous section — but Aciman writes arousal so beautifully you miss it when it’s gone. Should we be surprised Paul’s focus is a man this time? Not exactly, though it’s curious that Paul doesn’t miss a man’s touch when he’s with a woman or vice versa.  And yet Paul knows from his history that desire is a trap. As the passage accumulates, the perceptions exhaust him. We see what infatuation can do to a person, the steady cataloging of gestures practically synonymous with rage. Paul is making a meal of Manfred, the new beloved. You can practically hear the chewing, and you feel complicit for having been seduced.
Near the end the book’s harmonic intention comes to full flower. Giovanni rings through Maud, Maud through Manfred. It’s not that they’re variations on the same character; they don’t inhabit the same emotional position. The betrayed here is the betrayer there. Paul is too fluid to be drawn to one kind of love, in his sexuality and soul. Perhaps the book’s greatest wonder is to suggest we can be wildly different people over the span of a life depending on what we lack. Lack: It’s telling that the few acts of consummated sex here are summarized. From what we guess, they’re too awkward to enact. Chloe, the woman with whom Paul happens to have an affair every four years, describes herself as being “wounded in her sex,” a line from Lawrence Durrell they laughed about in their youth. That the phrase ends up losing its status as a joke says everything about the book’s take on time and desire.
If this sounds desolate, I should say it’s also an oddly hopeful book, full of tough pleasures. And if you think Aciman has explored this territory before — true, but he’s up to something bolder this time. This book reads as if he’s taken his three previous novels, combined and distilled them down to their essence. The stakes are higher. There’s so much more to lose, and no safety net in sight. Proust still hovers overhead, but not as obtrusively as he did before: Aciman is all the way himself here. He writes with the ferocity of a writer who’s finally getting his vision down, and he has to say it, has to get it out. He’s made a magnificent, living thing.