MELBOURNE, Australia — Rafael Nadal beat sixth-seeded Gaël Monfils in four sets on Monday to reach the quarterfinals of a Grand Slam tournament for the 30th time, prompting talk of a potential Australian Open final against Roger Federer.
The veterans have a long way to go to get there.
For Nadal, 30, his first priority is No. 3-seeded Milos Raonic.
With No. 1-ranked Andy Murray and No. 2 Novak Djokovic — the two most consistent performers in the last six years at Melbourne Park — upset in the first week, Raonic, a finalist at Wimbledon last year, is the highest-ranked player in the draw.
He advanced to the last eight here for the third straight year with a 7-6 (6), 3-6, 6-4, 6-1 victory against No. 13 Roberto Bautista Agut.
Nadal is the only major winner still in contention on the bottom half of the draw, although he has not added to his total of 14 majors since capturing the French Open in 2014.
Federer, in the top half of the draw, will play Mischa Zverev on Tuesday, and would have to beat him and either Stan Wawrinka or Jo-Wilfried Tsonga — the other quarterfinalists playing Tuesday — to advance to the final.
Nadal’s 6-3, 6-3, 4-6, 6-4 win over the United States Open semifinalist Monfils in the fourth round was his first over a top 10 player at a Grand Slam since that run to his last title at Roland Garros.
“Being in the quarterfinals of a Grand Slam after couple of years not being there is very special for me,” said Nadal, who last progressed this far at the 2015 French Open.
It also showed that after a couple of months off to rest his injured left wrist, he is still a contender at the majors. He has not won an Australian title since 2009.
He went up a break early in the first two sets, had his chances in the third before Monfils rallied, then traded breaks in the fourth before breaking the acrobatic Frenchman to win. Over all, he converted six of 17 break point chances.
As for Raonic, he hit 33 aces and 75 winners but had nine double faults and 55 unforced errors, and seemed to go on a roll after spiking his racket into the court in frustration in the ninth game of the third set.
Also in the round of 16, No. 15 Grigor Dimitrov closed with an ace to hold off the No. 117 wild-card entry Denis Istomin, 2-6, 7-6 (2), 6-2, 6-1. Istomin, who upset the six-time champion Djokovic in the second round, needed repeated treatment on his tiring legs in the third and fourth sets.
In the quarterfinals, Dimitrov will play No. 11 David Goffin, a 5-7, 7-6 (4), 6-2, 6-2 winner over No. 8 Dominic Thiem.
Serena Williams kept her bid for an Open-era record 23rd major title on track with a 7-5, 6-4 win over No. 16-seeded Barbora Strycova to reach the quarterfinals here for the 11th time.
Despite four service breaks — two in the first four games — and 46 unforced errors, and with the fluky net cord and the off-balance, scrunched-shouldered backhand that bounced flatly and clinched her the first set on her eighth set point, she ground down Strycova.
“I wasn’t serving my greatest today; also, she was putting a lot of returns in there,” said Williams, who had a first-serve percentage of 45, and made four double faults. “I feel like it was really good for me to win on probably not my best day, which is always good, because sometimes you rely on one shot and if it goes off, and then, like, what happens now?
Next up, she will face the 2016 semifinalist Johanna Konta, who beat Ekaterina Makarova, 6-1, 6-4.
Mirjana Lucic-Baroni reached the semifinals at Wimbledon in 1999 as a 17-year-old and, after a long, difficult time off the tour, she has returned to the quarterfinals of a major for the first time since.
She beat the United States qualifier Jennifer Brady, 6-4, 6-2, and will next play the United States Open finalist Karolina Pliskova, who ended Australia’s involvement in the singles draws with a 6-3, 6-3 win over Daria Gavrilova.
Whatever comes of it, the 34-year-old Lucic-Baroni said she would make the most of the moment.
