Ray Kroc, the whirling center of “The Founder,” doesn’t come across as a meat-and-potatoes man — much less a mogul destined to peddle burgers and fries. As played by Michael Keaton, an actor who generates terrific centrifugal force, Ray seems more like a guy who fuels up on 10 cups of coffee before calling it a night with a bottle of Scotch. “The Founder” never figures out what makes him spin and run and keep on running, but it does give you Mr. Keaton zinging around like the Road Runner. His kinetic performance doesn’t enhance the movie; it is the movie.
The real Ray Kroc (1902-1984), as business-school students and more than a few fast-food consumers might know, is the entrepreneur who put the big numbers on the McDonald’s sign. In the 1950s, that number was a lowly one million, but has since been replaced by the unfathomable, somewhat terrifying “billions and billions.” Kroc liked to call himself the founder of McDonald’s. His memoir, “Grinding It Out: The Making of McDonald’s,” promises that it is “The personal story behind founder Ray Kroc’s amazing success!” Some of that sentence is true; the success part is, at any rate. Certainly it was a McGreat success, though one larded with McFibs.
“The Founder” opens in 1954 with Ray racking up miles selling milkshake mixers. He has his pitch down cold, but the customers aren’t buying. His fortunes change when he comes across a bustling burger joint in San Bernardino, Calif., called McDonald’s, where crowds of smiling customers sail through fast-moving lines. He’s impressed by the turnout, but he’s more taken with the seamless efficiency of the McDonalds’ Speedee Service System. The brothers bring Ray into their business, showing him how it’s done, not realizing that they’ve invited a snake into their garden. Mr. Keaton nearly levitates off the floor in moments like this, creating a contact high.
The director, John Lee Hancock, keeps things overly neat and tidy (it all shines or gleams), but he also keeps the story humming even when business talk threatens to slow it down. Like Ray, he seems lifted by the McDonalds, and there’s real heart and pleasure in a flashback in which they figure out their system’s choreography, moving young, confused workers around like chess pieces. The McDonalds’ introduction of Fordism to their business turned employees into factory workers and changed the restaurant industry, though the movie elides the global stakes. Mostly, it sticks to milestones and showdowns up until the handshake deal that changed everything.
Mr. Hancock tends toward needless fussiness, overshooting and overcutting when he should let the camera run. (I lost count of all the angles he uses to show Ray reading a map.) That’s too bad because some of the movie’s best moments involve Ray alone, including a scene in which — in boxer shorts, a bottle nearby — he drops the needle on a motivational record. As an actor, Mr. Keaton often comes across as jittery as a thoroughbred at the gate, so when he goes still it feels as if something important is happening. Ray remains an unanswered, not especially compelling, question, but Mr. Keaton comes close to making you believe there’s soul to go with the fries and freneticism.
Filmmakers used to polish up a halo to tell a great man’s story; now they tend to carefully complicate the picture, underscoring his weaknesses and vices, boozing and philandering. Even with a few pins stuck in him, the great man remains great and very much the charismatic, triumphant individual. That’s true of Ray, too, who for all his bad deeds never comes across as a true heavy. Mr. Keaton is good company, for one, and villainy just doesn’t work in entertainments like this, which can’t risk turning us off. Happily, there are always lawyers, in this case, Harry J. Sonneborn (B. J. Novak), who slithers up to Ray to explain where the money is. All Ray does is follow it.