WASHINGTON — President-elect Donald J. Trump’s choice for White House budget director failed to pay more than $15,000 in payroll taxes for a household employee, he admitted in a statement to the Senate Budget Committee, the sort of tax compliance issue that has derailed cabinet nominees in the past.
Mr. Mulvaney said he had subsequently paid more than $15,000 in taxes and awaits the state tax bill, as well as penalties and interests. His confirmation hearing before the committee is scheduled for Jan. 24. The employee was a babysitter hired when Mr. Mulvaney and his wife had triplets in 2000.
Attempts to reach Mr. Mulvaney’s office for comment were not successful. A spokesman for the chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, Senator Michael B. Enzi, Republican of Wyoming, said he would have no immediate comment. Mr. Mulvaney will almost certainly be asked about the issue at his hearing, and Republicans on the committee are most likely aware of its existence.
The situation is similar to that of former Senator Tom Daschle, who in 2009 was forced to withdraw his nomination as President Obama’s choice to lead the Health and Human Services Department. During Mr. Daschle’s confirmation process, it was revealed that he had paid roughly $140,000 in back taxes related to a car and driver provided to him by a former employer, and to some consulting income.
Mr. Daschle’s withdrawal came two weeks after Timothy F. Geithner, Mr. Obama’s first Treasury secretary, was nearly knocked out with his announcement that he had failed to pay $25,000 in payroll taxes while working at the International Monetary Fund.
Two potential attorneys general under President Bill Clinton — Zoe E. Baird and Kimba Wood — lost their chances to become the first women to hold that office; their nominations were pulled after revelations of so-called nanny issues.
The revelation of Mr. Mulvaney’s tax issue will test the Senate, which has greeted tax issues of past nominees with bipartisan denunciations.
The process of confirming Mr. Trump’s nominees has quickly been somewhat stymied because of a slow vetting process. Several hearings were delayed because the nominees had not been cleared by the agency charged with unraveling potential conflicts of interest.
Nominees undergo a rigorous screening by the F.B.I. and must clear the Office of Government Ethics to unravel any potential conflicts of interest that could present future legal problems. What is more, many committees have their own screening process.