WARSAW — The long convoy from an American armored brigade slid unobtrusively across the German frontier into Poland just before 10 a.m. on Thursday. A dozen residents from the southwestern border town of Olszyna turned up to watch.
“Americans coming here is the biggest thing that’s ever happened to us,” said one resident, Mieczyslaw Mroz, 62.
The convoy — the first installment of what are promised to be several thousand NATO troops to be based across Eastern Europe — made its lumbering way into the nearby town of Zagan for an official welcoming ceremony on a frigid square flanked by tanks.
After years of yearning for a permanent NATO troop presence along the alliance’s eastern flank — to keep the guy from the East, President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, at bay — leaders in Poland and elsewhere were jubilant when a plan to station a rotating contingent of a few thousand multinational troops was approved at the alliance’s summit meeting in Warsaw last summer.
But now, as those troops are arriving on the scene, the situation has radically changed, and the promise of security feels considerably less certain.
The American president-elect, Donald J. Trump, enters office trailing a string of sometimes contradictory statements about NATO and insisting on a new era of chummier relations with Russia’s autocratic leader.
So there is considerable concern in Warsaw and other Eastern capitals about whether the troops will actually arrive in the numbers promised, and whether this desire for friendlier relations with Moscow will lead to a deal that undermines the whole effort.
NATO officials past and present say they remain convinced that the deployments will proceed and confident that the new president will soon understand the nature of the threat Mr. Putin presents to Europe and the United States.
Statements Mr. Trump made during the campaign that questioned whether NATO had outlived its usefulness reflected, in part, his businessman’s sense of grievance that allies were not paying their fair share of the costs of the alliance, officials said.
And Russia’s future behavior may also compel the alliance to continue the deployments.
The deployments are structured as nine-month rotations. The armored brigade that crossed the border Thursday morning, based at Fort Carson, Colo., will remain until the fall, some troops on a base near Zagan and others spread across the region. But they are not scheduled to leave before replacements are in position, making the deployment, in effect, permanent.
A second American contingent, due in April, is to be positioned in eastern Poland in the so-called Suwalki Gap, considered the likeliest path for a Russian land invasion, although such an invasion is considered unlikely.
But here in Eastern Europe, Polish and other regional leaders are less certain, wondering whether those future troops will show up after Mr. Trump assumes office and, if they do, whether they will be based in the east, as promised.
And that does not take into account concerns about other promised American and NATO initiatives to reassure the anxious East, including an American missile shield to be built in Poland, mirroring one already in place in Romania, and the opening of forward supply depots throughout the region where NATO armaments could be stored to make rapid deployment possible in the event of an invasion.
Mr. Stavridis said he expected the troop deployments to take place as scheduled, but suspected that the new administration’s desire for a Moscow deal will lead to some horse-trading, perhaps involving that promised missile shield.
The nomination of Gen. James N. Mattis, a strong proponent of NATO, as Mr. Trump’s secretary of defense does give Eastern Europeans more confidence.
Now, at least, if Russians do come across the border “they might bump into NATO forces or even kill some Americans,” he said, and that will be a powerful deterrent.
A Polish military orchestra played the Polish and American national anthems at Thursday’s welcoming ceremony in Zagan. About 20 civilians turned up in the bitter cold, including a little girl in a red jacket and pink hat, who sat on a sled waving an American flag.
Capt. Matt Piazza, 28, like other American soldiers, declined to name Russia as the reason for the deployment.
Edyta Maher, 39, who had wandered over from the tiny village of Kalki to watch the convoy cross the border, expressed a more wary attitude.
