Coming off their second five-day break of the month, the Rangers had the upstart Columbus Blue Jackets waiting for them at Madison Square Garden on Tuesday.
Back in uniform for the hosts was the steady defenseman Marc Staal, who had missed nine games because of a concussion, and Antti Raanta, Henrik Lundqvist’s understudy, who had not played since he was injured in his last start, Jan. 14 at Montreal. But Raanta figured to keep his spot at the end of the bench for the game.
Enter the pesky Blue Jackets, who earlier this season won 16 games in a row. They are led by the former Rangers coach John Tortorella and are solidly in playoff position.
Tortorella started the backup goaltender Joonas Korpisalo, who passed an early test by making five saves after the Rangers had a power-play chance 11 seconds into the game.
Then it was the Blue Jackets who scored first, as defenseman Seth Jones floated a shot from the right point that eluded a screened Lundqvist at 3 minutes 53 seconds of the first period. Columbus scored five more times before the Rangers forged a goal, and the Blue Jackets finished with a 6-4 win.
Lundqvist kept his comments succinct after the contest.
“I know I need to be better,” he said.
Surrendering an early goal has been a persistent problem for Lundqvist this season — it was the sixth opening-shot goal he has allowed, and the eighth for the team in 50 games.
In the second period, the game became an outright disaster for the Rangers as Columbus scored four more times.
Brandon Saad made it 2-0 after 1:06 with his 17th goal of the season, and Alexander Wennberg made it 3-0 with another soft goal at 3:42. This led to Raanta donning his mask and replacing Lundqvist — the fourth time this season Lundqvist has been pulled.
Columbus kept swarming the out-of-sync Rangers. Jones scored again to make it 4-0 at 12:52 before Nick Foligno snapped the puck past Raanta at 16:04 to give the Blue Jackets a 5-0 advantage.
Center Derek Stepan said he had no explanation for the Rangers’ dreadful second period. “A good team like Columbus will make you pay,” he said.
The margin increased to six when Matt Calvert scored for Columbus at 1:49 of the third period, and the Rangers appeared ready to skate for the exits.
But Jimmy Vesey, Michael Grabner and Chris Kreider scored in a three-and-a-half-minute span to slice the deficit in half.
Rangers defenseman Kevin Klein added one more goal at 18:53 of the third, but Korpisalo held on his third win of the season, a 33-save performance. The victory illustrated why the Blue Jackets (33-12-4) are 7 points ahead of the Rangers (31-18-1) in the standings, with one fewer game played.
The loss was another letdown after a break for the Rangers, who were coming off a five-day All-Star Game hiatus. After an earlier break, from Jan. 8 to 12, they stumbled in a 4-2 home loss to Toronto on Jan. 13.
Lundqvist spent this second January respite snorkeling in the blue water of the Turks and Caicos with his teammates Mats Zuccarello and Mika Zibanejad. The 34-year-old Lundqvist — who, like Rangers Coach Alain Vigneault, is chasing an ever-elusive Stanley Cup — has had an inconsistent season. He has performed solidly at times, shining lately in a 1-0 win on Jan. 22 at Detroit and a 3-2 home victory over the Los Angeles Kings the next night. But he has been shockingly unsteady in other games, allowing seven goals over two periods to the Dallas Stars in a 7-6 home loss on Jan. 17.
The Rangers’ desultory performance came on the same day that Vigneault spoke of being awarded with a two-year contract extension, through the 2019-20 season.
The Rangers had won eight of their last nine games against Columbus, including a stirring 5-4 comeback on the road on Jan. 7.
But the fiery Tortorella, who coached the Rangers from 2009 to 2013, has injected new life into a franchise that has made the postseason just twice in its history and has never won a series.
Alain Vigneault coached his 296th career game with the Rangers, passing Phil Watson for sixth place in franchise history. … The Rangers face the Blue Jackets twice more, Feb. 13 at Columbus and Feb. 26 at the Garden.