WASHINGTON — On Dec. 6, Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. asked a half-dozen probing questions during the argument of a patent case involving Life Technologies, which makes genetic testing kits. Later that week, if the court followed its usual practices, he met in private with his colleagues to discuss the case and cast his vote. If he was in the majority, as he is most of the time, he assigned the majority opinion to himself or to another justice.
On Wednesday, about a month after all of this, the Supreme Court announced that Chief Justice Roberts “has concluded that he should not continue to participate in this case.” He had discovered, the court said, that he owned 1,212 shares of the parent company of Life Technologies.
Corporate relationships can be tangled, but this one was relatively straightforward, and it was disclosed on the second page of the petition seeking review in the case. “Life Technologies Corporation is an indirect wholly owned subsidiary of Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.,” the petition said. The statement was repeated on the second page of the company’s brief on the merits of the case.
Thermo Fisher Scientific was among the chief justice’s larger holdings. According to his latest financial disclosure report, released in June, his shares were worth between $100,001 and $250,000. At Friday’s closing price, the shares were worth about $178,000.
Only three members of the court — Chief Justice Roberts and Justices Stephen G. Breyer and Samuel A. Alito Jr. — appear to own individual stocks. In an era when potential executive branch conflicts are drawing intense scrutiny, those justices might consider setting a different tone for the judicial branch by selling their stocks and buying, say, index funds.
Oversights happen, even at the Supreme Court, and Chief Justice Roberts surely acted in good faith and took action as soon as he learned about the matter.
Still, it was the third misstep of this sort by a justice in the last 15 months, according to Fix the Court, an advocacy group that seeks more openness at the Supreme Court. The pattern suggests that, at a minimum, more care is required.
The latest episode puts the court in a ticklish spot. Just months ago, it ruled that a decision tainted by a conflict of interest for a single Pennsylvania Supreme Court justice required reconsideration, even though the ruling had been unanimous.
“A multimember court must not have its guarantee of neutrality undermined, for the appearance of bias demeans the reputation and integrity not just of one jurist, but of the larger institution of which he or she is a part,” Justice Anthony M. Kennedy wrote for a five-justice majority in the case, Williams v. Pennsylvania.
But a partial cure, Justice Kennedy wrote, was better than none.
The Pennsylvania case arose from Chief Justice Ronald D. Castille’s failure to recuse himself from a capital case in which he had, when he was Philadelphia’s district attorney decades before, authorized his staff to seek the death penalty.
That is nothing like Chief Justice Roberts’s financial conflict in the patent case. But the principles outlined in Justice Kennedy’s majority opinion were general ones.
Chief Justice Roberts dissented in the Pennsylvania case, saying Chief Justice Castille’s failure to disqualify himself may have been unwise but did not violate the Constitution’s due process protections. As a consequence, Chief Justice Roberts did not address how courts should address proceedings tainted by conflicts.
One way to do so in the patent case, Life Technologies v. Promega Corporation, No. 14-1538, would be to dismiss it while allowing Life Technologies to refile its petition and seek review from a court in which Chief Justice Roberts is recused from the outset. For all we know, after all, the chief justice supplied the fourth vote needed to hear the case in the first place.
Stephen Gillers, an expert in legal ethics at New York University’s law school, said the lawyers in the case could decide whether to seek such relief.
