Bryan Cranston returns with “Sneaky Pete,” a show he helped create about a hustler trying to out-con some cons. And a new generation of children get their own version of “Lemony Snicket,” this one starring an unrecognizable Neil Patrick Harris.
SNEAKY PETE on Amazon. Giovanni Ribisi plays Marius, a con man who assumes the identity of his former cellmate — that would be Pete — and then reunites with Pete’s family members, who haven’t seen him recently enough to tell the difference. The real Pete had talked long and hard about their bond business, and Marius imagined Wall Street money, the better to repay a debt. But those bonds turn out to be bail for suburban criminals, and soon the new Pete discovers a talent for chasing jumpers. Bryan Cranston, who created this drama with David L. Shore (“House”), stars as a violent gambler alongside Margo Martindale and Peter Gerety as Pete’s grandparents. The result is brisk and breezy, but “there are dangerous shoals of sentimentality” as Marius-Pete finds himself falling for his new family, Mike Hale wrote in The New York Times. Graham Yost (“Justified”) is the showrunner.
BEL CANTO THE OPERA 9 p.m. on PBS. The Lyric Opera of Chicago presents Jimmy López and Nilo Cruz’s adaptation of the Ann Patchett novel about a hostage-taking in Peru in which terrorists storm the vice president’s home — only to become captives themselves when government troops surround the compound. Danielle de Niese stars in this opera curated by Renée Fleming, the company’s creative consultant, whom Ms. Patchett has said was an inspiration for the character of Roxane Coss, a renowned American soprano.
BARACK OBAMA: THE REALITY OF HOPE 10 p.m. on NBC. In an interview taped before his farewell address, President Obama speaks with Lester Holt about his fulfillment of promises made eight years ago and his dreams for the country.
MY REALITY: A HIDDEN AMERICA 10 p.m. on ABC. A year and a half ago, Diane Sawyer and her team put out feelers on social media, asking working Americans to chronicle how they live. This edition of “20/20” explores issues confronting the middle class and possible solutions.