Simon Spurr stood on his tippy toes to fetch a shoe box from a wardrobe in his West Village apartment. There were 20 dark blue boxes there in an otherwise clutter-free aerie given over to Modernist furniture, coffee table books and art. As he cracked open the box, the smell of fresh Italian leather filled the room.
“Beautiful,” Mr. Spurr said, as he caressed the handmade, black-and-white horsehair Chelsea boot that he spent the last year perfecting. This $1,195 boot is not only an example from the first run of a luxury footwear brand, March NYC, that Mr. Spurr is unveiling this week, but it also reflects the 43-year-old’s return to the fashion spotlight.
Five years ago, Mr. Spurr was an ascendant star in the city’s fashion firmament. Alongside Patrik Ervell, Billy Reid and Thom Browne, he was a promising young designer in a rapidly expanding men’s wear market. Handsome and with a plummy English accent, Mr. Spurr embodied a sort of fine tailored Savile Row-meets-rock ’n’ roll swagger that bewitched American men’s wear.
But his progress ended suddenly in 2012, when Mr. Spurr shocked the fashion industry and announced that he was walking away from his brand. Now he is trying to make a creative comeback. “It’s basically like being back at square one again,” he said.
Mr. Spurr’s meteoric rise began in 1997, when he landed a job designing jersey knits at Nautica straight out of Middlesex University in London. His sharp tailoring and rakish flair led to a stint with Hedi Slimane at Yves Saint Laurent, before he was plucked to head men’s wear design at Calvin Klein’s CK line in New York. Then, from 2003 to 2005, Mr. Spurr was the design director for Ralph Lauren’s Purple Label.
In 2006, he set out on his own, with the label Spurr. The idea was to start with something simple, like denim, and expand every season until he reached a full range of men’s wear. He would show at New York Fashion Week, earn accolades, expand his retail reach, dip into accessories, perhaps, and, if all went well, be bought out by an established fashion house.
For a while, he seemed well on his way. The 38 pairs of his jeans he sewed by hand sold out immediately at Bergdorf Goodman. He added sportswear the next year, and suiting the year after that. In 2010, he started Simon Spurr, a line of elevated suiting, and showed his first runway collection.
But then things went sideways. In 2012, a few days after he was nominated for a Council of Fashion Designers of America award for men’s wear designer of the year, Mr. Spurr announced that he was quitting his brand. At the time, he cited an unexplained disagreement with Judd Nydes, his business partner.
Mr. Nydes, who retains control of the defunct label, did not respond to requests for comment.
Mr. Spurr banished himself. “I took six months to get my head together and then began looking for work,” he said.
He was the creative director for a couple of English brands, including Kent & Curwen, before spending much of 2016 traveling (Cannes, Burning Man, the Bahamas) and reclaiming, if not his name, at least his passions.
The March NYC boots come in two styles — Chelsea boot and zip Cuban heel — and are handmade in a small factory in Reggio Emilia, Italy, from high-quality calfskin, which may explain the aggressive pricing ($795 to $1,195). Unlike his last venture, this one is self-funded. “I relied on a combination of savings, my severance packages and selling old clothes,” he said.
In addition to boots, Mr. Spurr has branched out into furniture design. An edition of five modern chairs, crafted out of Carrara marble, is currently on a cargo ship from Italy, and he hopes to sell them for $28,000 each. “They’re between art and furniture, but you’re definitely not supposed to sit on them,” he said.
