“Everything here has a story behind it,” said Nick DiMola, walking through the trash-picked treasures at his shop at DiMola Brothers, a garbage removal company.

Whether hoarders or neat freaks, most people leave behind pieces of their lives, he said. Much of it goes to the dump, but some of it catches Mr. DiMola’s eye and winds up in his garage on Summerfield Street, a quiet residential block in Ridgewood, Queens.
The staggering collection of salvaged items he has amassed over his 30 years in the business is an open secret in this neighborhood on the Brooklyn-Queens border. Every time Mr. DiMola opens his garage doors, passers-by gawk at the explosion of artifacts in his shop.
There are old vending machines that once dispensed soda or cigarettes or gumballs. There is a trove of war memorabilia and New York City lore. The ceiling and walls of his office, and sections of his shop, are covered with old street and business signs, and even some working neon signs. There are vintage license plates, old photographs and original oil paintings signed by noted artists.
Growing up in Ridgewood and nearby Richmond Hill, Mr. DiMola had little interest in history.
He began removing rubbish as a teenager and couldn’t help saving certain items from the trash. These keepers led him into local history and people’s lives.
“It takes you on a journey — garbage — into stories,” he said, and pointed at an oil painting of a cow that he said was done by an inmate in a prison that overlooked a pasture.
“I can’t get rid of something like that, with that kind of story,” he said, and then pointed at a painting of a young basketball player hanging behind an old gasoline pump near an old gynecologist’s chair.
The 1959 work bore the signature of Lon Keller, an artist who died in 1995 and specialized in sports. Many credit him with creating the top-hat logo for the New York Yankees in 1947.
“I was offered $4,000 for that,” said Mr. DiMola, adding that while he does not sell items, they may wind up financing his son’s college education. Meanwhile, he said, his wife, Pam, forbids him from bringing any of the items to their home, on Long Island.
He pointed to an ad for Hassan cork tip cigarettes and said he pulled it from “a hoarder situation” on the East Side of Manhattan.
“That sign alone is worth $1,500,” he said and continued walking around the shop pointing out random items, including a box of old programs from Yankees games, a bayonet from the French army engraved with the year 1872 and a nickel-plated beer tray from the Diogenes Brewing Company, which has been closed for a century.
Here was an apparently original photo of the Enola Gay, the plane that transported the atom bomb dropped on Hiroshima. There was an autographed publicity photo of Joan Crawford, and here was one of another actress, Fran Lee, which came from her apartment on West End Avenue in Manhattan.
Ms. Lee’s advocacy for public health and safety issues helped bring about New York City’s pooper-scooper law in 1978.
Mr. DiMola made a photo collage from the dozens of photos from the acting career of Ms. Lee, who died at 99 in 2010. And so, the woman designated by The New York Times as “New York’s foremost fighter against dog dirt” is memorialized on a trash man’s office ceiling in Queens.
“You got a whole history of people here,” he said, grabbing a brown wooden box rescued from a house in Middle Village, Queens.
He sifted through old immigration papers inside that belonged to a man named Herbert Leutritz, who immigrated from Bremen in 1922.
“A whole life’s story in this cigar box,” said Mr. DiMola, pulling open one of many drawers and looking through old war bonds, gold teeth, German stamps bearing Hitler’s portrait and currency from dozens of countries.
In addition to the cluttered display, many more items remain uninspected in boxes. For years, a box of pottery that Mr. DiMola pulled from a SoHo apartment languished on a shelf, until Mexican diplomatic officials appraised them as ancient Mayan artifacts.
He said he was set to give them part of the collection, but was put off by their attempt to seize the items and held onto them instead.
Near vats of homemade wine, there was an old Norden bombsight, a pivotal technology used by bombers during World War II for aiming.
“It all tells a story,” he added.