On a cool, damp night last weekend, Lauren Duca, 25, sat at a corner banquette at the Red Cat in Chelsea, sipping white wine. She had spent her day trekking around the city, getting a blowout in Chinatown, meeting some friends for brunch in the West Village and stopping home in Brooklyn for some relaxation time with her dog, a Shiba Inu puppy named Demi.
Ms. Duca was a little nervous. “I need to slow down my heart rate,” she said. She took a deep breath, closed her eyes and raised her glass.  She would be appearing on stage as a guest monologuist for the improvisation company Upright Citizens Brigade. Previous guest monologuists at U.C.B. have included Gloria Steinem, Amy Schumer and the hosts of the “2 Dope Queens” podcast, Jessica Williams and Phoebe Robinson. So, you know, no pressure.
It might surprise some that Ms. Duca — who in the past two months has gone from a relatively obscure freelance journalist to a national newsmaker — is susceptible to the jitters. On Dec. 10, Teen Vogue published a scorched-earth opinion piece she wrote titled “Donald Trump Is Gaslighting America” on its website. It went viral.
On Dec. 23, she appeared on “Tucker Carlson Tonight” on Fox News and managed to get these words in edgewise: “You’re actually being a partisan hack who’s just attacking me ad nauseam and not even allowing me to speak.” The video clip went viral.
On Jan. 8, she complained to Twitter that Martin Shkreli, the so-called Pharma Bro and a professed supporter of President Trump, was harassing her after she declined his invitation, delivered via private message, to be his date at the inauguration. In a public tweet, she said, “I’d rather eat my own organs.” Mr. Shkreli then updated his profile picture with a Photoshopped image of his face superimposed over Ms. Duca’s husband’s, in a photo of the couple snuggling. Mr. Shkreli was suspended indefinitely from Twitter. News of this went viral as well.
“There’s been a lot of crazy things like this happening,” she said.
Before the presidential election, Ms. Duca was writing for publications like Teen Vogue, focusing mostly on pop-culture fixtures like Kylie Jenner and her unexpected passion for cheap ramen noodles.
After the election, something changed. “It felt like nothing I was working on mattered anymore,” she said.
With close to 1.3 million hits, the piece became the most-read article on the Teen Vogue site in 2016.
Her new purpose has brought a lot of new opportunity, like the invitation from U.C.B. She arrived at the theater on West 26th Street a few minutes early, wearing a long black dress, patterned tights and lace-up boots. She wove past the packed crowd lining up for $2 Pabst Blue Ribbon cans and slipped backstage.
Shannon O’Neill, the artistic director of U.C.B. New York, and Tami Sagher, a cast member and former writer for “30 Rock,” warmed up the crowd and then welcomed Ms. Duca to the stage. Ms. Sagher called her “my hero” (adding an unprintable word before “hero”) and urged the audience to check out Teen Vogue for its unvarnished political coverage. Ms. O’Neill then asked for suggestions for a word that Ms. Duca could riff on to start the show.
“Blooper!” someone in the crowd called out.
“Ah, O.K.,” Ms. Duca said, haltingly. “‘Blooper’ makes me think of messing up, which is something I am terrified of doing now.” The stakes are higher, she said, because she has a lot more Twitter followers now than she did six weeks ago — 142,000 more to be exact. And more followers, she said, means more people are parsing everything she does.
“I could tweet the word peanut and they would be like, ‘Don’t you know that, like, my son’” is allergic, she said, clutching her iPhone in her right hand like a security blanket. The crowd laughed. She seemed to get more comfortable.
Being internet-famous comes with its own strange addiction to the feedback loop. During intermission, Ms. Duca couldn’t resist sneaking a peek at her phone, noticing a shout-out on Twitter from a supportive audience member. Ms. Duca hit the retweet button and returned to the stage.
Her final anecdote was the most personal, and generated the loudest response. Reacting to the audience prompt “blue bloods,” Ms. Duca went straight to her parents, conservative Republicans who live in New Jersey, voted for Mr. Trump and enjoy watching “Blue Bloods,” the CBS police drama starring Tom Selleck.
“They have no idea where I came from,” she said.
After Hillary Clinton’s defeat, Ms. Duca told the audience how she had asked her mother, a physical therapist, to read her political writing, hoping it would sway her opinion.
The elder Ms. Duca praised her daughter, telling her she was “like the Michael Jordan of writing.” But even maternal pride couldn’t stop her from taking a jab at Mrs. Clinton. “You have to admit that we really didn’t know what happened with her emails,” she said.
