WASHINGTON — The prospects for James N. Mattis to serve as secretary of defense in the Trump administration received a boost on Tuesday when two experts in military policy recommended that an exception be made so Mr. Mattis, a retired four-star general, can assume the top Pentagon post.
Military officers are barred by law from serving as defense secretary unless they have been retired for seven years. General Mattis left military active duty in May 2013.
Senator John McCain, the Arizona Republican who leads the Senate Armed Services Committee and has strongly supported General Mattis’s nomination, convened a hearing on Tuesday that was intended to give committee members, particularly Democrats, a chance to explore the issue of civilian control of the military, including the legislation that would be needed to enable General Mattis to take the Defense Department job.
But Mr. Cohen, who signed a letter during the campaign arguing that Donald J. Trump was unfit to serve as commander in chief, argued that an exception should be made because General Mattis was a person of integrity, had important experience at a time when the Pentagon has to contend with multiple threats and might dissuade the incoming administration from acting recklessly.
“A Secretary Mattis would be a stabilizing and moderating force, preventing wildly stupid, dangerous and illegal things from happening, and over time helping to steer American foreign and security policy in a sound and sensible direction,” Mr. Cohen said.
Kathleen H. Hicks, with the Center for Strategic and International Studies, told the hearing that it was appropriate to make an exception for General Mattis, and praised his character and expertise. But she stressed that this was the sort of exception that should be made only rarely.
“I assess the state of U.S. civil-military relations to be strong enough to withstand any risk such a once-in-two-generations exception, on its own, could pose,” she said.
The only previous case in which a legal exception was made so that a military officer could become defense secretary was George C. Marshall. Faced with the Korean War and growing tensions with the Soviet Union, Congress passed an amendment in 1950 allowing General Marshall to become the Pentagon chief.
After the hearing, Senator Kirsten E. Gillibrand, a New York Democrat, said she still had “grave concerns” about allowing General Mattis to become defense secretary.
But there was little opposition from other members of the panel. Senator Jeane Shaheen, Democrat of New Hampshire, said that Mr. Cohen’s assertion that General Mattis could be a stabilizing force within the Trump administration was the “strongest argument” in favor of confirming the retired Marine general.
Senator Richard Blumenthal, Democrat of Connecticut, asked for advice on crafting legislation to ensure that confirming General Mattis would not open the door for similar nominations of recently retired officers to run the Pentagon. Mr. Cohen said that one way to avoid that would be to require that any future nominee be retired from the military for at least a decade.
General Mattis is scheduled to testify on Thursday before the committee, which is expected to approve his nomination and the proposed legislation. General Mattis’s supporters hope President Obama will sign the legislation before leaving office.