Buddy Greco, the jazz pianist, singer and sometime member of Frank Sinatra’s Rat Pack whose hard-swinging renditions of “The Lady Is a Tramp,” “Mr. Lonely” and “Around the World” were hits in the early 1960s, died on Tuesday in Las Vegas. He was 90.
The death was confirmed by his wife, Lezlie Greco.
He came into his own as a Las Vegas lounge singer with a propulsive, swinging style that he applied to a long list of standards, and, in a recording career that generated more than 60 albums, genres ranging from country to rock ’n’ roll.
His style was heard to advantage on the albums “Buddy Greco at Mister Kelly’s” (1956) and “I Like It Swinging” and “Let’s Love,” recorded in the early 1960s. He was a fixture in Las Vegas’s casino lounges, starting in the 1950s at the Sands and continuing through the 1990s, when he performed in the Starlight Room at the Desert Inn.
Armando Joseph Greco was born on Aug. 14, 1926, in Philadelphia. His father, Joseph, was a wood finisher and freelance opera critic with a show on the Italian-language radio station WPEN, where Armando made his singing debut as a boy. His mother was the former Carmela Piedimonte.
After listening to records by Art Tatum, Oscar Peterson and Nat King Cole, his idol, the young Armando set his sights on becoming a jazz pianist and at 15 formed a trio, the Three Shades of Rhythm. When he applied for a union card, a union official shouted across a room, “Buddy, what’s your name?” Too embarrassed to shout back the exotic-sounding “Armando,” he repeated “Buddy,” and the name stuck.
He graduated from South Philadelphia High School in 1942 and started a new group, Buddy Greco and His Three Sharps, which signed to the Musicraft label in 1946. “Ooh! Look-a There, Ain’t She Pretty,” recorded the next year, became a hit.
Tipped off by his manager, Benny Goodman heard the group at Club 13 in Philadelphia and hired Mr. Greco as a singer, pianist and arranger. After touring and recording with Goodman for three years, Mr. Greco struck out on his own, performing at lounges and nightclubs in the United States and Britain.
Although he never reached the top tier, he enjoyed success with his recordings of “I Ran All the Way Home” (1951), “Mr. Lonely” (1962) and “Around the World” (1961), the theme song to the film “Around the World in 80 Days.” His signature song, “The Lady Is a Tramp,” doubled down on Frank Sinatra’s version, hippifying it with a finger-snapping introduction.
While performing at the Desert Inn in the early 1990s, Mr. Greco met the singer Lezlie Anders, who became his fifth wife. She survives him, as do five daughters, Cindy Soldano, Joann Greco O’Connell, Deborah Greco, Anastasia Greco and Gina Greco; three sons, Armand (known as Buddy Jr.), Sam and Jean Paul; and 13 grandchildren.
In 2010 Mr. Greco and his wife produced “Fever! The Music of Miss Peggy Lee,” which opened in London and toured the United States. The couple later ran Buddy Greco’s Dinner Club in Cathedral City, Calif.