WASHINGTON — A nascent effort by the Obama administration to limit corporate consolidation, begun after officials concluded that a lack of competition was hurting the American economy, appears to be coming to an abrupt end as the Trump administration takes charge.
President-elect Donald J. Trump railed against media company mergers on the campaign trail, promising to block the proposed combination of AT&T and Time Warner, but conservatives and liberals alike say they see no evidence Mr. Trump will be worried about the continuing rise of megacompanies in other parts of the economy once he takes office.
On President Obama’s watch, companies have combined at a frantic pace in recent years, although the dollar volume of mergers fell slightly in 2016 after reaching record heights in 2015.
And some experts see evidence that less competition may be weighing on economic growth, letting companies hold down wages and reduce investment in innovation, a conclusion seconded by the Obama White House last year.
“Consumers and workers would benefit from additional policy actions by the government to promote competition,” according to a report released by the White House in April.
The new administration will inherit oversight of a number of deals in progress. The Justice Department is suing to prevent a pair of mergers uniting health insurers — Anthem with Cigna, and Aetna with Humana. The Federal Trade Commission, which also oversees competition, has taken a particular interest in hospital mergers.
Also looming is the AT&T merger with Time Warner, which Mr. Trump promised to prevent.
“As an example of the power structure I’m fighting, AT&T is buying Time Warner and thus CNN, a deal we will not approve in my administration because it’s too much concentration of power,” he said after the deal was announced in October.
Mr. Trump has privately reiterated his opposition to the deal in recent weeks, but his objections are seen as case-specific, rooted in his tense relationship with CNN, rather than representative of any broader views about corporate combinations.
Companies pursuing mergers may see an opportunity in reaching out to Mr. Trump directly. The cellular phone companies Sprint and T-Mobile flirted with a merger in 2014, but backed down when the Obama administration signaled concerns about further consolidation in the industry, which already is dominated by a few big players.
Last month, Masayoshi Son, the chairman of the Japanese company SoftBank, which owns a majority stake in Sprint, met with Mr. Trump in New York. After the meeting, Mr. Trump claimed credit for SoftBank’s previously announced plan to invest $50 billion in the United States, prompting speculation about a revival of the merger talks.
A change in administration can affect individual cases. The George W. Bush administration, for example, quickly wrapped up the Clinton administration’s antitrust lawsuit against Microsoft, and on lenient terms. Presidents can also exert illicit influence, as when President Richard M. Nixon scuttled a federal antitrust lawsuit against International Telephone and Telegraph, a major contributor to his campaign.
Presidents, however, primarily exert influence over the antitrust process through the appointment of senior officials at the Justice Department and the F.T.C. Mr. Trump has yet to put forward nominees for those jobs, beyond the selection of Senator Jeff Sessions, Republican of Alabama, for attorney general. But the officials overseeing the transition at those agencies, including a former F.T.C. commissioner, Joshua Wright, have supported a relatively permissive approach to mergers.
In one important respect, Mr. Trump has said that he is determined to reduce competition: He has repeatedly promised to reduce imports from foreign countries. Economists have long viewed free trade as one of the most important checks on the market power of domestic companies. It was the availability of Japanese and German cars, for example, that forced American car companies to pay attention to quality. Reduced foreign competition could help to increase the wages of American workers, but at the expense of higher prices and less innovation.
The government’s approach to antitrust enforcement shifted sharply in the early 1980s, with the adoption of economic tools to evaluate mergers. Instead of assuming bigger was bad, the government increasingly sought evidence that consumers would be harmed by higher prices. The result was an era of consolidation as the government basically gave corporations the benefit of the doubt.
In recent years, however, a growing body of economic evidence has suggested that this period of consolidation did result in higher prices. In an October paper, two Federal Reserve economists presented evidence that mergers among manufacturing companies from 1997 to 2007 increased prices. Moreover, they found the deals did not deliver on the stated purpose of increasing efficiency.
In its April report, the White House Council of Economic Advisers highlighted evidence that older and more established firms were increasingly profitable, while business creation was in decline, suggesting a dearth of competition.
“We have a growing body of empirical evidence that suggests very strongly that there’s a relationship between increased market concentration and various measures of economic inequality or declining economic dynamism,” Mr. Rahman said. The culprit? “A couple decades of lax and spotty enforcement,” he said.
Mr. Obama pledged during his 2008 presidential campaign that he would “reinvigorate antitrust enforcement.” But his administration has maintained a generally permissive attitude toward consolidation, notably in allowing a series of mergers that left the United States with four major airlines and fewer alternatives for passengers in many cities. Government data shows that average ticket prices fell by 4 percent in each of the last two years, but the industry’s costs have fallen much more quickly. The industry recorded $25.6 billion in profits in 2015. There was an additional $11.5 billion in profits during the first three quarters of 2016.
Mr. Wu and other experts see a recent shift in the government’s approach to enforcement. Renata Hesse, the acting head of the Justice Department’s antitrust division, argued in a September speech that it was sometimes important to act in anticipation of harm, rather than wait for clear evidence.
“If we required particularized and quantified proof of consumer harm in every case, we would simply make it more difficult to stop harmful conduct,” she said.
But whatever might have come of that line of logic is now likely to be nipped in the bud. Alden Abbott, a longtime F.T.C. official and now a Heritage Foundation fellow, said he expected the Trump administration to affirm the status quo.
“Given what happened in the election, any thought that a new head of the agency would try to come up with an enforcement policy less focused on economics and facts and more focused on notions of fairness, I think that’s not very likely,” he said.
Mr. Abbott said the Trump administration also could be more permissive in evaluating nonmerger conduct, for example, discounts to secure customer loyalty against potential rivals. He noted a 2011 case in which the F.T.C. ordered the end of one such incentive program offered by McWane, a pipe-fitting company that controls about 45 percent of the domestic market. Mr. Wright cast the only dissenting vote, arguing there was no evidence of real harm to customers.
Mr. Trump’s views on the concentration of corporate power may be shaped by his own experiences. He is most likely the first president who has personally been on both sides of an antitrust case. He and other investors in the failed United States Football League sued the National Football League in a 1986 case alleging the larger league had used its monopoly power to prevent the rise of a competitor. A jury rejected the most important claims but awarded Mr. Trump and his fellow plaintiffs a symbolic $3.
Two years later, Mr. Trump, then the owner of several casinos, was the defendant in an antitrust action. He paid a $750,000 civil penalty to settle charges that he had purchased stock in two rival casino operators without telling regulators.