Steven McDonald, a New York City police officer who was shot by a 15-year-old boy in Central Park in July 1986 and paralyzed from the neck down, but who forgave his assailant, hoped for the youth’s redemption and remained in the public eye for his spirit in the face of adversity, died on Tuesday in Manhasset, N.Y. He was 59.
His death, at North Shore University Hospital, was announced by Police Commissioner James P. O’Neill.
Officer McDonald was hospitalized on Friday after having a heart attack. He lived in the village of Malverne in Nassau County with his wife, Patricia Ann Norris-McDonald, the mayor of the village and his caregiver.
A plainclothes police officer when he was shot, Officer McDonald remained on the Police Department’s payroll afterward as a first-grade detective, at times appearing at roll calls and offering support for wounded officers.
Mr. McDonald in 1986, the year he was shot and paralyzed.
Mr. Jones was convicted of attempted murder. In the summer of 1988, Officer McDonald sent stamps and a box of stationery to Mr. Jones along with a note saying, “Let’s carry on a dialogue.” He later met with Mr. Jones’s mother and attended services at a Baptist church in Harlem with his grandmother.
The correspondence continued for a while but ended after Officer McDonald turned down a request from Mr. Jones’s family to seek parole. The officer said he was not knowledgeable or capable enough to intervene.
Mr. Jones was paroled in 1995 after eight and half years in prison, having faced up to 10 years under guidelines for sentencing juvenile offenders.
Four days after coming home, Mr. Jones died of head injuries he sustained the previous day when a speeding motorcycle on which he was a passenger crashed into parked cars while performing wheelies in East Harlem, his old neighborhood, the police said at the time.
One of the cars carried a police officer from the department’s parole division who was monitoring Mr. Jones because of the case’s notoriety and his troubled record while in prison. The officer received minor injuries.
Officer McDonald, who was able to speak, albeit haltingly, and breathe with the help of a respirator, made many public appearances over the years, telling of his faith as a Roman Catholic and saying that if people wanted forgiveness, they had to show it to others. He also said he was grateful to God for sparing his life.
He made trips to Northern Ireland in the cause of reconciliation between Catholics and Protestants, accompanied by the Rev. Mychal F. Judge, the chaplain of the New York City Fire Department. Father Judge was killed in the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks at the World Trade Center when debris rained down on him while he was ministering to victims.
Officer McDonald’s life also touched the New York sports scene. Mets relief pitcher Jesse Orosco gave him the glove he was wearing when he got the final out in the team’s 1986 World Series victory over the Boston Red Sox. And he appeared on the ice at Madison Square Garden annually to present the Rangers’ Steven McDonald Extra Effort Award to a player who had demonstrated special grit.
Steven McDonald, a native of Queens Village, was born on March 1, 1957, and grew up in Rockville Centre on Long Island, one of eight children of David McDonald, a police sergeant, and his wife, Anita. He spent four years as a medical corpsman in the Navy before joining the Police Department.
He was living with his wife in Manhattan when he was shot, and they moved to Malverne soon afterward, buying a home there outfitted for his needs.
His wife and son and his father, David, a retired New York City police sergeant, survive him, but complete information on survivors was not immediately available.
A funeral mass will be held at St. Patrick’s Cathedral on Friday, with Cardinal Timothy M. Dolan the main celebrant.
Officer McDonald’s efforts to support others who surmounted disabilities drew national attention. In August 1996, though he was a Democrat, he addressed the Republican National Convention in San Diego in support of Senator Bob Dole’s nomination, citing the serious wounds Senator Dole sustained in World War II and had overcome.
