Dorante, the title character in Pierre Corneille’s 17th-century comedy “The Liar,” has a little problem with truth-telling. Even when it serves no discernible purpose, he compulsively and ceaselessly — er, how shall I put it? Makes false statements? Proffers unsubstantiated assertions? Presents alternative facts?
Well, since Dorante (Christian Conn) is himself so blithe about his penchant for fabrication — and we are talking matters of romantic comedy, not matters of state — let us just say that he cannot not tell a lie.
Setting his sights on the comely Clarice (Ismenia Mendes), whom he sees strolling in a Paris park, Dorante, portrayed with swashbuckling heartiness by Mr. Conn, boasts that he’s a soldier from the German wars — although, in fact, he ditched a boring law career in another city. When she demurs at his sudden intimacy, he insists that he’s been haunting her doorstep for six months — when, really, he has arrived in Paris just hours before.
Watching in stupefaction is his newly hired servant, Cliton (the superlative comic actor Carson Elrod), who himself has a psychological tic that gets him into hot water. His “tragic flaw,” as he puts it: He cannot stop his tongue from uttering the unvarnished truth.
The plays of Corneille, best known as a tragedian, are produced rarely in America, even more rarely than those of his fellow titans of classical French theater, Racine and Molière (and productions of their work hardly swamp our stages). So it is a continuing reward that David Ives, a playwright of ample comic gifts, best known for his Tony-nominated “Venus in Fur,” has in recent years done a deep dive into these realms, producing scintillating adaptations of Molière’s “The Misanthrope” (as “The School for Lies”); the lesser-known “The Heir Apparent,” by Jean-François Regnard; and “The Metromaniacs,” by Alexis Piron.
The first two of those were seen at the Classic Stage Company, where “The Liar” opened on Thursday, in impeccably acted productions that managed to make the preening fops, bawdy servants, blushing ingénues and romantic heroes of long-ago France seem like our contemporaries, only with an uncanny gift for rhymed verse. Mr. Ives achieves the same feat here, in what may just be his most brilliant act yet of Franco-American theatrical resurrection.
Catholic, but please don’t let that interfere.
Here’s my address, and the key to my room.
It is, partly, Cliton’s interaction with Isabelle that upends Dorante’s romantic ambitions. His boss has asked Cliton to get from Isabelle the name of the beauty Dorante has been flattering, but when he asks, she assumes he means the also lovely Lucrece. As the French say, oops.
Add a couple of clashes between Dorante and Clarice’s betrothed, Alcippe (Tony Roach) — caused, of course, by Dorante’s fabulations — and the muddled ministrations of Dorante’s father, Geronte (Adam LeFevre), trying to arrange a marriage for his son, and you have an ample recipe for ripely comic romantic complications.
Another pleasurable perk, and one of Mr. Ives’s many departures from the original plot, is the ball of confusion continually flattening Cliton. It’s not just his boss’s head-spinning lies that render him dumbfounded, but also the fact (unknown to him) that Clarice’s and Lucrece’s maids are twins, both played by Ms. Hutchinson in a miniature comic tour de force. She switches nimbly between the flirty Isabelle, cozying up to Cliton, and her stern, dour sister, Sabine, swatting away his attentions with horror.
Michael Kahn, the longtime artistic director of the Shakespeare Theater in Washington, unsurprisingly proves supremely adept at guiding his actors through the verse, so that there’s no daylight between character and language. Even the actors in the smaller roles, such as Mr. LeFevre as the doddering but doting Geronte, and Aubrey Deeker as Alcippe’s pal Philiste, the only one to see through Dorante’s whoppers, make strong impressions.
As the chronically outraged Alcippe, who cannot sort out whether Clarice has been true to him, Mr. Roach swaggers and fumes energetically. Ms. Mendes brings a sweet perfume of deviltry to her comely Clarice, who’s none too pleased about her long engagement to Alcippe, and happy to fan the flames of his jealousy. Ms. Pedlow’s reserved Lucrece reveals an unexpected vulnerability. Mr. Elrod works comic wonders with Cliton’s economical asides.
Still, Dorante, with his unruly utterances, remains the pivot on which the swirling comic complications turn, and Mr. Conn’s smiling exuberance makes clear how much sheer delight Dorante takes in spinning yarns by the yard.
Perhaps I’ll go onstage and be an actor.
Maybe Corneille will write me up a play.
I’ll emigrate and be a politician.