The choreographer George Balanchine remains best known for his many plotless pure-dance creations. He also, though, made story ballets, often with unimagined twists and astonishing endings. This week New York City Ballet revives his “La Sonnambula,” the most suspenseful of all his narratives. Originally titled “Night Shadow” in 1946, this is a Romantic drama tinged by Gothic horror and bizarrerie.
The music is Vittorio Rieti’s arrangement of melodies from five of the operas by Vincenzo Bellini. If you know the originals, Rieti’s alterations only add to this work’s strangeness: Rhythms are heightened, harmonies altered, orchestration greatly intensified. And the plot, while reminding you of many other plots, journeys ahead in its own startling way in unpredictable directions.
The setting is the courtyard of a grand house. There are guests, who dance, most irresistibly in a polonaise. The revels are led by the Baron (the host); his relationship with the Coquette is striking but ambiguous. There are entertainers, who introduce idioms exotic, acrobatic and comic. The Poet is an uninvited guest who is immediately drawn to the Coquette. He chooses, however, to remain alone when everyone else departs — and it is now that the strangest arrival of all makes her first appearance.
She is the title character, the Sleepwalker. Like Lady Macbeth, she carries the night light from her bedroom. Like the maddened heroine of Donizetti’s opera “Lucia di Lammermoor” (in traditional productions), she wears a long nightdress, with billowing sleeves. She almost always remains on point, and at first she moves with startling speed and impetus, as if helplessly seeking something she cannot find.
Is she the Baron’s wife, kept out of sight because she is no longer in her right mind? (Sleepwalking and lunacy have long been linked, as Arlene Croce observed in a 1987 New Yorker essay.) Is she like the first Mrs. Rochester in “Jane Eyre”? No answers are known.
Yet it’s precisely now that she begins to elude him. And as she does so, Rieti’s music (from 3:32 onward) — astoundingly — overlays that first melody with another, from Elvira’ first mad scene (“Vieni al tempio”). Bellini’s mad scenes are ones of pathos, but also ones in which a confined spirit seeks release and amplitude. He tries to embrace her; she steps under or around his arms, leaving him grasping thin air. And it’s this elusiveness that transforms him; he’s obsessed by her in a way he wasn’t with the Coquette.
Two images stand out. He kneels to her, as if in submission; she, on point, her legs extended behind her in arabesque, bends down toward him as the music builds to a knockout climax (4:10) – but, though you expect her to meet his face in a kiss, she instead lowers her head, past his, onto his shoulder, both evading and embracing him in the same moment.
Then, after a series of further successful efforts to block her path, he traps her (4:52) by ringing his arms around her. Yet her impetus is such he immediately finds himself on his knees to her, arching in a mighty backbend that epitomizes his complete enthrallment to her, and she — with immensely powerful timing as the music reaches an even bigger climax — simply steps out of his arms and moves on.