Baryshnikov Arts Center, 450 W. 37th St.
Jiving to the Bee Gees sure didn’t look like this when John Travolta did it in “Saturday Night Fever.” Still, for arresting choreographic interpretations of that movie’s anthem, “Stayin’ Alive,” it’s hard to top the Slavic folk dance moves that enliven a scene toward the end of “Our Secrets,” a harrowing musical tragicomedy out of Hungary, which runs through Sunday at the Baryshnikov Arts Center.
Like much of this drolly paradoxical piece from the Budapest-based Bela Pinter and Company, that scene is both very funny and downright pathetic. What’s being portrayed is a romantic evening for two that involves a lovingly prepared dish of tripe and, yes, folk dancing to “Saturday Night Fever” as a precoital tease.
But it’s hard to sustain a disco groove when the music keeps speeding up and slowing down, making the Bee Gees sound as drunk as the couple listening to them. And then there’s the little matter of the state police’s bursting in just as the couple have gotten down to erotic business.
Talk about buzz kill. Written and directed by Mr. Pinter, who also appears as the man caught with his trousers down, “Our Secrets” sets the moral conflicts of Hungarian life in the early 1980s to a score unlike anything to be heard on a Broadway musical stage.
A scene from the production by Bela Pinter and Company, about an artists' community that's torn apart during the 1980s in communist Budapest.
You might think of this unsettling and imaginative production as a sort of perversely animated mixtape — a metaphor confirmed by the presence of a giant reel-to-reel recorder on the back wall of the set. But the soundtrack (mostly performed by a cast that doubles as its own orchestra and chorus) isn’t only melodic.
It also includes the voices of people revealing damning personal secrets, such as one man’s confession to his therapist of his sexual attraction to his 7-year-old stepdaughter. Privacy is clearly not among the luxuries afforded by the Communist state. Nor, for that matter, is having friends you can trust.
“Our Secrets” covers thematic territory that was memorably mined by “The Lives of Others,” the Academy Award-winning 2006 film about love, East German-style, in the age of state surveillance. But Bela Pinter and Company, an internationally renowned theater troupe seen here at the Lincoln Center Festival in 2009, gives the material its own distinctive and dizzying spin.
The show follows the collisions and collusions within a group of Budapestians who devote their leisure time to dancing to Hungarian folk music. Chief among them is Istvan Balla Ban (a heartbreaking Zoltan Friedenthal), an anthologizer of such music, and his best friend, Imre Tatar (Mr. Pinter), who have other extracurricular pursuits they prefer to keep to themselves.
Istvan is a pedophile; Imre is the editor of a revolutionary samizdat magazine. These are alter egos of which party officials, whose ears are everywhere, can make strategic use. Without giving too much away, it seems fair to reveal that in this world, pedophilia is perceived as by far the more forgivable sin.
As you may have gathered, “Our Secrets” is a play without heroes. It also suggests that no life, perhaps, could emerge as entirely heroic beneath the magnification of constant surveillance, a chilling thought for the era of Snowden. The script refuses to allow us to comfortably identify with, or unconditionally condemn, any of its characters.
Even the gargoyle apparatchik Comrade Panczel (a cross-dressed and brilliant Eszter Csakanyi), the epitome of institutionalized evil, is revealed to be a lonely soul. And his blundering overtures to the tormented Istvan provide the play with one of its more bizarrely poignant scenes.
The multifarious cast members combine raw psychological realism with Dickensian grotesqueness. (The play is performed in Hungarian with English supertitles.) They include Hella Roszik and Zsofia Szamosi as the frustrated women in Istvan and Imre’s lives; Szabolcs Thuroczy as the dance center’s cutup in residence; and Eva Enyedi and a wonderfully deadpan Angela Stefanovics as the children who become the objects of Istvan’s monstrous desire.
The show is annotated throughout with folk ballads suffused with what might be described as a festive melancholy. “Complaining gives your heart relief,” goes one of them.
Well, only up to a point. In “Our Secrets,” music is ultimately less cathartic than contaminating. And I can promise that if you see it, you will never again be able to listen to a certain ethereal Bach melody with innocent ears.