59E59 Theaters, 59 E. 59th St.
Puppets are hardly a novelty on New York stages, but I’ll bet you’ve never seen one representing a talking, singing toilet plunger, have you?
Strange to say, that’s not the oddest moment in “Made in China,” an all-puppet musical that blends an unlikely romance between two lonely souls stranded in middle age with pointed commentary on the ties between America’s voracious consumerism and human rights abuses in China.
Mary has let her body go to seed, filling her empty heart by gorging on unwholesome food. Divorced, and rarely able to see her children or grandchildren, she also fills the void in her life with unbridled shopping sprees.
In a boisterous early sequence, she rampages through a store snapping up everything in sight. But when she opens a newly bought package of Christmas tree ornaments, she also finds a note stuffed inside from a worker in a Chinese factory. It urges Mary to bring the plight of abused laborers in China to the attention of human rights organizations.
Things only get stranger from here. I don’t want to spoil all the show’s often-charming oddities, but eventually Mary and Eddie are plummeting down through the earth (via, ahem, Mary’s toilet) to land — where else? — in China, where they soon find themselves imprisoned, and then toiling in a grim factory.
The nicely turned songs, with music and lyrics by Yan Li, are mostly in the style of traditional American musical comedy, with infusions of Chinese flavorings. They are performed by four members of the Norwegian chamber music group MiNensemblet, along with Mr. Yan and Max Mamon. Several are reflective laments by Eddie and Mary on their loneliness, their growing affection for each other or the bizarre predicament(s) they find themselves in.
As in the best puppet theater, the performers who give voice to their characters and manipulate the puppets do so with such seamless grace that we absorb the story with minimal distraction. The style here is in the tradition of the Japanese bunraku: the puppeteer-actors are shrouded in black clothing, with dark veils over their faces, and almost invisible against the dark background. You are hardly aware of their presence, which makes it easier to accept the more bizarre episodes and unlikely transitions.
I didn’t follow how Mary and Eddie escaped their labor camp by way of a dancing forest of bamboo, or for that matter how being swallowed by a dragon they encounter while leaping from bamboo stalk to bamboo stalk somehow lands them back in America. Clearly narrative logic is not a high priority for Wakka Wakka.
But the puppets, designed by Mr. Waage, have such distinctive personalities that the plot’s absurdities rarely intrude on our enjoyment. The prickly personality of Mary, with her bulging, needy blue eyes and pendulous breasts, is brought to life by Mr. Russo with funny-sad precision. So, too, does Mr. Estrada bring fine emotional shadings to Eddie, whose chilly frustration with the woman whose life he becomes entangled in melts into something warmer.
But even Mary and Eddie’s dogs, and the many inanimate objects that populate the show — the dancing letter that sets the plot in motion, and of course that peppy plunger — are brought to life with a magical vividness that enchants. The romantic comedy and sociopolitical polemic aspects of “Made in China” may not always be smoothly integrated, but the show’s visual allure never ceases.