I did not go poo in the toilet until I was 4 years old.
I went pee in the toilet, of course. I mean, I wasn’t a freak, am I right? The toilet could have all of my pee it liked. But my poo, no. Pooping was my sacred time, and I wasn’t about to bid it farewell.
Back to 1991. As I said, I remember the night I went in the toilet very well, partly due to the fact that it’s all on videotape. Yes, my mother taped the entire thing, with my father off to the side doing what would now be considered director’s commentary. That might sound weird, but you’ve got to understand: My parents had a new camcorder and really wanted to try it out.
There’s a few more minutes of tearful pleading, me saying I’ll never get on the toilet for as long as I live, and then — SMASH CUT TO ME ON THE TOILET! Now that’s how you edit a scene. I am on the toilet, but I’m not doing my thing yet. I am, as the kids say, “prairie-dogging it.” I know my parents have won, I know the fateful moment is near, but I don’t want to raise the not-so-white flag of defeat just yet.
In a bizarre moment, my mother sympathetically asks, “Do you want me to turn off the camera?” And I say, through my tears, “No.” It’s as if I knew that, years later, I would write a piece on this. Or I was just straight-up weird. Either way, it makes for great cinema.
Why was I so afraid? The fear wasn’t based in anything tangible. I didn’t think the toilet was a monster or anything like that. Rather, it was an existential dread rooted in the fear of change. I liked my life, and I liked being a kid, and, in a way, using the toilet would be the first major step on my path toward the darkness of adulthood.
I also really loved pooping in diapers. In fact, I vividly remember what it was like. And guys: We are missing out. Pooping in my diaper was always the high point of my day. I wouldn’t just shamefully sit in a corner and do my business; this was my thinking time. I remember walking around in my diaper as I went, daydreaming, talking to my imaginary friends, pontificating on the meaning of life. The relaxing act freed up my imagination in unparalleled ways.
The diaper was part of my identity. It was who I was. So on that video, when I finally give in and use the toilet, I don’t just see in my eyes the feeling of relief. I see fear of the unknown, fear of change and, ultimately, death. Later in the video, when I receive all the presents promised for making progress, I still see that fear amid the bribery-induced joy. The toilet is the timpani in the funeral march of change, giving us a rhythm as we all march toward the grave.
Twenty-six years later, I still fear change, but now, I accept the fear. When big life events happen, it’s natural to feel afraid. I was afraid when I got engaged. I was afraid when “Crazy Ex-Girlfriend” got ordered to series. And yes, who I was on the inside did change after these major events, but it was change that made me a better person. Change is inevitable, and, if you try to fight it, life will eventually take away your diapers and force you to grow up.