Two years after being convicted of trying to thwart a federal investigation and of making false statements to government agents, former State Senator John L. Sampson was sentenced on Wednesday to five years in prison.
Until mid-2015, Mr. Sampson, 51, was a powerhouse in Albany, representing a swath of southern Brooklyn and serving as the Democratic leader in the Senate. But in July of that year, he was found guilty of attempting to derail an investigation into allegations that he had embezzled more than $400,000 in state money while working as a court-appointed referee for foreclosed properties in Brooklyn.
During his trial, prosecutors in the United States attorney’s office in Brooklyn said Mr. Sampson had used the money in part to pay for his unsuccessful 2005 campaign for Brooklyn district attorney. Although the embezzlement charges were thrown out by Judge Dora L. Irizarry because the statute of limitations had passed, the prosecutors charged Mr. Sampson with obstruction and lying to federal agents.
The guilty verdict centered on Mr. Sampson’s relationship with two friends: Edul Ahmad, a businessman from Queens, and Sam Noel, a longtime paralegal in the same federal prosecutor’s office that was pursuing Mr. Sampson. Mr. Ahmad, who agreed to cooperate with the government after he was charged with mortgage fraud, testified that Mr. Sampson had threatened to silence anyone who was helping the investigators. The prosecutors also played video and audio recordings at the trial of a visibly distraught Mr. Sampson taking a check register that Mr. Ahmad indicated could prove the embezzlement and putting it in his pocket.
Mr. Noel testified that Mr. Sampson had asked him to use his position in the prosecutors’ office to look up information about any case being pursued against him. Mr. Noel also told the jury that Mr. Sampson had asked him to look up information about Mr. Ahmad’s case and that he had used confidential law enforcement databases to make both queries.
Before Mr. Sampson spoke to the court, Alexander Solomon, an assistant United States attorney, told Judge Irizarry that Mr. Sampson’s actions were “shockingly disturbing,” particularly for a man who had once served as the chairman of the State Senate’s ethics committee. “He was manipulative, vulgar, selfish and greedy,” Mr. Solomon said.
In receiving his sentence, Mr. Sampson joined the ranks of powerful state politicians who have been prosecuted and punished for their misconduct in recent months. In May, Sheldon Silver, a Democrat and the former speaker of the State Assembly, was sentenced to 12 years in prison for corruption. Just days later, Dean Skelos, the onetime Republican Senate majority leader, was sentenced in the same federal courthouse in Manhattan to five years in prison after being convicted with his son, Adam, of abusing his office.