Particularly since Mr. Yanukovych lost power after protests in Maidan Square in Kiev, Mr. Galeotti said, Mr. Putin and his circle “have a different sense of how the game is played. They genuinely believe that Maidan was engineered by the West” and because of this “all bets are off” in their view, a shift that has legitimized “the principle of regime change or at least regime disturbance” through mischief making in the United States election.
Mr. Dobrynin related in his memoir how he thought this was a bad idea but nonetheless made an oblique offer of help to Mr. Humphrey during a breakfast at the Democratic candidate’s home. “He knew at once what was going on,” Mr. Dobrynin recalled, and made it clear he had no interest in receiving any Soviet assistance.
While propaganda and disinformation have long been key elements in efforts by both Moscow and Washington to shape events, the Kremlin, at least during the Cold War, went to extraordinary lengths to undermine foreign political figures it viewed as hostile to Soviet interests.
 Another target was President Carter’s Polish-born national security adviser, Zbigniew Brzezinski.
Mark Kramer, an expert on the Cold War at the Davis Center for Russian and Eurasian Studies at Harvard, said the declassified report had erred by stating that the Russian “influence campaign” directed at the November election marked a “significant escalation” of previous Russian operations. This assessment, he said, “is simply untrue” and reflects a lack of understanding of just how extensive Moscow’s meddling has been in the past.
“The reality is that the two main Soviet intelligence and security agencies waged a vigorous campaign for decades to meddle in U.S. politics and discredit the United States,” Mr. Kramer said in an email.
Mr. Galeotti, the intelligence expert in Prague, cautioned that this mission to influence foreign politics was not a uniquely Russian phenomenon but had also been embraced in the past by the C.I.A., which, in the 1950s, sought to shape and subvert politics in countries like Iran and Guatemala.
