The biggest presence at Sunday’s Golden Globes was a TV star who didn’t show up, didn’t win an award, was not thanked and was only rarely mentioned by name. Hollywood’s first awards show of the year was — like so much in today’s headlines — brought to you by Donald J. Trump.
Even before Meryl Streep took the president-elect to the Hollywood-shed, he loomed over Jimmy Fallon’s monologue. The last time Mr. Trump appeared with Mr. Fallon on NBC’s “The Tonight Show,” the host tousled his hair during a softball interview. Mr. Trump’s subsequent election was both an affirmation of celebrity’s power and a repudiation of most celebrities’ politics.
So beyond “Moonlight” versus “Manchester by the Sea,” a big question hanging over the awards was how, or whether, Mr. Fallon would address the Republican elephant in the room.
It was a fitting choice, if not an especially hilarious one, at the most escapist of awards shows. Music and music-related comedy are the strength of Mr. Fallon’s “The Tonight Show.” (He brought his bandleader, Questlove, along as D.J.) And just as “La La Land” is a bubbly tribute to performers and their dreams, Mr. Fallon’s talk show is a stage for celebrities — and politicians — to perform their likability.
The most memorable part may have been at the beginning, when Mr. Fallon’s Teleprompter went out. He vamped for a bit, and after the commercial break he returned with a joke — likening his mishap to Mariah Carey’s singing disaster on New Year’s Eve — that it seemed half of Twitter had already made at that point.
Mr. Fallon handled his technical foul-up much better than the diva. But he didn’t make much of it either, and that summed up the night. He wasn’t bad; this year just didn’t seem like his cultural moment. 
It was Meryl Streep, receiving the Cecil B. DeMille Award, who repudiated Mr. Trump, for a “performance” during the campaign in which he mocked a disabled reporter. “It sank its hooks in my heart,” she said. Call me biased (that reporter is a colleague at The Times), but it was as passionate and devastating as any scripted clip played that night.
Ms. Streep also said that without Hollywood’s performers from around the world, “you’ll have nothing to watch but football and mixed martial arts, which are not the arts.” Did that persuade anyone for whom those non-arts are entertainment? There is a school of thought that it does nobody good for celebrities to deliver political diatribes, coded or not, on a night that celebrates the fortune of the fortunate.
But their work says something, like it or not. The 2016 election was, among other things, a cultural argument: overtly and subtextually, it was in part about how comfortable America was with change, diversity and inclusion — about whether there was some long-ago, homogeneous “greatness” that America had lost.
Sometimes, this Globescast said, art is an escape. Sometimes it’s a call to arms. And sometimes seeing, and being seen, is a statement in itself.