Reversing a stance of more than a century, the Boy Scouts of America said on Monday that the group would begin accepting members based on the gender listed on their application, paving the way for transgender boys to join the organization.
The announcement, reported on Monday night by The Associated Press, reverses a policy that drew controversy late last year when a transgender boy in New Jersey was kicked out of the organization about a month after joining.
“After weeks of significant conversations at all levels of our organization, we realized that referring to birth certificates as the reference point is no longer sufficient,” Michael Surbaugh, the Scouts’ chief executive, said in a recorded statement on Monday.
The announcement came amid a national debate over transgender rights, with cities and states across the nation struggling with whether and how to regulate gender identity in the workplace, in restrooms and at schools.
In recent years, the Boy Scouts of America have expanded rights for gay people. In 2013, the group ended its ban on openly gay youths participating in its activities. 
Advocates for gay and transgender people who had pushed for changes in Boy Scouts’ policy praised Monday’s announcement.
The announcement came less than three months after Joe Maldonado, an 8-year-old transgender boy, was kicked out of a Cub Scout pack in Secaucus, N.J., because of his birth gender. It may have been the first such ejection in the country, Mr. Wahls said.
On Monday, Joe, who will turn 9 on Wednesday, said he was glad for the reversal.
“I think it’s pretty cool that I get to go back in,” he said.
His mother, Kristie Maldonado, however, said she was conflicted when representatives from the local Boy Scout chapter called on Monday to inform them of the reversal. She said she had already begun the process of filing a discrimination complaint against the chapter.
Joe was upset by the initial decision to kick him out of the group, he told The Record, a newspaper in northern New Jersey, at the time.
After Joe was removed from the Boy Scouts last fall, he and his mother enlisted the help of Garden State Equality, a group that advocates for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender rights and had worked with the Maldonados before. With that help, they were able to raise awareness about Joe’s dismissal locally and then nationally.
While he was encouraged by what appeared to be the group’s quick decision on accepting transgender scouts, Scouts for Equality plans to push for a more formal policy, Mr. Wahls said.
“We want to make sure that they work with experts who have experience with transgender youth and youth programs,” he said.
The Boy Scouts of America claim nearly 2.3 million members between the ages of 7 and 21, and the group counts many notable figures among its alumni and volunteers.
One of them, Rex W. Tillerson, President Trump’s nominee for secretary of state, was involved in getting the organization to accept gay scouts and leaders. He was the national president of the Boy Scouts of America from 2010 to 2011 and served on the group’s executive board in 2013 when it voted to lift the ban on gay scouts.
That decision came after years of reluctance from the organization and a wrenching internal debate that involved threats from some conservative parents and volunteers that they would quit. When the ban on gay leaders was reversed in 2015, the Mormon Church, the largest sponsor of scouting units, briefly threatened to leave the group as well.