LONDON — Patrick Stobbs recently sat in a conference room here playing songs from his smartphone, attempting to show how his start-up, Jukedeck, is at the cutting edge of music. The tune sounded like the soundtrack to a 1980s video game. “This is where we were two years ago,” he said, looking slightly embarrassed.
“And this is where we are now,” he continued. He then played a gentle piano piece. Its melody was simple, and it was unsubtle in its melancholy, but there was no denying that it could work as background music for, say, a health insurance commercial.
Mr. Stobbs didn’t write the music himself, nor did he commission it from a composer. Jukedeck is one of a growing number of companies using artificial intelligence to compose music. Their computers tap tools like artificial neural networks, modeled on the brain, that allow the machines to learn by doing, rather as a child does. So far, at least, these businesses do not seem to be causing much anxiety among musicians.
Having machines write music is not new. In the 1950s, the composer Lejaren Hiller used a computer to produce the “Illiac” Suite for string quartet, the first computer-generated score.
Since then, countless researchers have pushed that work forward. But several start-ups are now trying to commercialize A.I. music for everything from jingles to potential pop hits. Jukedeck, for instance, is looking to sell tracks to anyone who needs background music for videos, games or commercials. The company charges large businesses just $21.99 to use a track, a fraction of what hiring a musician would cost. Mr. Stobbs wouldn’t reveal how many tracks it has sold, but said that the British division of Coca-Cola pays for a monthly subscription.
Tech giants are also involved. In June, Google Brain announced Magenta, a project that aims to have computers produce “compelling and artistic” music, filled with surprises. Its efforts so far do not quite fit the bill.
Jukedeck’s beginnings are somewhat surprising for a tech company. Mr. Stobbs and the composer Ed Newton-Rex, both 29, founded it in 2012. They had been choristers at King’s College School in Cambridge, England, and Mr. Newton-Rex went on to study music at the University of Cambridge, where he first learned that artificial intelligence could compose. After graduating from Cambridge, the pair set up a choral boy band (“a terrible idea,” Mr. Stobbs said), and had aspirations to run a record label. But in 2010, Mr. Newton-Rex attended a computer science lecture at Harvard, where his girlfriend was studying. The lecturer made coding sound relatively straightforward, and also made Mr. Newton-Rex recall his earlier studies in A.I. music. He decided to put the two together, and he set about building Jukedeck on the flight home.
Jukedeck’s system involves feeding hundreds of scores into its artificial neural networks, which then analyze them so they can work out things like the probability of one musical note’s following another, or how chords progress. The networks can eventually produce compositions in a similar style, which are then turned into audio, using an automated production program. It has different networks for different styles, from folk to “corporate” — something that sounds like the glossy electronica typically played at business conferences. The company only recently started experimenting with the artificial neural networks for the audio output as well as the composition. This should make tracks sound more natural and varied — more human, in other words.
Other companies working on A.I. music tend to involve musicians more directly in the process. The Sony Computer Science Laboratory in Paris, for example, considers musicians essential to its Flow Machines project, which has received funding from the European Research Council.
The idea behind the project is to get computers to write pop hits, said François Pachet, the laboratory’s director. “Most people working on A.I. have focused on classical music, but I’ve always been convinced that composing a short, catchy melody is probably the most difficult task,” he said.
Around 20 acts have already used the system, Mr. Pachet said, some performing the songs they wrote using it at a recent concert. He is in talks with some well-known groups, like the indie band Phoenix, to try it, he added, and several albums will be released this year.
Musicians appear to enjoy it. “I could never have written a song like the one I did without it,” said Mathieu Peudupin, a French rock musician who goes by the name Lescop.  He said it was like working with a bandmate, although he ignored most of its suggestions. “But what singer in the world listens to his bandmates?” he said, laughing.
But the founders of Jukedeck are less certain.
