PHILADELPHIA — As President Trump tells it, American cities are dangerous war zones. Bullets fly. Criminal aliens roam free. Mothers and children languish in poverty.
But the president’s broad and cutting rhetoric fails to capture the complicated reality of urban America.
With declining crime, rising populations and growing innovation, cities in this country are prospering on many levels, albeit unevenly.
Cities do remain places of segregation and enormous wealth gaps. Black and Latino families often bear more than their fair share of poverty, poor schools and violence. The number of people nationwide living in extremely poor neighborhoods has increased by about five million over roughly the last decade, according to a Brookings Institution study.
When Mr. Trump speaks about cities’ problems, he focuses almost exclusively on these pockets of entrenched social ills.
Although Mr. Trump’s assessment of cities is incomplete, he was “tapping into a level of outrage that we ought to have about our cities,” said Lee Huang, the senior vice president of Econsult Solutions, an economic consulting firm based here. “Whether it’s violence in Chicago, whether it’s unemployment and poverty in Philadelphia, whether it is these structural and physical examples of blight and disinvestment and disparity, I don’t think he’s off in saying our cities have a lot of challenges,” Mr. Huang said.
But Mr. Trump’s critics say that by generalizing conditions in cities, he is sowing fears and solidifying stereotypes, which serves to divide the country.
Sulaiman Rahman, said he worried that by portraying the communities where minorities live as disastrous, Mr. Trump is trying to justify deploying aggressive policing tactics.
Although homicides in large cities in 2015 increased about 15 percent from 2014, they were still down 51 percent from two decades earlier, Richard Rosenfeld, a professor at the University of Missouri-St. Louis, said.
While murders did rise nearly 13 percent in Philadelphia from 2014 to 2015, they dipped slightly last year.
“Carnage doesn’t describe the reality of crime in American cities,” Mr. Rosenfeld said.
Mr. Trump’s assessment of cities is rooted in the problems of segregation, discrimination and economic inequality that “urban progressives” have emphasized, argued Aaron Renn, a senior fellow in urban policy at the Manhattan Institute for Policy Research, a conservative think tank.
The president wants to correct those disparities, Mr. Renn said.
“I’ve never heard him once say, ‘You’re to blame for the problem,’” he said.
As Shanise Bolden, 26, strolled through her Northside neighborhood, Frankford, to her job working with the mentally ill, she had earbuds in her ear and carried her iPhone in a colorful case. A brown tote bag dangled from her wrist. Despite the high crime statistics in this part of town, she had little concern walking around here.
“Why would it be scary when we know each other?” she asked.
That sense of community and kinship belies the rough edges on Frankford’s surface, residents say. It is something that people would never see or appreciate if they judged the community only by crime and economic statistics, they said.
It is a neighborhood of tightly packed rowhouses. An elevated train track cuts through the main drag, Frankford Avenue, which is jammed with convenience stores and cellphone shops, and storefronts boasting haircare products, clothes and pawned goods.
Leshay Davenport, 23, says she avoids parts of her Philadelphia neighborhood that are known known for riffraff but feels comfortable letting her daughter, Lyric, 3, play outside.
For all the Frankfords there are in cities, there are also many neighborhoods like Fishtown, about 15 minutes south. Once a tattered haven for drugs and other vices, it is now a place of nighttime joggers. It is common to see people with yoga mats slung over their shoulders, cycling in and out of a studio where a receptionist has to buzz them in. Corner stores that once peddled chips and candy have been replaced by bars with Skee-Ball machines and pool tables.
Gentrification has driven a lot of low-income residents to Frankford, and that sometimes leads to violence.
Leshay Davenport is not too worried, though. She recently strolled through a park behind the boxy, red brick public housing complex where she lives in Frankford, holding her 3-year-old daughter, Lyric, by the hand.
Ms. Davenport, 23, said she avoided certain parts of the neighborhood known for having a lot of riffraff. But having lived here for a decade, she said, she feels comfortable enough to let Lyric play outside.
The challenges of living in a place like Frankford are real, said Rasheed Ross, 18, a senior at Sankofa Freedom Academy.
Positive role models are hard to find, he said, and it is easy to get caught up in the wrong thing. A lot of people think their only avenues for success are rapping, basketball or dealing drugs, he said.
