Days before his inauguration, President-elect Donald J. Trump is engaged in a high-profile feud with some of the country’s most prominent African-American leaders, setting off anger in a constituency already wary of him after a contentious presidential campaign.
Mr. Trump’s criticism of Representative John Lewis of Georgia, a widely admired leader of the civil rights movement, has prompted a number of Democratic lawmakers to say they will not attend his inauguration on Friday.
The angry reaction is driven not only by Mr. Trump’s Twitter posts but by what many blacks say they reveal about the president-elect’s lack of understanding of the reverence with which the civil rights movement and its leaders are viewed by African-Americans.

Mr. Trump’s talk is especially striking as it comes during the transition period, when, typically, incoming presidents are focused on trying to bring the country together.
Mr. Trump has also not made any public announcement of plans to commemorate Martin Luther King’s Birthday, a tradition observed by most Republican and Democratic politicians. A plan for him to visit the National Museum of African American History and Culture on Monday has been scrapped.
On Twitter, Cornell William Brooks, the president of the N.A.A.C.P., criticized Mr. Trump and posted a photo showing a young Mr. Lewis bloodied from protesting.
“By disrespecting @repjohnlewis, @realDonaldTrump dishonored Lewis’ sacrifice & demeaned Americans & the rights, he nearly died 4. Apologize,” he wrote.
Vice President-elect Mike Pence defended Mr. Trump’s criticism of Mr. Lewis during an interview with “Fox News Sunday,” though he did so in noticeably softer tones.
Asked if he thought Mr. Trump’s Twitter posts were appropriate given Mr. Lewis’s biography and record, Mr. Pence said that the president-elect “has the right to defend himself” and that Mr. Trump had wished to call attention to Democratic policy failures in America’s cities.
A spokesman for the Trump transition team said it would have no further comment.
Many of the members of Congress who will not attend Mr. Trump’s inauguration said they planned to instead meet with activists and focus on how to push back against Mr. Trump’s administration.
Representative John Conyers Jr. of Michigan, the dean of the House of Representatives, was among those announcing that he would not be attending the inauguration and was gearing up to fight Mr. Trump. “I will do everything in my power to ensure that accountability is brought to bear on the administration and that the Constitution and our nation’s laws are adhered to, as no one is above the law,” he wrote in a statement.
Others skipping the event include Representatives Raúl M. Grijalva of Arizona; Maxine Waters of California; Luis V. Gutiérrez of Illinois; Katherine M. Clark of Massachusetts; William Lacy Clay of Missouri; Nydia M. Velázquez, Jerrold Nadler and José E. Serrano of New York; Marcia L. Fudge of Ohio; Earl Blumenauer and Kurt Schrader of Oregon; and Mark Pocan of Wisconsin.
Mr. Trump had scant support in the black community before his transition began; only about 8 percent of blacks voted for him on Nov. 8. The relationship seemed further imperiled when Mr. Trump appointed his White House chief strategist, Stephen K. Bannon, the former head of Breitbart News, who some people fear will bring nationalist and racist views to the West Wing.
The Rev. Al Sharpton, who led a march on Saturday in Washington, said Mr. Trump’s Twitter posts drove more people to brave the cold to demonstrate.
The deep unease that many African-Americans feel about Mr. Trump has also set off a backlash toward black celebrities who appear with him. The comedian Steve Harvey and the rapper Kanye West have faced fierce criticism and ridicule for meeting with Mr. Trump at Trump Tower in Manhattan.