Conversation sings and swings, bends and bounces and hits heaven smack in the clouds, in the glorious new production of August Wilson’s “Jitney,” which opened on Thursday night at the Samuel J. Friedman Theater. In Ruben Santiago-Hudson’s vital revival of a 1982 play only now making its Broadway debut, words take on the shimmer of molten-gold notes from the trumpets of Louis and Miles.
How sweet the sound. And how sorrowful and jubilant, as life in a storefront taxi company in an African-American neighborhood in Pittsburgh comes to feel like a free-form urban concerto, shaped by the quick-witted, improvisatory spirit that makes jazz soar.
Acted by an impeccably tuned ensemble, this early work from an American master makes you realize how much the New York theater has missed the voice of Wilson, who died in 2005. And it feels somehow fitting that this play — part of one of the great cycles of modern drama — should open on the eve of Donald J. Trump’s inauguration.
The successor to Barack Obama, the country’s first African-American president, Mr. Trump enters office at a moment when racial unease and resentment glare hard and unignorably in the United States. After a singularly polarizing presidential campaign (not to mention recent dismissive tweets by Mr. Trump in response to criticism from the eminent civil rights leader and congressman John Lewis), many minority-group members wonder just how aware their new leader is of the history of such divisions and of the urgent need to acknowledge them.
There’s no way a theatergoer can watch “Jitney,” a Manhattan Theater Club production, without feeling the pulsing, defiant aliveness of every character onstage. Set in the late 1970s, this was the first play Wilson wrote in his great 10-play cycle portraying 10 decades of history in the Hill District of Pittsburgh.
“Jitney” is also the work, Wilson said, in which he found his voice as a dramatist, one that borrowed from the musical traditions of blues and jazz, transliterated into spoken dialogue and monologues of Shakespearean eloquence. It is a language that makes lives perceived as marginal not only visible but monumental.
This magnifying focus summons thoughts of another great American dramatist, Arthur Miller, and his belief in the possibilities of the common man as a tragic hero. Wilson’s most direct answer to Miller’s “Death of a Salesman” was his Pulitzer Prize-winning “Fences,” seen on Broadway in 1987 and the basis for the current excellent film directed by and starring Denzel Washington.
No single character dominates “Jitney” the way that the Olympian Troy Maxson bestrides “Fences.” If there is a central figure in “Jitney,” it’s the hard-working, tension-diffusing Becker, who runs the car service that gives the play its plot and structure. In that role, John Douglas Thompson builds to a heroic blaze of frustration and indignation that reminds you why he is one of this country’s greatest classical actors (“Macbeth,” “Othello,” “Tamburlaine”). But Mr. Thompson does not — and should not — eclipse our sense of “Jitney” as a group portrait.
Wilson was not only saying that black lives matter, but also that black life matters. The world portrayed in “Jitney” is a self-contained microcosm, shaped by privation, obstruction and a make-do resourcefulness that becomes its own art form.
David Gallo’s set exudes an aura of both contingency and vibrancy. We are in the ramshackle room out of which Becker and his fleet of drivers operate their gypsy cab service, taking calls on a rotary pay phone. Every stick of furniture, from the battered refrigerator to the coffee table on concrete blocks, has the look of salvage.
John Douglas Thompson and Brandon J. Dirden in a scene from August Wilson's play, on Broadway at the Samuel J. Friedman Theater.
Large windows with commanding views of the street are screens of a sort for the greatest soap opera in town — the lives of the drivers’ friends and neighbors. You might also note that the stage is raked, with the floor sloping toward the audience; a man unsure of his footing could slide right off the edge.
For everyone in “Jitney” is balancing over a chasm: the prospect of poverty, homelessness, alcoholism, prison and abrupt, imminent death. The everyday chatter — and such chatter is the warp and weft of “Jitney” — often involves getting and spending, the itemization of food and housing costs, of landing jobs with a criminal record, or where a body might find a bed that night.
All of Becker’s drivers need the work. So they are chilled to learn that the city plans to tear down their building, along with most of the old structures that define the cityscape of the Hill. The official word is that housing projects will take their place, but no one is really expecting that to happen.
The specter of the wrecking ball provides the most far-reaching dramatic tension. But “Jitney” gives equal stage time to all manner of personal frictions and confrontations, many of which anticipate themes that echo throughout Wilson’s later work.
They include the clash of paternal and filial expectations, here embodied by Becker and his son, Booster (Brandon J. Dirden), newly out of prison for a racially motivated murder; and the respective needs of men and women in forging a life together, rendered by a beautifully matched André Holland, as the fiery Vietnam veteran Youngblood, and Carra Patterson, as his pragmatic partner.
There’s the company sot, Fielding (Anthony Chisholm, with a voice from the bottom of a bottle), who turns out to have been a coveted tailor for Billy Eckstine and Count Basie. The numbers runner Shealy (Harvy Blanks) tells the story of the woman who cursed him into seeing her face on that of all subsequent lovers. The soft-spoken, cautious Doub (Keith Randolph Smith) has harrowing tales of his time in the Army, when he stacked dead bodies in Korea.
Their back stories emerge through sly asides, testy debate and those ravishing, aria-like soliloquies for which Wilson is famous.  Storytelling is the default mode of speech here; it gives form, substance and almost ceremonial style to existences that might otherwise feel all too tangential.
Conversation becomes performance art, and part of the pleasure of watching this peerless cast is the delight its characters take in listening to the others riffing. What they say is often sad and hilarious, angry and resigned in a single breath. And though there’s not a white person in the show — and very little polemical speechifying — you come to see this emotional complexity as a specific response to a white man’s world that thwarts these men at every turn.
“Time go along and it come around,” says Doub. Though “Jitney” takes place nearly 40 years ago, it feels even more topically resonant than the first (and last) time I saw it, in Marion McClinton’s fine 2000 production for Second Stage Theater.
That many of the societal problems faced by its characters remain almost exactly the same is shaming and sobering. Yet their collective voice is joyfully intoxicating. “Jitney” is a lament that has the affirmative ring of celebration.