Good morning. I don’t expect everyone is going to join me, but if you’re up for a delicious, slightly sporty breakfast tomorrow morning, you might consider making some anchovy butter tonight.
You don’t need a recipe. Just take a stick of unsalted butter, and let it soften on the counter while you assemble the other ingredients: a tin of anchovies, some garlic cloves, a shake or two of smoked or regular paprika, a wee splash of lemon juice, and maybe, but probably not, some salt. Rinse and mince the little fish, mince the garlic, and fork everything together into the butter to taste.
Make sure whatever you do, even if it’s to omit the anchovies entirely and just have eggs with plain toast, that you spread the butter “wall to wall.” That is a vernacular phrase of the chef Gabrielle Hamilton, used at her restaurant Prune in New York. It means to cover the entire surface of the bread from edge to edge – an important step in buttering, one that is too often shirked. Since Gabrielle is now a writing colleague, contributing to The New York Times Magazine as an “Eat” columnist, we’re pleased to bring it into our stylebook.
Why, here’s her latest article now: a paean to the joys of homemade steak tartare and an accompanying dish of crisp, sweet-salty pommes Anna!
We’ve got other great new recipes up on Cooking. Melissa Clark has a terrific new one for farro with roasted squash, feta and mint that’s super adaptable in addition to being easy to make and delicious to eat.
Or join us in the wayback machine, and try these recently rejuvenated recipes for Italian pot roast and penne with roasted garlic, pancetta and arugula.
Thousands and thousands more recipes are available for your delectation on Cooking. Go look through them and, if you something strikes your fancy, save the recipe to your recipe box. Then cook! You can rate the recipes with stars and put notes on them if you’ve discovered a fiddle or substituted an ingredient.
And if you run into trouble, either with the recipes or the technology that supports them, please ask for help. We’re standing by at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Now, here’s what the great journalist Jonathan Landman used to call a true fact. I’m running a high fever and sweating into my keyboard, my thoughts beginning to race and jumble against a dull ache in my shoulders. It’s time for chicken soup, a fistful of Tylenol PM and a marathon of “Nobel,” on Netflix. See you on Friday.