President Trump signed an executive order on Monday requiring that with every new federal regulation proposed, two must be revoked.
(SOUNDBITE) (English) U.S. PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP, IN AN EXCHANGE WITH OWNERS OF SMALL BUSINESS, SAYING: TRUMP: “So, this is small business and this is regulation and this will be the largest ever cut, by far, in terms of regulation. These folks are small business owners and they’re great people. They have been representative of the community, the small business community. If you have a regulation you want, number one, we’re not going to approve it because it has already been approved, probably, in 17 different forms. But if we do, the only way you have a chance is we have to knock out two regulations for every new regulation. So, if there’s a new regulation, they have to knock out two. But it goes far beyond that. We’re cutting regulations massively for small business, and for large business but they’re different. And, that’s what this is about today.  There will be regulation; there will be control. But it will be a normalized control where you can open your business and expand your business very easily and that is what our country has been all about.
WASHINGTON — President Trump on Monday reiterated his intention to roll back Dodd-Frank financial regulations enacted to prevent another financial crisis, telling reporters that he soon planned to do “a big number” on the 2010 law.
During the 2016 campaign, Mr. Trump had pledged to “dismantle” Dodd-Frank, passed when Democrats controlled the White House and Congress, without specifying the actions he planned to take. He has not announced his timetable for carrying through on that pledge as president.
Mr. Trump’s pick for secretary of the Treasury, Stephen T. Mnuchin, a hedge fund manager, also has promised to “kill” parts of the law, including the so-called Volcker rule restricting banks from making certain kinds of speculative investments of the kind that led to the 2008-9 global economic crisis.
“Dodd-Frank is a disaster,” the president said during a 10-minute session with reporters as he signed an executive order slashing government regulations.
Before meeting with business leaders late Monday morning, Mr. Trump again took credit for the performance of the stock market, which recently crossed the 20,000 milestone for the first time.
Perhaps the most important section of Dodd-Frank is the requirement that banks undergo periodic stress tests to monitor liquidity and their ability to withstand a financial shock akin to the collapse of the housing market in 2008.
In response to the law, banks have curbed parts of their businesses, including proprietary trading, and focused more on raising revenue through consumer services.
The financial services industry spent millions seeking to prevent Dodd-Frank from going into effect, but some in the industry have cautioned against creating new upheaval by scrapping it completely.
“We’re not asking for wholesale throwing out Dodd-Frank,” Jamie Dimon, the chief executive of J.P. Morgan Chase, said at a financial services conference in December.
The executive order that Mr. Trump signed on Monday requires federal agencies to identify two regulations they plan to cut whenever requesting a new one — a requirement that opponents have called arbitrary, but one that fulfills an early campaign pledge.