KOBLENZ, Germany — Marine Le Pen wasted no time in proclaiming 2017 as the year of far-right awakening in Europe.
“We are living through the end of one world, and the birth of another,” Ms. Le Pen, the leader of France’s National Front party, told a cheering gathering of members of European right-wing parties on Saturday in this Rhine River city to chart a joint path to success in elections in the Netherlands, France and Germany this year.
The triumph of anti-Europeans in Britain and Donald J. Trump in the United States has galvanized the Continent’s far-right parties, who are making appeals to disillusioned voters already bitter over social inequality, loss of sovereignty and waves of migration. And, amid suspicions that Russia is trying to destabilize the Continent by allying with the right, Europe’s mainstream parties may be forced into awkward or ineffectual coalitions, to preserve their power and keep extremists out.
Geert Wilders, a Dutch nationalist whose anti-Islam Dutch Freedom Party currently leads the polls for spring elections in the Netherlands, was emblematic of the confidence of the far-right at the meeting.
“The genie will not go back into the bottle again, whether you like it or not,” he said.
Mr. Wilders and other far-right leaders have successfully tapped in to a sense of lost identity across Europe that has been heightened by the arrival of waves of migrants, the effects of a globalized and digitized economy and perceptions that attempts are being made by institutions like the European Union to impose uniformity on diverse European cultures.
Patrick Bauer, 22, a member of Alternative for Germany, a far-right party that has benefited from widespread opposition to Chancellor Angela Merkel’s decision to allow in some one million mostly Muslim migrants in 2015, said he was drawn to the meeting mostly by Mr. Wilders.
The Dutchman epitomizes the choice and variety that should be available in Europe, without citizens being forced to accept policies and economic models fashioned by pan-European institutions, said Mr. Bauer, who sits on a local council in the Taunus hills north of Frankfurt.
He described himself as a Christian strongly opposed to abortion and worried by what he sees as the advance of Islam — “up to 80 percent of students at some schools in Frankfurt,” he said.
The German chancellor’s name was loudly booed and chants of “Merkel must go!” erupted several times during the two-hour morning rally, attended by hundreds of supporters.
The gathering Saturday was notable for bringing together the two women, Ms. Le Pen and Frauke Petry, joint leader of the Alternative for Germany, who hope to lead the right’s advance in France and Germany, the traditional motors of the now weakened 28-nation European Union, which Britain voted last June to leave.
The task of negotiating a British exit has fallen to a third woman, Prime Minister Theresa May. All three are now arrayed against Ms. Merkel, who has been in power 11 years but may fail in her bid for a fourth term in September elections.
Ms. Le Pen, speaking in French at her first appearance at a rally in Germany, was a forceful presence at the gathering, making an impassioned speech to loud applause.
While she gave a quieter speech than her French counterpart, Ms. Petry, a fluent English speaker who, like Ms. Merkel, was raised in the former East Germany and holds a doctorate in science, also called for a new model for the Continent.
“We are the ones who must take our fate into our own hands,” Ms. Petry said. “Something has happened and we are here to create an alternative for Europe,” she later told reporters.
Another Alternative for Germany leader, Björn Höcke, who is the party leader in the eastern state of Thüringen, caused an uproar in Germany last week by attacking Holocaust atonement and denouncing the central Berlin monument to millions of murdered European Jews, and also monuments to gays, disabled people and Sinti and Roma murdered by the Nazis.
Ms. Petry has voiced disapproval of Mr. Höcke and the sentiments he voiced.
In the German news media, outrage over Mr. Höcke’s comments competed on Saturday with Mr. Trump’s inaugural speech, widely seen as a belligerent challenge to Europe.
Commentators said that Europe could survive only by sticking together to preserve exactly the unity and the policies — such as a shared euro currency — criticized by the far-right leaders.
