HONG KONG — Chief Justice Zhou Qiang, China’s top judicial official, is hardly a radical reformer. But to liberal-minded watchers of the country’s evolving court system, he has nonetheless been an encouraging figure.
In recent years, he has spearheaded an effort to make China’s judiciary, which is subordinate to the ruling Communist Party, more professional. He has pushed to weed out poorly trained judges and to raise the pay of those with formal legal training, which often includes a heavy dose of Western jurisprudence.
So when the chief justice used warlike language on Saturday to denounce the idea of an independent judiciary and other cherished liberal principles, warning judges not to fall into the “trap” of “Western” ideology, observers in China and abroad were shocked and dismayed.
The speech was widely seen as a bow to the strict political climate that President Xi Jinping has established in China, as a major Communist Party conclave approaches this year. Though Mr. Xi won plaudits this week at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, for his support of economic globalization, at home he has overseen a yearslong program to constrain civil society, promote adulation for Mao Zedong, stamp out support for an independent press and sharply limit speech on the internet.
One Chinese scholar who spoke out was He Weifang, a law professor at Peking University, whose own online post criticizing the remarks was removed from the internet. In the post, he said it was wrong to call judicial independence a Western concept, citing the example of Bao Zheng, a famous Chinese judge who lived about 1,000 years ago and was celebrated for his just decisions.
In a telephone interview on Tuesday, Mr. He said Mr. Xi’s comments at a Communist Party work conference two days before the chief justice’s speech had made it clear that he was demanding obedience from the judiciary.
Mr. Cohen said that remark was consistent with Mr. Xi’s effort to whitewash the image of Mao, Communist China’s first leader. Since 2013, the Communist Party has spoken out against the notion of “historical nihilism,” which it takes to mean any denigration of the historical image of Mao and the party, including discussion of Mao’s disastrous economic policies in the late 1950s or his chaotic Cultural Revolution.
In recent weeks, the government has cracked down harshly on some officials who made negative remarks about Mao. In the northern province of Hebei, a deputy director of the Press, Publication, Radio, Film and Television Bureau in the provincial capital was fired after making what were deemed “erroneous comments” on his social media account, which has since been deleted. Overseas Chinese reported that the comments were critical of Mao.
While his position is prestigious, Chief Justice Zhou is not a member of the Communist Party’s ruling Politburo. Before Mr. Xi’s ascension to power in 2012, the jurist was a rising star, serving as the top official in Hunan, Mao’s home province. He was frequently mentioned as a possible candidate for a top leadership position.
Now he is showing his fealty to Mr. Xi, Mr. Cohen, the director of the U.S.-Asia Law Institute, said in a telephone interview. He said the speech appeared to be a bid for political survival before the Communist Party Congress set for late this year, which will determine who serves directly under Mr. Xi for the next five years.
