Judging by the reaction to a “Saturday Night Live” writer’s tweet, one norm of American politics remains unshakable: The children of presidents should be off limits.
It is a rule that has been cited — and sometimes broken — through a succession of first daughters. Now, for the first time in more than half a century, the president has a young son.
Shortly after President Trump took the oath of office on Friday, a comedy writer for “S.N.L.,” Katie Rich, tweeted what was intended to be a joke about Barron Trump and school shootings, prompting a barrage of criticism. Within a few hours, Ms. Rich deleted the tweet and locked down her Twitter account, but it remained a topic on social media all weekend.
By Monday afternoon, it was announced that Ms. Rich had been suspended indefinitely. She posted an apology on her Twitter account, which was again made public.
One of the most prominent reactions to the controversy came on Sunday from a former first daughter, Chelsea Clinton, who wrote a Facebook post imploring that Barron, 10, be left alone.
“Barron Trump deserves the chance every child does — to be a kid,” Ms. Clinton wrote in a post that received more than 105,000 reactions and was shared close to 9,000 times, as others recirculated her message on their own feeds.
“Standing up for every kid also means opposing POTUS policies that hurt kids,” Ms. Clinton added.
It was a rare point of agreement across the political spectrum on social media over a weekend during which hundreds of thousands of people marched to protest the new administration.
Trump supporters were particularly upset. Multiple online petitions called on NBC to fire Ms. Rich and had amassed more than 80,000 signatures by Monday morning. Mr. Trump has been quick to criticize “S.N.L.” in the past, but this time, the White House restrained itself to an unsigned comment on Tuesday from its press office that did not directly acknowledge the dust-up.
Though Barron will be in New York for at least several more months to finish his school year, he will be the first young boy in the White House since John F. Kennedy Jr. John-John, as he was known then, and his older sister, Caroline, a toddler, were treated gently, and one of his most famous moments was when he was photographed playing under his father’s desk.
That sort of warm public moment is more typical of White House children, often witnessed with delight by a president’s supporters. Barron himself drew positive attention Friday when he was caught on video playing peek-a-boo with his nephew after the inauguration.
During her father’s campaign, Ms. Clinton was also satirized on the show, and at 12, while she was living in the White House, her looks were mocked by the conservative pundit Rush Limbaugh.
The Bush twins, Jenna and Barbara, were 19 when George W. Bush was elected, but they too inspired late-night comedy for some of their behavior in college. And in 2014, Elizabeth Lauten, a spokeswoman for a Tennessee congressman, apologized and resigned after criticizing Malia and Sasha Obama on Facebook.
The era of social media has only cranked up the volume. It has also added risks for comedy writers used to trying out their material with followers.
Ms. Rich, who got her start in improv and began writing for “Saturday Night Live” in 2013, described her “S.N.L.” job in a 2015 interview with The Chicago Tribune, saying that she worked on about 200 jokes a week, a tiny fraction of which made it onto the show. She said she preferred working in the anonymity of the writer’s room to subjecting herself to the spotlight as a woman.
