Donald J. Trump propelled cable news to record ratings through a year-and-a-half campaign cycle, and now he is doing the same from the White House.
Though television executives were bracing for a ratings collapse after an election year of extraordinary viewership — CNN’s chief executive, Jeff Zucker said he expected to lose a quarter of his audience — ratings are going only one direction in President Trump’s first 11 days on the job: up.
The greatest beneficiary of the Trump era so far has been — no surprise — Fox News, which continues to have a stranglehold on the No. 1 spot among cable news networks for the 15th consecutive year.
Fox averaged 2.8 million viewers in prime time in January, up 17 percent compared with its audience in 2016. Though the network recently lost the anchor Megyn Kelly to NBC, her successor at 9 p.m., Tucker Carlson, has seen a huge ratings surge.
Mr. Carlson, who started on Jan. 9, finished the month with an average of 784,000 viewers in the 25-to-54-year-old demographic, making him No. 1 in cable news with the group most important to advertisers. Bill O’Reilly, once again, had the No. 1 show in total viewers for the month, averaging nearly 4 million viewers a night.
The absence of debates, primaries and town halls will make this year a long slog for cable news channels hoping to maintain the highs of 2016. But Mr. Trump’s frenetic first week and a half as president has given the networks some momentum. In total day audience, Fox News, MSNBC and CNN have seen jumps of 30 percent, 7 percent and 5 percent in January versus their averages last year, according to Nielsen.
MSNBC nearly tied CNN in total viewers in prime time, with an average of about 1.2 million viewers. Though Fox and MSNBC both had gains in prime time for the month versus last year, CNN slipped 7 percent in viewers compared with its 2016 averages. CNN did outpace MSNBC among the coveted 25-to-54 demographic, and likewise had a strong lead throughout the day, averaging 794,000 viewers compared to MSNBC’s 647,000. Fox News averaged 1.8 million for the day in January.