For years, Rudy Shepherd has made watercolor paintings to humanize people in the news.
Five days after the massacre of nine black parishioners in Charleston, S.C., in 2015, the artist Rudy Shepherd painted 9-inch-by-12-inch portraits of two of the victims, Myra Thompson and Tywanza Sanders, and posted them to Instagram.
He made these watercolors quickly, relying on images from the news media, and spending two or three hours on each one. They racked up a modest number of likes and a few admiring comments.
Over the next week, Mr. Shepherd, who lives in Manhattan, made portraits of all the other victims: the Rev. Clementa C. Pinckney, Ethel Lee Lance, the Rev. Sharonda Coleman-Singleton, the Rev. Daniel Lee Simmons Sr., Susie Jackson, Cynthia Hurd and the Rev. DePayne Middleton-Doctor.
One goal of these paintings, Mr. Shepherd said in an interview, was to reclaim the humanity of those individuals, to depict who they were beyond that day. Too often the individual disappears amid the frenzy of reporting about a high-profile crime, he said.
He waited about a week, feeling hesitant, before he painted a portrait of their killer, Dylann Roof, who was sentenced to death last week.
All of these works are part of a decade-long series, numbering in the hundreds, portraying people in the news — including Michael Brown, who died after being shot by a police officer in Ferguson, Mo.; Sandra Bland, who died during police custody in Texas; as well as pop-culture heroes like the Beatles producer George Martin.
The exhibition was conceived to address the Black Lives Matter movement, Ms. Hunt said, and to connect that moment, represented here by several large prints from Devin Allen’s 2015 series of photographs of demonstrations in Baltimore, with some of the history embodied in the museum’s collection. Deborah Grant’s “56 Blows” recalls the beating of Rodney King by the police in Los Angeles. And there are text-based prints by Kerry James Marshall, showing famed cries of resistance: “By any means necessary” and “Burn baby burn” among them.
Mr. Shepherd’s works, by comparison, are far more tender. His subjects smile with confidence at the viewer. Another distinction is the way they are displayed at the museum. Mr. Shepherd’s works are being shown in series, with a different portrait each week for the duration of the show, which runs through March 5. Last week, Myra Thompson’s image was on view. Two more Charleston portraits will follow: the Rev. DePayne Middleton-Doctor and the Rev. Daniel Lee Simmons Sr.
But Mr. Shepherd’s portraits, mounted on their own in a corner, offer an especially intimate connection with these individuals whose names and faces can blur amid the daily churn of news.
“I wanted to create an altarlike space so that you could kind of quietly approach,” Ms. Hunt said.
He tacked up the cover of The Post in his studio, and eventually made the first of his media portraits. The earliest examples often featured people accused of crimes, but he soon expanded, focusing on victims, perpetrators and others caught up in the news.
Mr. Shepherd said that his project would be simplistic if he held back from depicting bad people — even an unrepentant killer like Mr. Roof.
