Our guide to pop and rock shows and the best of live jazz.
CRX at the Knitting Factory (Jan. 17, 8 p.m.). The singer and guitarist Nick Valensi’s full-time band, the Strokes, is on a temporary break, so he has recently been fronting this quartet, whose debut album, “New Skin,” was produced by Josh Homme of Queens of the Stone Age. Where the Strokes skew more toward the classic-rock formalism of the Rolling Stones or the Beatles, Mr. Valensi’s new pursuit looks to slick ’80s New Wave and power-pop bands like the Cars and Cheap Trick, with catchy, fist-pumping results. With These People.
ALEJANDRO ESCOVEDO at City Winery (Jan. 19, 8 p.m.). One of rock’s best unheralded songwriters, Mr. Escovedo began his music career in the 1970s as a member of the San Francisco punk group the Nuns before veering into roots and alt-country terrain as a solo artist. His career was sidelined when he collapsed onstage in 2003. (Mr. Escovedo learned he had hepatitis C in 1996.) Since recovering, he has rebounded to make some of his strongest work yet, including the 2016 collection “Burn Something Beautiful,” which was partly inspired by his experiences surviving a hurricane while honeymooning in Mexico.
CHERRY GLAZERR at the Bowery Ballroom (Jan. 18, 9 p.m.). Fuzz-bomb guitar riffs, thrumming bass grooves, shambolic drum beats: On the surface, Cherry Glazerr might appear to be your average indie-rock band. But the group’s secret weapon is its singer and guitarist, Clementine Creevy. With vocals that can shift from an angelic coo to a shrieking wail, she is as deft at spinning tales about Ken Kesey’s “One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest” as she is at dissing Rob Kardashian. Listen for more yarns at this performance.
JAMES MURPHY at Output (Jan. 14, 10 p.m.). Before breaking out in the early part of the last decade with his disco-punk group LCD Soundsystem, the Brooklyn-based artist James Murphy earned a reputation as a vinyl-loving aesthete who would D.J. epic, late-night dance parties for tastemakers and celebrities alike. Mr. Murphy’s band, which went on hiatus in 2011 only to announce its reunion in 2016, has become a top-billed act at summer music festivals, consistently proving itself to be one of the best live bands in America. But Mr. Murphy, who is also a founder of DFA Records, occasionally returns to his roots for D.J. sets. For this party, nothing is off limits: Not many can successfully weave the Beatles, the Stooges, Donna Summer and the disco group the Peech Boys into a killer playlist. With Eric Duncan.
SAD13 at C’mon Everybody (Jan. 14, 7 p.m.). The singer and songwriter Sadie Dupuis is best known as the leader of the indie-punk band Speedy Ortiz, but last year she struck out on her own with a side project, Sad13, that showed off her gifts for creating hook-wise, synth-powered art pop. Ms. Dupuis has described drawing inspiration from ’90s pop groups like the Spice Girls and Salt-N-Pepa, yet her lyrics contain messages of female empowerment and sexual consent that feel very of the moment. She is performing the music from her debut solo album, “Slugger,” on her first-ever tour; this benefit concert will raise money for the Southern Poverty Law Center. With Patio, Painted Zeros and Jackal Onasis.
JILL SOBULE at Joe’s Pub (Jan. 17, 7 p.m.). In the mid-1990s, Ms. Sobule was part a class of female singer-songwriters like Alanis Morissette, Meredith Brooks and Fiona Apple who scored Top 40 success and heavy MTV airplay thanks to their fiercely catchy and proudly feminist pop. Her hits, including “Supermodel” and “I Kissed a Girl,” fused sugary melodies and her bright, girlish vocals with storytelling that was brilliantly subversive for mainstream audiences. Although Ms. Sobule has not matched that commercial success in recent years, she remains just as restlessly creative: For her 2014 album, “Dottie’s Charms,” she asked literary stars like Jonathan Lethem, Luc Sante and David Hajdu to contribute lyrics that were inspired by a vintage bracelet she received as a birthday gift.
BILL CHARLAP at Jazz Standard (through Jan. 15, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). On his unerringly tasteful recent album “Notes From New York,” Mr. Charlap, a pianist, leads his longtime trio in a springtime stroll through the American songbook. He has been working in an array of settings this week, including an intuitive piano duo with Renee Rosnes, his wife, on Jan. 12 and 13. His fine trio, with the bassist Peter Washington and the drummer Kenny Washington, will play the rest of the run — joined on Jan. 14 by two illustrious guests, the saxophonist Houston Person and the singer and pianist Freddy Cole.
STEVE DAVIS SEXTET at Smoke (Jan. 13-15; 7, 9 and 10:30 p.m.). Mr. Davis is a trombonist with a full tone and a strong foothold in the hard-bop tradition. His most recent album, “Say When,” is a tribute to one of his heroes on the instrument, J. J. Johnson. His next album will be recorded right after this engagement, with the same excellent coalition of peers who will perform here: Steve Wilson and Jimmy Green on saxophones, Larry Willis on piano, Peter Washington on bass and Lewis Nash on drums.
JOEY DEFRANCESCO & THE PEOPLE at Birdland (Jan. 17-21, 8:30 and 11 p.m.). A Hammond B-3 organist with a hurtling and effervescent style, Mr. DeFrancesco has a soon-to-be-released album, “Project Freedom,” that he is promoting with these performances. He appears here with the album’s rhythm section, Dan Wilson on guitar and Jason Brown on drums, and a commanding young alto saxophonist, Troy Roberts.
GILAD HEKSELMAN QUARTET at Jazz Standard (Jan. 17, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). The Israeli guitarist Gilad Hekselman has a vision of modern jazz that’s harmonically fluent but not averse to simple melody or gentle, approachable effect. He has had a fruitful affiliation with the tenor saxophonist Mark Turner; for this one-nighter he will team up with another prominent voice on that instrument, Chris Potter. The rhythm section has Rick Rosato on bass and Jonathan Pinson on drums.
CHRISTIAN MCBRIDE at the Village Vanguard (through Jan. 15 and Jan. 17-22, 8:30 and 10:30 p.m.). Mr. McBride, the bassist, bandleader and composer, holds fast to a mood of generous bonhomie with his trio, which recently released a live album recorded in this room. That group, now with Christian Sands on piano and Jerome Jennings on drums, closes out its engagement this weekend. Then, from Jan. 17 through 22, Mr. McBride will lead a groove-minded quartet, informally called New Jawn McBride, featuring the trumpeter Josh Evans, the saxophonist Marcus Strickland and the drummer Nasheet Waits.
NICHOLAS PAYTON: AFRO-CARIBBEAN MIXTAPE at Dizzy’s Club Coca-Cola (Jan. 12-15, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Mr. Payton, a trumpeter, keyboardist and (on occasion) vocalist with a taste for soulful postbop and moody funk, recently unveiled this band in New Orleans, his hometown. Along with the bassist Vicente Archer, the drummer Joe Dyson and the percussionist Daniel Sadownick, it features Lady Fingaz, a hip-hop D.J. who has logged some serious time in New Orleans, though she now lives in San Francisco.
