WASHINGTON — President Trump said last week that he would form a “very strong opinion” about how the United States should respond to the brutal killing of Jamal Khashoggi, the Saudi journalist, after Saudi Arabia presented the results of its own investigation of the crime.
But when the Saudis delivered that report on Thursday, Mr. Trump reacted with silence.
Instead, the Trump administration, as expected, imposed sanctions on 17 Saudis accused of involvement in the killing. That came hours after Saudi Arabia’s public prosecutor announced that he would seek the death penalty for five people he said took part in Mr. Khashoggi’s killing in the Saudi Consulate in Istanbul on Oct. 2.
A senior administration official said the United States was unlikely to take further steps against Saudi leaders, suggesting that both sides hope to put the episode behind them.
The report also contradicted previous statements by White House and Saudi officials about the events leading up to Mr. Khashoggi’s death. While Mr. Trump had no comment on the discrepancies, Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin, in announcing the sanctions, suggested there might still be new details to unearth about the killing.
The sanctions did little to quell passions on Capitol Hill, where Democrats and Republicans called on the White House to take much tougher action against Saudi Arabia, including halting military sales and forcing the kingdom to wind down a ruinous civil war in neighboring Yemen.
Mr. Paul said he believed that Prince Mohammed most likely directed the attack on Mr. Khashoggi, a charge echoed by Senator Christopher S. Murphy, Democrat of Connecticut. “We can’t blindly accept the results of a Saudi-led inquiry to determine who to hold responsible,” Mr. Murphy said.
The list of Saudis, who were punished under the Global Magnitsky Act, contained one noteworthy name but omitted another.
The Treasury Department named Saud al-Qahtani, a senior official close to Prince Mohammed, saying he was “part of the planning and execution of the operation that led to the killing of Mr. Khashoggi.” Mr. Qahtani directed media operations for the Saudi royal court and was the strategist behind the online harassment of the kingdom’s critics, including Mr. Khashoggi, according to American and Saudi officials.
But the list did not include Ahmed al-Assiri, a former deputy head of the Saudi intelligence service. Mr. Assiri, also a confidant of Prince Mohammed, was believed to have masterminded the operation to confront Mr. Khashoggi in the consulate in Istanbul. He was cashiered from his post and viewed as the most prominent fall guy for the operation.
But Mr. Assiri has his own ties to the Trump administration. In September, he met with senior officials, including Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, in New York on the sidelines of a conference organized by the group United Against Nuclear Iran.
The Treasury Department also imposed sanctions on Maher Mutreb, a subordinate of Mr. Qahtani, who it said coordinated and carried out the killing. Mr. Mutreb, another close associate of Prince Mohammed, has been photographed with the prince on foreign trips.
The United States named 14 other officials it said took part in the operation, as well as Mohammad al-Otaibi, the consul general in Istanbul at the time of the killing. Saudi Arabia has not said Mr. Otaibi was involved, so his inclusion on the list, experts said, suggested that American intelligence officials might have picked up additional information about his role.
The sanctions will freeze financial assets of the targets, if they are under United States jurisdiction, and prohibit transactions with them. It also prevents the Saudis from traveling to the United States — something that experts said was unlikely in any event.
American officials were at a loss to explain Saudi Arabia’s constantly shifting narrative of the attack. Two weeks ago, Mr. Pompeo said that “the Saudis have acknowledged that this was a premeditated attack.” But the latest Saudi explanation characterized it as a rendition operation gone bad — reverting to one of its earlier explanations of what happened.
Mr. Khashoggi’s employer, The Washington Post, dismissed the latest Saudi explanation, as well as the administration’s sanctions, as part of a continuing cover-up of the prince’s role.
“From the start, the Saudi ‘investigation’ has been an effort to shield those ultimately responsible for this heinous crime when there is every reason to believe that it was authorized at the highest levels of the Saudi government,” said Fred Ryan, The Post’s publisher.
While Mr. Trump seemed unlikely to hold Prince Mohammed to account, some lawmakers and experts said the United States was determined to use the furor over the killing as leverage to force the prince to bring the war in Yemen to a swifter end. The White House has already suspended American air-to-air refueling of Saudi planes.
Mr. Bolton recently met in Abu Dhabi with Crown Prince Mohammed bin Zayed of the United Arab Emirates. Analysts said they believed Mr. Bolton urged the prince, a respected senior figure in the region, to use his influence with Prince Mohammed to bring the war in Yemen to a close.
“This is a more symbolic, dramatic break than we’ve seen before — and it seems to be having some effect,” said Bruce O. Riedel, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution.
