Mississippi has elected only Republicans to the Senate for the last three decades. But a controversial remark by a Republican incumbent, Cindy Hyde-Smith, could flip one of the state’s seats. Here’s how we got here.
Republicans have won every Senate race in Mississippi for the last three decades. “Voters in Mississippi will head back to the polls Nov. 27 for a runoff.” But this year’s special election has some in the G.O.P. worried, after this controversial comment made by Republican candidate Cindy Hyde-Smith was caught on video. The remark was particularly tone deaf in Mississippi, where more than 600 people were killed in lynchings from 1877 to 1950 — more than any other state. Hyde-Smith, the state’s former agricultural and commerce commissioner, is in a runoff with Democrat Mike Espy after no one received more than 50 percent of the vote on Election Day. Espy was the agriculture secretary in the Clinton administration. And, if elected, would be the first black senator from the state since Reconstruction. He was running an underdog campaign in conservative Mississippi. But Hyde-Smith’s comments put the trajectory of the race in doubt. Facing an uproar over her remarks, she retreated from the campaign and dodged reporters’ questions. “We put out a statement yesterday and we stand by that statement. We put out the statement yesterday and it’s available. And we stand by that statement. I put out a statement yesterday. I put out a statement yesterday. We did address it yesterday. And that’s all I’m going to say about it.” But after her poll numbers dropped and companies began withdrawing contributions, she was forced to address them at a debate. “For anyone that was offended for my — by my comments, I certainly apologize. There was no ill will, no intent whatsoever in my statements. I also recognize that this comment was twisted and it was turned into a weapon to be used against me.” Espy responded this way: “Well, no one twisted your comments because your comments were live, you know, it came out of your mouth. And I don’t know what’s in your heart, but we all know what came out of your mouth.” The controversy appears to have emboldened Democrats. Espy picked up an endorsement from former Vide President Joe Biden, and Senators Cory Booker and Kamala Harris have stumped for him in Mississippi. “I think that people are fed up with and really just tired of supposed leaders who lead by trying to sow hate and division among us.” But Hyde-Smith still has some big advantages over her opponent. She’s been endorsed by President Trump, who won Mississippi by nearly 18 points in 2016. “And a vote for Cindy is a vote for me.” Trump’s support could help Hyde-Smith shore up conservative white voters, which may be enough to secure victory in solidly red Mississippi.
Mr. Espy, who is black, and Ms. Hyde-Smith, who is white, are locked in a runoff after no candidate in a four-person race received more than 50 percent of the vote on Election Day. Ms. Hyde-Smith has made her ardent support of President Trump, who endorsed her, central to her campaign in a state that the president carried by nearly 18 points in 2016.
No other state has such a dark history of public hangings, particularly lynchings of black people. More than 600 were killed in lynchings in Mississippi from 1877 to 1950, more than in any other state. Many lynchings were not documented, most likely making the actual total much higher, according to scholars.
The authorities claimed at the time that some of the killings were legal. Suspects were convicted and sentenced to death by hanging — and the public came out in droves to watch. In other cases, African-Americans were accused of crimes, chased down and murdered in extrajudicial killings.
“Hyde-Smith’s decision to joke about ‘hanging,’ when the history of African-Americans is marred by countless incidents of this barbarous act, is sick,” Mr. Johnson said in a statement.
And other groups, including the Black Voters Matter Fund, are mobilizing in the state to help Mr. Espy. LaTosha Brown, that organization’s co-founder, said that Ms. Hyde-Smith’s remarks showed that she either was ignorant of the phrase’s negative connotations or uttered it as a racist dog whistle. No matter the explanation, Ms. Brown said, the comments should disqualify someone running for Senate.
Ms. Hyde-Smith, who was appointed to the Senate after Senator Thad Cochran retired for health reasons earlier this year, said on Sunday that it was “ridiculous” to suggest there was anything negative about her remarks.
On Monday, she refused to answer questions about her comments at a news conference with Mississippi’s Republican governor, Phil Bryant.
Paul Reed, a University of Alabama professor who specializes in the sociolinguistic history of Southern and Appalachian English varieties, said that the phrase first appeared in written works in the United States in the mid-1800s and that its usage peaked during the civil rights era in the 20th century.
He said that the phrase had indeed once been used as an expression of regard. People would use the idiom to convey that they thought so highly of someone they would attend something as distasteful as a public hanging with him.
But given its clear negative connotation, Mr. Reed said, most people would not dare to use the phrase in 2018.
Michael Pfeifer, a history professor at John Jay College of Criminal Justice who has written several books about lynching in the United States, said the comment must be interpreted within the context of Mississippi’s history of lynching.
Ms. Hyde-Smith made the comment while on a campaign stop in Lee County, where at least two people were killed in recorded lynchings. 