WASHINGTON — When a former C.I.A. officer was detained overseas recently, Montenegrin officials thought the answer to a question that their country has been obsessed with for two years might be within reach: How did Russia try to topple Montenegro’s government?
On the eve of a parliamentary vote in 2016 viewed as a referendum on membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the Montenegrin police broke up what they claimed was a Russian-backed coup. The investigation and court proceedings over the ensuing two years have riveted the country, including the sensational, and head-scratching, allegation that the coup backers recruited a former C.I.A. officer to help ferry its plotters out of Montenegro.
The former officer, Joseph Assad, insisted it was all a huge mistake. He denied knowing of any Russian involvement in Montenegro and said he was only advising a friend hired as the opposition’s campaign adviser.
The Montenegrin controversy is a prime example of the sort of mistrust, suspicion and, sometimes, paranoia, that has arisen in the wake of Russia’s campaigns to meddle in European and American elections. Current and former Montenegrin opposition officials argued that government officials’ paranoia has them seeing Russians hiding behind every tree — and prompted them to wrongly tie Mr. Assad to the alleged plot.
American and Montenegrin intelligence agencies believe that the 2016 coup plot was real, and that Russia supported the Serbian nationalists who were arrested and accused of preparing the operation. Polish and British officials have helped identify two members of Russia’s military intelligence branch, formerly called the G.R.U., who they say were in Serbia to organize the coup.
Officials acknowledge that many questions remain unanswered about the Kremlin’s control over the operation and who directed Russian intelligence officers to try to topple a pro-NATO government. Montenegrin officials believe Mr. Assad can shed light on Russian funding for the opposition campaign and have sought to have him answer prosecutors’ questions.
Prosecutors believe Mr. Assad’s real job in Montenegro was to help coup plotters flee the country after assassinating the country’s prime minister, according to senior Montenegrin officials. He was supposed to use surveillance equipment smuggled into Montenegro from neighboring Bosnia and from Albania to help the plotters avoid the police as they escaped across the border to Serbia.
But the problem with that allegation, according to Mr. Assad and his allies, is its basic premise. Why, they ask, would a former C.I.A. officer help Russia and its partners?
The 2016 election in Montenegro was a closely fought battle. Led by Milo Djukanovic, the prime minister at the time, the ruling party promised it would deliver membership in NATO. Along with it, the party vowed, would come foreign investment to aid the economy of the former Yugoslav republic, which has been highly dependent on Russian tourism.
Opposition parties, unified as the Democratic Front, campaigned on an anti-corruption platform. Some pro-Russian, anti-NATO leaders also promised a vote on alliance membership if they were elected.
The campaign was unlike any Montenegro had seen since it gained independence from Serbia in 2006, in part because the opposition hired Aron Shaviv, a British-Israeli campaign adviser who crafted slick, and amusing, advertisements that poked fun of Mr. Djukanovic’s ruling party.
Mr. Shaviv has said his work drew the attention of security services, who delayed him at the airport, followed him to shoots and harassed him and his team. Montenegrin officials deny his accusations.
Nonetheless, the unwanted attention prompted Mr. Shaviv to bring in Mr. Assad as a consultant.
An Egyptian Christian raised in Egypt and Lebanon, Mr. Assad moved to the United States in 1990 and became an American citizen. He, along with his wife, joined the C.I.A. in 1999.
After leaving the C.I.A., Mr. Assad became a private security consultant and drew international attention when in 2015 he helped organize the rescue of 149 Iraqi Christians from territory in Iraq controlled by the Islamic State, work that was chronicled by ABC News.
Before taking the Montenegro job, Mr. Assad discussed the work with another former C.I.A. officer, Brian Scott, who helps lead several Florida-based security firms.
A contact in Malta warned Mr. Scott that the opposition coalition was connected to Russia. Mr. Scott passed that warning on to Mr. Assad, he testified during the Montenegrin judicial investigation.
Mr. Assad disputed Mr. Scott’s account and said he was never warned about possible Russian involvement. “In fact, if I had known that there were even credible allegations that the Russians were involved with the opposition, I would have never agreed to provide this personal security advice to Aron Shaviv,” the opposition adviser, Mr. Assad said.
American intelligence services were active in Montenegro two decades ago when it was united with Serbia, and the C.I.A. supported a State Department push in 2000 to help opposition leaders defeat President Slobodan Milosevic at the ballot box. But since then, the Balkans have not been a priority for American intelligence services.
Mr. Assad said he went to Montenegro once, to develop a contingency plan for Mr. Shaviv and one other colleague in case of Election Day violence. He denied that he used any surveillance equipment during his short stay.
On the morning of the parliamentary vote — Oct. 16, 2016 — Montenegrin security officials announced they had foiled a coup and arrested some 20 people, including Serbian nationalists, who planned to overthrow Mr. Djukanovic’s government.
Suspicion immediately turned to Russia. Britain, Poland and other allies began providing information about Russian intelligence operatives in Belgrade, Serbia, who may have been involved in orchestrating the coup.
Prosecutors eventually charged 14 people in connection with the coup, including two Russians, nine Serbs and three Montenegrins.
In June 2017, Montenegro joined NATO, becoming its 29th member. Since then, Moscow’s anti-Montenegro talk has cooled, and economic ties between the countries remain strong, with a steady flow of Russian tourists coming to the country’s Adriatic coast, said Srdan Darmanovic, the Montenegrin foreign minister.
But Russian meddling continues, including with intrusions in government computer systems and continued espionage in the country, officials said.
One Montenegrin official said investigators did not believe Mr. Assad was involved in plotting the coup, and they did not know how much detailed knowledge he had of the plan. But Mr. Assad’s alleged use of surveillance equipment to monitor the security services and work to develop an extraction plan could be prosecuted, Montenegrin officials said.
Mr. Assad denies he had anything to do with the alleged coup attempt or its planning. He said he was not aware of the coup when he left the country right before the election.
Prosecutors’ evidence of a coup is thin, others accused of involvement said. Milan Knezevic, head of the Democratic People’s Party, one of the three parties in the Democratic Front, has been indicted in connection with the alleged coup and faces up to 15 years in prison.
Mr. Assad faces up to 10 years in prison, but a senior Montenegrin official said the government did not want to detain a former C.I.A. officer. Instead, it just wants Mr. Assad to cooperate, hoping he can help clearly define Russia’s role in the alleged coup.
Mr. Assad was briefly detained in the United Arab Emirates in September at the request of Montenegro, according to his spokesman. But the U.A.E. counterterrorism judge who reviewed Mr. Assad’s detention ruled the allegations spurious, the spokesman said.
Mr. Assad will not go to Montenegro to answer questions. But his allies said he was willing to give a statement and submit to an interview with Montenegrin officials in the United States to answer questions.
Mr. Assad said he had done nothing wrong.
