The burdens and perils of the pedestal.
Well. Our picture of Sheryl Sandberg has just gotten a bit more complicated, has it not?
Until not that long ago, she was Sandberg the feminist icon. As chief operating officer of Facebook and author of “Lean In,” she encouraged women to belly up to the table, to know their worth, to march into negotiations with smiles on their faces and steel sheathing their nerves and eyes implacably trained on the C-suite. When her husband, David Goldberg, died in 2015, her inspirational appeal only grew, and she became an authority on personal growth as well. She openly shared her grief. She showed us how to talk to the bereft. In the book she co-wrote, “Option B,” she explained how to find meaning after loss and rebuild a broken self.
She was a feminist leader, corporate path-breaker and spiritual superempath all rolled into one. A Gloria Steinem-Amelia Earhart-Oprah Winfrey Thanksgiving turducken.
But now, we are seeing (not for the first time, but perhaps without the benefit of the full Photoshop experience?) Sandberg the shrewd, intensely political chief operating officer — a woman who, according to a recent story in The Times, worked to minimize findings that the Russians had taken up residence on Facebook in 2016 in order to sow disinformation in the run-up to the American presidential election.
Possibly worth noting: Sandberg’s conference room at Facebook is called Only Good News.
Then Sandberg spun into P.R. fifth gear, outsourcing the nasty business of protecting her company’s image to a Republican-run opposition research goon squad that felt no compunction about trafficking in anti-Semitic memes (George Soros is behind anti-Facebook activism!) while simultaneously charging Facebook’s critics with anti-Semitism.
But here’s a question: Was it ever realistic to expect Sandberg to behave differently?
Why do we assume female leaders are inherently gentler and less egomaniacal? With so few examples to draw from, how on earth would we even know?
Sandberg’s reputation as a formidable chief operating officer burnished her reputation as a towering feminist; her reputation as a towering feminist burnished her reputation as a formidable chief operating officer. But there was always going to be a gulf between celebrity Sandberg and businesswoman Sandberg. The two, arguably, even lived in tension with each other, with conflicting prerogatives.
It was possibly naïve, in this case, to think Sheryl Sandberg could have it all.
Closer to home, Hillary Clinton, as a senator from New York, chose a seat on the Armed Services Committee in 2002, presumably to establish her bona fides as a future commander in chief. She also voted for the invasion of Iraq.
The truth is, Sheryl Sandberg has been preoccupied with her own P.R. — and has been a master of the cold science of optics — ever since she was a teenager. One of the most revealing stories in “Lean In” is about her senior year, when she was voted Most Likely to Succeed. Believing that the title would interfere with her chances of getting a date to the biggest party of the year — “Who wants to go to the prom with the smartest girl in the class?”— she got a friend on the yearbook to remove the designation.
This is a woman who thought strategically about prom.
Much of the advice Sandberg gives in “Lean In” is, frankly, unapologetically strategic. And why ever not, when the obstacles to female advancement can seem as high as the moon? But controversially, much of it was also retrograde, a nod to realpolitik: Ask for a raise because women as a group tend to be underpaid, not because you personally deserve it. Note that someone more senior to you suggested that you ask for this salary negotiation in the first place. Be “relentlessly pleasant,” to borrow a phrase from Mary Sue Coleman, president of the Association of American Universities.
Only when women are represented at the top in greater numbers, she argued, will they be allowed to lobby for themselves without self-consciousness.
“Relentlessly pleasant” is exactly how Sandberg has been in her dealings with Congress. The Times investigation notes that she sends personalized thank you notes to lawmakers she meets.
What makes Sandberg’s current behavior so unsavory is that she put corporate interests — and her own image — ahead of the needs of democracy. She would sooner downplay Facebook’s involvement in a national security crisis than compromise the integrity of her reputation. And in so doing, Sandberg, one of the country’s most influential and renowned feminists, may have contributed to the historic loss of the first viable female candidate for president of the United States.
We have seen this movie before. Since November 2016, Sandberg has on more than one occasion chosen political expedience over feminist politics. She remained mum, for instance, in the lead-up to the Women’s March, and she didn’t participate in it — a decision that caught the attention of many women in Silicon Valley. What does it say when one of the country’s most visible feminists chooses not to lean in on that day, but instead strikes an angle of repose?
Perhaps because she knows who runs Washington these days, and is therefore proceeding with caution. Republicans, and President Trump in particular, remain convinced that Facebook quashes conservative content.
Among them: The book was geared mainly to white-collar women with means. The book also assumed that women could navigate corporations if only they had the gumption. In the age of #metoo, that idea didn’t age very well. Some impediments to female advancement aren’t simply female inhibition.
But oh, how I want to make sure that Sandberg isn’t unfairly held to double standards! Men, too, prioritize their companies and reputations over the commonweal. They also yell at their inferiors — “You threw us under the bus!”— without remorse. (I’m more interested in the fact that Sandberg apologized afterward. Would a guy have done that? Maybe, but maybe not?) The blame here ultimately lies with Mark Zuckerberg, who created this vexed, hexed platform, gleefully vowing to “move fast and break things,” not realizing that one of those things might be democracy itself.
And yet Sandberg has also been protected — by her grief, by her special status as a female leader in a seascape of men. Perhaps that’s the most poignant paradox of all. The same feminism that has subjected her to so much scrutiny over the years may also have insulated her from it — and at just the moment when it was most urgent.