The Learning Network|Do You Wish You Had the Go-to House?
Do You Wish You Had the Go-to House?
Where do you and your friends hang out? Is there one house or apartment that everyone goes to?
Do you wish your house was the go-to-house where everyone hung out?
My wife Donna’s family was different. When we began dating in high school, hers was the go-to house, always attracting hordes of cousins and friends. The yard came alive with shuttlecocks whizzing through the air and openhanded slaps sending volleyballs sailing over the net. I’d never experienced such a spirited party, and I loved it. Once there, I didn’t want to leave.
As a father, I feared the silence of my childhood and vowed to create a home like Donna’s, full of welcoming, noisy energy.
We added rooms to our tiny Cape Cod when our kids were in elementary school to make more space for the droves we wanted to fill our home. Our home matured as our children did, and continued to possess the DNA of the go-to house for a new generation.
Soon after our new rooms were complete, we received our first request to entertain. “Can I have friends over for a Halloween party and carve pumpkins?” my daughter asked.
That week we pasted black paper up and down the freshly painted walls. Ghosts, spiders and orange streamers swayed from the ceiling. Soon, 15 screaming 11-year-old girls dashed in and crafted their jack-o’-lanterns, which came to life with flickering candles planted inside.
As the years passed, it became routine to hear shoes falling onto the carpet followed by nervous gasps while Harry Potter chased Lord Voldemort, or during the roar of “The Fast and the Furious” car chases.
When the decibel levels got too high, my wife and I retreated to our own space in the old part of the house, away from the pandemonium.
Each time I passed an open window, I eagerly awaited the rumble of the garage door opening and the rush of footsteps inside to claim a basketball for an impromptu game of H-O-R-S-E or friendly pickup game of hoops for anyone who’d stop by. Or the sound and scent of hot dogs sizzling over flames in the fire pit my son built.
— Do you have the go-to house — the house where everyone likes to hang out? If so, how did it become that way? If not, do you ever wish it could be the go-to house?
— What is the most popular house for you and your friends to hang out in? Why do you like to spend time there? What do you and your friends do there?
— What might be the benefits of having the go-to house? What might be the drawbacks?
— The author said his parents “cherished serenity over chaos” in their home. What kind of environment do you prefer? What kind do your parents like? Are your parents welcoming to your friends? Do you wish things were different?
— If or when you have a family, would you want to have a go-to house? If so, what would you do to create an environment that would make your children’s friends want to hang out there?
