Asia Pacific|John Chau Aced Missionary Boot Camp. Reality Proved a Harsher Test.
For Mr. Chau, 26, the boot camp was the culmination of years of meticulous planning that involved linguistics training and studying to become an emergency medical technician, as well as forgoing full-time jobs so he could travel and toughen himself up.
It was an obsession. Ever since Mr. Chau had learned in high school through a missionary website, the Joshua Project, that the North Sentinel people were perhaps the most isolated in the world, he was hooked. Much of what he did the rest of his short life was directed toward this mission.
A tropical island, it is home to a few dozen people living a lifestyle thousands of years old and speaking a language no outsiders understand. Visitors have been driven back and killed by islanders armed with bows and arrows. Mr. Chau knew this.
As he prepared for the mission, Mr. Chau stepped up his exercise routine, doing push-ups, jogging and being careful what he ate.
Friends said he did not expect to die and had taken all precautions he could think of to survive, including packing what he called an “initial contact response kit” with dental forceps to remove arrows.
But they also said they were in awe of what he was trying to do, seeing Mr. Chau as a pure expression of their faith.
His mission failed. After landing on North Sentinel in mid-November wearing only black underpants — Mr. Chau thought that would make the islanders feel more comfortable — he struggled to communicate.
His friends mourn the loss of someone they describe as a real character: good looking but perennially single, always exploring, even landing a beef jerky sponsorship that gave him all the free jerky he could eat for his travels.
“He was caught up in a dangerous set of ideologies that helped drive him to do something so unwise,” said Kaleb Graves, a student pastor in Arkansas who befriended Mr. Chau at a linguistics institute last year.
Mr. Chau grew up in Vancouver in Washington State, not far from Portland, Ore. 
Mr. Chau attended a Christian high school and then Oral Roberts University, a fundamentalist Christian school, where people remembered how positive and open he was.
His heroes were the naturalist John Muir and Jim Elliot, an American evangelical missionary killed in Ecuador, and friends said missionary work was the perfect fit.
This passage is known as the Great Commission, and several of Mr. Chau’s friends said that more than anything else, it explained why Mr. Chau did what he did.
In the past few decades, mission work has soared. The number of American Christian missionaries going overseas has increased to around 130,000 today, from 57,000 in 1970, said Gina A. Zurlo, associate director at the Center for the Study of Global Christianity at Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary.
After college, Mr. Chau hit the road. He took temporary jobs — soccer coach, wilderness guide, AmeriCorps — so he could hike, mountain climb, kayak and scuba dive, blogging all the way.
He also learned first aid and became an E.M.T.
In 2015, he made his first of four trips to the Andaman Island chain, basing himself in Port Blair, the main city.
He was determined to translate the Bible into the language that the people on North Sentinel speak, which has stumped anthropologists who say it is unintelligible even to people who live on nearby islands.
While he was preparing for his mission, Mr. Chau struck up a relationship with Perky Jerky, a company that gives away its product to “micro influencers.” In exchange for free jerky, Mr. Chau agreed to promote Perky Jerky on social media.
He often had the boxes of Perky Jerky sent to his friend, Mr. Ramsey, whose family lived about an hour away from the linguistics school. He and Mr. Ramsey had met during a summer trip to Israel for Christian students.
While Mr. Chau did not broadcast his North Sentinel plans on social media, he revealed them to the Ramsey family.
“He was well aware of the dangers and the fact that it was not exactly legal,” Mr. Ramsey said.
Mr. Ramsey’s mother, who initially had misgivings, was won over and helped edit Mr. Chau’s application for missionary boot camp.
The people on North Sentinel eat fish and turtles, wear bark belts around their waists and carry long bows to fire arrows. They have killed several outsiders, including fishermen, who have stepped on their beach.
Nevertheless, Mr. Chau was determined to go there alone.
He thought his size would make him less threatening, Mr. Ramsey said. Mr. Chau was about 5’6,” 130 pounds.
In October 2017, Mr. Chau began his missionary training at All Nations’ headquarters in Kansas City, Mo. He attended lectures, spoke with anthropologists and participated in the village simulation exercise.
Mr. Chau performed impressively, she said. Still, there were concerns.
His planned trip to North Sentinel had no precedent. And missionaries usually travel in teams. Others were willing to go with him, Mrs. Ho said, but he refused, saying it was too dangerous.
Mr. Chau landed in Port Blair on Oct. 16, traveled to another island in the Andamans and then returned to Port Blair.
There, he holed up for 11 days in a small apartment that he referred to as a “safe house” in a long note that the police found after his death. He wrote that he never saw sunlight that whole time.
All Nations, the missionary organization where John Chau trained, shared images from a note written in his final days.
The police say he was doing this to avoid being spotted; his friends say he was trying to prevent himself from getting sick to protect the islanders, whose immune systems have been isolated so long that some experts say they could be wiped out by the common cold.
With the help of a local evangelical, Mr. Chau hired five fishermen. Their boat was a battered wooden craft about 30 feet long, with a roof made of bamboo sticks and a plastic tarp. They chugged out the night of Nov. 14.
When they reached North Sentinel in the morning, Mr. Chau assembled a collapsible kayak because the fishermen refused to go to the island with him, insisting on staying a half mile out.
Mr. Chau saw some islanders on the beach, paddled up to them and tried to preach, saying: “My name is John, I love you and Jesus loves you,” according to the note. They raised their bows and he paddled back to the fishing boat.
Mr. Pandya, one of the few anthropologists to have set foot on North Sentinel, said these were clear warnings.
The islanders chased Mr. Chau into the surf. He saw the fishermen far away, standing in the boat, waving their arms up and down, and swam to them.
The fishermen told the police the next morning that Mr. Chau swam to the island. They then went to the ocean to fish.
When they returned to North Sentinel a day later to check on him, they saw a group of islanders on the beach dragging Mr. Chau’s body with a rope.
All five fishermen have been arrested, along with two others, accused of helping lead Mr. Chau to his death.
“I don’t question his motivation, I question his methods,” said Richard Albert Mohler Jr., the president of the Southern Baptist Theological Seminary in Louisville, Ky.
Members of the Ramsey family gathered in their living room, read through Mr. Chau’s last letter and cried.
