1. Sponsor: The 2019 Win a Trip with Nick Contest (the “Contest”) is sponsored by The New York Times Company, a New York corporation with principal offices at 620 8th Avenue, New York, NY 10018 (“Sponsor”).
2. Contest Description: The Contest is a skill-based competition in which participants will compete to be selected as author of the top essay, as selected by Sponsor and the Center for Global Development (“CGD”) (together with Sponsor, the “Contest Entities”). The author of the winning entry will be awarded the opportunity to travel on a reporting trip as the guest of Nick Kristof. Participants will be invited to submit essays, which will be voted on and rated by the Contest Entities. The winner will also have an opportunity to submit a regular report from the trip on NYTimes.com.
The Contest submission period begins at 12 a.m. E.T. on November 24, 2018, and ends at 11:59 p.m. E.T. on January 11, 2019 (the “Submission Period”). To be eligible, submissions must be submitted during the Submission Period and in accordance with Section 4 of these Official Rules.
The Contest judging period begins on January 12, 2019, and ends on or about February 27, 2019 (the “Judging Period”). Eligible submissions will be reviewed by judge(s) selected in the sole discretion of Sponsor and will be judged in accordance with Section 5 of these Official Rules. One (1) winner (the “Winner”) will be selected.
Sponsor will attempt to contact the Winner, or an alternate if necessary, in accordance with Section 6 of these Official Rules.
The Winner will be publicly announced on or about March 1, 2019.
3. Eligibility: The Contest is open to individuals who are all legal residents of the fifty (50) United States or the District of Columbia (each an “Entrant”). Void in Puerto Rico and all jurisdictions other than those stated above and where prohibited or restricted by law. Each Entrant must be at least eighteen (18) years of age at the time of entry and current undergraduate or graduate students (including those who are expected to graduate in the first six (6) months of 2019) at an American college or university at the time of entry. The following individuals are not eligible to enter or win a prize: employees, representatives, agents, directors, and officers of the Contest Entities and their subsidiary, or affiliated companies, and any other parties involved in the administration of the Contest and each of the immediate family members of such excluded individuals (i.e., spouses, parents, children, siblings, and the “steps” of each) and all persons living in the same household of each. Subject to all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations.
The Winner must be available for travel on the dates selected by Nick Kristof. The Winner must also demonstrate to Sponsor, at least thirty (30) days before departure, the ability to obtain in timely fashion (i) a valid U.S. passport; (ii) all vaccinations and preventive medications required or recommended by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Centers for Disease Control for travel to the trip location; and (iii) medical clearance, following a physical examination performed within thirty (30) days of the proposed trip. All information submitted is subject to verification by Sponsor. The Sponsor will award the Prize only upon winner confirmation, verification and final approval.
Entry constitutes each Entrant’s certification that the Entrant meets the eligibility requirements set forth in these Official Rules. Sponsor reserves the right to verify and confirm each Entrant’s age and compliance with other eligibility requirements. Winning a prize is contingent upon fulfilling all requirements set forth herein.
By submitting an entry, each Entrant represents and warrants that there are no limits on the rights of the Entrant to enter this Contest, nor will any Entrant enter into any agreement or assume any obligation that limits the right or ability of that Entrant to participate in the Contest, or grant to Sponsor the specified rights as contemplated by Section 8 of these Official Rules.
4. How to Enter: To enter the Contest, during the Contest Period visit the Contest event page located athttps://www.cgdev.org/webform/nick-kristof-win-trip. Then, follow the provided instructions to complete and thereafter submit the entry form, which includes an essay of no more than seven hundred (700) words.
5. Judging Period: During the Judging Period all Essays that meet the Essay requirements listed in Section 4 above will be reviewed by judge(s) selected in Sponsor’s sole discretion. Selected CGD employees will review all Essay submissions and select forty (40) semifinalists to be reviewed by Nick Kristof and another employee of Sponsor. Essays will be judged on the following criteria: talent, writing ability, style, creativity and originality. Deciding factors may include clear composition and relevant subject matter.
6. Winner Notification and Announcement: The potential Winner, as determined by the judges, will be notified by email (via the email address listed on the Entry Form) or phone on or about February 28, 2019, and will be required to respond (as directed) to the notification attempt. Failure to respond timely to the notification may result in forfeiture of participation in the Contest and, in such case, Sponsor will select an alternate Winner. The potential Winner will be required to execute and return an affidavit of eligibility and liability/publicity release (where legally permissible) and other documents required by Sponsor within a reasonable amount of time, as determined by Sponsor in its sole discretion. If the potential Winner cannot be contacted by email after the first attempt, or if the potential Winner fails to sign and return the affidavit of eligibility and liability/publicity release within the required time period (if applicable), or if the potential Winner is unavailable to travel on the dates specified by Sponsor, the potential Winner will be disqualified and an alternate entry will be selected in its place from all eligible entries received according to the judging criteria described above. Sponsor reserves the right to extend or modify the Winner notification and announcement schedule as Sponsor deems necessary in its sole discretion to complete the verification process contemplated by these Official Rules and/or to select an alternate Winner.
7. Prize: One (1) Prize: The Winner will receive the opportunity to travel on one (1) trip with Nick Kristof, including a round trip airplane ticket, all trip meals, lodging and transportation, and other reasonable out-of-pocket expenses of Sponsor’s choosing and Winner’s Essay may be published on nytimes.com and/or in the print version of The New York Times (subject to Sponsor’s approval) (the “Prize”). The approximate retail value of the Prize is Four Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($4,500). The Prize is nontransferable and no substitution will be made except as provided herein at the Sponsor’s sole discretion. Sponsor reserves the right to substitute the Prize for one of equal or greater value if the designated prize should become unavailable for any reason. Winner is responsible for all taxes and fees associated with the Prize receipt and/or use.
8. Grant of Rights: In consideration of an Entrant’s Essay being reviewed and evaluated for this Contest, each Entrant hereby grants to the Contest Entities a nonexclusive, irrevocable, fully paid, universal license to use, copy, sublicense, distribute, publish, or display such Essay (and, if applicable, any reports from the trip), or any portion thereof in any media now known or hereafter devised and for any purpose, including advertising or promotions, and to use the name, likeness, voice, biographical information, and image of Entrant in any media now known or hereafter devised and for any purpose, including advertising or promotion of the Contest Entities. Entrant acknowledges and agrees that: (i) Sponsor has access to and/or may create or have created literary, visual and/or materials, ideas and concepts which may be similar or identical to the Contest Entry in theme and/or other respects; (ii) Entrant will not be entitled to any compensation or other consideration because of the use by Sponsor of any such similar or identical material, ideas and/or concepts; and (iii) Sponsor’s use of material containing elements similar to or identical with those contained in the Contest Entry, Essay, or reports from the trip shall not obligate Sponsor to negotiate with nor entitle Entrant to any compensation or other claim.
10. General Terms and Conditions: Sponsor reserves the right in its sole discretion, without prior notice to (i) cancel, suspend and/or modify the Contest, or any part of it, if any fraud, technical failures or any other factor beyond Sponsor’s reasonable control impairs the integrity or proper functioning of the Contest, as determined by Sponsor; (ii) disqualify any individual it finds to be tampering with the entry process or the operation of the Contest or to be acting in violation of these Official Rules or any other promotion or in an unsportsmanlike or disruptive manner; and (iii) cancel or reschedule the trip, in whole or in part, as well as the right, to dismiss the Winner from further participation in the trip as a result of conduct that is considered improper or offensive to the local community, is likely to be detrimental to the health or safety of the Winner or other individuals, or demonstrates that the individual is not capable or unwilling to participate fully in the trip experience. Sponsor’s failure to enforce any term of these Official Rules shall not constitute a waiver of that provision. All decisions by Sponsor are final and binding.
11. Limitation of Liability: Sponsor is not responsible for: (1) any incorrect or inaccurate information, whether caused by entrants, printing errors or by any of the equipment or programming associated with or utilized in the Contest; (2) technical failures of any kind, including, but not limited to malfunctions, interruptions, or disconnections in phone lines or network hardware or software; (3) unauthorized human intervention in any part of the entry process or the Contest; (4) technical or human error which may occur in the administration of the Contest or the processing of entries; (5) late, lost, undeliverable, damaged or stolen mail; or (6) any injury or damage to persons or property which may be caused, directly or indirectly, in whole or in part, from entrant’s participation in the Contest or receipt or use or misuse of any prize. Sponsor is not responsible for typographical or other errors in the offer or administration of this contest, including but not limited to errors in advertising, the Official Rules, the selection and announcement of Winners, or the distribution of any prize.
12. Governing Law; Disputes: This Contest is governed by the internal laws of the State of New York without regard to principles of conflict of laws. Except where prohibited, Entrant agrees that: (i) any and all disputes, claims and causes of action arising out of or connected with this Contest or any prize awarded shall be resolved individually, without resort to any form of class action, and exclusively by the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York or the appropriate New York State Court located in New York County, New York; and (ii) any and all claims, judgments and awards shall be limited to actual out-of-pocket costs incurred, including costs associated with entering this Contest, but in no event attorneys’ fees.
13. Privacy Policy: Any personal information supplied by an Entrant will be subject to Sponsor’s privacy policy posted at https://www.nytimes.com/content/help/rights/privacy/ policy/privacy-policy.html, and the supplemental terms of these Official Rules.
14. Winner List: Winner List requests will only be accepted after the Contest end date and no later than March 31, 2019. For the Winner List, send a stamped, self-addressed envelope to: “Winner’s List — 2019 Win a Trip with Nick,” ATTN: Zoe Greenberg, 620 8th Avenue, New York, NY 10018. Requests received without a self-addressed, stamped envelope will not be filled.