“The reason the statue was commissioned was to be a symbol that they could bring out when they felt government wasn’t separating church and state,” said Bruce Lederman, the lawyer for the Satanic Temple.
But in “Sabrina,” the lawsuit argues, the statue is an evil symbol representing the show’s antagonists. The statue sits at the center of the academy where Sabrina is sent to learn magic, and it is considered a homage to the “Dark Lord,” whom Sabrina is fighting against.
Mr. Lederman said the concern is that the next time the temple uses its statue to send a message about the separation of church and state, people may associate it with the television show instead.
Warner Bros., which produced the show, declined to comment. Netflix referred questions to Warner Bros.
Baphomet, described as a goat-headed hermaphroditic deity, is not a character invented by the Satanic Temple, the lawsuit said. It was depicted by an occultist, Éliphas Lévi, in a mid-19th century drawing, which the temple put on a T-shirt.
The lawsuit argues, however, that “Sabrina” copies particular details from the Satanic Temple’s Baphomet statue that have not been reproduced elsewhere. For example, it argues that the appearance of the children staring up at the goat-headed deity is identical to what appears in the Netflix show.
Lucien Greaves, a co-founder of the Satanic Temple, said designing and constructing the statue took over a year and cost about $100,000. Mr. Greaves said that the icon had become a sort of logo for Satanists and that it was distressing for him to watch it get swept up into the plot of a major television show.
“It makes you feel that all the work you’ve done can be totally eclipsed by this mega-giant media company,” he said.
On Twitter, Mr. Greaves compared the depictions on top of each other, with the show’s image below.
In an interview with VICE last month, Lisa Soper, the production designer for the show, said she thought the similarity between the statues was “kind of a coincidence.” She said hundreds of depictions of Baphomet existed, some with people surrounding him.
Mr. Lederman said that depending on how the lawsuit progresses, one remedy for the situation could be editing the image of Baphomet out of the show.
