Thanks to four touchdown passes by Baker Mayfield, the Cleveland Browns got to experience something for the first time since 2014: a winning streak.
Mayfield’s dominance, and a solid game from the team’s defense, was enough to hold off a late charge from Jeff Driskel and the Cincinnati Bengals in a 35-20 win. It gave Cleveland its first win on the road in its last 26 tries, and fulfilled a promise from the safety Damarious Randall, who had guaranteed that the Browns would win if Cincinnati’s A.J. Green was not active.
The Browns wasted no time in getting a lead on the Bengals. They received the ball to start the game and marched 78 yards on 10 plays, with the rookie running back Nick Chubb punching the ball in from the 1-yard line.
Mayfield, who was the No. 1 pick in the 2018 draft, then got some help from Myles Garrett, who had been the No. 1 pick one season earlier. A Bengals drive stalled out after 53 yards, and Cincinnati sent out Randy Bullock to try a 54-yard field goal, but Garrett, who has flashed serious potential despite a series of injuries, was able to block the attempt.
Mayfield needed just four plays to get the game to 14-0, finding Antonio Callaway for a 13-yard touchdown pass, and with the exception of a three-play drive that closed out the first half, Cleveland scored a touchdown on each of its first five possessions. Mayfield finished the day having completed 19 of 26 passes for 258 yards along with the four touchdowns.
“This team is very scary right now,” said Randall, who backed up his big talk during the week with an interception in the second quarter.
Following the interception, Randall ran to the sideline and handed the ball to Hue Jackson, the former Browns coach who joined Cincinnati’s coaching staff after he was fired by Cleveland. Jackson responded by tapping the safety’s helmet.
Mayfield, who had seemed to endorse Jackson’s firing at the time, expressed amusement at Randall’s chestiness but spoke in fairly harsh terms about his former coach. The rookie quarterback said he and Jackson had a word after the game, but that he kept it brief. “I didn’t feel like talking,” he said.
When asked for clarification, Mayfield said he did not appreciate Jackson’s decision to join a division rival.
On a day when nearly everything went right for Cleveland offensively, the most impressive play was a 14-yard touchdown pass from Mayfield to Chubb in which Chubb reached over the head of Brandon Wilson, pinned the ball against the safety’s helmet and shoulder pads, and then pulled it to his own chest as he landed in the end zone.
Cleveland’s final score, on a 6-yard pass to Darren Fells, gave Mayfield 17 touchdown passes for the season, which, according to the Elias Sports Bureau, tied him with Otto Graham for the Cleveland franchise rookie record. Graham, who would go on to lead the Browns to three N.F.L. championships between 1950 and 1955, had set the franchise rookie record in 1946, when the Browns played in the All-America Football Conference, an early competitor to the N.F.L.
In addition to the big games from Mayfield and Chubb, the Browns got solid days from David Njoku (5 catches for 63 yards) and Callaway (4 catches for 62 yards). Mayfield’s four touchdown passes went to four different receivers: Chubb, Njoku, Callaway and Fells.
The Bengals were down, 35-7, in the third quarter when Andy Dalton, Cincinnati’s starting quarterback, was lost for the day with a thumb injury. The offense seemed to wake up under Driskel, as the 25-year-old, who had just seven career passes coming into the game, led two scoring drives. He completed 17 of 29 attempts for 155 yards, throwing a 28-yard touchdown pass to Tyler Boyd and running in a 2-yard touchdown by himself midway through the fourth quarter.
Driskel’s magic then ran out, however, as Cincinnati turned the ball over on downs on each of its last two drives, letting Cleveland kneel on the ball to end the game.
Sunday’s win gave the Browns their first road win since Oct. 11, 2015, and their first winning streak since they won three straight in the middle of the 2014 season. The team is 2-1 under Coach Gregg Williams after having started the year 2-5-1 with Jackson.