A gunman who shot another man during a fight at an Alabama mall late Thursday night as thousands got an early start on their holiday shopping was fatally shot by the police, the authorities said.
The gunfire, which sent shoppers fleeing for cover into stores and stockrooms, also injured a 12-year-old girl, a police captain said at a news conference early Friday. The girl was said to be conscious, and the police said her injuries were not life-threatening.
The episode rattled the crowded Riverchase Galleria in Hoover, about 10 miles south of Birmingham. Video posted on Twitter showed people sprinting down the mall’s corridor in a panicked stampede.
Debby Woods, one of thousands of shoppers inside the mall, said she was buying jewelry at a kiosk when she heard one “bang” — and then two more.
“It was terrifying,” she told WBRC News. “Everybody started screaming.” Ms. Woods said she ran for the exits, as police officers sprinted toward the gunfire.
Hoover police officers responded to a call about gunshots being fired outside the Footaction store on the mall’s second level just before 10 p.m., Capt. Gregg Rector of the Hoover Police Department said.
Two men had gotten into what Captain Rector called a “physical confrontation.” One of the men fired at the other, and the victim, an 18-year-old man, was struck at least once. The 18-year-old, whose name, like the others, was not released, was taken to a hospital in serious condition, Captain Rector said.
The man who fired was confronted by officers as he tried to flee, Captain Rector said, and a Hoover police officer fatally shot him. The Jefferson County Sheriff’s Department is investigating the episode because a Hoover officer had opened fire.
Asked who had shot the 12-year-old girl, Captain Rector said it was “too early in the investigation” to know.
“We believe last we heard that she was alert, conscious and talking,” he said.
He said he was not aware of any other injuries to shoppers or police officers.
“It’s a sad day in Hoover,” Chief Nicholas Derzis of the Hoover Police Department said.
The Riverchase Galleria, whose website boasts that it is “the largest enclosed shopping center in Alabama,” had advertised special hours for the night of Thanksgiving; it had been scheduled to be open from 6 p.m. to midnight.
Officials noted that there had been extra officers at the mall on Thursday night as a precaution. Mayor Frank V. Brocato praised the police for their quick action, suggesting they may have saved others from injury.
“You just don’t bring guns into a crowded mall,” he said.