General Motors announced Monday that it planned to idle five factories in North America and cut roughly 14,000 jobs in a bid to trim costs. It was a jarring reflection of the auto industry’s adjustment to changing consumer tastes and sluggish sales.
In addition to an assembly plant in Lordstown, Ohio, the cuts affect factories in Michigan, Maryland and the Canadian province of Ontario.
Ms. Barra said no single factor had prompted G.M.’s cutbacks, portraying them as a prudent trimming of sails. “We are taking these actions now while the company and the economy are strong to stay in front of a fast-changing market,” she said on a conference call with analysts.
The idling of the five plants next year will result in the layoff of 3,300 production workers in the United States and about 2,500 in Canada. The company also aims to trim its salaried staff by 8,000. The cuts represent more than 10 percent of G.M.’s North American work force of 124,000.
Word of the cutbacks in Canada had surfaced over the weekend. Just before G.M.’s announcement, workers walked out of the plant in Oshawa, Ontario, into a driving rain. Waving red flags and clad in ponchos bearing the logo of their union, Unifor, they began blockading truck entrances.
Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said he had expressed his “deep disappointment” about the closing to Ms. Barra.
The United Auto Workers, representing workers at the American plants, said G.M.’s move “will not go unchallenged.” Closing domestic plants while expanding production in China and Mexico is “profoundly damaging to our American work force,” said the union vice president in charge of negotiations with G.M., Terry Dittes.
The plants include three car factories: one in Lordstown that makes the Chevrolet Cruze compact; the Detroit-Hamtramck plant, where the Chevrolet Volt, Buick LaCrosse and Cadillac CT6 are produced; and the plant in Oshawa, which primarily makes the Chevrolet Impala. In addition, the company will halt operations at transmission plants in the Baltimore area and in Warren, Mich.
G.M., Ford and Fiat Chrysler are all poised to negotiate new labor contracts next year. Some of the affected G.M. plants could resume production, depending on the outcome of the bargaining. Carmakers often agree to keep plants open in exchange for other concessions from the union.
More typically since rebounding from the recession, carmakers and their suppliers have restarted shuttered plants, adding new ones across the South and hiring tens of thousands of workers a year.
But demand for small and midsize cars has plunged. Two-thirds of all new vehicles sold last year were trucks and S.U.V.s. That shift has hit G.M.’s Lordstown plant hard. Just a few years ago, the factory employed three shifts of workers to churn out Chevy Cruzes. Now it is down to one. In 2017 the plant made about 180,000 cars, down from 248,000 in 2013.
More broadly, the yearslong boom in car and truck sales in North America appears to be ending, said John Hoffecker, vice chairman at AlixPartners, a global consulting firm with a large automotive practice. “Sales have held up well this year, but we do see a downturn coming,” he said. AlixPartners forecast that domestic auto sales will fall to about 15 million cars and light trucks in 2020, from about 17 million this year.
At the same time, automakers have had to contend with a new political agenda in Washington. One benefit has been the corporate tax cuts enacted last year. The changes, championed by Mr. Trump and his party, saved G.M. $157 million in federal taxes in the first nine months of the year, according to the company’s most recent quarterly earnings report.
President Trump expressed unhappiness with General Motors’ announcement that it planned to idle five North American factories and cut more than 14,000 jobs.
Well, we don’t like it. I believe they’ll be opening up something else. And I was very tough. I spoke with her when I heard they were closing. And I said, you know, this country’s done a lot for General Motors, you better get back in there soon. That’s Ohio. And you better get back in there soon. So we have a lot of pressure on them. You have senators, you have a lot of other people, a lot of pressure. They say the Chevy Cruze is not selling well. I say, well, then get somebody — get a car that is selling well and put it back in. So I think you’re going to see something else happen there. But I’m not happy about it. Their car is not selling well. So they’ll put something else. I have no doubt that in a not too distant future, they’ll put something else. They better put something else.
The Trump administration has moved to scrap stringent emissions requirements put into place under President Barack Obama, but the industry hopes that Mr. Trump will relent and reach an agreement with California, which sets its own emissions requirements. Automakers are wary of having two sets of standards.
Before the election and after, Mr. Trump prodded Ford, G.M. and others to build plants in the United States instead of Mexico or China. As events have played out, however, his determination to rework the North American Free Trade Agreement is expected to have a modest impact on automakers, preserving much of the original 1994 accord.
The terms negotiated with Canada and Mexico stipulate that at least 75 percent of an automobile’s value must be produced in North America for a company to import it into the United States duty-free, and that 40 to 45 percent of a vehicle’s value must consist of parts made by workers earning at least $16 an hour, a provision aimed at shrinking Mexico’s wage advantage. Analysts believe the changes will have little to no effect on American jobs.
Ms. Barra said G.M. would set aside up to $2 billion in cash to pay for the job reductions announced Monday, and take noncash charges against its pretax earnings of about $1.8 billion. The charges will affect earnings in the fourth quarter of 2018 and the first quarter of 2019.
General Motors also said on Monday that it would stop production at two unspecified plants outside North America by the end of next year.