These men are finding new stages on which to express their queerness, collapsing gender barriers in the world of dance.
When I was 15, I met a dancer from Canada’s Royal Winnipeg Ballet. The company had come to Los Angeles to dance in the Olympic Arts Festival, and my parents volunteered to host a post-performance dinner in our backyard. I recall about 200 people — family friends, Olympic officials and maybe 25 dancers — eating curry (is that right?) off paper plates. But that’s not what this is about. No, this is about the ballerino — my word for him — I met and what he represented to a lonely gay kid in Southern California in 1984, a kid who had never before met another gay person. Earlier that evening, I had seen the dancer turn, leap and smile onstage, expressing through the mute language of ballet who he was. Something about his movement told me he was gay, and I felt he was dancing not only for himself but for me. Onstage, the ballerino wore brown tights that showed the trunks of his thighs, and everything else. Now he was in loose linen pants with a drawstring belt and an open collar that exposed the rod of his clavicle.
He said hello. I could barely speak. He might have said, “Lovely party,” but that was it, he was on his way. The isolation of my queer youth was about to return. Out of nowhere, I told him he was my favorite ballet dancer in the world.
He seemed startled, and a little embarrassed, but he came to understand what I was trying to say: “If you need someone to talk to, you can write me, care of the Ballet.” The next day, I rode my bike to the library and looked up the address in Winnipeg and sent a letter trying to express something about myself I had never expressed before. Two months later, he wrote back, apologizing: He’d been on tour. Although time has devoured that sheet of paper, I still remember the gentle message embedded in his words: One day, you too will find yourself.
Men have danced together before in ballet, typically in expressions of friendship or rivalry, such as the death duet between Tybalt and Mercutio in “Romeo and Juliet,” first choreographed in Czechoslovakia by Ivo Vana Psota in 1938. We’ve seen choreographers invert genders, often casting men as Cinderella’s evil stepsisters for a laugh. Yet Chamblee had never performed a pas de deux explicitly depicting two men in love. Shortly after “Not Our Fate” premiered, Justin Peck, City Ballet’s resident choreographer, further challenged ballet’s gender norms when he adapted the woman’s role in the pas de deux at the heart of his 2017 “The Times Are Racing,” pairing Stanley with Daniel Applebaum, a 32-year-old gay soloist with the company.
There’s a hashtag for everything on Instagram; when you type #gayballet, you will come across men in tights and training shorts, and eventually you might find James Whiteside, most likely bare-chested with a large scratch tattooed on his ribs. Whiteside, 34, is a principal dancer with New York’s American Ballet Theater and, since joining the company in 2012, one of its major stars; critics applaud his power and energy and the depth he brings to his characters. For the choreographer Lar Lubovitch’s 2015 production of “Othello,” Whiteside didn’t want to waste the opportunity of working with a gay collaborator — his Iago was infused with what he calls “queer rage.” This month, at New York’s Joyce Theater, Whiteside opened the celebrated choreographer Arthur Pita’s new ballet, “The Tenant,” based on Roland Topor’s 1964 French novel and Roman Polanski’s film adaptation of the same name, which questions ideas of identity and gender.
“My personality was maybe something that ABT hadn’t encountered before,” Whiteside says. “I would come in ‘yaass kween’-ing everyone and doing drag queen walks, and that could have been so easily misconstrued as not taking the work seriously.” But Whiteside takes his work very seriously because he doesn’t want to, as he puts it, go back. Back to his late teens in South Boston when people regularly threw rocks at him and called him the F-word on his way to and from Boston Ballet. “I found myself a target anywhere I went,” he says. Like anyone who’s danced through fire and come out burnished, Whiteside can now laugh at his past and turn it into a personal statement and meta joke on Instagram. In one post, he’s flexing his biceps while wearing a pink bandanna, a black tutu and a tank top that says “Milk’s Gym” (Milk is the drag name of his boyfriend, Daniel Donigan, who appeared on two seasons of “RuPaul’s Drag Race”). Whiteside’s caption: “Masc femme butch kween horse peasant monarch wealthy broke realness.” Then a shrugging-guy emoji.
Whiteside has a point. But like any protagonist, he can’t see himself as we do. Before social media, ballet on video — think of those tame PBS broadcasts — appealed to a specialized audience. One reason is its perspective: The cameras, way up in the auditorium, show ballet from a limited point of view. But on Instagram, the close-up angles, taped ankles, the veins and arteries flooded with blood, give us ballet as the dancer experiences it. Rather than removing the magic of a darkened theater, this intimacy brings us closer to the my-God-how-does-the-human-body-do-that awe that ballet inspires.
In one post, we see Whiteside’s backside, naked but for the straps of a well-worn dance belt. But this isn’t just a thirst trap.  The caption — “Dancer butt” — tells us we’re looking at decades of sacrifice knotted up in muscle and skin. It shows us the feat behind the art, reminding us that the foundation of dance is physical strength — a quality associated with traditional masculinity. Whiteside is an athlete-artist restless with ideas and energy, and Instagram gives him a space arguably bigger than a company’s stage to experiment with what it now means to be a great dancer.
If ballet feels remote to many, especially younger people, this type of access and authenticity connects the medium to today’s cultural currents. Watters says he’s influenced as much by classical ballet as by reality television, including “America’s Next Top Model” and “RuPaul’s Drag Race.” He’s faced some backlash online about how he “represents” the Houston Ballet, which he joined as an apprentice in 2011, but that criticism seems out of step with what the word “representation” now means in our culture. “The Pre Show” is ostensibly about a dancer preparing for his roles, but its subtext is stereotypes — an artist owning, defying and subverting them as part of the process of becoming himself. Two years ago, before his promotion to demisoloist, a director taught Watters an important lesson: Ballet isn’t really about how high your legs can go or how many turns you can do, but what you’re trying to say about yourself and the world. Every step has to have intention.
Lidberg has since become a leading choreographer around the world, developing works for companies such as City Ballet and the Royal Danish Ballet. In his latest piece, “Siren,” performed in October at the Joyce, he flips the genders in Homer’s “Odyssey.” Ulysses is a woman, and the sirens — the original temptations — are men. Its central theme is that existential desire to connect.
Watching ballet is ultimately ephemeral — “an experience that can never be relived,” Lidberg says. So, too, is the body, especially the dancer’s. “Aging is very real, and for the dancer, it happens very quickly.” Rather than lamenting this, he embraces it, filming his work and releasing it on social media. In his 2007 ballet film, “The Rain,” he dances a pas de deux with a close male friend in a downpour to Doris Day’s “Perhaps, Perhaps, Perhaps” (1965). “My identity as a gay man has many layers,” Lidberg adds. He also tries to convey something he rarely sees in ballet — not just sexuality, but companionship and tenderness between men. In other words, love.
“I am a ballerina,” says Chase Johnsey. “That’s what I’ve done my whole career.” Johnsey, 33, danced principal female roles en pointe for more than a decade with Les Ballets Trockadero de Monte Carlo, the all-male ballet comedy, but he left the company at the end of last year, after he began to identify as gender fluid. Johnsey, who uses male pronouns, says he and others felt harassed because “we don’t live up to some masculine ideal of what a gay man is.” (Trockadero says Johnsey’s claims were investigated and no evidence to support them was found.) Growing up in what he calls “the swamps of Florida,” Johnsey remembers watching the ballerinas in class and wanting nothing more than to dance like them.
An essential part of queerness is fluidity — between identities, expectations, definitions and that word no one likes, labels. And what is dance if not fluid — in motion, in music, in the blend between physical and artistic? Ballet is most powerful when it is most fluid. So, too, is the dancer, when he, or she, or they, moves fluidly. A dancer must move between roles — now Romeo, now a prince, now a ruby — just as a queer person moves between roles, finding comfort and creativity in that movement. But classical ballet isn’t fluid. It’s rigid with custom and stiff with history. “You have all these people who love the way it’s been for 200 years,” Johnsey says.
