Economy|A $2 Billion Question: Did New York and Virginia Overpay for Amazon?
A $2 Billion Question: Did New York and Virginia Overpay for Amazon?
Amazon built a retail empire on low prices and free shipping. But for taxpayers, its new headquarters didn’t come cheap.
New York and Virginia collectively offered more than $2 billion in tax credits, rebates and other incentives to attract the company. That figure doesn’t include what could amount to hundreds of millions of dollars in infrastructure spending, worker training and other government assistance.
Economists have long criticized tax incentives as inefficient and unnecessary, arguing that they pit cities or states against each other and leave less money for education and public works that ultimately do more to lift local economies and improve livelihoods. Research has shown that incentives play at most a small role in corporate decisions, meaning governments often end up paying businesses to do what they would have done anyway.
Indeed, in selecting New York and Virginia for its new locations, Amazon turned down seemingly richer offers just next door. Maryland and New Jersey each offered multibillion-dollar incentive packages that dwarfed the ones Amazon accepted.
In its announcement on Tuesday, Amazon said that “attracting top talent was the leading driver” of its decision. Incentives were “one factor,” it said, but a secondary one.
New York’s incentive package is much larger than Virginia’s. Amazon promised to create about 25,000 jobs at each location, but New York offered twice as much as Virginia did.
New York has a history of offering generous incentive packages, including a 2007 deal for subsidized electricity to keep an Alcoa plant that was worth $5.6 billion over 30 years, according to Good Jobs First, which tracks corporate subsidies.
On a per-job basis, New York’s offer to Amazon is about typical for the state but well above the national average for such deals, said Timothy J. Bartik, an economist for the Upjohn Institute in Kalamazoo, Mich., who has studied tax incentives.
Amazon’s New York site could also qualify for federal tax breaks under the tax law passed by Republicans late late year. That law created a program to encourage development in so-called opportunity zones, including parts of Long Island City.
Ms. Doulis, of the Citizens Budget Commission, said that credit and similar ones might have outlived their usefulness. In the 1980s and ’90s, she said, companies were taking a risk by expanding in Queens or Brooklyn, and tax breaks provided an important inducement. But today, Long Island City is a rapidly developing neighborhood full of hip bars and luxury apartment complexes.
Still, Ms. Doulis said Amazon’s arrival was a major coup for the city, which has been trying to establish itself as a tech hub to rival Boston, Seattle and even Silicon Valley. Mr. Cuomo and Mayor Bill de Blasio on Tuesday said Amazon’s decision was a vindication of that strategy, which the mayor said would benefit all New Yorkers.
Tom Stringer, who advises companies on site-selection decisions for the consulting firm BDO, said high-cost places like New York and Virginia needed to offer incentives to compete with cheaper areas. And he said the deals would pay off in the long run in jobs and tax revenues.
But it isn’t clear they are good investments, said Jay Shambaugh, director of the Hamilton Project at the Brookings Institution. In offering incentives to Amazon, he said, New York and Virginia are effectively subsidizing a big, incumbent company at the expense of local businesses and start-ups. That is especially concerning, he added, when entrepreneurship rates are falling and cities are struggling to nurture homegrown businesses.
That could be a particularly bitter pill for local retailers, many already struggling to compete with Amazon, said Stacy Mitchell, co-director of the Institute for Local Self-Reliance, an advocacy group long critical of Amazon.
“If you’re a local retailer or small manufacturer or artist or writer or publisher, you’re watching as your city and state hands your tax dollars to your most ferocious antagonist,” she said.
But even many critics of tax incentives said the packages offered to Amazon were less egregious than some past examples. The New York and Virginia tax credits are tied to the number of jobs the company actually creates.
On a per-job basis, the packages offered to Amazon are smaller than some previous megadeals. For example, Wisconsin last year offered the Taiwanese electronics manufacturer Foxconn $3 billion in incentives for a project meant to employ 13,000 workers, at wages far lower than those promised by Amazon. The Foxconn deal, which has since grown even more expensive, has produced a public backlash in Wisconsin.
There are signs that Amazon may have been concerned about a similar reaction. The company didn’t choose the biggest incentive packages on offer, and in an unusual move, it included details of the tax breaks in its news release. And Greg LeRoy, executive director of Good Jobs First, noted that Amazon conducted the final stages of its search behind closed doors after a much more public search earlier in the process.
“They would have had another whole wave of blowback if they’d had another hunger games,” Mr. LeRoy said.