The voting delivered a split Congress — and revealed a country whose political and cultural divisions appear to be deepening.
The results are in: Democrats gained control of the House, even as Republicans strengthened their hold in the Senate. What does this mean for the next two years?
Alexander Burns, who covers national politics for The New York Times.
Democrats Won the House. Here’s What’s Next.
The Democrats took control of the House of Representatives, adding several women to their ranks. The party now has the power to investigate President Trump. Here’s how else Democrats may challenge the president.
[cheers] The Democrats have won control of the House. “We want our community back. We want our country back. And we want our state back.” “Change came tonight.” “We are standing in our power.” “A victory for our country.” Here are some of the new faces: “People like us, with unique names and different backgrounds.” “There’s never been a Native American woman.” “When we vote, this is what happens.” But what comes next? For starters, a lot of potential Donald Trump-related investigations. Democrats will now take control of House committees. That gives them the power to launch investigations and issue subpoenas. The people most likely overseeing some of these committees: They include many Trump foes.  He stiffs everybody. You can’t trust him. That’s what I’ve learned.” This is Representative Jerrold Nadler, a New Yorker who’s been feuding with Trump since the 1990s, when he tried to block one of Trump’s real estate projects. As the likely new head of the Judiciary Committee, Nadler has promised he will open investigations into Trump’s alleged interference with the F.B.I. and Justice Department. Another Trump nemesis is Representative Maxine Waters of California. “Maxine, a seriously low I.Q. person.” “This president has displayed the most despicable behavior that any human being could do.” She will now likely oversee the Financial Services Committee and may try to reinstate consumer protections rolled back by Republicans. Representative Elijah Cummings has promised to look into accusations of voter suppression and potential fraud and abuse by the White House and federal agencies. And then there’s Representative Adam Schiff, who said he’d reopen targeted inquiries into alleged ties between Trump and Russia. “We’ll be able to get answers the Republicans were unwilling to pursue.” So, what’s on the agenda? House Democrats have promised to make fighting climate change a priority and tackle gerrymandering. “A set of maps that distorts public sentiment.” They may try to team up with with Republicans on infrastructure spending and lowering prescription drug costs. “We’re going to work to drive down health care costs, strengthen the Affordable Care Act and dramatically reduce the cost of prescription drugs.” But getting buy-in on their legislative agenda from the Republican-controlled Senate would be a tall order on many issues. What about impeaching Trump? It’s not the party line — for now. “Impeachment is a very divisive approach.” They’d also need the Senate’s help. But Democratic House members may be able to get a hold of Trump’s tax returns, using an obscure 100-year-old precedent. And the leadership? Nancy Pelosi, the current Democratic leader, will be up for re-election in December. But there are others who may be interested in the job and many who want her out. “It’s time for people to know when to go.” “Will you vote for Nancy Pelosi?” “Probably not.” “I don’t support Nancy Pelosi.” So, when do they start? The 116th House of Representatives will be sworn in on Jan. 3, 2019.
An array of diverse candidates — many of them women, first-time contenders or both — ended the Republicans’ eight-year grip on the House majority, though Democratic gains did not extend to the Senate.
President Trump may now have to choose between escalating the conflict in Washington or attempting to reach across the aisle.
The results of the governors’ races could also prove significant in setting the nation’s political landscape for the next decade.
“What Happened in the Midterm Elections” was produced by Clare Toeniskoetter, Jessica Cheung and Theo Balcomb, with help from Annie Brown and Andy Mills, and edited by Lisa Tobin.
“The Daily” is produced by Theo Balcomb, Annie Brown, Jessica Cheung, Lynsea Garrison, Michael Simon Johnson, Andy Mills, Neena Pathak, Rachel Quester, Ike Sriskandarajah, Clare Toeniskoetter and Alexandra Leigh Young, and edited by Larissa Anderson, Paige Cowett and Wendy Dorr. Lisa Tobin is our executive producer. Samantha Henig is our editorial director. Brad Fisher is our technical manager. Chris Wood is our sound engineer. Our theme music is by Jim Brunberg and Ben Landsverk of Wonderly.