Facebook failed to closely monitor device makers after granting them access to the personal data of hundreds of millions of people, according to a previously unreported disclosure to Congress last month.
When a team from PricewaterhouseCoopers conducted the initial F.T.C.-mandated assessment in 2013, it tested Facebook’s partnerships with Microsoft and Research in Motion, maker of the BlackBerry handset. In both cases, PricewaterhouseCoopers found only “limited evidence” that Facebook had monitored or checked its partners’ compliance with its data use policies. That finding was redacted from a public version of PricewaterhouseCoopers’s report released by the F.T.C. in June.
Facebook, like other companies under F.T.C. consent decree, largely dictates the scope of each assessment. In two subsequent assessments, Facebook’s October letter suggests, the company was graded on a seemingly less stringent policy with data partners. On those two, Facebook had to show that its partners had agreed to its data use policies.
Because the United States has no general consumer privacy law, F.T.C. consent decrees have emerged as the federal government’s chief means of regulating privacy practices at Facebook, Google and other companies that amass huge amounts of personal data about people who use their products. In letters and congressional testimony, F.T.C. officials have pointed to the decrees as evidence of robust consumer privacy protection in the United States.
Facebook’s letter disclosing the assessors’ findings came in response to questions Mr. Wyden raised during an intelligence hearing in September. The hearing was held just weeks after The Times reported that Facebook had struck data-sharing deals with dozens of phone and tablet manufacturers, including Microsoft, BlackBerry and Amazon.
The October letter to Senator Ron Wyden details Facebook’s oversight of its partnerships with device makers.
While the assessment reports were publicly released by the F.T.C. in June, they included significant redactions, which Facebook and PricewaterhouseCoopers said were necessary to protect trade secrets.
Mr. Wyden, whose staff had viewed the full assessments, said at the hearing that he found parts of the unredacted reports “very troubling” and pressed Sheryl Sandberg, Facebook’s chief operating officer, to release them in their entirety.
The Electronic Privacy Information Center, a Washington-based consumer rights group that helped obtain the 2011 consent decree, is currently suing the agency for release of the full assessments, arguing that the public cannot otherwise judge how effectively the F.T.C. is policing privacy violations.
Facebook’s compliance with the consent decree is the subject of a new F.T.C. investigation opened in the wake of the Cambridge Analytica scandal.
In the letter last month, Facebook’s vice president for United States public policy, Kevin Martin, noted that the assessors’ findings had not caused Facebook to fail PricewaterhouseCoopers’s overall evaluation: The assessors concluded that Facebook was operating “with sufficient effectiveness to provide reasonable assurance” that it was protecting its users’ privacy.
It remains unclear whether Facebook has ever scrutinized how its partner companies handled personal data. A spokeswoman declined to provide any examples of the company’s doing so.
A BlackBerry official, who declined to discuss details of the companies’ data-sharing agreement, said BlackBerry did not think that Facebook had ever audited its data use, but noted that BlackBerry’s business model relies on protecting users’ personal information.