Nine companies will vie for more than $2 billion dollars to build small landers to carry science experiments to the lunar surface.
Astronauts may one day set foot on the moon again, and small robotic spacecraft will be there waiting for them.
NASA announced on Thursday that it had selected nine companies that will compete for billions of dollars in contracts to take small payloads for the agency to the surface of the moon.
“We are building a domestic American capability to get back and forth to the surface of the moon,” said Jim Bridenstine, the NASA administrator. NASA astronauts last landed there in 1972, and no American spacecraft has touched down on the lunar surface in one piece since then.
The Trump administration sees the moon as an opportunity to test technologies as well as new strategies that could reduce the price tag for trips to space, and jump-start new commercial companies.
Cumulatively, the contracts could be worth up to $2.6 billion over 10 years. Flights could begin as soon as next year, and NASA officials are aiming for two a year, or about 20 in all.
Rather than relying on NASA engineers to design the spacecraft, the space agency is publishing the capabilities it needs and requesting proposals from companies to provide those services.
In this approach, NASA would just be one of many customers, Mr. Bridenstine said. The companies could also carry commercial cargo.
While President Obama told NASA to focus on sending astronauts to Mars, largely bypassing the moon, the Trump administration has made the moon a priority, although astronauts would likely not arrive until late in the 2020s. Mr. Bridenstine has also continued talking about Mars as an eventual destination.
Entrepreneurs have long dreamed of enterprises like mining the moon for precious metals and helium isotopes that could be fuel for future fusion reactors, but success has been elusive. The Google Lunar X Prize, started in 2007, announced a $20 million award for the first privately funded spacecraft to land on the moon. But after several extensions, that competition ended quietly this year with none of the finalists even attempting a launch.
But with this program, NASA is looking to replicate the success of SpaceX, the private rocket company led by Elon Musk. SpaceX carries cargo, and soon will carry astronauts, to the International Space Station. NASA provided much of the money needed to develop the Falcon 9 rocket, and SpaceX now has a thriving business launching commercial satellites as well.
For the new NASA program, called Commercial Lunar Payload Services, the moon landers would be far too small to carry people, but they could ferry scientific experiments to the lunar surface. They could also help NASA scout and study potential locations for bases, particularly in the eternally-shadowed craters near the moon’s poles that are filled with frozen water.
Thomas Zurbuchen, NASA’s associate administrator for the science directorate, said there were already many experiments that scientists know they want to send to the moon. He gave the example of retroreflectors — essentially, fancy mirrors that reflect light in the direction it came from. The Apollo astronauts deployed them during their moon landings, but placing additional reflectors on the moon would enable precise measurements of its gravity.
More ambitious science projects could include astronomical observatories on the far side of the moon, where interference from Earth is blocked entirely.
Orbit Beyond of Edison, N.J.
In some ways, the NASA program is a revival of the Lunar X Prize. Astrobotic and Moon Express were founded with the aim of winning that prize. In addition, Orbit Beyond will use the lander developed by Team Indus, the India-based company that was one of the prize’s finalists. Draper is teaming up with a company that grew out of a Japanese Lunar X Prize team — iSpace, which recently secured $90 million in funding of its own.
The nine companies already have not-quite-finished hardware. Other teams have designs that are still on the drawing board or are working on prototypes. Lockheed Martin based its moon lander on InSight, the spacecraft that landed on Mars this week.
Most of the teams said they would not be ready until 2021.
NASA officials said they did not expect all of the companies to succeed. Rather, they likened the effort to high-risk, high-reward bets by venture capital investors.
Whenever they get to the moon, they may not be alone.
SpaceIL, an Israeli company and former X Prize contestant, says it will send a robotic lander to the moon’s surface with SpaceX’s help early next year. And India and China both have announced plans to send robotic explorers to the moon’s surface in 2019.
