For a new A.R. project, we combined 675 photos of the original torch of the Statue of Liberty to allow readers to see it up close as never before.
A central goal of visual journalism is to reduce the distance between the information we journalists gather and the understanding we can convey to readers. And as technologies evolve, the kit of tools and applications we can use to deliver the news to readers is always expanding.
Augmented reality is one such technology, enabled by our mobile platforms, that lets us create experiences that reduce that distance. With A.R., your phone can become a window, through which the physical environment around you is augmented with digital information. This can be anything from contextual information relevant to where you stand, to an object that appears as if it were there in the space with you. It allows you to interact with this virtual object in the same manner as you would the physical environment it has been augmented into.
You may have seen our previous augmented reality projects, including an in-depth look at David Bowie’s visual legacy through the “David Bowie Is” exhibit at the Brooklyn Museum. We brought life-size art objects to our readers, allowing them to walk around Mr. Bowie’s iconic fashion pieces and examine them up close. Or a project aimed to shed light on the nail-biting rescue of a Thai boys’ soccer team from deep inside a cave, in which we used the technology to project accurate slices of the cave at key junctures to give a better sense of what rescue divers had to contend with.
An augmented reality feature we published this month with the Metropolitan section, titled “Take a Tour of Lady Liberty’s Torch (Right This Second),” demonstrates what is now possible. The article provides a history of the original torch, which has been on display in the statue’s pedestal since it was replaced in the 1980s. Surely if we could deliver every reader to the inside of the pedestal to view the torch firsthand, that would be the best way to convey its shape, its size, its details and perhaps its grandeur.
Augmented reality allows us to deliver the next best thing — we can give readers the experience of placing a photographic, three-dimensional capture of the torch into their immediate environment, in life size, and then to walk around it, up to it, even on it.
Capturing the torch in this way took the special expertise of our newsroom staff, and a bit of a balancing act.
“We left Lower Manhattan at dawn, taking the 6:30 a.m. ferry from Battery Park with all the employees who work on the island,” explained Niko Koppel, a producer on the immersive storytelling team. He was joined by the graphics editor Mika Gröndahl. Neither of them had ever been to Liberty Island before. “This was truly an amazing way to see it, crossing New York harbor to the illuminated statue at sunrise,” he said.
When Niko and Mika arrived at the pedestal of the statue, they were overwhelmed: It was a dark, cavernous space, and the torch is 16 and a half feet tall, almost reaching the ceiling. They used 13 LED lights to illuminate the torch from all sides, and then began shooting, first with wide shots of the torch, lit and unlit, from the balcony.
Plans had been in the works for the Metropolitan section to produce this story for some time, timed to coincide with the torch’s coming move to a more permanent home in a new museum nearby. Jeffrey Furticella, a photo editor for the Metro desk, initially suggested the inclusion of an augmented reality component, noting that it seemed like a good opportunity to use the technology since it was a story so focused on one particular object.
