LONDON — Olivia Colman does not have a process. She is apologetic, since she understands that this makes for uninteresting conversation about the many fascinating characters she has played — most recently the imperious, needy, vulnerable, monstrous Queen Anne in Yorgos Lanthimos’s “The Favourite,” for which she is hotly tipped as a best actress Academy Award nominee.
But Colman has no trouble being less than lovable on screen. In Paddy Considine’s “Tyrannosaur,” she played a meekly religious, abused wife; in “Fleabag” a hilariously poisonous stepmother; in “Run,” a tough-as-nails inner city mother; in “Broadchurch” she was an often tearful, often irritable, willfully unglamorous police officer.
In “The Favourite,” Colman’s Anne is jowly, lumbering and capricious; a willful child-woman who screams for attention and vulnerably displays her chronic insecurity and the deep unhappiness occasioned by losing 17 children to miscarriages, stillbirth and childhood death. Anne ruled from 1702-14, during a turbulent period that saw the incorporation of Scotland and England into the single state known as Great Britain, and the country’s long involvement in the War of the Spanish Succession. But the movie focuses on politics only to the extent that they influence the stratagems of the Duchess of Marlborough (Weisz) and her cousin Abigail Hill (Stone) as they scheme for the favors (all of them) of the Queen.
In a telephone interview, Lanthimos said that after seeing Colman’s performance in “Tyrannosaur” and working with her on “The Lobster,” he couldn’t think of anyone else to play Anne, and had shifted the schedule to accommodate her.
Growing up in the city of Norwich, in the east of England, Colman said she dreamed of being an actor from a young age, but “it was a secret dream, like talking to animals.” Instead, she went to teacher training college in Cambridge, where she successfully auditioned for Footlights, an amateur dramatic club run by Cambridge University. There she met her future husband, Ed Sinclair (with whom she has three children), and followed him a year later to the Bristol Old Vic drama school.
Her breakthrough came in 2003, when David Mitchell and Robert Webb, fellow actors at Footlights, asked her to play a central role in “Peep Show,” a series that developed a cult following over nine seasons. Her talent for deadpan comedy didn’t go unnoticed, and Colman began to pick up bigger roles, mostly in sitcoms and comedies.
That led to “Broadchurch,” and the role of Detective Sergeant Ellie Miller, one of the lead investigators (alongside David Tennant’s Detective Inspector Hardy) in a search for the killer of an 11-year-old boy. The series was a huge success in Britain and abroad, and even though Tennant was the bigger name, Colman’s portrayal of a woman enduring the harrowing personal consequences of the investigation made the series hers.
“She brings such humor and vulnerability and playfulness to everything,” she said.
Colman has subsequently starred in several large-scale projects, notably “The Night Manager” (for which she won a Golden Globe) and the coming BBC production of “Les Misérables.” But the call from “The Crown” still came as a shock, she said.
“I was such a massive fan of the show, and I thought Claire Foy was just breathtaking,” she said. “I no idea they were going to recast for season 3 and 4, so hadn’t thought about the role at all.” She did an imitation of her agent calling her and trying to be discreet while she shrieked “the Queen?!” with her phone on loudspeaker.
