Designed as an international contest, the Japan Cup remains a horse racing highlight locally, but has struggled to attract top-quality competition from abroad. The race conflicts with other major races on the global calendar, which draw away many horses.
But this year, there was an unexpected challenge: International horses are finding it difficult to travel to and from Japan in the first place.
In June, Nippon Cargo Airlines was forced by the Japanese government to ground its flights after an error was uncovered in its maintenance records. The airline has usually transported a majority of racehorses going to and from Japan. Some flights have resumed, but it’s not clear if horses will be accepted.
From the 29 international runners who were nominated, two horses accepted and arrived from overseas to run in the Japan Cup: Coolmore’s Capri, who was a dual Group 1 winner in Europe last year, and Clive Washbourn’s Thundering Blue, a Group 2 winner who has competed in Group 1 company in Europe and North America this season. The last foreign horse to win the Japan Cup was Alkaased in 2005.
Naohiro Goda, the international client representative for the Japan Racing Horse Association, said the Japan Cup had struggled to attract international runners before the airline’s problem.
“The standard of Japanese horses is much higher than before, and the competition is much tougher for foreign raiders now,” he said. “Also, trainers in the United States and Europe prefer to ship their horses to run in the Hong Kong International Races, which are scheduled only two weeks after the Japan Cup.
Coolmore routinely runs its horses around the world. As for Thundering Blue, Menuisier said the chance to compete in Japan was too good to pass up. The horse, who lost nine times and was gelded before finally winning a race, has improved with age. He was invited to the Japan Cup after finishing third in the Juddmonte International Stakes in England, then he won the Stockholm Cup International in Sweden and was second in the Canadian International Stakes.
The racing association helps with importing horses, but the airline’s grounding has also kept Japanese horses from competing elsewhere. As racing has become more global, the inability to ship a horse was an unexpected problem for the Japanese industry.
A recent example is Sunday Racing’s Aerolithe, who was going to run in the Breeders’ Cup Mile, but there was no way to the United States.
While a limited number of horses from Japan aim to race overseas, the Japanese are known for being active at major thoroughbred sales around the world and they routinely buy horses for seven figures. The Yoshida family has had to be creative with shipping their new purchases home.
