As a child of the Harlem Renaissance, Roy DeCarava grew up surrounded by black artists, writers and thinkers. And while his community often faced racism and discrimination, Harlem residents did not let stereotypes define them. Instead, they sought out ways to challenge these narrow expectations.
When he became the first black photographer to win a Guggenheim fellowship, in 1952, Mr. DeCarava took the opportunity to continue documenting Harlem and its residents. His work became the basis for “The Sweet Flypaper of Life,” a best-selling collaboration with Langston Hughes.
In their joint work, Mr. DeCarava and Mr. Hughes celebrated the art of living through difficult times — and they imbued it with spiritual wisdom. First published in 1955 (and now in its fourth printing since 1983), “The Sweet Flypaper of Life” is now available again from First Print Press. The pocket-size book features 141 silver gelatin photographs chosen by Mr. Hughes alongside his fictional landscape reflecting on a city within a city.
Mr. DeCarava was an unknown photographer when he met Mr. Hughes one summer evening in the early 1950s while photographing on the street. Impressed by Mr. DeCarava’s work, Mr. Hughes — already a well-established poet — helped Mr. DeCarava get his first book deal with his publisher, Simon & Schuster. The publisher’s only condition was that Mr. Hughes had to write the accompanying text.
Mr. DeCarava was also a master of spatial elements who found nuance in shadows and darker tones. He had a creative sensibility that made his style distinct from that of his peers, including the portrait photographer, James Van Der Zee, and the photojournalist, Gordon Parks. It was this approach that attracted Mr. Hughes.
Shortly after “The Sweet Flypaper of Life” was published, Mr. DeCarava opened his own gallery, in his brownstone apartment in Harlem, and in 1963, he became the first director of the Kamoinge Workshop, a Harlem-based collective that supported the work of black photographers, and is still active today. Next year, First Print Press, David Zwirner Books and the DeCarava Archives plan to republish “The Sound I Saw,” a book of Mr. DeCarava’s jazz photography. They will also launch an exhibit about his working life, which will be presented at David Zwirner.
Follow Fayemi Shakur on Twitter: @7fayemi. You can also find Lens on Facebook, Instagram and on Twitter @nytimesphoto.