July, 2020: Updated with new opportunities.
When we ask teachers why they bring their classes to our site, we always hear one answer first: Posting in our public forums gives young people an “authentic audience” for their voices and ideas.
We’re honored to serve that role, and this week we’ll be talking about it on a panel at the National Council of Teachers of English conference. As a companion to our talk, on the theme of “Why You Should Publish Student Work — and Where and How to Do It,” we’ve compiled this list of opportunities specifically for teenage writers and visual artists. We hope, with your help, to crowdsource even more.
The list begins with our own offerings and those of our N.C.T.E. panel partner, the Scholastic Art & Writing Awards, and goes on to name dozens more that are open to young people in the United States — though many, including ours, also accept work from students around the world.
Please note what we did NOT include: In-person events or competitions; sites that do not seem to be taking submissions now or in the near future; opportunities open only to those from a specific state or region; opportunities open only to members of specific organizations; or competitions that require the use of paid products.
But, of course, we know this list is incomplete. What should we add? Let us know in the comments, or by writing to |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| and thank you.
Note: The descriptions below have been taken directly from the sites themselves. Please check the rules and requirements for each to decide if they are right for your students.
Our Student Opinion question and Picture Prompt offer anyone 13 to 19 years old a place to publicly post writing that is read by our editors and other students around the world. We are not looking for formal work here; instead, we encourage students to use these forums to hone their voices, ideas and opinions; show us their thinking; and participate in civil discussion about issues from politics to pop culture. Each week, we publish a roundup of favorite responses.
The nation’s longest-running and most prestigious recognition program for creative teenagers in grades 7 to 12. In 2018, students submitted nearly 350,000 works of visual art and writing to the Scholastic Awards; more than 90,000 works were recognized at the regional level and celebrated in local exhibitions and ceremonies. The top art and writing at the regional level were moved onto the national stage, where more than 2,800 students earned National Medals. National Medalists and their educators were celebrated at the National Ceremony at Carnegie Hall in New York City.
Categories include: Critical Essay; Dramatic Script; Flash Fiction; Humor; Journalism; Novel Writing; Personal Essay & Memoir; Poetry; Science Fiction & Fantasy; Short Story; Writing Portfolio (graduating seniors only); Architecture & Industrial Design; Ceramics & Glass; Comic Art; Design; Digital Art; Drawing & Illustration; Editorial Cartoon; Fashion; Film & Animation; Jewelry; Mixed Media; Painting; Photography; Printmaking; Sculpture; Video Game Design; Art Portfolio (graduating seniors only) and Future New.
The journal has its eyes focused ahead, seeking to showcase what its global staff of emerging writers sees as the future of poetry, prose and art. We’re looking for work that’s bizarre, authentic, subtle, outrageous, indefinable, raw, paradoxical. We’ve got our eyes on the horizon.
The online publication is known for featuring quality, creative, thoughtful and often thought-provoking written and artistic work written and edited by children and teenagers. Accepts writing, art, photography or videography from young people who are 5 to 18 years old.
The best writing and illustrations from entries we receive each year from secondary schools throughout the United States and abroad. Every September we send copies printed by The Patriot News in Mechanicsburg, Pa., to approximately 3,000 schools. Susquehanna University and the Writers Institute invite high school students to submit fiction, memoir, personal essay, photography and/or poetry.
Publishes the work of high-school-age writers and artists from around the globe. All forms of original writing and art are accepted as submissions for our biannual journal.
elementia is a literary arts magazine published to represent and uplift young adults. We accept original poetry, fiction, nonfiction, graphic stories, photography and illustrations.
An international teen anthology of poetry and art. In print for 20 years, we accept submissions from teenagers from around the world. Each year we publish the best of all entries received.
A yearlong achievement program designed to recruit, stimulate, and encourage high academic and cultural achievement among African-American high school students.
ACT-SO includes 32 competitions in STEM, humanities, business, and performing, visual and culinary arts. Almost 300,000 young people have participated from the program since its inception.
The National YoungArts Foundation (YoungArts) was established in 1981 to identify and nurture the most accomplished young artists in the visual, literary, design and performing arts, and assist them at critical junctures in their educational and professional development. YoungArts’ signature program is an annual application-based award for emerging artists ages 15 to 18 or in grades 10 to 12 from across the United States in categories that include cinematic arts; classical music; dance; design arts; jazz; photography; theater; visual arts; voice; and writing.
Parallax Literary Magazine has been published by the Creative Writing department of Idyllwild Arts Academy since 1997. Idyllwild Arts Academy is a college preparatory boarding high school dedicated to the passion of young artists. Created, designed, and run by students, Parallax has always championed the high school writer by publishing the best of Idyllwild students’ creative writing and visual art. In 2011 Parallax expanded by adding an online component, which accepts submissions from high school students worldwide. The website also showcases student book reviews and writer interviews for the first time.
Our free, annual, international youth poetry and art contest — the largest in the world — inspires children ages 5 to 19 to translate their observations into creative expression.
Sandpiper is a journal of literature and art devoted to uplifting the voices of those emerging and underrepresented in the literary scene, including but not limited to those of class, race, ability, gender, sexual orientation, and intersectional identity. However, all submissions are welcome. Sandpiper accepts poetry, prose, art, and photography.
We are a nonprofit magazine for youth that encourages communication, cooperation, creativity and celebration of cultural and environmental richness. It provides a playful forum for sharing ideas and experiences among youth from different countries and cultures. We are an ad-free, ecologically-aware, literary magazine printed on recycled paper with soy ink. Accepts many kinds of writing, including essays, stories, letters to the editor, riddles and proverbs, as well as drawings, paintings and photos.
A national teen magazine, book series, and website devoted entirely to teenage writing, art, photos, and forums. For over 25 years, Teen Ink has offered teenagers the opportunity to publish their creative work and opinions on issues that affect their lives — everything from love and family to school, current events, and self-esteem. We have no staff writers or artists; we depend completely on submissions from teenagers around the world for our content. Teen Ink has the largest distribution of any publication of its kind.
The Adroit Prizes are awarded annually to two students of secondary or undergraduate status. We’re fortunate to receive exceptional work from emerging writers in high school and college, and the best of the best will be recognized by the Adroit Prizes.
Bennington launched the Young Writers Awards to promote excellence in writing at the high school level. Our goal with this competition is to recognize outstanding writing achievement by high school students. Each year, students in the 10th, 11th and 12th grades are invited to enter poetry, fiction or nonfiction.
Ember is a semiannual journal of poetry, fiction, and creative nonfiction for all age groups. Submissions for and by readers aged 10 to 18 are strongly encouraged.
Created and edited by teenagers, Ephimiliar focuses on work by unpublished voices and students of all ages. We publish on a rolling basis at the convenience of everyone’s urgent yet sporadic writing processes. We are open to working with writers to edit a submission that we feel is a near-fit because we know that neither party would benefit from that rejection.
Fiction and poetry for a general audience, but has a regular section devoted to writing by talented high school writers.
Hypernova Lit is an online journal dedicated to publishing the writing and visual art of teenagers. We seek to cast light on the brilliant work produced by teenagers. We are deeply committed to honesty and fearlessness in the work we publish, with a particular emphasis on teenagers telling their own difficult truths. Out of respect for our writers and artists, we do not censor for language or content.
A literary magazine for young writers with a focus on those in Asian countries, The Foredge Review aims to support teen interest in writing and reading by providing a platform for receiving recognition. We welcome submissions of poetry, flash fiction, and creative nonfiction from anyone 13-18.
To encourage high school juniors to write and to publicly recognize the best student writers.
Since 2009, the Norman Mailer Center has collaborated with the National Council of Teachers of English to present the Mailer Student and Teacher Writing Awards. Awards are given for fiction, nonfiction writing, and poetry. National winners in each category receive a cash prize presented at an award ceremony. Recognition is also extended to writers whose work earns top scores in early evaluation rounds.
The Polyphony Lit Cover Art Contest: High school students from around the world are encouraged to submit visual art for the cover of their annual literary magazine.
The Claudia Ann Seaman Awards for Young Writers: Annual awards to high school students in poetry, short fiction, and creative nonfiction. Each year, a distinguished panel of professional published authors choose one winner and two honorable mentions in each genre. The winners are awarded a $200 cash prize. Students from around the world are encouraged to submit.
Accepts essays, fiction and poetry. All finalists will receive a Certificate of Honorable Mention. All winners will be considered for publication in Venture, Rider’s literary magazine.
We’re a community of young writers (ages 13 to 18), hailing from over 120 countries. Join our global platform, and explore our ever-changing library of prompts as you establish a regular writing practice and expand your repertoire of styles, all while building your portfolio of polished work. Enter competitions for the chance to receive feedback from authors, writing teachers, and other experts in the field.
The Concord Review, Inc., was founded in March 1987 to recognize and to publish exemplary history essays by high school students in the English-speaking world. With the Fall Issue (#118), 1,196 research papers (average 7,500 words, with endnotes and bibliography) have been published from authors in 45 states and 40 other countries. The Concord Review remains the only quarterly journal in the world to publish the academic history papers of secondary students.
The Curieux Academic Journal is an academic journal written entirely by high school students.
The Milking Cat is dedicated to providing weekly comedic pieces from a variety of aspiring high school comics. With pieces ranging from comics and movies to stories and satires, The Milking Cat is the place to be for young comedians.
INKspire is a place for youth to share their stories and offer perspectives on relevant, contemporary issues. Young people can learn from one another, share their stories, thoughts and ideas while connecting with other youth around the world.
Please see the description at the top of this list.
Young Post is a teen print news and English-teaching product that is part of the South China Morning Post. While we are a Hong Kong product, we do welcome students from around the world in our pages and on our site. We have a Junior Reporters club, in which students learn reporting skills, and pitch and contribute stories. We have local members who have moved overseas for senior school or university who still contribute, but it would be wonderful to hear from more students interested in sharing stories that matter to them with their Asian peers.
We are a site for conversations. We invite youth of all ages to voice their thoughts about their passions, to explain things they understand well, to wonder about things they have just begun to understand, and to share discussion posts with other young people using as many different genres and media as they can imagine!
Why Diplomacy and Peacebuilding Matter: In a 1,000- to 1,250-word essay, identify two cases — one you deem successful and one you deem unsuccessful — where the U.S. pursued an integrated approach to build peace in a conflict-affected country.
Guidelines for the 2019 International Essay Contest for Young People will be announced at the end of January 2019.
Describe and analyze an act of political courage by a US elected official who served during or after 1917.
A publication by and for youth in foster care, the stories in Represent give inspiration and information, while offering staff insight into those teenagers’ struggles.
What are the essential qualities of a citizen in your community in 21st-century America? We encourage you to bring emotion, creativity, specific examples (including current events), and well-researched facts into what you write. A good essay will demonstrate how citizenship is not an abstract idea, but is, in fact, action inspired by constitutional principles. We can’t wait to see what citizenship looks like in your community!
National Novel Writing Month is a fun, empowering approach to creative writing. The challenge: draft an entire novel in just one month. For 30 wild, exciting, surprising days, you get to lock away your inner editor, let your imagination take over, and just create! Our Young Writers Program supports under-18 writers and K-12 educators as they participate in our flagship event each November, and take part in smaller writing challenges year-round.
Summer Writing: Stay cool and creative all summer long by participating in Camp NaNoWriMo’s July session—either online here or over at Camp NaNoWriMo, or offline by using our writer-friendly, print-out-able Summer Writing Program resources. Choose a project you care about, set an ambitious goal, get feedback on your progress, and receive support from an international community of fellow writers.
An award-winning quarterly literary magazine that features the work of today’s best teen writers (ages 13-19).
We’re inviting all high-school age students to submit unpublished, original English-language stories of up to 2,000 words in length for the 4th Annual “Storytellers of Tomorrow” Contest. The criteria for earning prizes in this contest is simply overall quality, meaning that well-edited, engaging, and evocative stories have the best chance of winning over the judges.
These awards are offered to recognize superior work by student journalists usually as individuals but sometimes as an entire staff working with either print or online media.
Each year, the National Scholastic Press Association presents the Individual Awards, honoring the best individuals in scholastic journalism. There are six categories. Entries are judged by teams of professionals with experience and expertise in the area of each particular contest. The contests are open to any student on staff of an N.S.P.A. member publication.
We encourage, support and recognize individual student initiative and achievement in scholastic journalism, regardless the medium.
A multimedia education project that invited young people in grades 5 through 12 to write letters in response to poems written and read by some of the award-winning poets who serve on the Academy of American Poets Board of Chancellors.
A letter-writing competition for high school students that runs from March 31, 2019 to April 8, 2019. We invite you to submit a letter to the editor in response to a Times news article, editorial, column or Op-Ed in the last few days. We will publish a selection of our favorites.
YCteen is written by a staff of teen writers who work in our New York City newsroom. But writing is a form of conversation, and we want you to join in. We invite you to submit letter to the writer, responding to their story. This is an opportunity to express your opinion or present your own point of view on a story you’ve read.
Eligibility for this annual playwriting contest is limited to students in the 11th grade in the U.S. (or international equivalent of the 11th grade).
Young writers with disabilities and collaborative groups that include students with disabilities, in the U.S. grades 6-12 (or equivalents) or ages 11-18 for non-U.S. students, are invited to explore the disability experience through the art of writing for performance — in the form of plays, screenplays, or music theater. Writers are encouraged to craft short (10 minute) works from their own experiences and observations in the style of realism, through the creation of fictional characters and settings, or writing metaphorically or abstractly about the disability experience.
An annual Off-Broadway festival of one-act plays written by playwrights ages 6 to 18 and produced, designed, directed, and acted by New York theater professionals.
The Young Playwrights Festival takes place each spring at the Eugene O’Neill Theater Center. If your play is selected for the festival, you will work with a creative team composed of National Theater Institute alumni — a director, dramaturg, designer, and actors to develop and stage your script.
We welcome submissions of challenging, entertaining plays and musicals that are appropriate for teen and younger actors and/or audiences.
Sponsored by Hollins University, the Nancy Thorp Poetry Contest provides scholarships, prizes, and recognition for the best poems submitted by high-school-aged women.
Recognizes outstanding young poets and is open to high school sophomores and juniors throughout the world. The contest winner receives a full scholarship to the Kenyon Review Young Writers workshop.
Whether you are a published poet, have never written a poem, or have the writing of a poem on your bucket list, the Poetry Matters Project invites you to take the “Poetry Month Challenge” where participants challenge their friends, and family to write a poem of no more than 30 lines in 30 days. Entries can be posted at You can send your entry as an audio recording, document file, mp3, or video file.
The Leonard L. Milberg ’53 High School Poetry Prize recognizes outstanding work by student writers in the 11th grade in the U.S. or abroad.
An innovative, extracurricular program that trains creative high school communicators to bring complex science to the general public through the power of story. Science and technology are advancing exponentially, yet fewer than 7 percent of American adults are scientifically literate. With growing medical, environmental and social issues facing us all, it is essential that the next generation of communicators be prepared to help people make sense of emerging science that affects their personal health and well-being, as well as that of the world around them.
EarthPlex is the climate platform for teens founded by a fourteen-year-old. Any teenager can submit a post about climate change or read quality content about the environment, ways we can protect it, the impact of corporations, and more. Our mission is to give those under eighteen a voice in the battle against climate change.
THINK is an annual science research and innovation competition for high school students. Rather than requiring students to have completed a research project before applying, THINK instead caters to students who have done extensive research on the background of a potential research project and are looking for additional guidance in the early stages of their project. The program is organized by a group of undergraduates at MIT.
Students submit entries to their representative’s office, and panels of district artists select the winning entries. Winners are recognized both in their district and at an annual awards ceremony in Washington. The winning works are displayed for one year at the U.S. Capitol.
Calling all K-12 students — bring your creativity to life in a Doodle of the Google logo, using any medium you choose for the chance to be a Doodle 4 Google winner. The National Winner’s artwork will be featured on the Google home page.
The Gutenberg Award recognizes exceptional achievement in the field of graphic arts. Awards are available for printed items, websites, and photographs. Entries may be submitted by graphic arts students at any educational level including those in university, college, community-college, postsecondary technical school, high school vocational, high school technology education, and junior high/middle school technology education programs. There are three different Gutenberg competitions: print, website, and photography.
High school students may submit visual art and photography, painting, drawing, ceramics, glass, sculpture, mixed media, printmaking, weaving, digital and 35mm photography.
The All American High School Film Festival is the largest student film festival in the world. Our festival offers an unparalleled experience designed specifically to promote and empower the future of film. Each October, thousands of student filmmakers join us in New York City for an action-packed weekend of resources and entertainment, including our Teen Indie Awards Show, where we hand out over $400,000 in prizes and scholarships.
The American Youth Film Festival is an opportunity for the youth to showcase their movie making skills. Categories include animation; comedy; commercials; documentary; feature; music video; public service announcements; science fiction; and short.
The Boulder International Film Festival is currently accepting entries of short films made by teenagers (ages 12-18) for the Boulder International Film Festival Youth Pavilion. Winners must be present at Teen Opening Night the evening of March 1.
Make a three-minute video explaining a big idea in physics, life sciences, mathematics or the science of the Covid-19 pandemic.
Cinema/Chicago’s CineYouth Film Festival is designed to encourage youth filmmakers in their creative endeavors. CineYouth provides opportunities for young filmmakers to articulate themselves artistically, and have their voice heard. Held annually in Chicago, CineYouth is a three-day festival celebrating and fostering the creativity of filmmakers 22 years old and younger by screening officially selected work and encouraging their creative endeavors by presenting a filmmaking workshop, discussions and panels.
GIF IT UP is an annual international gif-making campaign that encourages people to create new, fun, and unique gif artworks from digitized cultural heritage materials. Entrants are invited to search, discover, adapt, and reuse public domain and openly licensed video clips, images, art, documents, or other materials found in D.P.L.A. or international partner libraries Europeana, Trove, and DigitalNZ.
The High School Film Competition encourages tomorrow’s filmmakers to create films that inspire filmmakers and audiences through the transformative power of the art form. Students may submit short films under 15 minutes in length that are documentary or narrative; live-action or animated.
The Live Más Scholarship is not based on your grades or how well you play sports. No essays, no test scores, no right or wrong answers. We’re looking for the next generation of innovators, creators and dreamers who want to make a difference in the world.Submit a video (2 minutes or less in length) that tells us the story of your life’s passion. It could be a short film, animation or just a simple testimonial. This is not about how well you can make a film – we just want you to show us your passion and explain why you should be considered for a Live Más Scholarship.
An international competition for narrative, nonfiction and animated films under 40 minutes in length created by filmmakers aged 18 and under.
Celebrates the cinematic works, visions, and perspectives of young people from around the world. Through the exhibition of youth-created media, the festival seeks to create a forum for young filmmakers and encourage freedom of expression through cinema. The free event features a screening of short films created by filmmakers 18 years and younger.
Filmmakers who are age 18 and under can send work to FutureWave Shorts.
Create a short video – up to 60 seconds – about human population growth that highlights one of the following global challenges: Preserving Biodiversity, Sustainable Resource Use, Protecting Human Rights.
The A.A.P.T. High School Physics Photo Contest is an international competition for high school students. For many years this contest has provided teachers and students an opportunity to learn about the physics behind natural and contrived situations by creating visual and written illustrations of various physical concepts. Students compete in an international arena with more than 1,000 of their peers for recognition and prizes.
Wildlife Photographer of the Year uses photography to challenge perceptions about the natural world, helping to promote sustainability and the conservation of wildlife. We celebrate biodiversity, evolution and the origins of life, and aim to inspire a greater understanding of nature. We champion ethical wildlife photography. This means we advocate faithful representations of the natural world that are free from excessive digital manipulation, accompanied by honest captions and that display total respect for animals and their environments.
Rocky Mountain School of Photography trains students of all ages to become passionate image-makers through practical, hands-on learning environments for all skill levels. The R.M.S.P. High School Photo Contest is an annual opportunity for students aged 14-18 to submit their best images for the chance to win a new camera and other prizes. The contest opens Dec. 1 and closes Feb. 28.
We are looking for the next generation of talented photographers! The Youth competition, for everyone aged 12-19, recognizes that a love for photography often starts at a young age. The competition helps young photographers grow and flourish into the next stages of their careers. Judges are looking for good composition, creativity and clear photography. The 2019 theme is “Diversity”: In one single image show the judges an example of diversity. To be understood in its widest sense, the image of diversity could concern people, culture or environment and could be of a local or global concern. All techniques and styles are welcomed, and judges will particularly reward creativity.
Do you have an opportunity to add? Let us know by posting a comment or writing to us at LNFeedback@nytimes.com.