Climate|Air-Conditioners Cool the Home but Heat the Planet. Can Anyone Invent a Better One?
Air-Conditioners Cool the Home but Heat the Planet. Can Anyone Invent a Better One?
As the death toll continues to climb from the most destructive wildfire in California’s history, President Trump on Tuesday declared a “major disaster” in the state, paving the way for federal funding to the thousands left homeless by the blaze.
Here on the climate desk, Kendra Pierre-Louis found the president’s claims oversimplified. You can read her fact-check here.
And why are there so many wildfires in California, anyway? Kendra found that there are four key ingredients, and as you might suspect, climate change is playing a role.
Also this week, the International Energy Agency’s World Energy Outlook is out, and Brad Plumer gets to the heart of the matter: The rapid rise of renewable energy and a decline in coal use, on their own, won’t be enough to bend the curve on global warming.
To do that, Brad notes, governments will have to adopt policies on the national level to further drive down planet-warming greenhouse gas emissions. Carbon dioxide emissions are climbing and will continue to do so until 2040, according to the report, unless governments find a way to reduce the need for fossil fuels. That could range from major investments in energy efficiency to expanding technologies like carbon capture for coal- and gas-fired power plants.
Brad also took a deep dive into a government solution on the local level: replacing older diesel-guzzling school buses with electric ones. At $365,000 apiece, he reports, electric buses are still pretty expensive. And critics say there are cheaper and faster ways to clean up the atmosphere. But with costs dropping as technologies like battery storage improve, excitement about electric buses as a creative answer to reducing emissions is rising.
And finally, the Keystone XL oil pipeline is back in the news, after a federal judge ruled last week that the Trump administration had failed to explain how allowing the project to proceed would affect climate change.
President Barack Obama in 2015 rejected a permit for the pipeline, which would connect Canadian oil sands to Gulf Coast refineries. One of President Trump’s first acts in office was to reverse that decision. Now, though, a court is demanding that the administration go back to the drawing board and more fully review the project.
Coral Davenport and I unpack the ruling here.
Can we build a better air-conditioner?
As incomes grow and more people move to cities, and as global temperatures rise, the world is buying more air-conditioners. And as more air-conditioners spin up — you guessed it — they cause more warming, both through the energy they consume and the gases they release.
In fact, the number of air-conditioning units worldwide could surge to 4.5 billion by 2050 from about 1.2 billion today, a new report warns. By the end of the century, household air-conditioning alone could elevate global temperatures by as much as a half-degree Celsius.
Richard Branson, the British entrepreneur and Virgin Group founder, hopes to break that vicious cycle. This week he helped to initiate the Global Cooling Prize, a $3 million technology competition that aims to spur more efficient air-conditioning technology.
“Most air-conditioners, at their core, are still running on 100-year-old vapor compression technology,” Mr. Branson said. “There’s been no incentive for innovation.” He added that the prize isn’t open only to start-ups, but people from all walks of life.
The prize initially offers 10 chosen contenders $200,000 to build prototypes of more efficient cooling methods. That technology will then be tested in a lab as well as in 10 Indian apartments in midsummer.
“We think the world needs air-conditioners that are five times more efficient,” said Iain Campbell of the Rocky Mountain Institute, a Colorado-based nonprofit that wrote the new report and is managing the prize.
One start-up, for example — SkyCool Systems, based in Palo Alto, Calif. — is working on a literally out-of-this-world technology that beams the heat of the sun away from the earth and into space. The technology would take advantage of the ability of infrared light to pass through the atmosphere at certain wavelengths.
There are also more down-to-earth ideas. As my colleague Kendra Pierre-Louis wrote this year, experts say governments should also set efficiency standards for air-conditioners and provide incentives for manufacturers and buyers.
There has been some good news. As part of an agreement known as the Kigali amendment to the Montreal Protocol, some countries are working to phase out refrigerants that are also potent greenhouse gases.
If you’re trying to save a little water in the kitchen, sit back, relax and let your dishwasher do all the work.
It might seem counterintuitive, but it’s true. Most dishwashers today need much less water for a full load than you’d use running your kitchen faucet for just a few minutes.
That’s because dishwashers have come a long way. Today, the average machine certified by the government’s Energy Star program uses 3.5 gallons or less per cycle, according to Einav Henenson, deputy area director for the Arizona Department of Water Resources. That’s down from about 15 gallons per load 20 years ago.
Even the most efficient kitchen faucets move 1.5 gallons of water every minute, Ms. Henenson said. So, if you leave the tap open for just three minutes while hand-washing that huge pile of dishes, you’ll use more water than the machine would have.
Plus, you could have been doing something more fun than washing dishes.
To really save water, run the dishwasher only when full and resist the temptation to rinse every dish, plate and cup in the sink before loading. Most modern dishwashers can handle those sticky, crusty food remnants just fine, said Peter Brostrom, a water efficiency manager for the California Water Resources Control Board. If your machine can’t, scrape all those unsavory bits into the trash instead of sending them down the drain.
What if you don’t have a dishwasher? Try the two-bucket method: Fill a sink with soap and hot water. If you have a double sink, fill the other side with clear water. If you don’t, use a plastic tub. Wash all the dishes in the soap, then rinse.
Good dishwashing habits might not make a huge dent in your overall home water use. Taking a shower and washing clothes are both more water-intensive. But anything that saves water also saves energy and reduces your carbon emissions.
