Most recently, “Beyond the Beautiful Forevers,” by Katherine Boo. I’m astonished and moved to see how she intimately engages and clearly depicts the lives of people living in a slum village next to the airport in Mumbai.
So many — but here I can mention only a handful: the work of Peter Brown, who combines enormous learning with historical imagination, as in his essays in “Society and the Holy in Late Antiquity”; Ramsay MacMullen’s “Enemies of the Roman Order”; Noel Lenski’s “Constantine and the Cities,” which makes brilliant sense of sharply divergent views of Constantine; David Brakke’s “Athanasius and the Politics of Asceticism”; and the one I most recently read, Adi Ophir and Ishay Rosen-Zvi’s new book, “Goy: Israel’s Multiple Others and the Birth of the Gentile.” And I’m delighted that Annette Gordon-Reed’s meticulously researched and intensely contested books on Thomas Jefferson, Sally Hemings and their families have succeeded in changing the previous consensus!
Besides your own, what books (fiction or non) best capture Christianity’s formative years? Have any books on the subject caused you to change your views?
What is your favorite book to assign and discuss with your students?
What books about religion would you recommend to believers? And to nonbelievers?
William James, “The Varieties of Religious Experience” — for anyone curious about the emotional power of religious experience. I love this book!
Poetry, biography, history, since so much of what really happens is weirder than anything we could invent. I avoid science fiction — religious traditions already are packed with fantasy stories — and often skip fiction, unless it’s amazing, and then irresistible.
Although this question is, of course, totally counterfactual, the answer is obvious: the United States Constitution and the Bill of Rights.
Delighted to imagine a table for six, with Barack Obama, Michelle Obama — whose forthcoming book I can’t wait to read — and David Remnick, Jacqueline Novogratz and Madeleine Albright.
Poetry, always — a worn navy blue copy of the Oxford Book of English Verse, which captivated me when I first discovered it at age 14, starting with Anonymous’s “O Western wind, when wilt thou blow” and then going on to all the poems that sing, like those of Robert Herrick, John Donne and Christina Georgina Rossetti; some slender books by contemporary poets, including C. K. Williams, Sharon Olds, Tracy K. Smith, Marie Howe, Kevin Young, and Robert Pinsky’s anthology, “Essential Pleasures,” which these surely are!