 Democratic candidates are running from your leadership, declaring it time for a new generation in Washington even as they welcome endorsements from Joe Biden, who’s been around nearly two decades longer.
“How does one deal with this negative public sentiment, and reorganizing your coalition and bringing them back under your leadership and support for you?” he says in front of the standing-room crowd at the John F. Kennedy School of Government here.
In South Florida two days later, Nancy Pelosi is still not running away.
The caricatures come easily. One ad — Republicans have run more than 61,000 featuring her in the last six weeks, more than either party has run about President Trump — depicts a California congressman walking in a cheap version of Ms. Pelosi’s signature stilettos, more streetwalker than former speaker. Has anyone ever attempted to tar a candidate with Chuck Schumer’s reading glasses or Mitch McConnell’s wingtips?
But there is something different this year. With more women than ever running for the House — most of them Democrats — Ms. Pelosi does not just know her power, to use the slogan she repeats to female candidates, she is declaring it. She tells audiences she is a “dazzling fund-raiser” (she has brought in half of every dollar raised by the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee) and a “master legislator” (the one who shepherded and protected the health care legislation that so many Democrats are running on).
Even Republican polling shows that the ads against her aren’t moving many people; she’s more popular than Mr. Trump and the other big three leaders in Congress. That’s not saying much — none of them would win a contest — but voters care less about her than they do about immigration, health care, corruption, gun policy and Mr. Trump.
She has spent months crisscrossing the country campaigning for this new generation, excited for what she calls a “watershed year” for women in the House; she came to Congress five years before the Year of the Woman in 1992, after raising her five children, and there were only 23 female House members. She moves from New York to Boston to Florida in a day with no evidence of weariness, raising money, rallying volunteers in districts the Democrats are hoping to flip, whispering to candidates, promoting the health care law — all, to paraphrase the old line about Ginger Rogers, in three-inch heels.
And the surging numbers of women turning out in politics this year are speaking up for her, defending her against what they see as Republican-stoked misogyny and ageism.
 “I am in awe of her,” Ms. Mack said after.
Ms. Pelosi tells female candidates they have to be ready, to know their issues cold and to have a plan: “I don’t want you to be intimidated by anything people will say, because they’re always trying to diminish whatever it is we have done,” she told the audience at Emerge.
She has been urging Democrats to put aside thoughts of a “wave” or a “tsunami” — it’s the drops of water that count. “Conor Lamb won by 627 votes,” she reminded volunteers.
Within her party, the criticism of Ms. Pelosi is that she hasn’t done enough to help the Democrats recognize and cultivate younger leaders and the emerging style of politics: the flood of small donors and the young, often outsider candidates and grass-roots groups that have flourished since 2016. With her at the head, the party can seem “off in a tower somewhere,” said Tahra Goraya, 45, a master’s student at Harvard who has worked at nonprofit groups for children and Muslim rights.
Given the criticism, it was surprising to see Ms. Pelosi’s obvious familiarity with the Parkland students, who have become emblems of the new generation, as she spent more than an hour talking to them in South Florida last month.
The other activists prevailed on Mr. Hogg to apologize to Ms. Pelosi in August, after his derogatory remarks to New York magazine. She responded by setting up a monthly call between her and young activists across the country.
In her 15 years as leader, 68 new Democratic women have entered the House, and the total has risen to 65 from 42.
She’s pragmatic about those who’ve run ads against her.
There are roughly two dozen votes against her bid for speakership, not enough to sink her; some of the Democratic candidates saying they won’t vote for her are in Republican districts where they’re unlikely to win.
“Bridge within the party?” asked Mark Gearan, her interviewer at the Kennedy School. “Bridge — how are you referencing the bridge?” His voice trailed off as she gave him the kind of look that is most withering when it comes from a mother.
With days to go, Nancy Pelosi was not agonizing, she was organizing her grandson Paul’s 12th birthday party. She helped him and his brother, Thomas, make their Halloween costumes. For Thomas, a hamburger (his best friend was fries). For Paul, a skeleton outfit and a mask of George W. Bush: The Ghost of G.O.P. Past.