The latest criminal charges against Michael D. Cohen, President Trump’s longtime fixer, for lying about a Moscow hotel deal raised questions of whether Mr. Cohen created new legal risks for Mr. Trump or his family members, possibly by contradicting what they told investigators about the same project.
The answer, at least according to the president’s lawyers and people close to his family, is no. Although Mr. Trump’s lawyers have long worried that the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, is trying to catch Mr. Trump in a lie, they said Mr. Cohen’s new account of the Trump Organization’s abortive hotel project in Moscow essentially matches what Mr. Trump himself stated in written answers delivered to prosecutors just nine days ago.
Mr. Cohen might have lied to the authorities about aspects of the deal, as the complaint charges, they said, but the president did not.
“The president said there was a proposal, it was discussed with Cohen, there was a nonbinding letter of intent and it didn’t go beyond that,” said Rudolph W. Giuliani, one of Mr. Trump’s lawyers, who with others negotiated the president’s responses to Mr. Mueller’s questions for nearly a year. He said prosecutors did not raise certain details that Mr. Cohen now says he misled Congress about — including how long the hotel project stayed alive — and that the president did not volunteer those details.
Notes by the president’s lawyers this year show that prosecutors were trying to scrutinize Mr. Trump’s business dealings in Russia during the campaign, including what he knew about the hotel deal that Mr. Cohen was pursuing with Felix Sater, another business associate.
“What interaction and communication did you have with Michael Cohen, Felix Sater and others, including foreign nationals, regarding real estate developments in Russia during the period of the campaign?” Mr. Mueller’s team asked in a meeting with Mr. Trump’s lawyers, according to the notes.
Mr. Cohen’s new account of the hotel deal will inevitably be compared not only to the president’s, but also to those of Donald Trump Jr., his eldest son, who testified repeatedly before congressional committees last year about that project and other matters. The complaint states that Mr. Cohen misled Congress about the fact that he had briefed Trump family members about the project. Although the family members were not named, a person familiar with the situation said Mr. Cohen discussed the deal with Donald Trump Jr. and Ivanka Trump.
Testifying before the Senate Judiciary Committee in September 2017, the younger Mr. Trump said that he was only “peripherally aware” of the proposed venture to build a new Moscow hotel bearing the Trump name. Most of what he knew about it, he said, he had learned recently while preparing to testify. He told the committee that Mr. Cohen pursued the project in 2015 and told the House Intelligence Committee that the deal fell dormant as of June 2016 — an accurate date, according to Thursday’s court documents.
Lawyers for Ms. Trump and her brother declined to comment on their interactions with Mr. Cohen about the project. But people close to the Trump family said that while emails indicate that both of them were aware of Mr. Cohen’s efforts to get it off the ground in 2015, their involvement appears to end in January 2016. If Mr. Cohen tried to continue with the project after that, these people added, they did not know.
The president’s critics will also inevitably seek to learn whether he knew that Mr. Cohen, then still a trusted aide, falsely testified to Congress last year. As they continue to do, Mr. Trump’s lawyers then closely monitored what witnesses like Mr. Cohen were telling the authorities through joint defense agreements with their lawyers.
But even if the president knew that Mr. Cohen misled Congress, legal experts said, he is not in legal jeopardy as long as he did not ask Mr. Cohen to lie. And there is no allegation that he did so.
The latest complaint, on its face, seems less worrisome for the president than the previous one lodged against Mr. Cohen in August, said Chuck Rosenberg, a former United States attorney and senior F.B.I. official. In that case, Mr. Cohen directly implicated Mr. Trump in a crime, saying he instructed him to pay money to two women to cover up a potential sex scandal that he feared could endanger his presidential candidacy. Mr. Cohen pleaded guilty to campaign finance violations and a host of other charges for which he has yet to be sentenced.
The president lashed out fiercely at Mr. Cohen on Thursday, calling him a “weak” prevaricator who concocted a false tale about the hotel deal in hopes of winning a lesser punishment. That charge conflicts with Mr. Giuliani’s assertion that Mr. Cohen and Mr. Trump have now given prosecutors much the same account.
Asked how he reconciled the seeming contradiction, Mr. Giuliani blamed Mr. Cohen.
