Closer to home, China has continued to place military equipment and installations on rocks and reefs in the South China Sea, over which it claims sovereignty. And it is persuading some nations to sever diplomatic ties with Taiwan while forcing foreign companies, including hotels and airlines, to drop any mention of Taiwan.
There is a consensus in Washington that American officials need to find ways of pushing back.
In the South China Sea, that has mainly taken the form of what are called freedom-of-navigation operations by the Navy, in which ships sail near the islands or features claimed by Beijing to establish that the waters are international — and not Chinese territory. On Sept. 30, American and Chinese warships nearly collided, coming within 45 yards of each other.
On Tuesday, Mr. Pence’s plane flew over the South China Sea to Singapore, where he attended the annual summit meeting of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Mr. Pence told a Washington Post columnist on the plane that the flight, which passed within 50 miles of the contested Spratly Islands, was a type of freedom-of-navigation operation.
Graham Allison, a Harvard Kennedy School professor who wrote a book on the potential for war between the United States and China, said most people in the region had thought it was “game over” on the South China Sea — too late to roll back China’s presence from rocks and reefs, as well as islands it created by dredging sand.
But “the Trump administration now means to fight back vigorously on all fronts, including on the South China Sea — and perhaps even on Taiwan,” Mr. Allison said.
Last Friday, at the close of the Washington meeting with their Chinese counterparts, Mr. Pompeo and Mr. Mattis made sharp comments on Pacific issues.
“Regarding our strong ties with a democratic Taiwan, I reiterated the U.S. policy has not changed and that we are concerned about China’s increasing efforts to coerce others, constraining Taiwan’s international space,” Mr. Pompeo said, notably, in opening remarks to journalists.
Later, Gen. Wei Fenghe, the Chinese defense minister, made his own assertive comments on Taiwan, referencing the American Civil War and the United States Pledge of Allegiance.
Analysts in Washington took note of the remarks.
The United States has been more aggressive in defending Taiwanese interests since John R. Bolton became national security adviser in April.
Last month, the Pentagon sailed two warships through the Taiwan Strait, which underscored the potential for conflict.
The White House had initially considered sending an aircraft carrier through the strait — something the United States has not done since 2007. That most likely would have ignited a furious response from China. Instead, the Pentagon sent a cruiser and a destroyer.
Defense Department officials had argued that the carrier would be too provocative at a time when Washington and Beijing are already at loggerheads over trade and other issues. That includes Communist Party repression of ethnic Uighur Muslims, which Mr. Pompeo regularly denounces. On Wednesday, American legislators introduced bills calling on the Trump administration to take action to defend the Uighurs.
Mr. Mattis and Mr. Wei have tried to lower the temperature on tensions in the Pacific. Before the Washington talks, the two met in Singapore last month on the sidelines of a conclave of Southeast Asian defense ministers.
But one Defense Department official said that cordial talks were the limits of what the two nations could achieve for now. Both countries have dug into seemingly nonnegotiable positions on China’s militarization of disputed land features in the South China Sea — the issue that most bedevils the military relationship.
The Chinese do not describe their actions as militarization; they accuse the United States of militarizing the sea with its freedom-of-navigation ship operations and overflights. Now, officials from Britain and France say their navies are also taking part in the operations, even though Southeast Asian nations contesting China’s claims have not publicly committed to participating.
“The Chinese side made it clear to the United States that it should stop sending its vessels and military aircraft close to Chinese islands and reefs, and stop actions that undermine China’s sovereignty and security interest,” Mr. Yang said.
