As residents recovered and demanded an explanation, The Times asked readers to share their experiences. We’re continuing to collect information and provide updates as they become available.
On Friday morning, the snow from an early winter storm started to melt, and people in and around New York City wanted answers from their government officials.
But on Thursday night, they were just trying to get home.
The region was crippled by snow and ice, with the effects ranging from felled tree branches in city neighborhoods to children trapped on school buses for hours. In New Jersey, one person died after an accident involving a train and a car, said Gov. Philip D. Murphy.
Ten. And. A. Half. Hours.
It usually takes Brian G. Andersson about 45 minutes to travel the five miles from his office in one part of the Bronx to his home in Woodlawn.
On Thursday night, the trip took 10 and a half hours.
The journey started around 5 p.m., Mr. Andersson said. While he usually travels by subway or bus, he and his wife had planned to see a movie, so she drove to pick him up.
They didn’t make the screening. By the time Mr. Andersson left, the snow was heavy enough that they decided to head home. The problem was how to get there.
As they plotted a route, Mr. Andersson and his wife looked on Waze and Google Maps to find the least-clogged streets. They didn’t have much luck.
Eventually, they detoured around Yankee Stadium and headed home. They wouldn’t arrive until the next morning.
Kim Hoyos, 23, who lives in Parsippany, N.J., left her office early to try and beat the rush. By the time she arrived at the Port Authority Bus Terminal at 4:45 p.m., she said, the crowds were massive and escalators to upper floors were blocked.
With her phone slow and no working Wi-Fi, Ms. Hoyos wasn’t sure whether her bus had been canceled or delayed. So she waited it out, staying at the bus station for more than two hours as she tried to get more information.
As more people kept arriving, the whole area began to feel “very, very claustrophobic,” she said. Then she started to see law enforcement officials closing doors.
Zeina Farhat, who takes a bus to Wayne, N.J., also said the crowds at Port Authority were intense. She arrived at 4 p.m., then waited in line for her bus for close to three hours, she said.
When she was finally at the front of the queue, ready to board the next vehicle, the authorities shut down bus service so they could plow the roads, she said.
Ms. Farhat finally got a bus home four and a half hours after she arrived. When she finally reached her car, it was blocked in by heaps of snow created by snow plows.
Ms. Hoyos, on the other hand, eventually gave up on her commute and sought refuge with a friend in Brooklyn, where she spent the night.
That part of her journey, she said, was easy.
Chibani Bennasr, 39, a New York taxi driver, said he got stuck on a block of East 46th Street for an hour and a half after snow and falling tree branches stopped traffic.
His passenger hopped out of the yellow cab after 20 minutes. That left Mr. Bennasr alone in the car, he said, where he played games on his phone to try to relieve the stress.
Mr. Bennasr eventually called it a night and went home to Jersey City. It took him two more hours to get there.
All told, he said, he lost $80 because of the storm.
Leah Epstein was living in New Jersey during Hurricane Sandy. She has experienced major snowstorms and commuted through their aftermaths.
And still, she said, she has never experienced anything like her drive home on Thursday.
“It was hell on earth,” she said.
Ms. Epstein, a horse trainer, works at a farm about 10 miles from her home in High Bridge, N.J. If she times it right, she can make the trip in 18 minutes. On Thursday, it took her more than four hours.
Across New York City, especially in Manhattan, people woke up on Friday to arboreal carnage.
Trees and their limbs were strewn across streets and sidewalks. And even as the snow began to melt, the branches and piles of soggy leaves remained.
City officials had received close to 1,700 service requests related to damaged trees by 11 a.m. on Friday, according to the New York City parks commissioner, Mitchell J. Silver. Of those requests, roughly 600 of them were for trees that had fallen.
Most of the calls were concentrated in Manhattan, Mr. Silver said, which is not common for winter storms.
“Queens tends to be the borough with the most trees,” he said.
The abundance of fall foliage, usually a gift to city residents eager to soak up the last touches of nature before winter hits, was in part to blame. The wet snow adds extra weight, Mr. Silver said, causing stress to trees that is also exacerbated by the wind.
As officials worked to clear blocked roads and walkways, the parks department urged people to stay out of city parks until winds had lessened and workers were able to clear debris.
 It was like a scene from “Mad Max”! Cars were abandoned; people were out of the cars pushing others that were slipping back; and those that were on the other side of these cars were in jeopardy of being hit by sliding vehicles.
— Coudiebug, a commenter writing from Trumbull, Conn.
My parents, who are in their 70s, were trapped on the Deegan last night for FIVE HOURS. Traffic was at a standstill. … They thankfully stayed in their car; others were spinning out in road conditions that seriously should not have caused such a nightmare.
My normal commute that takes 40 minutes from Long Island City to Yonkers took four hours and 45 minutes. Much of that time was spent in the Bronx, where multiple cars were stuck on top of bridges causing complete gridlock. On highways, multiple cars were abandoned on the side of the road. I saw one plow truck during the entire drive.
— De Paul Sunny, a commenter writing from Yonkers, N.Y.
Winnie Hu contributed reporting.