WASHINGTON — Donald J. Trump was more involved in discussions over a potential Russian business deal during the presidential campaign than previously known, his former lawyer Michael D. Cohen said Thursday in pleading guilty to lying to Congress. Mr. Trump’s associates pursued the project as the Kremlin was escalating its election sabotage effort meant to help him win the presidency.
Mr. Trump accused his former fixer of lying to receive a reduced sentence for the crimes he has pleaded guilty to. Under his earlier plea agreement, Mr. Cohen faced about four to five years in prison.
The proceedings in Lower Manhattan appeared to have global repercussions. After Mr. Cohen’s appearance in court, Mr. Trump abruptly canceled a planned meeting with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia while both leaders are in Argentina. The president said he called off the meeting because of Russia’s recent hostilities with Ukraine.
The new revelations were certain to increase the strain between Mr. Trump and the Justice Department. In recent days, the president and his lawyers have increased their attacks on the department and the Russia investigation, including Mr. Mueller. This week, the special counsel’s office accused Mr. Trump’s onetime campaign chairman, Paul Manafort, of repeatedly lying to investigators in breach of his plea agreement.
The acting attorney general, Matthew G. Whitaker, was told of Mr. Cohen’s impending plea Monday or earlier, a person familiar with the special counsel’s investigation said. The White House learned of it late Wednesday, people close to Mr. Trump said.
The new revelations also came a week after Mr. Trump’s lawyers provided Mr. Mueller with written responses to a set of questions.
The special counsel identified Mr. Cohen’s false statements to Congress in testimony and materials that Mr. Cohen provided to the Senate and House Intelligence Committees, which have been conducting their own investigations into possible coordination between the Trump campaign and Russia.
“There’s a reason people shouldn’t lie when they’re in front of a congressional investigation,” Senator Richard M. Burr of North Carolina, the chairman of the Intelligence Committee, said on Thursday. The committee’s top Democrat, Senator Mark Warner of Virginia, said that the panel had made additional criminal referrals to Mr. Mueller, but he gave no specifics.
President Trump disparaged his former lawyer, Michael Cohen, who pleaded guilty to lying to Congress regarding a proposal to build a Trump Tower in Russia.
Mr. Trump said on Thursday that discussions about the Moscow project took place in early 2016, but that he did not know exactly when he decided to stop pursuing it.
Mr. Cohen’s new guilty plea in Federal District Court is the first time the office of the special counsel has charged him. In exchange for pleading guilty and continuing to cooperate with Mr. Mueller, he may hope to receive a lighter sentence.
He is scheduled to be sentenced in two weeks. It is unclear what additional time he could face with the new guilty plea.
He said that the payments to Ms. Clifford and Karen McDougal, a former Playboy model, were made “in coordination with, and at the direction of, a candidate for federal office” — a reference to Mr. Trump.
Representative Adam B. Schiff of California, the top Democrat on the House Intelligence Committee, said Mr. Cohen’s plea on Thursday only added urgency for congressional investigators who plan to begin an inquiry into Mr. Trump’s foreign business dealings when Democrats take control of the House in January.
