Well, Matt Whitaker. I don’t know Matt Whitaker. Matt Whitaker worked for Jeff Sessions and he was always extremely highly thought of. And he still is. But I didn’t know Matt Whitaker. He worked for Attorney General Sessions. He was very, very highly thought of and still is highly thought of. But this only comes up because anybody that works for me, they do a number on them. But Matt Whitaker is a very smart man. He is a very respected man in the law enforcement community. Very respected, at the top of the line.
The faint presidential praise came just two days after Mr. Trump unceremoniously dumped Mr. Sessions, putting Mr. Whitaker in charge of the Justice Department and the special counsel’s investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 election. Since then, criticism has mounted about Mr. Whitaker’s lack of credentials to be the nation’s top law enforcement official, along with allegations that he has conflicts of interest that should keep him from overseeing the Russia inquiry.
Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the chamber’s top Democrat, sent a letter to Mr. Trump on Friday saying that the appointment of Mr. Whitaker, who was chief of staff to Mr. Sessions, was unconstitutional.
“I am not aware of any precedent for appointment of an official who has not been confirmed by the Senate to serve as acting attorney general,” Mr. Schumer wrote.
But in a phone call in recent days, Mr. Whitaker told Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, the Republican chairman of the Judiciary Committee, that a 2003 Office of Legal Counsel opinion held that the president could make such an appointment.
“He said they had the Office of Legal Counsel look into it, and they had precedent,” Mr. Grassley said in an interview.
Mr. Whitaker has also visited the Oval Office several times and is said to have an easy chemistry with the president, according to people familiar with the relationship. And the president has regarded Mr. Whitaker as his eyes and ears at the Justice Department.
Mr. Whitaker has publicly sided with Mr. Trump in saying that the investigation led by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, is an overreach. That has raised questions about what changes Mr. Whitaker could make to Mr. Mueller’s mandate, particularly changes that might benefit Mr. Trump.
The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit also wants to know what impact Mr. Whitaker will have on the investigation. On Friday, the court requested a report from both the Justice Department and the Mueller team “addressing what, if any, effect” Mr. Whitaker’s appointment has on the case, which was previously being overseen by Rod J. Rosenstein, the deputy attorney general.
As Mr. Sessions’s chief of staff, Mr. Whitaker helped stabilize the tense relationship between Mr. Trump and Mr. Sessions, according to officials who were familiar with the dynamic.
Mr. Whitaker attended meetings at the White House; in some cases, the president and the attorney general were both there, officials who were also present said.
The acting attorney general, a vocal critic of the special counsel investigation into Russian meddling, was associated with a shadowy company fined nearly $26 million.
In August, when the relationship between Mr. Trump and Mr. Sessions hit a low point and the two men exchanged a rare public tit-for-tat, Mr. Whitaker attended a meeting on prison overhaul with both of them later that day.
Yet, on Friday morning, Mr. Trump said four times that he did not know Mr. Whitaker.
Democrats have called for Mr. Whitaker to recuse himself from the special counsel investigation over what they see as his conflicts of interest, including his public criticism of the inquiry and his ties to a witness in the investigation. The witness, Sam Clovis, is a former Trump campaign aide and a former candidate for Iowa state treasurer. In 2014, Mr. Whitaker was the chairman of Mr. Clovis’s unsuccessful campaign.
Mr. Trump suggested on Friday that he was a little surprised that Mr. Whitaker’s appointment would draw such criticism.
“You didn’t have any problems with Matt Whitaker when he was working for Jeff Sessions,” Mr. Trump said.
Mr. Grassley, who recommended Mr. Whitaker to serve as United States attorney during the George W. Bush administration, said he sympathized and saw no reason he should recuse himself from overseeing the Russia case.
One criticism of Mr. Trump’s decision to appoint Mr. Whitaker is that it goes against the Justice Department’s succession plan to turn first to the deputy attorney general — Mr. Rosenstein — when the top job is vacant. The president has publicly criticized Mr. Rosenstein, as well.
Senator Richard Blumenthal, Democrat of Connecticut, said in an interview on Friday that he was considering filing a lawsuit to contest Mr. Whitaker’s appointment, most likely on grounds raised by Mr. Schumer.
“There are a number of very serious constitutional issues raised by this deeply flawed appointment,” Mr. Blumenthal said.
Mr. Trump, however, has authorities provided in a separate law that gives him options for making temporary appointments without Senate confirmation.
Speaking to reporters on Friday morning, Mr. Trump bristled at criticism that Mr. Whitaker was not the right choice to run the department, because, as Mr. Schumer said, Mr. Whitaker was not currently serving in a Senate-confirmed position.
Mr. Whitaker was confirmed by the Senate when he served as the United States attorney for the Southern District of Iowa during the George W. Bush administration. But so was Mr. Mueller. In 2001, Mr. Mueller was confirmed by the Senate to be the F.B.I. director. And he went through previous Senate confirmations to serve as the United States attorney in the Northern District of California as well as when he served as the assistant attorney general at the Justice Department in the early 1990s.
The special counsel position is not one that requires Senate confirmation.