Still undecided about what to get someone deserving — yourself included — who loves to savor armchair glimpses of New York? If you can handle the freight — both in pounds (11) and price ($250) — “New York by New York” (Assouline) is the perfect gift. This majestic five-borough kaleidoscopic tour enlists distinguished photographers (among them, Edward Steichen and Weegee) and celebrated writers (including Edith Wharton, E.B. White, Tom Wolfe) to capture the evolution of the city through immigration, maritime commerce, culture, skyscrapers, protest movements in text and more than 300 illustrations.
Kate Ascher and Thomas Mellins mined the 35,000 items that the developer Seymour Durst’s family donated in 2011 to Columbia University’s Avery Architectural and Fine Arts Library to produce “New York Rising: An Illustrated History From the Durst Collection” ($60; the Monacelli Press). Maps, ephemera, photographs and other illustrations generously punctuate the 10 chapters on subjects ranging from “Moving the People” to “Remaking Times Square” and written by an A-team of municipal experts that includes Russell Shorto, Hilary Ballon (who died in 2017), Andrew Dolkart, Carol Willis, Ann Buttenwieser and Lynne B. Sagalyn.
“In the Shadow of Genius: The Brooklyn Bridge and Its Creators” ($34.95; Empire State Editions/Fordham University Press) reimagines the story behind the span and its engineers through the lens of Barbara Mensch, a photographer who has lived for decades in a maritime warehouse overlooking her subject. Her images are gripping and unconventional, her discoveries palpable and personal as she writes persuasively in defining the genius of the Roebling family.
If the holiday cards aren’t uplifting enough, then read “Sacred Shelter: Thirteen Journeys of Homelessness and Healing” ($105 for hardcover, $30 for paperback; Empire State Editions/Fordham University Press), edited by Susan Celia Greenfield. They’re reminders that individuals can make a difference, through a program founded by Catholic Charities of the Archdiocese of New York in collaboration with the Interfaith Assembly on Homelessness and Housing, which will share the royalties with Life Experience and Faith Sharing Associates.
The title of “Recovered Memory: New York and Paris 1960-1980” ($45; Daylight Books) speaks for itself. Frank Van Riper’s black-and-white photographs and accompanying text eternize two idiosyncratic decades that will never be duplicated. Mr. Van Riper captures the exuberance of the city on the cover: a couple dropping from the Parachute Jump in Coney Island.
Interiors seldom seen are also memorialized in “New York Splendor: The City’s Most Memorable Rooms” ($85; Rizzoli New York), by Wendy Moonan. Stunning photographs and explanatory text offer a rare peak at the handiwork of prominent designers and architects who created Brooke Astor’s library, for instance, and revived Gracie Mansion.