U.S.|Louisiana School Made Headlines for Sending Black Kids to Elite Colleges. Here’s the Reality.
In an interview with The Times, the Landrys denied falsifying transcripts and college applications, but Mr. Landry admitted that he hit students and could be rough. “Oh, I yell a lot,” he said. He goads black and white students to compete against one another because that is how the real world works, he said.
In 2013, Mr. Landry was sentenced to probation and attended an anger management program after pleading guilty to a count of battery. Despite the documentation, he insisted that he did not plead guilty or serve probation. Mr. Landry said that the victim was a student whose mother asked him to hit her child, and he said he had eased up on physical punishments.
“I don’t do that anymore,” he said.
A court document recording minutes from the sentencing hearing of Michael Landry’s battery case.
Instead, he calls himself a “drill sergeant” or “coach,” and asks children to kneel before him to learn humility, for five minutes at most, Mr. Landry said.
That is not how the students have experienced it. Tyler Sassau, Mr. Sassau’s brother, said he can still feel the humiliation and smell the stench on his clothes from kneeling last year on a bathroom floor for nearly two hours.
In their defense, the Landrys touted the school’s ACT scores and high graduation and college enrollment statistics.
The students who navigated the Landrys’ system and made it to the nation’s top colleges now face their own quandaries.
T.M. Landry produced its first graduating class in 2013, and since then, 50 students have graduated, according to the school’s promotional materials. They have had mixed success in college.
For yet other Landry students, particularly those who spent multiple years at the school, the results after graduation have been disappointing. Some have withdrawn from college, or transferred to less rigorous programs.
Asja Jackson, whose Wesleyan University acceptance video also went viral, decided to leave this month after she said she fell into a depression over her first-semester struggles. She said she “froze and failed” her first chemistry tests and walked out of a biology exam. Her papers, she said, were “childish,” and she was too embarrassed to attend a writing workshop.
She studied and worked through the night, like she had done at T.M. Landry since eighth grade, but she just was not “catching it,” she said. She said she eventually stopped eating, talking to her friends, leaving her room or going to class.
At least five T.M. Landry families spoke with local law enforcement, and two more contacted the local education authorities for aid, but little changed.
Ashlee McFarlane, a lawyer at Gerger Khalil & Hennessy in Houston, said dozens of parents, students and staff have left the school and are reaching out to her for help.
The couple started T.M. Landry in 2005 as a home-school for their son and five children. The early results were not good. Two of the six students ended up in prison, Mr. Landry said. But the couple continued to recruit students from area churches, telling parishioners that teaching was their calling.
T.M. Landry, now an unaccredited private school, settled last year into a bare-bones factory building that Mr. Landry has compared to his students: abandoned and run down, but loved by him.
By taking no government funding, the school falls into a narrow category of educational institutions that the state does not regulate or approve, said Erin Bendily, the assistant superintendent of policy and governmental affairs at the Louisiana Department of Education. Some T.M. Landry diplomas say that students meet Louisiana state requirements, but the state does not recognize the diplomas.
Mr. Landry said he does not participate in state scholarship programs or accept any other funding because it would impair his ability to run the school in a “nontraditional” way.
Over the years, Mr. Landry has appealed to parents whose children were struggling, bored or ignored in their public and private schools. He told them that his school had special programs for students with disabilities. Parents said he took a deep interest in their lives, called their children “baby girl” and “baby boy,” and shared personal stories about his own family members who had struggles with drugs or had been in prison.
Mr. Landry used to tout the school as created for “black troublemakers.” As it became more prominent, it started to appeal to local doctors, paralegals and small-business owners. Some white and Asian families also enrolled their children.
“The fact that he was black, I was like, ‘Man, he’s going to uplift these kids,’” said Doresa Barton, whose three children were enrolled at Landry until this year.
To many T.M. Landry families, tuition is not cheap — about $600 a month, or $7,200 annually. Mr. Landry’s annual salary has averaged about $86,000, according to four bankruptcy filings, which he says were driven by all of the tuition that he and his wife have covered.
The days start at T.M. Landry with a morning meeting, chants and pep talks, a ritual meant to “center” students and help them find their voice and confidence, Mr. Landry said.
The school is based loosely on a Montessori model that emphasizes mastery, so classes are optional, the Landrys said. Younger students described their education as learning from computer programs and YouTube videos. Instructors and textbooks are on hand, but the students teach one another. Math and English lessons are taught by the Landrys, who devote most of their attention to older students preparing for the ACT. Select students take dual-enrollment courses at the University of Louisiana in Lafayette.
Adam Broussard, a Landry parent, noticed last fall that his 8-year-old, who had attended the school since he was 3, was writing “chicken scratch.” Mr. Broussard had been happy with the school — his older son had been admitted to Brown after two years at Landry — but he confronted Mr. Landry about his younger son’s progress. Mr. Landry responded that he did not teach sentence structure and just wanted students to love to write.
An independent assessment at Sylvan Learning Center revealed that Mr. Broussard’s younger son was performing two grade levels behind.
News of the Broussard boy’s low test scores spread last fall, and at least eight parents interviewed by The Times had their own students assessed. Of their 11 students, only two were performing at grade level, while the rest had fallen behind or made no progress. One junior was performing at a fourth-grade level in reading and math.
Dodie Thomas, a T.M. Landry grandmother, said she discovered that her 6-year-old granddaughter had never learned phonics and that she could not read. She played with Legos most of the day.
“I feel like I’ve paid for a high-priced babysitter,” Ms. Thomas said.
Middle and high school students said they mostly completed worksheets that were recycled every few weeks. They came to recognize the failures in the school.
“It was like building a house on water,” Tyler Sassau said.
High school students took ACT practice tests day after day and sporadically attended classes. Bryson Sassau, who took the ACT three times, said that once he got to college, he realized an education that revolved around test preparation had ill-served him. “If it wasn’t on the ACT, I didn’t know it,” he said.
The Landrys recruited their own family members and parents of students to serve as instructors. They also pulled in staff from other schools by promising them that they would get rich through consulting jobs or owning one of their own T.M. Landry schools one day.
Tanika Williams was hired to teach philosophy last year. She took pride in her lessons, but said that because students were not required to attend class, some showed up infrequently.
“I would look at kids literally walking around all day,” she said.
At least a half-dozen staff members resigned. Among those remaining was Keidrick Owens, who had been accused at his previous school of instructing older students to whip younger students with a belt. Last fall, Mr. Owens pleaded guilty to contributing to the delinquency of a minor and was sentenced to 18 months’ probation.
When Mr. Landry’s booming voice would ring through the school — “I’M GETTING MAD!” — students scurried to get out of his path.
More than a dozen students and staff members told The Times of pupils being humiliated in front of their peers and of racial groups being pitted against one another. Academically weak students were demeaned, and headstrong students were made to kneel.
More than a half-dozen students interviewed said they had witnessed Mr. Landry choking their schoolmates, and three students observed him slam others on desks. Another three students said they saw Mr. Landry place a child with autism in a closet.
Nyjal Mitchell, 16, said he wanted to be accepted by Mr. Landry because he dreamed of attending the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He cleaned the school. He stayed later than others. He competed fiercely with his classmates. He said he even ignored attacks on his younger sister, Sanaa, who was bullied.
Mr. Mitchell and his parents filed complaints against Mr. Landry in February 2017 with the Breaux Bridge police, detailing what they said were three instances of assault against the young Mr. Mitchell — choking, shoving and dragging. In the family statements to the police, Nyjal Mitchell reported that he also saw Mr. Landry choke three other students, including one with autism.
The police conducted an investigation into the alleged assaults, which witnesses said took place from late 2016 to January 2017. The inquiry included witness statements from three students and one teacher.
“Nyjal attempted to remove Mike’s hand due to him turning red,” one student said, according to the police report.
In another episode cited in the report, Mr. Landry dragged Mr. Mitchell by his hoodie across a concrete floor, put his foot on Mr. Mitchell’s throat and made Mr. Mitchell kneel.
Mr. Mitchell said he believed the punishment was a “normal” part of being a T.M. Landry student.
“He had my son broken,” said his mother, Mary Mitchell.
During the investigation, the Breaux Bridge police determined the episodes happened beyond city limits, so the case was referred to the local sheriff, whose office did not comment on its status.
Mr. Landry told students that he would ruin their futures if they left the school or told anyone what happened there, according to 20 current and former students interviewed and Terica Fuselier, a former teacher. They said that Mr. Landry threatened to alter or withhold their transcripts, or force them to enroll in a lower grade. Retaliation was a constant worry for students and teachers, Ms. Fuselier said.
Megan Malveaux, 16, said she believes she received a mediocre transcript from T.M. Landry because she chose to leave the school. An original and a revised document, which had different birth dates, include courses she never took.
Portions of two of Megan Malveaux’s transcripts, prepared by the Landrys. The top tear includes an incorrect date of birth. The update is shown in the second version. The New York Times has redacted part of the date for her privacy.
Kelvin Simon said that when he found out the school wanted to submit a fraudulent transcript for his daughter’s application to Yale, he told Mr. Landry that he would not pay tuition until the school produced a real transcript. Mr. Landry refused, and Mr. Simon withdrew his daughter in October.
After Thanksgiving, Mr. Landry tried to bargain with him: In exchange for an accurate transcript, Mr. Simon would pay no tuition but keep his daughter in the school, according to texts reviewed by The Times. Mr. Landry also advised Mr. Simon to state that his income was below $65,000 on financial aid forms to qualify for a scholarship. Mr. Simon’s daughter chose to withdraw her application to Yale rather than apply through T.M. Landry, which she no longer trusted.
Bryson Sassau had never started an organization called the Dry House — he had never even heard of it — and had never taken the classes or earned the accolades listed.
A recommendation from his English teacher praising his debate skills twice referred to another student.

The Landrys said that they have never falsified information on transcripts or college applications. Instead, Mr. Landry said, he encouraged students to “go deep” on their personal statements, and not to hide their struggles. He would edit the statements, he said, or tell them if he did not agree with their approach.
With the exception of federal financial aid forms, each parent interviewed said they never saw their child’s college application.
The joy was real.
The first recorded Ivy League acceptance appeared to come from Brown in 2013. It was just one student in a cramped room, his classmate filming behind him. It had five comments and two shares.
In 2016, the first year T.M. Landry secured several Ivy League acceptances, the videos were of higher quality and included reaction shots from students in Ivy League sweatshirts.
Students and parents noticed the biggest shift when T.M. Landry moved in early 2017. The school’s population grew as the Landrys began recruiting high-performing students from other schools, particularly those with high ACT scores. Visitors and cameras paraded through what had become a Potemkin village.
Students and teachers rehearsed in the days before a visitor came, often the same lessons — down to the math problems displayed on the board — that they had run for the last visitor. Students who came to school had to have pristine shoes, fresh hairdos and their scripts ready — name, grade, college aspiration and major.
The pressure to paint a positive picture of the school continued even after students left T.M. Landry. When Ms. Jackson reached out to the Landrys to share her struggles at Wesleyan, she said they encouraged her to “stay on the path.” If not for that advice, she said would have left school earlier.
“They kept telling me that I had to stick it out, and show my school that T.M. Landry is for real,” she said.
Ms. Thomas, the grandmother, said she felt like the Landrys preyed on their own community. “We expect that of other people, but we had an African-American who was one of us and seemed to be doing right by us, and it was a sham,” she said.
Several parents are paying for tutoring or have enrolled their children in home-schools to help them catch up.
Mr. Mitchell is among several students who never received a transcript. Last year, he was required to take ninth- and 10th-grade classes at his public high school. This year, he is doing 10th- and 11th-grade coursework.
“To do all that work and still end up behind, it’s kind of a slap in the face,” he said. He still wants to attend M.I.T.
“I just want people to know what I went through,” Mr. Mitchell said.
Ms. Lewis, a Landry parent of three, said that her son Dawson, who has Asperger’s syndrome, left T.M. Landry for another private school this fall, and that he had finally found peers who embraced his quirkiness. Teachers did not make fun of him for having Encopresis, a condition where he soils himself when he is nervous, that had earned him the nickname “Mr. Smelly Man” from Mr. Landry.
But her son had to leave his new school after about two months because administrators there never received his transcript from the Landrys.
The Landrys said that they withhold transcripts only when families do not pay their tuition. They declined to address any specific families or situations.
The graduates face an uncertain future. Mr. Smith at N.Y.U. and Bryson Sassau at St. John’s both plan to take G.E.D. exams as a precaution after hearing that other Landry graduates left their colleges to return to Louisiana — only to find that their high school diplomas were not accepted at local colleges or for internships.
Mr. Smith now works in the emergency room at a hospital in Louisiana. He believes he will go back to college, but he worries about other students, particularly his younger brother, who is a student at T.M. Landry.
Mr. Sassau had a severe seizure because of his epilepsy on campus this past spring, and St. John’s allowed him to take medical leave. He is set to return in January.
Ms. Jackson said that she hopes to enroll at a college in the South, closer to home.
Just before Thanksgiving, The Times went to the school to see if the Landrys would take part in a follow-up interview. The couple agreed, but entered the conference room with about two dozen students who fielded many of the questions.
He raised his arms on either side of him, forming a cross.
Mr. Landry slipped into the familiar call-and-response with his students.
“In English,” he commanded them.
“I love you,” they said.
“In Mandarin,” he yelled.
“Wo ai ni,” they said.
“Kneel,” they shouted.
