A former schoolteacher and his twin brother pleaded guilty on Monday to federal conspiracy and bomb-making charges, admitting in court that they had stockpiled explosive material in their Bronx apartment.
The former teacher, Christian Toro, 28, paid at least two students about $50 an hour to break apart fireworks, extract the explosive powder and store it in containers, the authorities had said.
“We were going to use the black powder and other materials to make an explosive,” Christian Toro told a judge on Monday in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
Yet even after the guilty pleas, the brothers’ motive for building a bomb and what their target might have been remained unclear. “I just want you to know that I had no intention of using it, let alone on anyone or anything,” Christian Toro told Judge Richard M. Berman. Tyler Toro also contended that he had never intended to harm anyone.
Tyler Toro, left, and Christian Toro.
At a bail hearing, one prosecutor, Elizabeth Hanft, said there was a text-message exchange between the brothers about the October 2017 mass killing of concertgoers in Las Vegas.
Tyler Toro texted his brother that the shooter in the Las Vegas massacre had a police scanner, and that they should invest in one, too.
The investigation that led to the men’s arrest stemmed from a bomb threat that was called into Harlem Prep High School, a charter school where Christian Toro taught, nearly a year ago, according to a criminal complaint and statements by law enforcement officials at the time.
The police arrested a 15-year-old female student and charged her with making the threatening call. Mr. Toro resigned on Jan. 9, and three weeks later he was charged with rape after being accused of having a sexual relationship with the same student. It was during the rape investigation that New York police detectives learned Mr. Toro had paid students to harvest powder from fireworks.
After Christian Toro resigned, Tyler Toro returned to the school a laptop that his brother had been using in connection with his job, according to the complaint, which is signed by an F.B.I. special agent, Seth Yockel. A copy of a book with instructions for making explosive devices was found on the computer’s hard drive, the complaint said.
Christian Toro later told investigators that he had come across the book while researching the 2013 Boston Marathon bombings and had only looked at its table of contents, the complaint noted.
A search of the brothers’ apartment turned up what Ms. Hanft called “a veritable trove” of chemicals and other bomb-making materials, including a box containing 20 pounds of iron oxide, five pounds of aluminum powder, five pounds of potassium nitrate, a jar of explosive powder, a box of firecrackers and a bag containing scores of metal spheres of varying sizes, which the authorities said could become projectiles in a blast.
The students who were paid to dismantle fireworks visited the men’s apartment between October 2017 and last January, the complaint said.
The men are to be sentenced on March 26.