Brian Kemp, the candidate for governor, resigned from his secretary of state post to focus on the transition — even though his opponent, Stacey Abrams, has not conceded.
On Tuesday, as you know, we earned a clear and convincing victory at the ballot box. And today we’re beginning the transition process. We will work together in the days, weeks and months ahead to ensure a smooth transition that keeps our state on the path for prosperity, growth and opportunity. In addition to having the right team, you need energy and focus. That is why effective 11:59 a.m. today I’m stepping down as secretary of state.
ATLANTA — Brian Kemp, the Republican who has claimed victory in the Georgia governor’s race, said on Thursday that he was resigning as secretary of state, removing himself from the process of determining whether he had in fact been elected.
Robyn A. Crittenden, the commissioner of the Georgia Department of Human Services, was named acting secretary of state, and will oversee the certification of Georgia’s election results. Ms. Crittenden assumes the office at a volatile moment in Georgia, with Ms. Abrams’s campaign still raising pointed questions about the integrity of the election.
Ms. Crittenden will also supervise runoffs in at least two other statewide races, one of them for secretary of state, as well as one for governor if Ms. Abrams’s campaign succeeds in forcing one.
While prominent Republicans sent congratulations to Mr. Kemp on Thursday, Democrats did little to hide their disgust with his course of action.
“Press releases do not declare victory,” said Lauren Groh-Wargo, Ms. Abrams’s campaign manager.
As Mr. Kemp’s resignation took effect at 11:59 a.m. Thursday, his office said he had won 50.3 percent of the vote and held a lead of about 63,000 votes over Ms. Abrams. To win the governorship, Mr. Kemp must have an outright majority.
But Ms. Abrams’s campaign believes there is still a potential path to a runoff in the remaining untabulated absentee and provisional ballots.
The Abrams campaign said it intended to file a lawsuit on Thursday concerning a southwest Georgia county where mailing of absentee ballots was delayed by an injunction and, later, by Hurricane Michael. The suit seeks an extension of the deadline for ballots there to arrive and be counted.
The campaign did not immediately announce any other litigation, saying it was considering its options.
Mr. Kemp’s office said on Wednesday that there were fewer than 25,000 remaining untabulated ballots statewide, most of them provisional. That would almost certainly be too few to force a runoff, even if they were all validated and were cast overwhelmingly for Ms. Abrams.
Ms. Groh-Wargo brushed those figures aside on Thursday. “We do not believe any of those numbers are credible,” she said.
The Abrams campaign demanded that state officials release much more data, including county-by-county breakdowns, to support their conclusions, and said that valid ballots were still turning up. The campaign is also urging voters who cast provisional ballots because of problems with their identification to visit county election offices quickly and clear up the matter so their votes can be counted.
Mr. Kemp’s resignation as secretary of state appeared to render moot a federal lawsuit filed on Tuesday by the nonprofit group Protect Democracy demanding Mr. Kemp’s recusal. A hearing in that case was scheduled for Thursday.
As Mr. Kemp and Mr. Deal spoke at the Capitol, protesters stood outside the governor’s office suite with signs demanding that every vote be counted properly. A detachment of state troopers stood guard.
Mr. Kemp’s dual roles as both player and referee in the governor’s race has infuriated Democrats ever since he won the Republican nomination. They frequently accused him of using his office to further a campaign of voter suppression, through purges of voter rolls and other disputed actions.
Democrats denied any wrongdoing and condemned the investigation — and especially the public announcement of it two days before the election — as a last-minute political stunt. But Mr. Kemp once again rejected calls to step down at that time.
On Thursday morning, standing in the stately ceremonial office long used by the state’s governors, he said he would now spend his time preparing to move in.