PISCATAWAY, N.J. — A cup of whiskey in hand, Kevin Zitko, the deputy chief for the Washington Township Fire Department, sat inside his decommissioned fire truck outside Gate B of HighPoint.com Stadium on a recent Saturday. He laughed as Rutgers fans motioned for him to turn on the siren and flash the lights.
Typically, Zitko activated them only in victory, but a win was not likely against Michigan, the No. 4 team in the nation, so he obliged. Passers-by erupted with applause for the rare display.
The emergency medical worker knew his Scarlet Knights. Rutgers looked like a little brother in losing to Michigan, 42-7, that day and falling to Penn State, 20-7, last weekend to remain winless in Big Ten games this season. Now 1-10 over all and 0-8 in conference play heading into Saturday’s season finale at Michigan State, the Rutgers program has slowed to a complete halt since beating North Carolina in the Quick Lane Bowl in 2014 after its inaugural Big Ten season. A loss against Michigan State would leave Rutgers with its worst record since 2002.
Ash, who came from Ohio State in 2016, will have to work his way up from rock bottom if he is retained after the season. In three campaigns, he has compiled a 7-28 record, which includes a 78-0 loss against Michigan in 2016. Ten of his players have been arrested over the last 11 months.
But dumping Ash could cause other problems for Rutgers. His buyout would cost the university $9.8 million, and investment is needed elsewhere for an athletics program already operating in the red. In 2017, the department’s deficit was $47.4 million.
While the women’s soccer team played in the N.C.A.A. tournament for the seventh consecutive autumn and women’s basketball coach C. Vivian Stringer recently celebrated her 1,000th career victory, sports success has been limited on campus. Attendance at football games has dwindled. Opposing fans regularly wear their teams’ colors in the front row of the Rutgers student section.
Never much of a football school to begin with, Rutgers joined the Big Ten searching for national exposure and increased revenue from television as athletic conferences expanded. Now the university has its shortcomings broadcast to the Big Ten Network's audience each week, and the uptick in media revenues is still years away.
Athletic director Patrick Hobbs, who hired Ash and extended his contract last year, has yet to make a statement of support for his coach moving forward.
Mark Killingsworth, an economics professor and vocal critic of the athletic department’s chronic financial issues, sees no end to what he calls “utterly shameless” spending. While Rutgers fans point to 2021, when the university will receive its first full share of conference revenue, Killingsworth said administrators needed to be held accountable for what he deemed to be poor decision making.
Killingsworth has offered to make three $1,000 donations for athletic scholarships in honor of Hobbs and Robert Barchi, the university’s president, if they eliminate the deficit by 2021. It’s doubtful Killingsworth will have to write any checks.
Ash has had trouble getting the teenage prospects who accept his scholarship offers to stay committed to the program. In October, when Rutgers was 1-5, Marlyn Johnson, a 6-foot-4, 190-pound wideout at Peddie School in Hightstown, N.J., announced that he was reopening his recruitment. A few days later, after Rutgers fell to 1-6, C.J. Hanson, an offensive lineman from St. John Vianney High in Holmdel, also changed his mind about playing for Rutgers before recommitting the next week.
Indeed, Rutgers has beaten the point spread four consecutive weeks, so one could argue that it has begun to surpass expectations. But criminal incidents have also accrued under Ash. Last December, wideout Dacoven Bailey was charged with sexual assault in his hometown in Texas. He was subsequently dismissed from the team. In August, eight players were charged with credit card fraud in Middlesex County. Four left the program or were dismissed before the season. The others remain suspended.
Most recently, Izaia Bullock, a linebacker from Linden, N.J., was accused of planning a homicide. The Middlesex County Prosecutor’s Office charged Bullock in October with two counts of attempted murder in the first degree and two counts of conspiracy to commit murder in connection with “a plot to murder the family members of an acquaintance.” He appeared in one game this season and was dismissed from the program after his arrest.
His lawyer, Steve Altman, a former season-ticket holder for Rutgers football, declined to comment as he prepared for a detention hearing.
Hobbs has bet on Ash’s ability to develop players as the fix for off-field issues and on-field losses. If Ash still has a job here next season, he will have an opportunity to mold a young core. The freshman tailback Isaih Pacheco, a punishing rusher, broke off an 80-yard run against Michigan, the country’s top-ranked defense. That was the longest run from scrimmage for Rutgers since it joined the Big Ten in 2014. Pacheco has been a bright light.
Defensive back Avery Young also has shown promise as a ball hawk in the secondary.
Quarterback development is another story. In a 34-7 loss to Maryland, Artur Sitkowski, a freshman, completed only 2 of his 16 passing attempts for 8 yards while throwing four interceptions. In the home finale against Penn State, he tried to float the ball away to the sideline, releasing it from his own 5-yard line as he faded backward. It was picked off some 30 yards downfield.
The senior Giovanni Rescigno, who replaced Sitkowski, concluded his five-year career as the subject of a viral video. Rutgers attempted a version of the “Philly Special,” where the tailback throws to an open quarterback. The Philadelphia Eagles executed it for a score in last February’s Super Bowl. Rescigno was open but dropped the ball in the end zone on fourth and goal from the 1-yard line.
“Maybe for a day or two it might be like that,” he said.
G Tomsky, a former marching band member, remembered the high notes as the final seconds ticked away in the fourth quarter of the Penn State game. He graduated in 2015, and recalled performing at bowl games, mostly before Rutgers joined the Big Ten, where a decent team is on the other side of the line of scrimmage every week.
