Americas|U.S. and Brazil Chose Similar Leaders. It May Lead to Smoother Relations.
U.S. and Brazil Chose Similar Leaders. It May Lead to Smoother Relations.
RIO DE JANEIRO — The United States and Brazil have been uneasy allies during the best of times.
But Brazilian voters may have put an end to that dynamic by electing as their next president Jair Bolsonaro, a far-right lawmaker who is unabashedly pro-American and strikingly similar to President Trump in temperament, tactics and style.
Mr. Bolsonaro’s enthusiasm for closer ties with the United States is among the starkest signs that Brazil’s foreign policy is about to undergo profound changes.
As a candidate, the incoming president denounced the alliances and foreign policy of the leftist Workers’ Party, which governed Brazil from 2003 to 2016. During that period, Brazil fostered close commercial ties with China, championed Cuba’s authoritarian government and was a pillar of multilateral alliances that excluded the United States.
Mr. Bolsonaro has yet to outline a detailed foreign policy vision, but he recently unveiled his pick for foreign minister: Ernesto Araújo, a midlevel diplomat who heads the United States and Canada department at the Foreign Ministry and shares his admiration for Mr. Trump. In his blog, Mr. Araújo has called climate change a Marxist plot and praised Mr. Trump for combating the “globalism” movement led by China.
In recent interviews, Mr. Bolsonaro has suggested that Brazil could relocate its embassy in Israel from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem, following a similar move by Mr. Trump, and raised the possibility of severing diplomatic relations with Cuba.
His team’s priority, though, is clearly to build a strong partnership with the Trump administration. Key surrogates have begun a charm offensive that appears designed to burnish the international image of Mr. Bolsonaro, who became notorious as a lawmaker by insulting minorities and praising Brazil’s military dictatorship.
Brazil’s new president and his son are certain to get a warm reception in Washington. Mr. Bolsonaro and Mr. Trump both rose to victory by running social-media-powered insurgent campaigns that took aim at the political establishment. Both were initially regarded by political analysts as too inexperienced and boorish to pull ahead. And both appear to relish escalating, rather than defusing, political fights.
Mr. Bolsonaro’s rise comes as the patchwork of alliances of leftist governments created at the turn of the century in a bid to end Washington’s hegemony in the region have largely disintegrated. Venezuela, which was a key axis of that network, has become a regional pariah under President Nicolás Maduro, whose mismanagement of the economy has led to an acute shortage of food and medicine.
The humanitarian crisis there, which has caused an exodus of more than three million people, is likely to be at the top of the agenda with the United States when Mr. Bolsonaro takes office.
Mr. Bolsonaro has already picked a fight with Cuba. Havana announced that it was recalling the more than 8,000 doctors deployed to remote and poor regions of Brazil after Mr. Bolsonaro accused the communist government of treating health professionals like slaves.
And as a candidate, Mr. Bolsonaro visited Taiwan, angering Beijing, which considers the island part of its territory. He also raised alarm at China’s growing influence in Latin America, expressing unease at the prospect of letting Chinese companies buy significant stakes in Brazilian state companies.
That wariness puts him in sync with the Trump administration, which is pushing back on the approach China has taken to investing in and lending money to developing economies.
However, analysts said Mr. Bolsonaro would have limited leverage in blunting China’s interests in Brazil without angering key constituencies that have come to depend heavily on the Chinese market. China overtook the United States as Brazil’s top trading partner roughly a decade ago; Brazil’s economic growth hinges largely on expanding and diversifying its commercial relationship with Beijing.
Oliver Stuenkel, a professor of international relations at Fundação Getulio Vargas university in São Paulo, predicted that Mr. Bolsonaro will come to recognize that maintaining close relations with China is crucial for Brazil.
A new era of closer cooperation between the United States and Brazil could create “a big opportunity to do things with a government that walks and talks and sounds like the one here,” said Thomas Shannon, a former top State Department official who served as ambassador to Brazil.
That could include a significant expansion of trade, broader security partnerships and increased cooperation on medical and scientific research, Mr. Shannon said. But he said there was good reason to be skeptical that the Trump administration would seize the opportunity.
The White House and the State Department did not respond to a request for an interview about the Trump administration’s outlook on the Bolsonaro era.
Matias Spektor, another international relations professor at Fundação Getulio Vargas, said Brazil and the United States had last forged a strong and durable partnership in the 1940s, when President Franklin D. Roosevelt persuaded the Brazilian government to turn on Nazi Germany and join the alliance that won World War II.
After democracy was restored in Brazil in the mid-1980s, following a 21-year military dictatorship that began with a coup backed by Washington, much of the political left in Brazil regarded the United States with suspicion and resentment.
Another low point came in 2013 when the government of President Dilma Rousseff, a leftist, reacted angrily to the revelation that the National Security Agency had been spying on her and other senior Brazilian officials.
Over the years, attempts to improve relations have faltered because the matter was either not a priority for the American government or politically expedient in Brazil.
Since Ms. Rousseff’s impeachment, Washington and Brasília have expanded cooperation in security matters, particularly counternarcotics, said Mr. Cutz, the former White House official.
A full-throated endorsement by Mr. Bolsonaro might have given past American administrations pause because of concerns about his commitment to democratic principles and human rights. But Mr. Cutz said there was little reason to believe the Trump administration would have reservations.
