The couple met in August 2014, after Dr. Wolf’s reporting on human rights violations in the Middle East resulted in online threats. When she began inquiring about security, colleagues recommended Mr. O’Shea.
They embarked on what Ms. Wolf described as “a very professional relationship,” with Mr. O’Shea accompanying her to any event with a potential for danger.
Dr. Wolf was equally impressed with Mr. O’Shea.
Six months later, the job was finished, but Dr. Wolf and Mr. O’Shea, each of whom has two children, were only just beginning.
Molly Therese Sammon and Jeffrey Michael Berryman were married Nov. 24 at the Journeyman Distillery, a whiskey maker and events space in Three Oaks, Mich. Michael C. Hathaway, a friend of the couple who became a Universal Life minister for the event, officiated.
The couple met at the University of Notre Dame, from which both graduated.
Ms. Sammon, 28, is a special-education teacher at Blacksburg High School in Blacksburg, Va. From 2012-15, she was a special education mathematics teacher at Chicago Vocational Career Academy in Chicago, where she was a Teach for America corps member. She received a master’s degree in special education from National Louis University in Chicago.
She is the daughter of Maureen Fitzpatrick Sammon and William J. Sammon of Beverly Shores, Ind. The bride’s father is a purchasing-department manager, in East Chicago, Ind., at ArcelorMittal, a Luxembourg steel company. Her mother is a volunteer coordinator for the League of Women Voters of Porter County, in Valparaiso, Ind.
Dr. Berryman, also 28, is a postdoctoral associate in theoretical particle physics at Virginia Tech in Blacksburg. He received a doctoral degree in theoretical particle physics from Northwestern.
He is a son of P. Jeanne Berryman of Niantic, Conn., and James P. Berryman of Old Lyme, Conn. The groom’s mother is a nurse at the Center for Compassionate Recovery, a drug and alcohol treatment center in Madison, Conn. His father is a partner in Suisman Shapiro, a law firm in New London, Conn.
Credit...Tim Cree of Creepwalk Media Inc.
Samantha Lynn Arpino and Eugene Katsman were married Nov. 24 at the Royalton Mansion in Roslyn Heights, N.Y. Rabbi Randy Sheinberg officiated.
Ms. Arpino, 28, is a senior accountant and certified public accountant for Peterson Management in New York. She graduated from Hofstra University.
She is the daughter of Karen R. Arpino and Michael S. Arpino of North Hempstead, N.Y. The bride’s father is the director of business development in New York for JAK Creative Design, based in Darien, Ill. Her mother owns Karen Arpino Interiors, an interior design business in New Hyde Park, N.Y.
Mr. Katsman, 34, is a senior manager and certified public accountant for EisnerAmper, an accounting firm in New York. He graduated from Boston University.
He is the son of Lyudmila Katsman and Alexander Katsman of Suffern, N.Y. His mother is the accountant and business administration manager for Onkyo U.S.A., an electronics provider, in Upper Saddle River, N.J. His father is the accountant for Partnership for the Homeless in New York.
The couple met in 2014 while working together at EisnerAmper in New York.
Cynthia Lynch Shor and David Anthony Church were married Nov. 20. Cantor Zachary S. Konigsberg officiated at the Village Club of Sands Point, N.Y.
Ms. Shor, 71, is the executive director of the Walt Whitman Birthplace Association, which operates the site in Huntington, N.Y., where the poet was born, in 1819. She graduated from N.Y.U., received a master’s degree in literature from American University and was a doctoral candidate at what was then called the Steinhardt School of Teaching and Learning at N.Y.U. She is an emerita director of N.Y.U.’s alumni association for the colleges of arts, science and engineering.
She is a daughter of the late Gladys E. Lynch and the late Patrick Henry Lynch Jr., who lived in Des Moines. Her father retired as a plumber for Wolin Plumbing in Des Moines. Her mother retired as a licensed practical nurse at Mercy Hospital in Des Moines.
Dr. Church, 74, retired as the principal of Kingston High School in Kingston, N.Y., and is now a consultant in Greer, S.C., for charter schools, providing board training, leadership consultation, and also helping to establish new charter schools. He graduated from Long Island University, received a master’s degree in educational administration and business from Baruch College and received a doctoral degree in educational administration and policies from Hofstra University. He is also a director of the International Ballet in Greenville, S.C.
He is a son of the late Concetta Aulisio Delessio and the late Dominick Delessio, who lived in Brooklyn, and was raised by an aunt, the late Martha Delessio Church and her husband, the late Frank J. Church, also of Brooklyn. The groom’s father was a machinist at the Eberhard Faber Pencil Company in Brooklyn, and later in White Haven, Pa. The groom’s aunt worked with her husband at his printing and engraving business in Brooklyn.
The bride’s previous marriage ended in divorce, and the groom was a widower.
Carolina Maria Vélez and Adam Nicholas Quatrini were married Nov. 19 at Holy Family Catholic Mission in Rutherford, Calif. Deacon Chuck Cancilla officiated.
Ms. Vélez, 30, is an advocacy manager at Microsoft in New York and an adjunct professor at Washington & Jefferson College in Washington, Pa. She graduated from Carnegie Mellon University, from which she received a master’s degree in public policy and management. She also received a law degree from the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law at Yeshiva University in New York.
She is a daughter of Dr. Marcela Bohm-Vélez and Dr. Rafael I. Vélez of Pittsburgh. The bride’s father is an anesthesiologist for the Allegheny Health Network and a founder of CIMA Software, a software company in Sharpsburg, Pa.; Brainstage, a company that specializes in medical technology in Carnegie, Pa.; and Carmolex, a drug discovery service company in Pittsburgh. Her mother, a radiologist who specializes in women’s imaging, works in private practice in Pittsburgh. The bride’s parents also own Horizon View Farms in Rockwood, Pa.
Mr. Quatrini, 32, is a lawyer in Greensburg, Pa., at Quatrini Rafferty, for which his father, Vincent J. Quatrini Jr., is a founding partner and managing partner. He graduated from Dickinson College in Carlisle, Pa. The groom received a law degree from Duquesne University in Pittsburgh.
He is a son Patricia Quatrini and Mr. Quatrini Jr. of Greensburg. The groom’s mother is an assistant professor at Indiana University of Pennsylvania.
The couple met after being set up by Ms. Vélez’s brother-in-law in 2016.
Maya Catherine Popa and Sam Matthew Nester were married Nov. 23 at the Explorers Club, a professional society based in New York that promotes scientific exploration, where they are members. The Rev. Charlene Powell, a Presbyterian minister, officiated.
Ms. Popa, 29, is an English teacher and the director of the creative writing program at the Nightingale-Bamford School in New York. She graduated summa cum laude from Barnard College and received an M.F.A. in poetry from N.Y.U. She also received a master’s degree from Oxford.
She is the daughter of Catrinel I. Popa and Radu D. Popa of New York. The bride’s father is the associate dean of the law library at N.Y.U. and a writer. Her mother was, until September, the vice president for design at Hue, the fashion legwear company, in New York.
Mr. Nester, 31, works as the artistic director of the Bridge Arts Ensemble in New York, and is a member of the trumpet faculty for the Juilliard School’s music advancement program, for which he is also the artistic administrator for community engagement. He is also the director of brass bands at St. Hilda’s & St. Hugh’s School in New York. He holds a doctorate in musical arts from the Manhattan School of Music.
He is a son of Christine A. Nester and Matthew C. Nester of Brisbane, Australia. The groom’s mother is an assistant in nursing at Seasons Aged Care in Kallangur, Queensland, Australia. His father, who is retired, was the financial coordinator for major infrastructure projects for the Brisbane City Council.
The couple met in 2011 at Joe, a cafe in New York.
Keo Kanhchana Chea and Edward Kuei Chung Chan were married Nov. 23 at St. Patrick Catholic Church in Philadelphia. The Rev. George Schommer, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony. On Dec. 7, the couple is to have a second ceremony at Club One, an events space in Repulse Bay, Hong Kong. Brian Wang, a friend of the couple, is to lead the ceremony.
Mrs. Chan, 38, is an assistant director of the public engagement division at the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau in Washington. She graduated from the University of California, Davis, and received a law degree from the University of California, Hastings.
She is a daughter of Mealany Poum Chhim and Rithy Chea of Rocklin, Calif. The bride’s parents retired as the owners of a Stop & Shop grocery store in Rocklin.
Mr. Chan, 35, is a principal of 1315 Capital, a health care private equity firm in Philadelphia. He graduated from Johns Hopkins University, and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
He is a son of Brenda Chan and Dr. Yuk Charn Chan of Philadelphia. The groom’s mother retired as a certified public accountant in Philadelphia. His father is a retired biochemist with SK Biopharmaceuticals in Fairfield, N.J.
The couple met in January 2014 through a mutual friend in Washington.