When it debuted at the Cannes Film Festival in May, the director Lars von Trier’s new film, “The House That Jack Built,” prompted walkouts, dismissals and outright condemnations because of its graphic depictions of a serial killer’s spree of sexualized violence.
Now he and his distributor, IFC Films, are hoping an unorthodox release plan will help spin bad press in their favor. An edited, R-rated version of “Jack” will reach theaters and video on demand on Dec. 14; but first the unrated director’s cut will show in cinemas on Wednesday for “one night only,” all but daring audiences to withstand what so many at Cannes could not.
The “director’s cut” label is usually affixed after a film’s traditional release rather than before, but the Danish provocateur’s savvy appropriation seems a logical variation on that pliable phrase — which has undergone a fascinating transformation over the past four decades. And, like so much of the current moviemaking landscape, its ubiquity is owed, in no small part, to Steven Spielberg and George Lucas.
Neither man invented the idea of a feature rereleased to theaters in altered form. The most common occurrences before the late 1970s, however, took scenes out instead of adding them in. Salty “Pre-Code” films, made before the 1930 Production Code (regulating sex, violence, and adult content) was enforced, were subsequently trimmed and rereleased to comply with it. In something close to this spirit, the 1977 R-rated smash “Saturday Night Fever” was shown in theaters the following year in a PG version, with its profanity and sex expunged.
“Close Encounters of the Third Kind: The Special Edition” was a commercial disappointment at the box office, but its creation (and that of separate “Collector’s Edition” for DVD in 1998) set a precedent, allowing directors to return to previously released but compromised works and adjust them to their satisfaction.
“Close Encounters” first landed in theaters a few months after another sensation, George Lucas’s “Star Wars.” As Spielberg was frantically working toward his Christmas Day deadline, Warner Bros. realized it had another Lucas sci-fi feature, the 1971 flop “THX 1138,” sitting on its shelves. The studio rereleased it, allowing Lucas to restore five minutes of footage that the company had forced him to trim six years earlier. (He would recut it entirely, and add new material, for its 2004 DVD version.) The following year, Universal rereleased Lucas’s other pre-“Star Wars” effort, “American Graffiti,” with four minutes of scenes restored.
That final goal proved difficult. Though the rereleases were financially successful, many fans objected to Lucas’s tinkering (particularly his choice to re-edit Han Solo’s killing of a bounty hunter into an act of self-defense). Lucas continued to alter the films in subsequent home video versions to fans' chagrin; because the original, theatrical versions had been removed from circulation, they were essentially replaced by Lucas’s revamps. The move raised larger questions about a director’s recut. Do filmmakers reserve the right to take their original version — the one moviegoers know and love — out of circulation?
By that time, the concept of the “director’s cut” had been thoroughly monetized. For sexually explicit films like Paul Verhoeven’s “Basic Instinct” or hyperviolent efforts like Oliver Stone’s “Natural Born Killers,” the minor trims required for a theatrically profitable R rating were restored for home video, drawing more consumers and turning the “unrated director’s cut” into a secondary revenue stream.
The ubiquity of the term has, to some extent, diluted it — reducing it to a marketing tool, signaling the redressing of an artist’s grievances, yet resulting in the creation of more product and thus more income for the very creators of those grievances.
What does the rerelease of “The House That Jack Built” mean for a filmmaker like von Trier, widely considered a visionary, albeit one with an inclination to troll?
Only time will tell. And of course, if it doesn’t work, von Trier can always recut it.