Opinion|So Much for Bipartisanship, Eh, Mitch?
So Much for Bipartisanship, Eh, Mitch?
If he wants a unified Senate, Mr. McConnell would be smart to allow a vote on criminal justice reform.
“The Senate has proved its ability to reach bipartisan solutions to some of the most pressing challenges facing our nation,” Senator Mitch McConnell wrote last week not on the satirical news site The Onion, but for Fox News.
At a news conference the day after the midterm elections, the Senate majority leader warned that it would be “presidential harassment” if the newly elected Democratic majority in the House used its constitutional prerogative to act as a check on a president who has pushed ethics, decency and the rule of law to the brink. It was as if Mr. McConnell’s obstructionism in the Obama years had never happened.
But after two years of pushing for extreme legislation and appointments that succeeded or failed on party-line votes, Mr. McConnell is now putting the brakes on what is likely one of the only true examples of bipartisanship of the Trump era so far: a criminal justice reform bill that has brought together the American Civil Liberties Union and the Fraternal Order of Police, Republican conservatives like Senator Charles Grassley of Iowa and Democratic liberals like Senator Richard Durbin of Illinois.
Until last week, all the stars were aligned for the bill — called the First Step Act — to be voted on before the end of this Congress: President Trump announced his support at a ceremony in the Roosevelt Room; House Speaker Paul Ryan agreed to push it over the line in the House; and Mr. McConnell had promised before the election to bring it to the floor after the midterms.
Now Mr. McConnell is reneging. He told Mr. Trump that a vote on the bill is no longer likely this term because the remaining time on the floor will be taken up by other priorities. Among them are the stalled farm bill and possibly more judicial nominations.
This is a repeat of what happened in the waning months of Barack Obama’s administration. That period is more likely remembered for Mr. McConnell’s blockade of President Obama’s nomination of Judge Merrick Garland to the Supreme Court and his refusal to join Democrats in denouncing Russia’s attempt to hack the 2016 election. But Mr. McConnell also had a hand in scuttling an earlier bipartisan criminal justice reform measure that enjoyed broad support.
This time around, not even Mr. Grassley, who as chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee has been an ally in the Republican drive to ram through judicial nominees, seems to have much patience left for Mr. McConnell’s tactics.
“I think it deserves a floor vote, and McConnell should honor his indication that he gave us that he would bring it up if we could show the votes,” Mr. Grassley told The Times last week.
Mr. Grassley is right. Rather than bragging about nonexistent congressional unity, Mr. McConnell should unite with those who’ve already put in the work, and bring the First Step Act to a vote before Congress adjourns.