As investigators try to determine what started the most devastating wildfire in California history, which has killed at least 63 people, the beginning premise is that human beings — through their mistakes, or their toys, tools and technologies — were probably behind it.
The Camp Fire, which, in addition to its death toll, destroyed more than 10,000 homes and businesses, began on a day of low humidity, strong winds and lingering drought, with soils and plants in some areas parched by more than 200 days with no significant precipitation. That was the environment in which the fire began — itself a crucial piece of the puzzle.
An electrical cause is certainly on the table, Mr. Engel said, from a power line that could have fallen in the wind, or some other malfunctioning electrical equipment.
Other causes will also be considered, from a tossed cigarette to a power-mower blade sparking a rock to a hot vehicle tailpipe. Many investors in Pacific Gas and Electric, one of California’s largest utility companies, have already placed their bets and reduced their risk, with the company’s share price plummeting in a wave of selling in fear that the company will be held liable.
The utility was responsible for several of last year’s wildfires that burned through Northern California’s wine country. In fact, Cal Fire has determined that of the 21 major fires last fall in Northern California, at least 17 were caused by power lines, poles and other equipment owned by Pacific Gas and Electric Company.
This year, the utility said that it would begin pre-emptively turning off the power to some customers to avoid causing wildfires under certain conditions.
Cal Fire, once it determines a cause, can seek compensation for firefighting costs — which in the case of the Camp Fire will be staggering, whoever foots the bill. More than 5,600 firefighters were still on the lines on Wednesday, with 23 helicopters in the air and 630 fire engines were on the ground. The fire has burned 138,000 acres and was 35 percent contained.
Whatever set off the blaze — which was first reported early Thursday, just east of Paradise, a town of about 27,000 people in the Sierra Nevada foothills — strong winds roaring through the dry terrain were the reason it spread so quickly and caused so much devastation.
A changing climate is potentially part of the Camp Fire’s story, in deepening patterns of drought in California. Some researchers said that logging in the burned area after a fire in 2008, which was intended to clear out fuels and make this part of Northern California safer, may have had the opposite result. The logging may have left fast-burning weeds and young trees in the fire’s path.
“When it got to the logged area, it spread very rapidly and people just didn’t have much time to evacuate in Paradise, so this whole notion that logging — so-called hazardous fuels reduction — was going to save the town is a dangerous falsehood,” said Chad Hanson, a fire ecologist at the John Muir Project, an environmental group that has been critical of land-management policies and logging practices on public lands. The speed at which the fire spread has raised concerns about the more than 600 who are missing.
For the team of 10 investigators from Cal Fire that has begun its work, old-fashioned shoe-leather will be the start. They plan to interview as many witnesses as possible, and Mr. Engel said he starts every day looking in the news media for the names of displaced fire survivors.
In the age of the cellphone, another important investigative tool will be video. Many people turned on their phone cameras as they were escaping or as the fire was approaching their homes, and posted the video to social media. Investigators will be searching for the video, hoping to create a kind of composite from multiple sources, showing how the fire spread and which way smoke was moving at any given moment.
The investigation of the Camp Fire will not end with the state’s inquiry. Private investigators, especially from insurance companies, will eventually arrive, though Cal Fire’s work comes first. If criminal charges become part of the picture, prosecutors from Butte County or other jurisdictions also would be brought in.
Mr. Engel, the state fire official, said that investigators do not typically focus on the broader issues of land management or climate science: how and when trees were cut for timber, for example, or patterns of drought.
Those things could be important in a fire’s total impact, he said, and on the potential for more fires. But determining the cause of a fire is like taking a short story that is complete except for its first sentence, and then writing a beginning that explains how and what happened.
That sentence often starts with something about the weather. “Temperature, wind and humidity; those are the things that affect ignitions,” Mr. Engel said. After that, human variables are almost always in play.
Researchers have shown, for example, that when people take their guns out into the woods for target practice, some kinds of ammunition are more likely to start a fire than others.
