Like many who are now incarcerated, I was the victim of a miscarriage of justice. I got lucky, but because of dysfunctional, discriminatory rules, most don’t.
The criminal justice system has a set of rights created to protect you. But is it really protecting us? The rapper Meek Mill explains the urgent need for criminal justice reform.
The criminal justice system has a set of rights created to protect you. But do you think it’s really protecting us? You had a right to remain silent, but that really means you had a right to be silenced, doubted, interrogated, suspected. The color of your skin can and will be used against you in a court of law. In their hands, we’re incarcerated five times more often than white people convicted for the same crimes. You have a right to an attorney during questioning. And in some states, 80 percent of criminal defendants can’t even afford a attorney, so an overworked public defender controls your fate — one government employee, countless lives at stake. You had a right to be innocent until proven guilty. But somehow, about 47 percent of the wrongly convicted are black. And if they do prove you’re guilty, they’re going to write you a run-on sentence, on average 20 percent longer than white defendants accused of the same crime. Even if you get out, you’re still not free.  And if you don’t remain perfect, with the smallest slip-up, smallest infraction, the most honest mistake, you’re going to join us, the 80 percent who come back to prison within five years, as I did. That’s when you realize, they didn’t bring us here to thrive. They brought us here to build this. The plantation and a prison are actually no different. The past is the present. It ain’t no coincidence. This was the plan since abolition, to keep us subjugated by creating this system. But I believe in a different set of rights, the right to stand up and be heard, the right to reform a broken justice system and build a new future. We had the right to be silent. Now it’s our right to speak up. Do you understand these rights as I’ve read them to you?
