Representative Nancy Pelosi was nominated to be the speaker in the new Democratic House majority. But she will need to convince many of the 32 Democrats who voted against her to claim the post when the House votes on Jan. 3.
I’m very proud. We look forward to the results, whatever they are. They will be intense, and they will be a vote of confidence to send me, my name, to the floor — that I’m proud to be the nominee, the nominee of the House Democratic Caucus, once again, for Speaker of the House. Scores of members of Congress, who just gave me a vote, are giving me a vote of confidence. That is where our focus is. Are there dissenters? Yes, but I expect to have a powerful vote as we go forward.
The congressional freshman class of 2019 includes the most racially diverse and most female group of representatives ever elected to the House.
Just before the balloting began, Ms. Pelosi dispensed with one major obstacle that had threatened to strengthen her foes, securing the support of a small but critical bloc of Democrats after she agreed to change House rules to give rank-and-file members more influence in Congress.
With Democrats so far in control of 234 seats for the next Congress, Ms. Pelosi can afford to lose no more than 16 Democrats in the Jan. 3 roll call vote if all lawmakers are present and voting. That margin may change as additional races are called.
“None of us wants to have a floor fight, but voters have to be heard — we need to protect new members,” said Representative Kathleen Rice of New York, who attended the meeting along with Mr. Moulton and Representative Tim Ryan of Ohio. Several of the newly elected members won in competitive districts after promising not to support Ms. Pelosi for speaker, and they risk losing their seats if they go back on their word.
Along with Ms. Pelosi, Democrats moved unanimously to return their other two top leaders, forgoing a vote and electing Representative Steny H. Hoyer of Maryland, 79, as the majority leader and Representative James E. Clyburn of South Carolina, 78, as the whip. The results amounted to a resounding endorsement of a leadership team that has remained unchanged for more than a decade, a remarkable reality for a party whose new face is one of generational, racial and cultural transformation.
Still, the election did yield the promise of a new generation of leaders. Democrats chose Representative Ben Ray Luján of New Mexico, the 46-year-old chief of the party’s House campaign committee, for the fourth-ranking position of assistant majority leader. And Representative Hakeem Jeffries, 48, of New York, who has been a leading voice in favor of generational change within the party, was elected chairman of the caucus, the No. 5 post.
Taken together, their elevation reflected a new sense of urgency among House Democrats after midterm election victories ushered in a disproportionately young class of freshmen eager to shake up the stilted ways of Washington and infuse a different set of voices into their party leadership.
Mr. Jeffries beat out an icon of the left, Representative Barbara Lee of California, who would have been the first black woman to be elected to that post. Ms. Lee, at 72, would also have been the fourth septuagenarian in the House Democratic leadership. The contest between two members of the Congressional Black Caucus split Democrats, with 123 supporting Mr. Jeffries, who represents Brooklyn and Queens, and 113 siding with Ms. Lee.
Ms. Lee said after the vote that she “absolutely” thought that sexism and ageism had been at work in the contest.
In impassioned speeches to an ornate hearing room full of Democrats on Wednesday afternoon before the vote, Ms. Pelosi’s allies argued that she was the best person to take on President Trump and outmaneuver Republican congressional leaders at a critical time for the country.
Representative Adam B. Schiff of California, who is in line to become chairman of the Intelligence Committee, became emotional as he made the case for Ms. Pelosi.
The leader of the House Democrats faces challenges from multiple factions in her quest to regain the speakership.
Although she easily won the nomination, Ms. Pelosi’s victory carried notes of caution for a leader who has proclaimed unequivocally that she had the votes to become speaker. Those who have pressed for a new leader have long believed that after they showed she did not have such support, they could force a debate over an alternative candidate for speaker, a clear time limit on her tenure or a compromise in other leadership posts that would ensure a generational change at the top — all options Ms. Pelosi has refused to consider.
But Ms. Pelosi, who excels at legislative haggling and the corralling of a sometimes fractious group of Democrats, has demonstrated in the past that she has the capacity to win over dissenters with a mix of sweeteners and unspoken threats. The last time she faced opposition, when Mr. Ryan challenged her for minority leader in 2016, she lost 63 Democrats, almost twice the number that voted against her on Wednesday.
Her deal with the Problem Solvers Caucus appeared to ease her path considerably. Among the changes she agreed to were one that would make it easier for “consensus” bills — those that gain at least 290 co-sponsors — to get a vote on the House floor, and for bipartisan amendments, with at least 20 members of each party supporting them, to be considered in committees.
Another notable change would eliminate the ability of one member to essentially force a vote of no confidence in the speaker, a threat that has allowed the House Freedom Caucus, a group of ultraconservative Republicans, to handcuff the speaker, and ultimately led to the resignation of Speaker John A. Boehner in 2015. Instead, the move would have to be initiated by a party caucus or conference.