WASHINGTON — President Trump on Tuesday lobbed familiar insults and accusations at the special counsel investigation, a day after prosecutors said his former campaign chairman repeatedly lied to investigators in breach of a previous plea agreement.
The continuing investigation is a “Phony Witch Hunt,” carried out by a “conflicted” prosecutor and a staff of “Angry Democrats,” the president said in three morning Twitter posts.
The Phony Witch Hunt continues, but Mueller and his gang of Angry Dems are only looking at one side, not the other. Wait until it comes out how horribly & viciously they are treating people, ruining lives for them refusing to lie. Mueller is a conflicted prosecutor gone rogue....
....The Fake News Media builds Bob Mueller up as a Saint, when in actuality he is the exact opposite. He is doing TREMENDOUS damage to our Criminal Justice System, where he is only looking at one side and not the other. Heroes will come of this, and it won’t be Mueller and his...
There was nothing new in the president’s accusations, but they are his first public comments about the investigation by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, since the disclosure on Monday that his former campaign chairman, Paul Manafort, lied multiple times to prosecutors in violation of a plea agreement he struck months ago.
Mr. Trump also suggested that he has heard the accounts of witnesses who have been interviewed by the Mueller team.
“Wait until it comes out how horribly & viciously they are treating people, ruining lives for them refusing to lie,” the president wrote.
The president also accused the special counsel team of forcing witnesses to lie, a narrative that echoes what one witness, Jerome Corsi, has said.
Mr. Corsi, a conspiracy theorist and friend of Roger J. Stone Jr., a former Trump adviser, recently told reporters that he refused an offer from the special counsel to sign a plea agreement saying that he willfully lied when he spoke to investigators.
Sarah Huckabee Sanders, the White House press secretary, deflected questions on Tuesday about Mr. Trump’s perspective on the special counsel’s accusation that Mr. Manafort lied to investigators. She said she was not aware of any discussions about a potential presidential pardon for Mr. Manafort.
Mr. Trump recently provided written answers to some of Mr. Mueller’s questions about whether any of his associates coordinated with Russia’s efforts to interfere in the 2016 presidential election.
Mr. Manafort’s lawyers on Monday disputed that he lied to federal investigators and said he had met repeatedly with the special counsel’s office and answered questions truthfully as part of his agreement to cooperate with the investigation.
Facing a steep prison sentence for multiple criminal charges, Mr. Manafort signed a guilty plea agreement in September to two counts of conspiracy related to his consulting work in Ukraine. Lying to prosecutors during his subsequent cooperation violates that agreement and could lead to the special counsel pursuing additional charges against him.
Mr. Manafort is one of several former Trump aides who have been charged with lying to federal investigators, including three other former campaign advisers, Michael T. Flynn, Rick Gates and George Papadopoulos, who started serving his 14-day prison sentence on Monday.
Prosecutors have also been asking questions about Mr. Stone and his ties to WikiLeaks, one of the sites that published stolen Democratic emails.