The killings of nine parishioners at a black church in Charleston and 11 congregants at a synagogue in Pittsburgh brought people in those two communities together in an unspeakable grief.
PITTSBURGH — An African Methodist pastor, dressed in a dark suit and white clerical collar, greeted a Conservative rabbi, wearing a black overcoat and matching fedora, in the lobby of a downtown hotel on Friday morning. They spread their arms wide and embraced at length, the rabbi patting the pastor rhythmically on the back as the pastor drew him close. Words were not necessary.
The two men had never met, but for a week they have been bound by the unspeakable grief of two unconscionable desecrations. The pastor was the Rev. Eric S.C. Manning, who leads Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church in Charleston, S.C., where nine parishioners were shot to death in a racist attack during a Wednesday night Bible study on June 17, 2015. The rabbi was Jeffrey Myers of the Tree of Life congregation in Pittsburgh’s Squirrel Hill neighborhood, where 11 worshipers were gunned down during shabbat services last Saturday.
When a virulent anti-Semite walked through unlocked doors into a house of God that morning and opened fire on believers in prayer, the analogies to the massacre at Emanuel A.M.E. became inescapable. Here within 40 months were two ruthlessly murderous attacks in the most sacred of spaces, victimizing minority communities — one racial, one religious — that share a centuries-long struggle against bigotry and persecution.
In both instances, the gunmen left a cache of hate-filled online commentary and eagerly volunteered their motives.
“I have to do this,” Dylann S. Roof, who was 21 at the time, told his African-American victims in Emanuel’s fellowship hall as he fired 77 shots from a Glock semiautomatic handgun, “because y’all are raping our women and y’all are taking over our world,” according to survivors who testified at his 2016 trial.
Shortly before the assault on the synagogue, which the police say involved four weapons, including a Glock .357, Robert Bowers, 46, explained himself in a social media post. “I can’t sit by and watch my people get slaughtered,” he wrote. “Screw your optics, I’m going in.” After his surrender, he told a SWAT officer that he “wanted all Jews to die” because they “were committing genocide against his people,” according to a criminal complaint.
Despite what likely will be overwhelming physical and witness evidence, Mr. Bowers pleaded not guilty on Thursday to 44 federal counts, including hate crimes that will carry a possible death sentence if, as pledged, the Justice Department pursues it. Like Mr. Roof, who was convicted and sentenced to death, Mr. Bowers requested a jury trial.
Pastor Manning heard about the Pittsburgh shootings last Saturday morning when his smartphone vibrated with a news alert. He was at Emanuel, participating in a panel discussion about the Charleston massacre for a visiting group of young lawyers. His heart sank.
“Not again,” he recalled thinking.
He did not hold President Trump — whom he refers to as “45” — directly responsible for inciting violence. But he referred pointedly to the president’s “undercurrents and untruths.” And he contrasted the powerful eulogy against hate delivered by President Barack Obama after the Emanuel tragedy with Mr. Trump’s instant response that the killings could have been prevented if the synagogue had had armed guards.
By Sunday afternoon, Pastor Manning knew he wanted to be in Pittsburgh, to lend solidarity, to offer solace and advice, to practice what he calls a “ministry of presence.” He and his wife flew up on Thursday night, and on Friday he met for two hours with Rabbi Myers in the hotel coffee shop.
The rabbi invited him to speak on Friday afternoon at the last of 11 funerals over four days, for 97-year-old Rose Mallinger, the oldest of the victims. He read from the 23rd Psalm.
For family members of the so-called Emanuel Nine and others in Charleston, the Tree of Life shootings carried their own form of post-traumatic stress.
Sharon Risher, who lost her mother, Ethel Lance, in the Charleston attack, said she could not stop crying when she heard the news on CNN. “It was like somebody had just stabbed me in my heart again,” she said.
The synagogue shootings also reverberated in Pittsburgh’s black churches. On Thursday evening, Bethel African Methodist Episcopal Church, just a few miles from Squirrel Hill, hosted a multifaith prayer service to show support for the Jewish community. “Our grief is your grief, and our tears are mingled with yours,” said McKinley Young, a senior bishop in the A.M.E. church.
The killings in Charleston became a national touchstone not only because they evinced such a shocking level of indiscriminate violence. Also central to the moment were the spontaneous expressions of forgiveness for the killer expressed by some victims’ family members, at a bond hearing only two days after the attack.
Their views were not shared by all in Charleston or in the church, or even within their families. But their demonstrations of Christian grace moved people around the world.
But, Rabbi Diamond and other leaders here said, there has not been much talk of forgiveness for the synagogue gunman within Pittsburgh’s Jewish community.
Jews interviewed here said they had been too busy burying the dead, and trekking from shiva to shiva, to devote much thought to the killer. But Jewish theologians also explained that their tradition, rooted more in the retributive justice of the Old Testament than the turn-the-cheek ethos of the New Testament, takes a different approach to forgiveness.
Under the guidelines for repentance, or teshuvah, when man sins against God, say by violating rules of the Sabbath, he may seek forgiveness through confession and prayer. But when man sins against man, the offender must seek and receive forgiveness from the victim, after making restitution.
Those who forgave Mr. Roof in Charleston echoed a centuries-old tradition that in the black church can be as much a mechanism for survival as a prayer for a murderer’s soul. At a Bible study on Wednesday night at St. James African Methodist Episcopal Church, not far from Squirrel Hill, most of the 11 parishioners present said they still felt called to forgive the synagogue gunman, despite their proximity to tragedy.
The rituals of the aftermath in Pittsburgh seemed sickeningly familiar all week. The sidewalk memorials of flowers and hand-scribbled messages. The nightmarish logistics of planning so many funerals. The initial court appearances by defiantly unrepentant perpetrators. The street demonstrations, the presidential visits, the gun control debates. The utter emotional and physical exhaustion.
The men talked about how to provide for a devastated congregation, how to handle the onslaught of media requests, how to balance the demands of an ongoing police investigation with the need to restore, if not normalcy, at least some sense of order. Pastor Manning offered Rabbi Myers an Emanuel Nine commemorative pin, which he attached to his lapel.
