If you follow theater, you probably already know about the Broadway bigfoots opening this month: “Network” starring Bryan Cranston, “To Kill a Mockingbird,” starring Jeff Daniels, and “The Cher Show,” starring three Chers. But it’s also a month, Off Broadway, for wider exploration, from Beverly Hills and Brooklyn to France, Iran and Iraq.
One of the bright spots in the lives of the thousands of people stuck in a migrant camp in Calais, France in 2015 and 2016 was a makeshift theater called Good Chance. Organized by Joe Murphy and Joe Robertson, it gave refugees a place to perform and listen, dance and cry.
It also gave Mr. Murphy and Mr. Robertson the material for a play. But the result, called “The Jungle” after the name of the camp, is not a tribute to the transcendence of liberal values. Rather, it’s a way of asking whether their good intentions made a positive difference or were just a diversion.
Lynn Nottage’s two Pulitzer Prizes — for “Ruined” in 2009 and “Sweat” in 2017 — honor big tragedies about big subjects: war, labor, powerlessness. But one of her earlier, breakthrough plays, in 2004, was a picaresque comedy on a much smaller scale. Instead of a community there is one woman, Undine (born Sharona Watkins). And among the awful things that happens to her is that … she’s forced to move from Manhattan to Brooklyn.
The idea behind Nassim Soleimanpour’s “White Rabbit Red Rabbit,” which played on Monday evenings for nine months in 2016, was that a different “guest star” enacted the text at each performance, without having seen it beforehand.
It was a stunt that paid off, at least when the actors were inventive enough. Nathan Lane, for instance, was able to make connections between the nearly sadistic requirements of the form and the situation in which it was written: Mr. Soleimanpour, an Iranian dissident, was then, in essence, a prisoner of a repressive power.
When the city of Mosul fell to ISIS in 2014, many Iraqi émigrés felt the strange, double loss of something they had long since left.
That’s the subject of “Noura,” a new play by Heather Raffo, directed by Joanna Settle for Playwrights Horizons. Eight years after fleeing Iraq, Noura and her family set out to celebrate a thoroughly happy Christmas in New York, only to find that unhappiness has a way of emigrating too.
