It’s Thursday. Relax. Mark Ruffalo found his backpack, after leaving it in a cab on the Upper West Side.
Weather: Kind of like yesterday, only sunnier and less raw: gusty with a high of 46.
Alternate-side parking: in effect until next Saturday.
Cuomo and Trump had lunch. Who got served?
Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo built his re-election campaign this year on the notion that he was the best person to defend New Yorkers against President Trump.
At the lunch, Mr. Cuomo failed to obtain a promise of funding from Mr. Trump.
But the meeting also exposed a dilemma that Mr. Cuomo and Democrats nationally face: They must oppose Mr. Trump at all costs, but they also can’t stand in the way of progress on key projects.
Mr. Cuomo desperately needs to improve mass transit in New York. To do so, he needs federal money, which means he needs Mr. Trump’s support. It’s a tricky balance.
New: House Democrats on Wednesday elected Mr. Jeffries their new caucus chairman.
Why it matters: They were “choosing a leading voice for generational change in the party as their fifth-ranking leader and a new face of their nascent majority,” according to The Times.
Notable: Congresswoman-elect Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez did not vote for Mr. Jeffries. Representative Sean Patrick Maloney, who was absent due to a recent illness, had asked to postpone the vote for Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee chairman. A spokesman Mr. Maloney said he was supportive of Mr. Jeffries.
Judges preparing to sentence a criminal often get letters from the defendant’s family members and friends begging for leniency.
But the federal judge who will sentence Louis Ciminelli, a construction executive convicted in a bid-rigging case linked to Governor Cuomo’s $1 billion plan to revitalize Buffalo, recently received an unusual handwritten letter on behalf of Mr. Ciminelli — from his former dog walker.
The dog walker, Jeanne Burke, made clear to Judge Valerie E. Caproni of Manhattan why she felt Mr. Ciminelli should not be sent away for long.
“A man’s heart and soul are easily seen through a dog’s adoring eyes,” she wrote, noting that both of Mr. Ciminelli’s dogs died recently.
Judge Caproni is scheduled to sentence Mr. Ciminelli on Monday. It could not immediately be determined whether she has a dog.
Still searching for Bobby Fischer: A 26-year-old from Park Slope unsuccessfully tried to become the first American since 1972 to win the world chess championship.
Online dangers: There’s a plan to turn New York into a capital of cybersecurity.
Jay-Z: The rapper won a New York court battle to halt arbitration over his clothing brand, on the grounds that there were not enough African-American arbitrators.
From the archives: On this date in 2012, fast food workers in the city went on strike, leading to a national movement to raise their wages. A $15 minimum wage for fast-food workers in the city goes into effect Dec. 31.
What do you hear? The Daily Mail reports that Mayor de Blasio was booed briefly at the Rockefeller Center Christmas tree lighting last night. Watch the video and judge for yourself.
For more events, see the going-out guides from The Times’s culture pages.
My 4-year-old daughter and I were planting tulip and hyacinth bulbs in the front yard of our house in Jackson Heights.
A man who was passing by on the sidewalk stopped and watched us. This wasn’t unusual. A lot of people walking by were curious about what we were doing kneeling on the ground on a cold November afternoon.
After a few moments, the man spoke.
“May I have some earth?” he asked.
“What?” I answered. I wasn’t sure I had heard him correctly.
“Earth,” he repeated.
He stooped down, ran his fingertips over the soil and pulled a small flower pot from a bag he was carrying.
Now I understood.
I handed him my trowel. He put two scoops in his pot, returned the trowel, thanked us and went on his way.
Pickles is a 7-year-old white and black Australian cattle dog/Border collie mix from Thailand who was adopted by Joseph Masella and his wife, Jasmin Cruz Masella, from Ditmas Park.
In August, according to Bklyner, Pickles went missing while out on a walk.
After an exhaustive search, he was finally found. And Pickles had a new friend, Violet, a dog who had been missing since 2016.
This Thursday, go the extra mile.
Correction: An earlier version of this newsletter mischaracterized Representative Sean Patrick Maloney’s position in a recent Democratic leadership vote. He is supportive of Representative Hakeem Jeffries, who was elected Caucus chairman.