Sometimes it seems as if we’re living under a constant barrage of heavy news. But it isn’t all bad out there. This feature is meant to send you into the weekend with a smile, or at least a lighter heart. Want to get The Week in Good News by email? Sign up here.
Chess has become cool in Norway.
And it seems to be due to the Norwegian world champion Magnus Carlsen. He’s been the world’s top-ranked chess player for the past eight years, and is now one of the country’s most famous people.
In Norway, stores struggle to keep chessboards on their shelves. Chess podcasts hover atop the download charts. Children play chess with their friends, and adults have chess-themed drinking games at chess-watching parties.
She’s connecting with strangers over grammar.
Long a language-obsessive, Ellen Jovin found communities of fellow word lovers online, but the time spent at her computer could be isolating.
Women are leading the way in Aruba.
Last year, Evelyn Wever-Croes became the first female prime minister of Aruba. Her election is significant, coming at a time when women’s ascent into top decision-making roles globally has sputtered.
Many women hold top jobs in the Aruban government. But Mrs. Wever-Croes wants to find more.
Universities are trying to strengthen the places they call home.
Look at the University of Maryland, which is working with the local government to attract start-ups, research facilities and people who want a walkable, affordable community. A university loan program offers $15,000 to staff and faculty members who want to buy a home nearby.
A golf champion rebounded from a difficult year, with a puppy’s help.
Lexi Thompson, 23, the leading American in the women’s golf rankings, returned to the winner’s circle on Sunday, ending a 14-month title drought that included a one-month hiatus because of mental health issues.
Her new puppy, Leo — a fluffy Havanese and miniature poodle mix — was by her side. He has perhaps been her best form of therapy amid the pressures of competition and the suffocating scrutiny of social media.
Steven Pinker thinks the future is looking bright.
The thesis of the Harvard psychologist’s latest book, “Enlightenment Now,” is that life on Earth is improving, and that people everywhere are far better off today than they were before the start of the Enlightenment in the 17th century. The Times sat down with Mr. Pinker to talk about what humanity needs to do to keep the good times rolling.
These photos show decades of children’s wonder at the Macy’s Thanksgiving Day Parade.
Rich or poor, if you’re willing to wake up obscenely early to stand outside in the cold, there’s a place for you on the parade route.
What would you like to see here? Email us at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| You can enjoy more of this feature at nytimes.com/goodnews.