COPENHAGEN — With two weeks to go before filming began, the producers for Denmark’s version of the TV show “Love Island” were finalizing the opening cast list. The day before, they had rejected a promising candidate — a gorgeous skateboarder with a penchant for World of Warcraft — because they feared she wasn’t emotionally mature enough to live under the glare of dozens of cameras for six weeks.
In Britain, “Love Island” was the watercooler hit of the summer, drawing an average of about four million viewers per episode. In the fourth season, which ended July 30, well-sculpted singles once again moved into a Spanish villa, where they attempted to find love through couplings, competitions and seemingly endless conversations about their romantic criteria. Nearly eight weeks later, the audience voted for its favorite pair.
The show has already moved beyond Britain: There are versions airing in Australia and Germany, and one planned for the United States. Like new versions in Finland, Norway and Sweden, Denmark’s “Love Island,” which has been airing six nights a week since Oct. 22, demonstrates the show’s wide-ranging appeal. But how does it play in the land of “hygge” and gender equality?
The Nordic region is no stranger to reality TV. But its homegrown fare tends to be either very wholesome — a show about cutting, stacking and burning firewood in Norway, for example — or decidedly more outré — like the purported comedy “Gay Army,” in which gay men are subjected to military training by a drill sergeant.
ITV was also drawn to the Nordic countries because they are among the most digitally advanced in the world, Mr. Beale said. The audience uses an app to vote on outcomes, like which two contestants to send on a date. And although the show airs nightly on conventional television, it can also be streamed on demand.
“About 270,000” viewers watched the Oct. 22 premiere in Denmark, the broadcaster TV3 said in a statement. Of those, 78,000 watched it on television. That week, the “Love Island” app was also the country’s most frequently downloaded.
At first glance, any accommodations to local tastes in the Nordic versions are difficult to detect. With their decidedly un-hygge bubblegum-colored bedspreads and sometimes surgically enhanced casts, the shows appear to be close copies of the original.
For the careful observer, however, deeper regional differences emerge.
In the Swedish, Finnish, and Norwegian versions, alcohol — strictly controlled in those countries — scarcely appears.
And in famously feminist Sweden, one of the games from the original British show that was criticized as sexist has been toned down. The original “melon challenge” required women to bounce suggestively atop a watermelon until it broke, while the men looked on. In Swedish “Love Island,” couples launched themselves together at the fruit.
That was evident during a game in which the women felt up the entire bodies, including groins, of the men, who were clad only in underwear. “Since the ‘60s and ‘70s, women in Denmark have learned to take control of their bodies and their sexuality,” said Bastian Larsen, a sex therapist and dating coach based in Copenhagen. “So it’s normal for them now to take the initiative. They’re verbally upfront about what they want.” In the British version of the game, the women restricted themselves to touching biceps and abs.
Even with explicit groping, however, the Nordic versions of “Love Island” have not matched the ratings of their British forebear. Sweden, for example, averaged 73,000 viewers per episode, though streaming drew 94,000 per episode, according to ITV. In Denmark, the televised version has also lagged behind other reality shows.
Should the Norwegian version be renewed in spite of its low ratings, Mr. Kronheim had some advice for the producers.
