336 pp. Ecco. $26.99.
So can we all agree that the center didn’t hold? Yeats warned us it wouldn’t. Didion reminded us. And now, in America at least, the center is a vast, smoking pit across which two furious armies block each other on Twitter. Jonathan Lethem’s new book may be billed as a detective novel for simplicity’s sake — and to remind us of his breakthrough, “Motherless Brooklyn” — but when did Lethem ever do anything simple? In “The Feral Detective,” a Manhattanite named Phoebe Siegler hires a private eye and searches the outskirts of Los Angeles and the Mojave Desert for a friend’s runaway daughter. What she’s really looking for is a way to understand the world after the ascension of Donald Trump. Along the way, the book grows menacing and allegorical, and winks Lethem-ly at so many storytelling archetypes — the road movie, the journey into darkness, the return of the king, the Mad Max-ish dystopia — that it’s hard to imagine such a strange machine actually flying.
And it doesn’t, not without turbulence.
“The Feral Detective” is full of pleasures and annoyances. It’s a frustrating novel and, when you set it on the bedside table for the night, you feel like telling it, “You stay there until you can behave yourself.” But while it’s not essential Lethem, the book grows in your estimation in retrospect, and upon rereading, because of its ambitions, its sneaky tenderness and the relevance of its questions about identity and tribal warfare.
Phoebe enlists the help of the private eye in question, Charles Heist, early on and their relationship drives the book — sometimes powerfully, sometimes off the road. Heist is “feral” in the sense that he’s rootless, unpredictable and hairy. He’s about 20 years older than Phoebe. There’s a freaky tween girl sleeping in his office until he can find a safe place for her and an opossum with a urinary tract infection residing in one of his desk drawers. Phoebe is both intrigued and repulsed by Heist. Having seen movies, you will recognize this as the prelude to soulful sex in the detective’s sketchy trailer.
Phoebe can be a problem. She’s our guide and conscience, yet Lethem colors her character in so slowly that she’s on the edge of a breakdown before we can grasp who she is. Phoebe is sarcastic and occasionally vulgar. She makes dangerous choices. She loathes Heist for his taciturn masculinity, then yearns to jump him again: “I wanted to slap him, but I might have damaged the tender flesh of my hand on his die-cut features, his Brillo sideburns.” At times, she seems less like somebody destabilized by the new political order and more like somebody tapering off Zoloft. It’s not a sexist portrayal, but in a blind taste test you would know that this book was written by a man. Phoebe appears to be a mouthpiece for Lethem’s own rage, and she’s not an especially convincing portrait of a woman. It’s not enough to have her use the word “menstrual” and read Elena Ferrante.
Halfway through the novel, Lethem just about switches genres on us as Phoebe and Heist are drawn into a gladiatorial battle in the desert involving the Bear clan and its throne. Lethem has taken us so far from the liberal bubble so fast that you’ve either got to go with it or go home. Go with it. Even the author seems to know that he’s pushed the plot over the top because he punctures the savagery with humor, as when Phoebe screams at the Bears watching the fight, telling them they’re insane and demanding to know if they even voted. At its best, though, “The Feral Detective” is a worthy morality play about our warring impulses for conflict and comfort. It asks who we are when we lose, or cast away, everything that was propping us up.
As in Didion’s vintage nonfiction, the characters in “The Feral Detective” suffer from a disorder caused by history itself. In “The White Album,” Didion wrote wryly of her trip to a psychiatric clinic: “An attack of vertigo and nausea does not now seem to me an inappropriate response to the summer of 1968.” Phoebe could say much the same thing 50 years later. You can get dizzy staring into the void where the center used to be.