A Washington State man in February texted to his friends pictures of a partially naked woman on his bed, according to police documents.
The man, Brian Varela, said in the texts that he believed that the woman was overdosing, but bragged that he had had sex with her and that he could do so again. Mr. Varela, who was 19 at the time, then started to play a video game, and fell asleep. When he woke up, the woman, Alyssa Noceda, 18, was dead.
On Thursday, Mr. Varela was sentenced to about three years in prison after he had pleaded guilty to felony charges that included second-degree manslaughter and third-degree rape.
The 34-month sentence was seen by members of Ms. Noceda’s family and others as woefully inadequate, and drew sharp complaints.
The judge in the case, Linda C. Krese of Snohomish County Superior Court, expressed frustration with the state’s sentencing laws that she said restricted her from imposing a stiffer penalty, according to news reports and interviews. Judge Krese said she could understand why family members and friends of the victim were “surprised” and even “outraged,” The Daily Herald of Everett, Wash., reported.
“You’re never going to feel like you can adequately hold him accountable,” Toni Montgomery, who prosecuted the case, said on Sunday.
Judge Krese did not respond to requests for comment on Sunday.
Ms. Montgomery said Washington State laws prescribe specific sentence ranges for certain crimes.
The manslaughter charge could have carried a sentence of 24 to 36 months, in part because Mr. Varela had no previous criminal convictions. The rape charge, and another charge that Mr. Varela pleaded guilty to — misdemeanor unlawful disposal of remains — carried shorter sentences, and they were all required to run concurrently, Ms. Montgomery said.
Judge Krese said in court that she was “not sure the Legislature really contemplated something like this” when it crafted the sentencing laws.
Mr. Varela had initially been charged with first-degree manslaughter and second-degree rape, and a conviction on those charges could have produced a sentence of almost 10 ½ years, Ms. Montgomery said.
But Ms. Montgomery said prosecutors opted for the plea deal because they did not think the first-degree charge would hold up. She said that was in part because Washington does not make it a crime in many cases for an individual to not get help for someone dying near them unless they are a parent, or the person dying is elderly, pregnant or a child.
It would have been harder to prove that Mr. Varela had a responsibility to try to keep Ms. Noceda alive, Ms. Montgomery said.
“Usually people who do stuff like this don’t get away with a slap on the wrist,” Ms. Pierson said. She could not be reached on Sunday.
Mr. Varela’s lawyer, Paul Thompson, said in an email that most felony crimes have a specific range of punishment set under the state’s Sentencing Reform Act and that his client pleaded guilty to amended charges.
“I cannot comment further than that as to the sentencing other than to say that he was sentenced to the high end of the crimes for which he was actually convicted,” he said.
According to statements gathered by the police, Ms. Noceda went to the trailer where Mr. Varela was living during the night of Feb. 3, 2018.
She told Mr. Varela she had brought Percocet, and crushed it up and snorted it, according to the police. Tests later showed that the drugs contained fentanyl, a powerful opioid. Mr. Varela told the police that he and Ms. Noceda had sex, and then he gave her liquid THC, which she smoked before collapsing.
Mr. Varela woke up the next day and found Ms. Noceda dead. He locked her in his bedroom and went to work. When he returned that night, he washed her body to try to remove his DNA and redressed her before putting her in a plastic crate, according to the police documents. He planned to pack it with onions to mask the odor, KOMO reported.
On Sunday, Mr. Varela was being held in the Snohomish County jail; he will be transferred to a state prison, Ms. Montgomery said.