“Law & Order: Special Victims Unit” finishes its fall season, and “Coco” offers a seemingly innocent emotional reckoning.
COCO (2017) on Amazon, Google Play and Netflix. Despite his family’s ban on music, born out of a deep and generations-old heartbreak, Miguel (Anthony Gonzalez) is still determined to become a musician. But after a strange series of events, he finds himself in the Land of the Dead, coming face to face with his idol Ernesto de la Cruz (Benjamin Bratt) and a ragtag, forgotten ghost named Héctor (Gael García Bernal). Miguel must navigate this otherworldly land to learn the truth and find his roots before it’s too late. Mixing Disney innocence with an extreme emotional appeal is by now a science for Pixar, so be prepared for the waterworks.
CHILDREN OF MEN (2006) on iTunes, Amazon, Google Play, Netflix and Vudu. It’s 2027, and society has been plagued with infertility, removing humans’ ability to reproduce. Against all odds, a young woman has found out she is pregnant and is assigned a protector in Theo (Clive Owen), who is instructed by his former flame (Julianne Moore) to escort the woman out of the country. As the future of humanity essentially rests on his shoulders (no pressure), Theo must risk everything and even learn how to feel hope once more. In her review for The Times, Manohla Dargis said the movie “lifts you to the rafters, transporting you with the greatness of its filmmaking,” and named it a Critic’s Pick.
LAW & ORDER: SPECIAL VICTIMS UNIT 10 p.m. on NBC. This television thriller closes its fall season. After the death of a promising new author, the SVU team uncovers a decades-old secret between two secretive brothers. Judd Hirsch and Wallace Shawn are guests stars.
N.F.L. FOOTBALL: SAINTS VS. COWBOYS 8 p.m. on Fox. Led by Drew Brees, one of the N.F.L.’s small handful of elite quarterbacks, the 10-1 New Orleans Saints take on the 6-5 Dallas Cowboys in this “Thursday Night Football” matchup. The Saints come into this game not only with a near-perfect record but with their defense relinquishing only 38 points in their last three outings. Meanwhile, the Cowboys are on a three-game winning streak.