Opinion|Will Mitch Run?
Will Mitch Run?
Landrieu speaks with certainty on many issues, but a 2020 candidacy may not yet be one of them.
That’s what the former New Orleans mayor and current whispered-about presidential possibility Mitch Landrieu told me Friday afternoon as we sat at a window table in a hotel restaurant in the city’s French Quarter.
I have known Mitch for a while. I, like most people, call him Mitch. We are both born and raised sons of Louisiana. When he swept into the hotel lobby, greeting and razzing the staff, all of whom seemed to light up at the sight of him, he seemed relaxed, the way a person is when in transition, not beholden to the previous labor nor fully engaged in the next.
The 58-year-old Landrieu has spent 30 years in politics, but he really began to be talked about as a possible presidential contender when he moved to take down Confederate statues in the city and gave a powerful, poetic speech explaining why.
Mitch is now asked about running for president so often that his answers sound like ones that have been honed by repetition, shaved down sharp and smooth.
“Someone said to me the other day, ‘Are you running?’ I said, ‘No.’ They said, ‘That’s what everybody says.’ I said, ‘What do the people who aren’t running say?’ ” We laugh.
But it seems to me that much of Landrieu’s trepidation, whether he articulates it as such or not, is that on the one hand he’s not exactly aligned with this moment, but rather speaks to a previous era that prized pragmatics and didn’t condemn compromise. And on the other, he envisions a future in which America’s intractable racial problems can actually be resolved.
Yet as he spoke, it seemed to me that radical wasn’t the correct word for it. He was simply describing himself as an effective centrist, one who gets results. The sad thing is that in a time of national intransigence, gridlock and hyper-partisanship, effectiveness is radical.
But the problem facing Landrieu is that being any kind of centrist Democrat when the party’s progressives are ascendant would be perilous.
The other issue is, ironically, Landrieu’s noble quest to be a racial healer.
As he told me: “The thing I’m most excited about is, I’m leading an initiative to try to knit the South back together across race and class.” He says it’s called the E Pluribus Unum Fund, and its primary funder is Laurene Powell Jobs’s Emerson Collective.
But he recognizes the conundrum the all-important black Democratic primary voters in the South would be in when faced with a white man from the region and black candidates from beyond it.
It would be a hard debate stage to manage without looking like a white savior, coming to fix America’s race problem and saying that he was a better choice to do so than the women and minorities in the race.
But, that is not Landrieu. One thing that I’ve always admired about him is that he’s not race blind, but race conscious. He talks straight about race, its complexities and its absolutes.
And, he's doing precisely what many of us have insisted white America do: He is a white man fighting to dismantle white supremacy, so that the burden isn't only on the shoulders of the oppressed.
That’s how Mitch talks. That’s how Mitch thinks. That’s who Mitch is.
Mitch is still trying to figure out if this is his moment, but even if it isn't, I'm sure he'll one day have a moment.
