A dazzling duck captured hearts.
He’s a Mandarin duck, and his species is native to East Asia. He should not be paddling in the Pond in Central Park, and yet there he is.
Nobody is sure how he got to Manhattan, but he appears healthy and is getting along well with the local mallards. His glorious plumage is already attracting fans.
Partially paralyzed men are walking with the help of an implant.
Three men who lost the use of their legs after severe spinal injuries are now able to walk without any supports with the help of a pacemaker-like implant.
Rooftop gardens are making Paris, and other cities, greener.
The department store Galeries Lafayette in Paris is crowned with a lush farm, filled with marigolds, tomatoes and strawberries. The garden also supplies more than 80 chefs who seek hard-to-find varieties of herbs.
Other agricultural start-ups are emerging in Paris, aiming to create community gardens that are tended by professional gardeners and rented to clients who harvest their own fresh produce. It’s all part of a citywide initiative to cover rooftops and walls with almost 250 acres of vegetation by 2020.
A gospel choir hit the big time.
The Kingdom Choir stunned millions of viewers at the wedding of Prince Harry and Meghan Markle in May, where it performed a version of “Stand by Me.” Before, the British group was largely unknown.
Now, the choir has an album and is set to tour in Britain and the United States. It sang at the Invictus Games in Sydney, Australia, last week.
Karen Gibson, the founder, said she was getting somewhat accustomed to fame. During an interview at a South London cafe, a young man stood up to make room.
A comedian is calling attention to disability rights in entertainment.
People with disabilities make up nearly 20 percent of the population, yet they account for only about 2 percent of onscreen characters.
Friends of a bookstore helped move thousands of volumes — one at a time.
October Books, a store and nonprofit in southern England, needed to move a lot of books to a new building about 500 feet away. The community came to the rescue, forming a chain that passed books down the line, hand-to-hand.
“Little Free Libraries” dot the globe.
They promote a friendly sharing economy. There are no due dates, no fines. You might never return a book. But you might leave another instead.
And these tiny libraries are very cute.
