President Trump took aim at Jim Acosta of CNN after he asked a question about the president’s description of the migrant caravan as an invasion.
President Trump lashed out at journalists during a surly and contentious news conference at the White House on Wednesday, renewing his attacks on the news media as “the enemy of the people” just moments after pledging an end to partisan politics in the wake of a grueling midterm election.
In tense exchanges on live television, Mr. Trump denounced a network correspondent as “very rude,” sternly told several reporters to “sit down,” and at one point stepped away from his lectern, suggesting that he was prepared to cut off the session — a rare formal East Room news conference — because of queries he disliked.
When Mr. Acosta attempted a follow-up, about the special counsel’s investigation into Russia and the Trump campaign, the president’s patience — what little was left — evaporated.
As cameras rolled, a White House aide leaned toward Mr. Acosta and attempted to remove the microphone from his hands. Mr. Acosta held on (“Pardon me, ma’am”) and declined to sit, as Mr. Trump continued to berate him.
The president frequently clashes with reporters, particularly Mr. Acosta, whose confrontational style has sometimes rankled his pressroom colleagues. But Mr. Trump also enjoys the jousting of a live news conference, and he had submitted to a string of interviews in the run-up to Tuesday’s vote.
By Wednesday, though, with his party on its heels after having lost control of the House, Mr. Trump seemed more ornery than outgoing.
Later, when Yamiche Alcindor of PBS asked about Mr. Trump and white nationalists, the president called her question “racist.” “What you said is so insulting to me,” he told Ms. Alcindor, who, like Ms. Ryan, is a woman of color.
Attacking the press usually redounds to Mr. Trump’s benefit: Many of his supporters are fired up by denunciations of news organizations as liberal elites. Jon Favreau, the “Pod Save America” host and former aide to President Barack Obama, lamented Wednesday’s exchanges as playing into the president’s hands.
“While President Trump has made it clear he does not respect a free press, he has a sworn obligation to protect it,” the network said.
Mr. Trump shot Mr. Alexander a look. “I’m not a big fan of yours, either, to be honest,” the president said.
Even in a tense room filled with journalists, the line earned some laughs.