It seems nothing can go right for the Jacksonville Jaguars in 2018.
Jacksonville took a 3-0 lead over the Steelers early in the second quarter. It held that lead — which at one point stretched to 16-0 — until there were eight seconds left in the game. But the latest blow in a season full of them came when Steelers quarterback Ben Roethlisberger bowled his way into the end zone for a 1-yard score, sending Jacksonville to a shocking 20-16 defeat.
Adding an extra level of disappointment to the defeat was Roethlisberger saying that the opportunity for the game-winning score only arose when Jacksonville’s stellar defense had taken away his plans A, B, C and D on the play.
 Myles Jack, a linebacker for the Jaguars, recognized the run and tried to pull the big quarterback down from behind, but it was too late. Roethlisberger just barely got the ball across the goal line.
The loss continued a terrible season for the Jaguars, who have not built on the momentum of a 2017 season that ended in the A.F.C. championship game. They dropped to 3-6 on the season.
For three quarters, Jacksonville was cruising. The team’s defense, led by the standout cornerback Jalen Ramsey, was throttling the Steelers, and its offense, led by Leonard Fournette and Blake Bortles, was doing just enough to get by. The Jaguars got three field goals from Josh Lambo to build a nine-point lead, and then Fournette, who had 95 yards in the game, ran in a 1-yard touchdown.
That touchdown, however, appeared to wake up Pittsburgh. After a false-start penalty and a six-yard completion from Roethlisberger to Ryan Switzer, the Steelers opened things up with a pass deep down the middle to Antonio Brown that went for a 78-yard touchdown. The entire scoring drive had taken just 52 seconds.
The teams traded punts and looked mostly ineffective for several drives after that, but Roethlisberger got a second touchdown pass — that one to Vance McDonald. He then ran in the go-ahead score himself after a face-mask penalty erased what appeared to be a game-icing interception for Jacksonville by D.J. Hayden.
Roethlisberger, who said the team never felt comfortable even after Brown’s huge touchdown, finished the day having completed 27 of 47 passes for 314 yards and two touchdowns. But he threw three interceptions, including two to Ramsey, who walked off the field looking devastated after the Steelers’ go-ahead score.
With their sixth-straight victory, Pittsburgh improved to 7-2-1 and left its poor start to the season in the past. A loss by Cincinnati helped increase the Steelers’ lead in the A.F.C. North, and they will try to keep the winning streak going next week when they travel to Denver to face the Broncos.