And Facebook’s top management comes in for withering criticism.
This article is part of the Opinion Today newsletter. You can sign up here to receive the newsletter each weekday.
The British government has a problem. The reality of leaving the European Union — Brexit — is turning out to be more unpleasant than its advocates promised. As a result, Theresa May’s government is at risk of collapsing, and it’s still not clear what will happen with Brexit.
The core problem hasn’t changed since the Brexit referendum passed in 2016. The advocates’ case revolves around unrealistic promises: that Britain could keep the benefits of European trade (easily selling products in other countries, for example) while getting rid of the downsides (like agreeing to continentwide rules).
Now that Britain needs to negotiate the specific terms of its exit with Europe, the impossibility of a perfect solution is becoming clear. That’s why May’s proposed deal appears to lack the support it needs to pass and is being savaged by both anti- and pro-Brexit members of Parliament.
Britain now seems to have three basic options. The first is a version of May’s muddle-through, in which Britain agrees to a deal with Europe.
The second is a no-deal Brexit, in which the country simply leaves. Steve Hilton — a former top Tory adviser — has a very brief summary of that option here, and Matt Ridley has a longer version in The Times of London.
The editors of Bloomberg Opinion don’t like either of those options, calling May’s approach “folly” and saying a no-deal Brexit would be a “calamity.” So they offer a third: A new referendum to give the British people the chance to undo their earlier decision to leave. But of course that has its own costs, in the form of public anger that politicians ignored the initial result.
There are no good options at this point. And it’s unclear which of the bad options Britain will choose.
Unfriendly. Facebook has come in for withering criticism for its attempts to cover up and minimize its role in spreading misinformation, as reported by The Times.
Facebook suffers from “an astonishing cluelessness and moral rot in the company’s top executive leadership,” writes Helaine Olen in The Washington Post. “What has happened at Facebook is a failure of management, plain and simple,” writes Shira Ovide in Bloomberg Opinion.
What now? Congress needs to take action, both to understand the full story of what happened at Facebook, as Slate’s Will Oremus writes, and to rein in Facebook.
“There are solutions; the overweening dominance of the tech platforms need not be seen as an immutable fact of nature,” my colleague Michelle Goldberg writes. Also in The Times, Kara Swisher lays out a five-point plan to making big tech companies in Silicon Valley more transparent, accountable, diverse and self-reflective.
