New York|N.Y. Democrats Vowed to Get Big Money Out of Politics. Will Big Money Interfere?
N.Y. Democrats Vowed to Get Big Money Out of Politics. Will Big Money Interfere?
In the months before the Nov. 6 elections, New York’s Senate Democrats received $25,000 from a mysterious group of five donors, with names like 2332 7 Ave L.L.C., 207 Silver Lane L.L.C. and 228 W 132 L.L.C.
The donors shared one address, at 223 West 138th Street in Manhattan — home to a real estate management firm with properties across Harlem and the rest of the city. Two more donors from the same address gave $20,000 to another Democrat: Letitia James, who was just elected New York attorney general.
The donations were made possible by a loophole in New York’s campaign finance law that, for more than 20 years, has allowed corporations to create limited liability companies for the sole purpose of giving virtually unlimited amounts of money to candidates.
The law treats limited liability companies as people, allowing each to donate up to $65,100 to every statewide candidate per election cycle — far more than the $5,000 aggregate contribution limit for corporations. Firms can create multiple L.L.C.s, effectively erasing any maximum.
Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, a Democrat, has been by far the greatest beneficiary of the state loophole in recent years, raising more than $17.5 million from L.L.C.s since taking office in 2011. The Senate Republicans’ campaign committee raised more than $3.4 million from L.L.C.s in that time, compared with $1 million for the Democrats.
The loophole’s existence is one reason critics call New York’s campaign finance laws among the weakest in the nation. The real estate industry in particular has made ample use of it. And Democrats, in their successful bid to recapture the State Senate for the first time in a decade, campaigned on a promise to close it.
But even as they vowed to muzzle big money’s influence, they benefited from the same L.L.C. donations they were railing against. Before the 2016 election, when the Democrats’ chances of regaining power seemed less certain, their campaign committee amassed $42,500 from L.L.C.s in the final weeks of the campaign. This year, amid widespread consensus that they would prevail, they took in more than $400,000 in the same period.
The corporations’ sudden generosity, and Democrats’ acceptance of it, has raised questions about whether lawmakers will make good on their promise to overhaul New York’s much-maligned campaign finance system, or whether — now that they have consolidated control of Albany’s levers of power — they might prefer to bask in its perks.
“Cynics are right to think that, O.K., people in power want to get more campaign contributions, whether they’re Democrats or Republicans,” said Michael Kink, the executive director of the Strong Economy for All Coalition, a group of unions and community organizations.
Democrats insist that closing the loophole will be one of their first priorities in the new year. They have proposed holding L.L.C.s to the same limit as corporations, and to count any donations funneled through them toward each stakeholder’s individual limits.
By all appearances, the proposal should sail through. The Democrat-dominated Assembly has voted to close the loophole for years. Mr. Cuomo has said he supports ending it.
But, as always in politics, there is rhetoric and there is reality.
Several people involved with the real estate industry’s political giving said they did not expect the newly Democratic Albany to be entirely hostile to their overtures. Mr. Cuomo has suggested that the Assembly may become less enthusiastic about passing ethics reform without the Senate standing by to squash it.
“I’m not suggesting that it’s a manipulation, but when you know something’s not going to happen anyway, it’s easier to be supportive of it,” the governor said in a recent radio interview.
The same, of course, could be said of Mr. Cuomo. For years, he has professed support for closing the loophole; for years, he blamed Republicans for the effort’s downfall. In the meantime, he has raised far more through L.L.C.s than the entire Senate Republican conference. In 2018 alone, L.L.C.s gave Mr. Cuomo more than $1.9 million.
Democratics denied that their new position in the majority would push the loophole down their agenda.
Mr. Kink was also optimistic about the prospect of reform, adding that heightened voter attention to money in politics could be enough to dissuade lawmakers from reneging on their promises. Democrats especially, with their New York City base, could be wary of getting too cozy with the real estate interests most associated with the loophole, he said.
The push coincides with a surge in attention nationwide to the once-humdrum issue of money in politics. New York City voters on Nov. 6 overwhelmingly approved a ballot proposal to lower contribution limits for city races and to increase the city’s matching-funds program for candidates. Baltimore and Denver also voted to introduce or expand matching-fund programs. A growing number of high-profile Democratic politicians, including Representative-elect Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and United States Senator Kirsten E. Gillibrand, have pledged to reject corporate PAC money.
If the Democrats close the L.L.C. loophole and carry out other changes they have backed, including a statewide small-donor matching funds program, New York’s campaign finance laws could go from the nation’s most lax to its most robust, said Lawrence Norden, deputy director of the Democracy Program at New York University’s Brennan Center for Justice. No other state has a similar active matching program.
The timing of reform may prove pivotal to what is sure to be one of next year’s biggest legislative fights: renegotiation of the state’s rent laws, which are set to expire in June. If Democrats close the L.L.C. loophole early, developers may lose one powerful means for making their voices heard.
In the past, real estate groups used L.L.C.s to deluge upstate Republicans, knowing that their constituents would be less likely to care about the industry’s long shadow, according to Susan Lerner, the executive director of Common Cause New York, a government reform group.
But those involved with the real estate industry said its power brokers did not seem concerned about the prospect of the loophole’s demise. In fact, they cheered it: Tighter restrictions could save firms from having to spend so lavishly on candidates.
And they noted that moneyed interests would always find a way to exert influence — if not through the loophole, then elsewhere, such as through unlimited independent expenditure spending.
Indeed, New York’s campaign finance problems run far deeper than the L.L.C. loophole. The state ranks second to last in the nation in the percentage of candidates’ money that comes from small donors, said Michael Malbin, the head of the Washington-based Campaign Finance Institute.
Even without the loophole, existing contribution limits far exceed those in any other state with a cap; in 16 states, the limit for statewide candidates is less than $5,000 a year, or less than 8 percent of New York’s.
