Illustrated. 486 pp. Penguin. $35.
At age 92, Alan Greenspan remains a towering figure in American finance. He was the second-longest serving chairman of the Federal Reserve (after William McChesney Martin). Dubbed a “rock star” by The Economist, Greenspan achieved an unprecedented level of celebrity for a Fed chairman as stocks soared to record levels in the 1990s, and then notoriety, as his legacy was undermined by the Great Recession that began in 2008, less than two years after he left office.
Greenspan was appointed by Ronald Reagan in 1987 and reappointed by three successive presidents from both parties. That a lifelong champion of free markets and an early acolyte of the objectivist author and philosopher Ayn Rand could so successfully straddle the political spectrum for so long is a testament to the bipartisan free-market ideology that followed the end of the Cold War. At the time it all seemed like the ultimate triumph of democratic capitalism.
Other than a few paragraphs arguing the case that the Fed’s easy money policy had little to no impact on the housing bubble that led to the Great Recession, “Capitalism in America” has almost nothing to say about Greenspan’s own role in recent economic history, and he offers no defense of his tenure as Fed chairman.
While “Capitalism in America” begins with the colonial era, when Americans were already enjoying “the world’s fastest growth rate,” Greenspan and Wooldridge hit their narrative stride and ideological sweet spot when they reach the late-19th-century “Age of Giants,” a name they prefer to the prevailing “Robber Barons,” who may have been rich but, as self-made men, were neither robbers nor hereditary barons.
That they also produced social and economic upheaval for many is a small price to pay, the authors contend. The rise of their great corporations, not to mention the industries they helped build and finance, from railroads to autos to retail chains like Sears, Roebuck, displaced millions of workers and small-business owners who were rendered obsolete. Cyrus McCormack’s threshing machine displaced a quarter of the world’s agricultural workers. “People seldom achieve great things without being willing to ride roughshod over the opposition,” the authors note.
Not surprisingly, these “giants” attracted popular hostility and resentment — Teddy Roosevelt called them “malefactors of great wealth.” Their success and attendant wealth unleashed a populist backlash. Williams Jennings Bryan campaigned against Wall Street and its “cross of gold.” Congress passed the first antitrust laws. The first federal income tax paved the way to income redistribution.
The popular reaction is typically a well-intentioned but misguided effort to preserve the status quo. “People link arms to protect threatened jobs and save dying industries. They denounce capitalists for their ruthless greed. The result is stagnation: In trying to tame the creative destruction, for example by preserving jobs or keeping factories open, they end up killing it,” the authors contend.
In their view, America today is already well along that path to stagnation. “Capitalism in America” barely mentions Trump beyond condemning his “dangerous” trade policies and warning about the fiscal recklessness of his tax cuts. But the entire book is an indictment of Trump’s stands on immigration and protectionism and his attempts to resurrect fading mining and industrial concerns — attempts that, as “Capitalism in America” shows repeatedly, are almost surely doomed.
At the same time, Greenspan’s admiration for the rugged individualists who populate the novels of Ayn Rand (who merits a nod in this history) and the frontier spirit that animated America’s early development shows no sign of weakening as Greenspan has aged. He and Wooldridge lament that Americans are “losing the rugged pioneering spirit” that once defined them and mock the “trigger warnings” and “safe spaces” that now obsess academia.
Their prescription for American renewal — reining in entitlements, instituting fiscal responsibility and limited government, deregulating, focusing on education and opportunity, and above all fostering a fierceness in the face of creative destruction — was Republican orthodoxy not so long ago. Before the Great Recession it was embraced by most Democrats as well, and more recently by President Bill Clinton, the recipient of glowing praise in these pages.
No longer. “Capitalism in America,” in both its interpretation of economic history and its recipe for revival, is likely to offend the dominant Trump wing of the Republican Party and the resurgent left among Democrats. It’s not clear who, if anyone, will pick up the Greenspan torch.
