Elections|They Challenged the Status Quo. On Tuesday, They’ll Find Out Who’s With Them.
They Challenged the Status Quo. On Tuesday, They’ll Find Out Who’s With Them.
In advance of Tuesday’s midterms, a look at how women candidates have chosen to present themselves in their campaign ads, and in their own words.
Gender Letter helps you keep up with the world, and the women shaping it. Tell me what you think at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| It’s almost time, readers. We’re days away from the most charged and divisive midterm election in decades. The buildup has been relentless, and the outcome could have profound effects, particularly if Democrats win the House majority.
In many ways, the climate of this election cycle is a byproduct of 2016’s seismic presidential election: A record number of women and minorities decided to seek elected office, many of them motivated by President Trump’s contentious comments (and policies) on immigration, race and gender.
Before we head to the voting booth on Tuesday (you can find your local polling place here), here’s a look at some of the choices these women, from both sides of aisle, have made in representing themselves in the lead-up to Election Day. Specifically, in their campaign ads, and more specifically, in their own words — whether they came out shooting, literally (guns feature prominently in many G.O.P. candidates’ ads), or tossed the playbook and tried to turn political taboos, like being a mother or a refugee, into strengths.
Here are six ads I thought captured the daring ways they chose to appeal to voters.
Fire the Gun or Film the Ultrasound? How Women Running for Office Define Toughness.
The 2018 election cycle has been called “the year of the woman,” but Republican and Democratic female candidates have starkly different takes on what that means.
Ayanna Pressley, a Democrat from Massachusetts, has put her struggles and identity front and center in her campaign ads. She’s now poised to become the first black woman to represent Massachusetts in Congress after beating a 10-term Democratic incumbent, Michael Capuano, in the primary.
Representative Marsha Blackburn, who is seeking Bob Corker’s vacant Senate seat, would be Tennessee’s first female senator if elected. In her ads, she channels President Trump, calling Republican lawmakers weak and vowing to help repeal Obamacare.
Ilhan Omar, a Democrat who’s heavily favored to win her bid for Congress in Minnesota, let her daughter do the talking in a campaign ad, flipping the script by presenting children as an asset, not a liability. If elected, Ms. Omar, a refugee, would be one of the first Muslim women elected to the House.
MJ Hegar, a Democrat from Texas, raised millions of dollars after her campaign ad titled “Doors” went viral; it has been viewed about three million times on YouTube. The ad focused on her military service, which includes three tours of duty in Afghanistan and a Purple Heart. She’s behind in the polls in her deeply conservative district and faces an incumbent, John Carter.
Just over 101 years ago, on Oct. 28, 1917, an article on the front page of The New York Times announced that more than 20,000 women had marched along Fifth Avenue demanding the right to vote.
“Women of all ages, from the nearly feeble to the vigorously youthful, walked side by side — all seemingly fired by enthusiasm for their cause,” the article stated. Alongside them were 500 men and people from France, Japan and Russia, among other countries.
A week later, women in New York state won the right to vote — three years before the 19th Amendment was ratified, in 1920, granting suffrage to American women at large.
Want us in your Instagram? We gotchu.
