Women at Google have a message for management: Enough.
Gender inequality has long been an issue at the internet giant, where only 31 percent of employees are female. But several recent incidents have prompted employees to demand better treatment; Googlers around the world are walking out of work today to make their demands known.
“We need transparency, accountability and structural change,” protest organizers wrote on an internal Google website, which was viewed by The New York Times.
The recent revelation in a Times article that Google had paid a $90 million exit package to Andy Rubin, the creator of the Android operating system, after the company found a sexual harassment claim against him credible, sparked workers to organize the walkout. (Mr. Rubin denied the allegations against him and said the report of his compensation was a “wild exaggeration.”) But tensions over the treatment of women in the workplace have simmered for years, Google employees said, with disrespectful remarks coming from executives and the rank and file alike.
Claire Stapleton, a product marketing manager at YouTube who helped organize the walkout, said that employees were looking for “the basics of respect, justice and fairness.” Since the revelations about Mr. Rubin, many more employees have come forward to share their stories of harassment at Google, she said.
“We joined Google to make the world a better place, and that’s what the walkout is all about,” Ms. Stapleton said.
Employees from more than 20 Google offices around the globe plan to walk out and present a list of five demands that includes an end to forced arbitration of sexual harassment and assault, increased transparency about compensation and the appointment of an employee representative to the company’s board, according to a list viewed by The Times. Google declined to comment.
The protest is the latest in a growing wave of employee activism in Silicon Valley, and particularly at Google, where workers have become increasingly vocal about issues within their companies.
Hi, newsletter readers! This is Joel Fagliano, the creator of the daily mini crossword puzzle, a graduate of Pomona College and the editor of the series of California-themed puzzles we’ve had over the past two weeks. These puzzles brought back good memories of my time in the Golden State. California has such a rich and varied range of subjects for puzzle creation; we covered everything from midterm politics to higher education to San Francisco landmarks. My personal favorite was the puzzle that managed to weave seven California sports teams all in one small 9x9 grid; that was some nifty puzzle-making by Bruce Haight.
Today’s puzzle, the ninth in our series, is themed around natural disasters often seen in California. For a slightly lighter topic, fans of California beer might check out 18-Across as well.
What’s been your favorite puzzle of the series? Email us at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| for a chance to appear in tomorrow’s newsletter.
The Raiders and the 49ers: separated by a thin body of water, and going nowhere in the standings.
There isn’t much to gain — or lose — in this latest matchup, but the trans-Bay rivalry could shift if the Raiders leave as soon as next season. Mostly because there wasn’t much competition to begin with anyway. But the fans have made it the Battle of the Bay, and we’ll see how it ends tonight.
Read the full story (and see our prediction) here.
