CHESTERFIELD, Mo. — Senator Lindsey Graham’s bipartisan overtures — on immigration, foreign policy, even investigations of President Trump — once made him a darling of Democrats, a Republican dealmaker to be wooed to the center.
But when the South Carolina Republican turned up in this St. Louis suburb to campaign against a Democratic colleague, Claire McCaskill, the crowd of Trump-loving women and red-hatted men practically swooned, bathing in the reflected glow of the president they adore — who now adores Lindsey Graham.
Mr. Graham, crisscrossing the country to turn out the Republican vote against the centrist Democratic senators who were once his natural allies, lapped it up. He has been basking in the exaltation of Trump backers ever since his lacerating defense of Justice Brett M. Kavanaugh. His own transformation from Trump-basher to Trump defender seems complete.
Gone is the senator who once called the future president “the world’s biggest jackass” and a “race-baiting xenophobic religious bigot.” With an eye toward re-election in 2020 in a state still on the Trump Train, Mr. Graham has climbed into the locomotive.
“The fall of Lindsey Graham into the dark Trumpian pit of demagoguery, division and incitement is complete,” Steve Schmidt, a former Republican strategist who has renounced the party, wrote on Twitter.
Theories abound about what has happened to Mr. Graham.
No. 1: He is most comfortable as a sidekick and is looking to the president to fill the void left by the loss of his dear friend and mentor, Senator John McCain. Mr. Graham bristled at the suggestion.
No. 3: He is tacking right ahead of his 2020 re-election run in a state where the biggest threat would likely come in a Republican primary — and where he cannot win without the backing of Mr. Trump.
His allies say the senator does not want a repeat of his brutal primary election in 2014, when the Tea Party set its sights on him, and he was forced to fend off six challengers.
“I saw a fatigue in him at the end of that experience that I had never seen before,” said Representative Trey Gowdy, Republican of South Carolina, a close friend.
Mr. Graham’s personal story is well known: He grew up in the back of a bar owned by his parents, who died when he was in his 20s, leaving him to care for his 13-year-old sister. In the Senate, where he has served since 2003, he teamed up with Mr. McCain, partly because of their shared interest in military affairs (Mr. Graham is a retired colonel in the Air Force reserve) and they traveled the world together. He wept on the Senate floor when the older man died.
“It’s the closest thing he ever had to a father,” Mr. Gowdy said.
He has long been known as a kind of happy-go-lucky independent thinker. He voted to confirm two of President Barack Obama’s Supreme Court nominees, Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan, which was one reason he was so angry at the Democrats’ opposition to Justice Kavanaugh. He also likes being in the middle of things. Whenever there is a Senate “gang” — a self-appointed caucus of problem-solvers — Mr. Graham seems to be in it.
“I like being relevant,” he said.
He has also done an especially artful job of befriending the president, often through flattery — “I try to start most conversations with a compliment” — which has won him Mr. Trump’s ear and the rarefied status of presidential golf partner. He views himself as uniquely positioned to guide a president inexperienced on matters of policy.
In the opening weeks of the Trump presidency, Mr. Graham promised to use his Senate Judiciary subcommittee on crime and terrorism to launch a bipartisan, no-holds-barred investigation of Russian interference in the 2016 election. At the same time, he reached out to Jared Kushner, the president’s son-in-law, as a potential partner on immigration and an overhaul of criminal justice laws.
Mr. Trump then invited Mr. Graham for lunch and sought the senator’s counsel on North Korea and Iran. The Russian investigation wrapped up quietly.
But the détente was complicated; Mr. McCain hated Mr. Trump. Mr. Graham, with the help of Mr. Kushner, tried to engineer a rapprochement, persuading the president to host Mr. McCain and his wife, Cindy, at the White House for dinner.
The good will didn’t last; Mr. McCain would ultimately bar Mr. Trump from attending his funeral.
In the interview, he credited himself with saving (in Mr. Sessions’ case, temporarily) the jobs of both men.
He said as well that he wants to become chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee after the election, if the current chairman, Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, grabs the gavel of the Finance Committee. Should that happen, he said, he would initiate an oversight investigation into whether the Department of Justice and the F.B.I. were “in the tank” for Mr. Trump’s 2016 opponent, Hillary Clinton, joining similar efforts in the House.
The Battle for Congress Is Close. Here’s the State of the Race.
The math currently favors the Democrats in the House and the Republicans in the Senate.
But perhaps nothing has cemented Mr. Graham’s standing in Mr. Trump’s world as much as his performance at the divisive Supreme Court confirmation hearing for the future Justice Kavanaugh, who faced allegations of sexual assault from Christine Blasey Ford.
His finger-wagging, lip-curling performance — “Boy, you all want power — God, I hope you never get it,” he snarled — was lampooned on “Saturday Night Live.” But Mr. Trump loved it.
“Wow! Remind me not to make you mad,” the president told Mr. Graham on a private call, the senator said.
Mr. Graham became “a national figure for conservatives overnight,” said Newt Gingrich, the former House speaker, which is why he was in Missouri on Monday, rallying Republican voters for Josh Hawley, the state attorney general who is trying to unseat Senator McCaskill, with whom he has served for nearly 12 years.
It was the seventh stop on a 13-state swing that also took Mr. Graham to Indiana to campaign against another fellow senator, Senator Joe Donnelly, on Thursday.
Here in Chesterfield, Mr. Graham warmed up the crowd with self-deprecating jokes about his flop on the 2016 presidential campaign trail — “If I had got 99 percent more votes I could have beat him!” he said of Mr. Trump — and their newfound friendship.
When he finished, Mr. Graham was mobbed by well-wishers, including a throng of squealing women, who beckoned him to pose with them for selfies. More than a dozen of them gathered around the senator, who looked up at the camera, beaming, as he soaked up his moment in the sun.