“Do You Have a Moral Duty to Leave Facebook?” an Op-Ed asked. Our readers say yes, it depends and don’t “scapegoat” Facebook.
Like Mr. Liao, I teach ethics, and I believe he is quibbling. There’s no doubt in my mind that we “should” get off Facebook.
My students and I often study utilitarianism, the moral theory that asks us to measure pleasures and pains in seeking to promote the greatest good for the greatest number. From this perspective, Facebook is a scourge.
The pleasures “normal” Facebook use provides — keeping up with friends, baby pictures — are balanced out by the pains it engenders — weakened in-person social ties, depression. Add to these the more catastrophic sufferings Facebook has enabled — the genocide of the Rohingya, the spread of white nationalism, the slow dissolution of global democracy — and the verdict is clear: We need to get off Facebook now.
I did last year.
The writer is an associate professor of humanities at Boston University.
The problem with this “intentionality” standard is that press reports and direct appeals repeatedly warned Facebook, first about the risks and then the actual events. Under prevailing international human rights norms, knowingly continuing to allow the vitriol to be posted turns Facebook into a “contributor” to the heinous acts themselves.
Facebook should now align its policies and practices with prevailing international human rights norms. If Facebook fails to do so, then the question in the headline will have answered itself.
The writer, former U.N. special representative for business and human rights, is a professor of human rights and international affairs at Harvard’s Kennedy School.
Let’s get real. We have just as strong a moral duty to “leave” our mouths, pens, pencils, telephones, printing presses, videos, etc. There doesn’t exist any medium that has not been used as a platform for hate and evil — as well as for love and good.
It is childish to turn what is nothing more than a tool or instrument into a scapegoat for our own moral failings. Almost as childish is the idea that it took Russian trolls to disrupt our elections, disseminate propaganda and promote hate. We were doing all of that just fine by ourselves.
Ours has become an age of Puritan hysteria in which we suppress speech in the name of stamping out hate. Or worse, where we insist that Facebook (for its own survival) becomes the arbiter of what speech we the people get to hear and what we don’t hear.
I frequently see the complaint that participation in platforms like Facebook creates narcissistic behavior and encourages a self-centered society. It is true that people display themselves, their products, their likes and dislikes, loves and hates. People expose themselves in ways that can happen nowhere else.
So what? Isn’t it more narcissistic to believe that dropping out of Facebook is some kind of substantial statement about yourself? Facebook is just a mirror of the world we live in. Parts of it are like the fun house mirror at a carnival. If you don’t like what you see in the distortions, take a close look at what you are putting in front of the mirror.
Moose Lake, Minn.