The police announced Friday night that they had arrested a 26-year-old man, James Polite, on charges that he wrote the anti-Semitic graffiti. He faces charges of criminal mischief, which the police classified as a hate crime, and making graffiti. Mr. Polite was taken to a hospital in Brooklyn for a psychiatric evaluation.
Earlier in the day, the police released a photograph of a suspect, taken by a security camera inside the temple.
The event, at the Union Temple of Brooklyn on Eastern Parkway in Prospect Heights, was to include a question-and-answer session. Ms. Glazer, a co-star of “Broad City,” was scheduled to interview a journalist, Amy Goodman, and two candidates for the New York State Senate, Jim Gaughran and Andrew Gounardes.
But shortly after 8 p.m., Ms. Glazer announced the event was canceled because the graffiti, written with a black marker, had been discovered in various locations inside the temple, which was built in 1929.
Rabbi Mark Sameth of Union Temple said he learned from the temple’s president that the vandalism was found soon after it happened.
The graffiti was found the same day as two swastikas were discovered spray-painted on a concrete pier near 72nd Street on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
On Tuesday, several buildings in Brooklyn Heights were defaced with swastikas drawn in chalk, an incident that the police are also investigating as a hate crime.
According to Police Department statistics, there have been 142 reported incidents of anti-Semitic graffiti in the city this year, up from 126 reports in 2017. Anti-Semitic incidents make up almost half of the 290 hate crimes in the city reported to the police this year.
Alison Kelley, who lives in the neighborhood, called the vandalism “horrifying.” She said the temple is a centerpiece of life in Prospect Heights for people of all backgrounds. It is a place not just for Jewish worship services, she said, but also for weddings, political forums, concerts, classes and other events. The building houses also a Jewish preschool, a gym and a German-language school.
“I’ve been here 28 years and they’ve always done outreach to the whole community,” Ms. Kelley said.