On a miserable day in Boston in April, Linden won a major marathon after a dozen years of trying. Can she repeat the feat in New York?
Ten miles into the Rock ’n’ Roll Philadelphia Half Marathon in September, Desiree Linden was about 50 seconds ahead of the second-place women’s finisher, Kellyn Taylor.  She slowed. She walked. She stopped.
A lot of professional runners would have dropped out. Don’t hurt yourself on a sweltering day when the goal — the New York City Marathon — is less than two months away.
But as Taylor started to catch up, Linden began to run again, beating her by 17 seconds, with a time of 1 hour 11 minutes 50 seconds and a side stitch that made it hard for her to breathe after she crossed the finish line.
Finishing “was the easiest way back,” she said last month from her home near Lake Michigan.
Linden is 5-foot-1, but the sharpness of her quads gives her away as one of the world’s fastest marathoners. She is also a hunting dog owner and a bourbon collector, and she favors running in shorts and tank tops instead of the briefs and sports bra kits of most other professional female marathoners. She is known for her consistency, a metronome-like ability to find a pace and maintain it mile after mile for an entire race. Steal her watch and ask her to run a 5:34 mile, and she can nail the time within a second or two.
Philadelphia in September was the inverse of the Boston Marathon in April, which came with sheets of rain, temperatures in the 30s and winds gusting past 25 miles per hour. Linden, who finished second in Boston in 2011 and had run in two Olympic marathons without a top-three finish, finally had her day. She became the first American woman to win the Boston Marathon since 1985, and credited her win in part to training in miserable weather in Michigan and in part to not wearing the minimalist uniform of her competitors.
After winning Boston, Linden has enjoyed herself. She drank Champagne from a shoe, then was honored at a Celtics game. She was a presenter at the Billboard Music Awards. Weeks before the New York City Marathon, when a lot of runners might isolate themselves to avoid trip hazards and germs, she traveled to Austin, Tex., for the Formula One United States Grand Prix. (She said she and her husband, Ryan Linden, are huge fans.) She has become an it woman to those American runners, especially women, who are more into the grit of the sport than any glamour it brings. Fun fact: Women now run more races than men in the United States.
For New York, she took a risk. After Boston, she left the Hansons-Brooks Original Distance Project, the program she had been with since college. Walt Drenth, her college coach, who is now at Michigan State, is guiding her once more.
To get ready for New York, she has trained about 120 miles per week, the same as at Hansons-Brooks. She also does “some shorter bouts of exercise, some things with a little bit higher intensity but not necessarily threshold pace,” Drenth said. She has done stints at altitude before, for example, in Kenya in 2014, but opted this time to stick closer to home, running along the shores of Charlevoix, Mich. There, neither snow nor rain nor heat nor gloom of night keeps her from the swift completion of her appointed rounds.
She also said that the current makeup of the Hansons-Brooks team did not suit her. In April, right before the Boston Marathon, the team signed Dathan Ritzenhein, who, according to the United States Anti-Doping Agency, had violated drug protocols while with Nike and the Oregon Project.
At the time, she told LetsRun.com, which is how the sport talks to itself in this country, that she was “not especially” supportive of Keith and Kevin Hanson’s move to bring him on board, and that she wasn’t consulted about the decision.
Asked recently whether the addition of Ritzenhein affected her decision to make a change, she said, “Yes and no.” She said the group was set up for success after adding Ritzenhein; Shadrack Biwott, 33, a Kenyan-born American; and Mohamed Hrezi, a native of Connecticut who competes for Libya. “They should have three Olympians in 2020,” she said. “They’re in a really great place.” The Hanson brothers declined to comment.
After New York, Linden will focus on the Olympic Marathon trials in Atlanta in March 2020. She has no concrete plan for her running career after the Olympics, assuming she makes the team, which is hardly a lock given up-and-coming talent like the 27-year-old Jordan Hasay. Also, Kenyan-born Sally Kipyego, a standout in the half-marathon, is now an American citizen and could be formidable competition.
Linden swears she will not overstay her welcome and allow people to talk about her in terms of what she used to be.
