Jerry Frankel, who parlayed his success as a dress manufacturer in Dallas into a second act as a prolific producer of Broadway shows, nine of which earned him Tony Awards, died on Saturday in Manhattan. He was 88.
His family said the cause was bladder cancer. He lived in Dallas and Carlsbad, Calif.
In all, Mr. Frankel produced 53 Broadway plays and musicals in collaboration with various partners, most often Jeffrey Richards.
Their first production together was a Broadway revival in 2000 of “Gore Vidal’s ‘The Best Man,’” a satire of presidential politics that was more simply titled “The Best Man” when it first opened in 1960.
His last show was “Come From Away,” a musical about the dozens of planes diverted to Newfoundland after the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. It won a Drama Desk Award for outstanding musical in 2017.
His love of risk-taking led him into horse racing. One of his horses, Joey Franco, was named California-bred horse of the year in 2004; another, Dayatthespa, who had 11 wins in 18 races and $2.3 million in track earnings, was voted New York-bred horse of the year 10 years later. Esops Foibles, still another of his horses, ran fifth in the 1978 Kentucky Derby, which was won by Affirmed.
Gerald Frankel was born on Aug. 1, 1930, in Far Rockaway, Queens. His father, Abraham, was a dress manufacturer; his mother, Anne (Dickman) Frankel, was a homemaker. He graduated from the University of Illinois with a degree in journalism but went into business with his father before moving to Dallas to start his own company, Jerell, in the 1960s.
The theater always intrigued him; each Thanksgiving, he took his family to New York City for a weekend of Broadway shows. “We’d see six shows in three days,” his daughter Elizabeth Bailenson said.
He dabbled in film producing in those days: He invested in “Slap Shot” (1977), a hockey film starring Paul Newman; was the executive producer of “Fast Break” (1979), a basketball comedy starring Gabe Kaplan; and helped produce “Cheaper to Keep Her” (1981), which starred the country singer Mac Davis.
Selling his dress company gave him enough wealth to plunge into Broadway production.
In addition to his daughters, Mr. Frankel is survived by his partner, Mary Casey; his son, Gordon Frankel Light; six grandchildren; and his brother, Ronald, his frequent thoroughbred partner. His marriage to Sandra Light ended in divorce. His second wife, Honu Stern, died in 2008.
Mr. Wildhorn recalled that before the opening of his musical “Bonnie and Clyde” (2011), Mr. Frankel sometimes booked extra rehearsal time.
