Lowering campaign contribution limits could blunt the impact of large donations.
Voters in New York City will want to turn over their ballots on Tuesday. When they do, they’ll find three proposed changes to the City Charter. All three ballot measures are the result of a charter commission put together by Mayor Bill de Blasio to strengthen the city’s well-regarded campaign finance system and increase the city’s dismal voter participation rates.
Though these are good goals, some of the proposals are flawed.
The first proposal would lower limits for contributions to candidates who participate in the campaign finance system, while increasing the funding match given for candidates in the program. Its goal is to boost the impact of smaller donations, to pave the way for more competition in the city’s elections. The contribution limit for citywide candidates would be lowered to $2,000 from $5,100. Matching funds would increase under the proposal, to an 8-1 match from a 6-1 match now.
Combined, these changes would be likely to help blunt the impact of large donations, and encourage more candidates to run for office.
The new rules wouldn’t become binding until 2022. Some critics of the proposal have said making the new rules optional for candidates running in the city’s 2021 elections — in which voters will choose a new mayor and a plethora of new City Council members — is a reason to vote against the initiative. This conclusion seems shortsighted, given the potential long-term benefits for the city.
This asks voters to create a Civic Engagement Commission to increase voter participation and implement participatory budgeting, a system some Council members use now, in which New Yorkers can vote on how to use a portion of the discretionary funds allotted to the district.
The measure would create a commission, largely controlled by the mayor, whose exact powers would be unclear. It would add yet another layer of bureaucracy without good cause. And in taking up participatory budgeting, such a commission could tread on the authority of the City Council, which now oversees that process. In a city with ample mayoral influence already, it is best that the powers afforded to the Council — most notably land-use and budget oversight — be carefully guarded.
Some of the initiatives the commission would be tasked with overseeing are worthy, such as expanding translation services at poll sites. But it would be wiser to implement them through legislation in the City Council or existing city agencies instead. That would preserve the powers of the Council and prevent the addition of unnecessary bureaucracy, better serving New Yorkers.
This would prohibit community board members from serving more than four consecutive two-year terms. This could weaken community boards by stripping them of their most seasoned members, replacing them with novices more susceptible to appeals from high-powered developers.