This week, we received the most comments on our writing prompts of the school year so far — and some of the best. With students’ excellent writing, interesting personal stories and smart insights, it gets harder and harder to choose our favorite comments.
 Read on to see what they had to say.
We’d like to welcome new classes from: Ames, Iowa; Aspen, Colo.; Computech Middle School; and Ottawa. Thank you for adding your voices to the conversation!
Please note: All student comments have been lightly edited for length, but otherwise appear exactly as they were originally submitted.
Would You Let a Homeless Person Live in Your Backyard?
A bold new pilot program in Los Angeles is addressing homelessness by offering incentives to homeowners to provide shelter to homeless people in their backyards. We asked students: If they were homeowners, would they take part in such a program?
As usual, they impressed us with their thoughtfulness, honesty and empathy. They told us why they would and wouldn’t let a stranger live in their backyards and offered even more solutions for how to help the homeless.
I would let a homeless person live in my backyard. Often times in our society people do not think about helping anyone except themselves. It is this type of attitude that can hold people back. Although my city has a low homeless population, it is still present. By providing a home for someone out of luck you could change their life. Allow them to feed their family, to not have to chose between clothing and a house over their head. You take away the stress of finding shelter and safety for the night, and allow them to build their life up again. To help other people is to help ourselves. What type of society would we live in if we only cared for people when they were rich? Just because they are without a home does not mean they don’t deserve to be treated like a human.
If I were given the opportunity to let a homeless person live in my backyard, I would most definitely help them and let them live there. I feel as though being there for others in your community who are struggling is a responsibility that you must accept as a member of the community. Opening up my backyard to the homeless would be my way of helping out in the community.
— Whitley Johnson, Hoggard High School, Wilmington, N.C.
Most Definitely I would let a homeless person live in my backyard. Growing up I have always been taught to treat others how you want to be treated and that would come in to play if I was ever faced with this situation. The statement in the article “ I believe that when God blesses you, it’s to bless someone else ” really hits home because I know how blessed I am to have a roof over my head, clothes on my body, and food to eat because there are so many people out there who are not as fortunate and I want to be able to provide things for them. If I can have all these things but I don’t share them then what is is the point of having them?
— Silas Coudriet, Hoggard High School, Wilmington, N.C.
I definitely would. The reason I would do this is that just because someone doesn’t have as much money as you to afford a home, does not mean that they should be living on the streets with no food or water. Each and every person should have an equal opportunity to get a job to earn money, even if they have been down the wrong path in the past.
— Ada Grace Perry, Oxford, Miss.
I, personally, would not want a homeless person to live in my backyard unless I knew their situation and knew they were doing everything in their power to help themselves. It might just be that I haven’t witnessed it a lot and I don’t grasp completely how much of a problem homelessness is, but there are safety precautions that I would need to know are keeping me safe. In Ames, IA we don’t have many homeless people that you see on a day to day basis. The only time I’ve seen a homeless person is off the interstate exits, asking for money. Just because I don’t experience it everyday, that doesn’t mean that it isn’t a problem for larger cities.
I do not feel that I would let a homeless person live in my backyard. I think that the concept is great and for the people that are receiving the help they need it’s great for them. I am one of those people that would be more than happy to share a lunch with them, or give them money or something but to me my home is my personal space and I would not want someone that I don’t know living in my personal space … In my community, homelessness is not as big of a factor that it maybe is in other communities and so maybe that is why i don’t feel such affection for having homeless live with me. I feel that if I can help in other communities, I would, but the living with me part is just a little too much for me to do at this time right now.
— Drew Gonzalez, Hoggard High School, Wilmington, N.C.
Yes, I would let a homeless person live in my backyard, provided that they are using the house to work toward solving other issues in their life, such as seeking help for illnesses/addictions, finding a job, raising their family in a stable environment, etc. I would not give a house to someone who is simply using it as a free place to stay, while not addressing the issues that made them homeless in the first place.
The problem of not having shelter is foremost in the minds of people experiencing homelessness, as shelter is one of the basic needs for survival. While this problem persists, homeless people are unable to devote energy to other matters. The first step toward solving homelessness is to give homeless people a home–once this basic need has been met, a person can devote energy to other matters (seeking counseling, applying for jobs, etc.) that will eventually make the person self-sufficient.
This is why I believe giving a stable, permanent housing situation to homeless people will be a successful solution. It recognizes that the base upon which all other solutions to homeless can be built is simply having reliable shelter. Traditional approaches that tout self-reformation first (getting help for addictions, finding a job) fail to recognize that people can’t address those issues without having a stable place to stay first.
In my town, homelessness is present but also assisted. We have multiple outlets for food, shelter, and supplies to aid homelessness in the area. There are a lot of good connections through these, however, I understand that it can be much more difficult in rural areas, and in larger cities, where supply and demand of help don’t work out as nicely. Because not every area has the community organizations for diminishing the effects of homelessness, the incentive-based pilot programs are a great idea in my opinion.
I agree with the article that homelessness is a problem that needs to be fixed however, there are other solutions to help that do not involve sharing your property with someone that you do not know. Instead of paying someone $1,500 a month to someone who opened up their backyard, that money could be used to help build establishments and create programs for people who face this problem.
— Abbie Lee, Hoggard High School, Wilmington, N.C.
Have You Noticed a New Attitude About Pimples?
In May, the Style section reported on a trend in skin positivity, exemplified by celebrities like Justin Bieber, Kendall Jenner and SZA all openly embracing their acne. We asked students if this new “pimple positivity” movement has made its way into teenage life.
They told us about their experiences with breakouts, as well as the shame that often accompanies them. Some commenters said the trend has made them feel more comfortable in their own skin, while others were less convinced. But all showed a remarkable awareness of how social media influences their sense of self-worth.
I have definitely noticed a change in the way people view acne, especially with the rise of these body and skin positivity movements through social media. Seeing celebrities like Kendall Jenner post photos with no makeup and imperfect skin shows people that even celebrities, the most famous and well-regarded people in the world, have flaws just like the rest of us.
Humans inherently compare ourselves to others, it’s part of our need to fit in. When the media only shows us perfection, we feel worse about ourselves and our looks. Seeing others embrace their acne on social media for the world to see helps induce confidence to those who are too scared to do the same. Personally, it has helped me feel more confident in my own skin, and I don’t feel the need to cover up every minor blemish or pimple with makeup in order to be confident.
The quality of content on the internet has evolved to the point where anything less perfection is ridiculed heavily. To combat the negative ridicule many influencers and celebrities have embraced not being perfect through posting pictures of them having acne, makes ugly faces, and posing in unflattering poses.
These influencers have a lot more power than people might think because many kids and adults idolize them. When they show their imperfections it can help the people who idolize them think “they are perfect, but they do have their moments as well”. This helps everyone put into perspective that these influencers are people too when it can be hard to notice through the heavily filtered and edited content they post.
The skin positivity movement I don’t think has reached teenagers and is only present on social media by a few big-name celebrities. I think that what they are trying to do and promote is amazing, however, acne and pimples are still somewhat of a taboo or shaming topic. Tabloids write headlines about a picture of a movie star with a pimple or blotchy skin. These news outlets shaming celebrities for not wearing makeup to cover “flaws” catches the attention of teenagers way more. Negativity trumps positivity in most people’s brains. Media as a whole needs to make this movement larger in order for it to have a larger impact.
I can hands down say that the skin positivity movement has really changed the way I think about my own acne. I used to be so insecure about the way my face looked and the red pimples that would pop up every morning. I wanted to be seen as one of those “perfect” girls on Instagram who have flawless skin. But as this movement became a trend, I started to realise that no matter how perfect people may seem, they still have imperfections and insecurities. We are human after all. It should not be embarrassing or shameful to have acne. Almost everyone in the world will experience a pimple or two in their lifetime. It is just part of the process of growing up. Although it is hard to get rid of the societal pressure to be perfect, I feel like this movement is slowly making others feel more comfortable and confident in their own skin.
As a someone that struggles with persistent acne I am thankful that society is trying to erase the stigma behind my biggest insecurity. Although at times I still feel the self criticism when I have a pimple, and the first instinct is to cover it up and find some remedy to get rid of it. There is still a cycle of shame because everyone around me seemed to have perfect skin; I was never made fun of because of my skin, but the internal warfare in my brain made me feel like everyone was staring at my acne.
I am so glad that nowadays society has accepted the truth: almost everyone has acne. This push towards self care and embracing your flaws has created a larger conversation about how to improve skin and overall healthy habits. I feel now that I can discuss acne and we commiserate over the same types of problems. As we embrace reality, we learn that these flaws are actually part of the human condition; no one is alone in their acne struggles.
— Grace Donahue, Danvers, Mass.
While the online skin positivity movement is admirable, I don’t believe that my generation is quite ready to be pioneers when it comes to accepting acne. As someone who attends high school and deals with acne at a higher magnitude than most of my peers, I can safely say that blemishes are not close to being considered cool.
Acne is primarily associated with adolescence, a period in life that is associated with the awkwardness and immaturity. It is associated with uncleanliness and shame. From teen media peppering acne on the faces of undesirable stereotypes to magazines insisting that you’re one diet-cut away from clear pores, it is difficult for anyone to see acne as anything but undesirable. Attitudes around acne can evolve in social media, but it is going to take a cultural shift to effectively change the associations that firmly root acne as something embarrassing.
— Rachel Sweningson, Bryant, Ark.
Hailey Wait’s bare faced pictures were different; she was confident, but with her acne. I’m not sure that there has been a great shift in the bravery of teens to face their pimple problems, but I do hope that her message acts as a call to action for kids my age to increase their confidence, and maybe go make-up free once in a while. I would love for a more welcoming and accepting community to be instilled for both teens and their pimples.
— Samantha Tenney, Danvers, Mass.
What Is This Image Saying?
Our Picture Prompt, “Giant Machine,” asked students to study the illustration above and connect it to current events and their own lives.
Our favorite part of the responses to this prompt? No two answers were alike. From government to technology, the economy, war and parade floats, students came up with all kinds of interesting and thought-provoking interpretations. This is exactly the kind of careful analysis and creative thinking we love to see.
In this picture prompt, I believe that the machine represents the American government. It is controlled entirely by itself, and there is no outside influence whatsoever. There appear to be three figures atop the machine, but they are truly apart of it even if they seem to be in control.
The machine is marching forward and destroying all protesters, and the bystanders who ignore the destruction aren’t harmed at all. There are a few people who are attempting to climb the machine and destroy it, and there are others who are in front of it prepared to fight. They are standing up to the machine and its destruction, but they will most likely be destroyed as well. If enough people stand up to the machine, eventually they will take it down. To me, the machine is a great symbol for our government because it shows how powerful our “democracy” actually is.
For me atleast this is a representation of the government taking control while all the people try to stop it but they are too small to make a difference. Notice how small the people look trying to stop it, this probably symbolizes how little the people can do to take try and take over or stop the machine. It would take everyone to even try and make as difference.
One way i think the machine represents the government is the three heads. One head is the legislative, the middle one is judicial and the final head is executive. the people dont want the government to be in control. they want their own beliefs to stand tall and they are trying to stop the government because the government puts their own filters on these beliefs.
In this picture prompt, most people seem to be ignoring the machine and its destruction. Some are standing and just watching without raising a fight, while others completely have their backs turned. This could symbolize the amount of people who refuse to vote, so they technically are ignoring the destruction of other people and the country. If people don’t get out and vote, the machine of a government we have will keep destroying our people and our nation. The government is too powerful for its own good.
I believe the picture of the machine represents more of technology than anything else. I see it as it’s taking over. Kind of like in the transformer movies. Its coming into are world and taking over our everyday lives. Ruining our worlds. In the picture you can see the machine has no expression, because it doesn’t care.
Technology is destroying the human race. Killing us every day, weather it be distracted driving, or people sitting on the couch all day and not getting exercise. It’s horrible. You phone isn’t ever going to care for you so why do we treat them like our best friends. Its taking over the world and we are sitting back letting it happen.
This picture shows that by just having a giant thing that has literal whistles on it. The people in the picture as well are shown as being in awe of the machine or just obsessing over it. No one is really doing anything, everyone is just gathered around it, fleeing from it (though this is a minority), or they are climbing it. One man is staring at with his arms in the air as if in surrender to the machine. I believe this demonstrates our ineffectiveness of instigating change within technology companies.
I think the image is representing the higher class of people with more money in their financial state. I only believe this because the statues is gold and underneath there are people trying to climb to get to the top and be as wealthy as the higher class. Some are struggling to climb and some have a good grip, but the statue is sturdy.
I also think this also shows how corrupt the world can be. People can try so hard to be part of something (the people climbing) and still fail to reach to the top. And instead they all have to live in the small houses that are around the statue. Most of the houses look like barns or run down homes, they are all about the same design. All of the people can represent the lower class.
I think this picture represents the 1% having a majority of the wealth. While the minority has the majority, the majority is trying to climb up the ladder to become rich. While the rich “plow over” the people below them. While the rich sit on a throne of gold and have golden suits the normal people are stuck on the ground. The rich sit there on a golden car that’s extravagant and over the top the people are stuck, with nothing.
