LOUISVILLE, Ky. — The sun had yet to rise above Churchill Downs, but pictured on a video screen towering above the track was a handsome bay horse named Discreet Lover, galloping effortlessly around the historic oval.
Uriah St. Lewis, 60, could not keep his eyes off his horse.
Forgive St. Lewis, Discreet Lover’s owner and trainer, for his wide-eyed wonder. At Parx Racing, near Philadelphia, his home track, the video screens and the races are far, far smaller.
In September, Discreet Lover was a 45-1 shot in the $750,000 Jockey Club Gold Cup at Belmont Park. The horse not only won that race, which came with the biggest purse in St. Lewis’s career, but it also gave St. Lewis a chance at a life-changing score here on Saturday in the $6 million Breeders’ Cup Classic.
Not bad for a guy who has managed to make a living with racehorses by watching every dollar. Not bad for a horse St. Lewis purchased for $10,000.
St. Lewis learned at an early age the importance of not wasting anything. He immigrated to the United States in 1973 from Trinidad and Tobago. When he landed in Brooklyn, at age 15, he saw unfinished plates of food being discarded.
His father died when he was 9, and St. Lewis picked up odd jobs like hauling trash and running errands to help support his family. Now, his family works with him. His wife, Amanda, and their 23-year-old twins, Jeré and Uriah Jr., are integral parts of the St. Lewis racing operation.
Uriah St. Lewis attended East New York Vocational and Technical High School in Brooklyn. But his real studies were at Aqueduct, taught by rail birds. He frequently sprinted the two miles to the track to put down a quick after-school wager.
The answer too often was no. St. Lewis took a job repairing on-track betting terminals for AmTote. But being so close to the betting action exacted its toll on the family.
The problem, as Amanda St. Lewis saw it, was that her husband did not know enough about the horses, despite his obvious passion. So she suggested that he learn and switch to a profession more befitting his love of the sport.
He connected with a trainer based out of Oklahoma named Robert Hayes. Convinced he should take a shot at the training game, St. Lewis left Brooklyn and headed there. He was an assistant to Hayes for a year, learning not only the quirks and talents of racehorses, but also how to manage a stable on a budget.
In 1988, St. Lewis took out a training license. At first, he thought the horse game was going to be easy.
Such dry spells have been common, and excruciating, for the family business. From 2007 to 2012, St. Lewis won only seven races — a total that can be exceeded by some trainers in a single week.
The operation was teetering, but the family was not ready to walk away from the sport.
In May 2015, along came Discreet Lover. Forty-four starts, seven victories and nearly $1.4 million in purse money later, horse and horseman are still together.
It has been a bumpy ride, but a miraculous one. There have been exultant highs, like the Jockey Club Gold Cup victory, and heartbreaking lows, like the death of Discreet Lover’s regular jockey, Jose Flores, in March, from injuries related to a spill.
Flores had ridden Discreet Lover 21 times and rode many other horses for St. Lewis over the years.
St. Lewis said Flores would be on his mind as Discreet Lover, now ridden by Manuel Franco, breaks from Post 13 at the Breeders’ Cup Classic on Saturday and the clock starts on the two most important minutes of his professional life.
But Flores’s death taught him that, win or lose, the moment should be savored.
