LONDON — A leather suitcase sits in a dark room. A woman hurries over cobblestones in high-heeled boots.  The moments seem unconnected and mundane but the relentlessly ticking clocks and repeated glimpses of the time on various watches and digital displays — 8:19, 8:20, 8:29 — make it clear: Something bad is coming.
In these tense opening moments of “The Little Drummer Girl,” a new series on AMC, the South Korean director Park Chan-wook sets a tone of crafted menace and paranoia, pitch-perfect period detail and vivid, visceral sensation that runs through the six parts of John le Carré’s hall-of-mirrors narrative, centered around the Israeli-Palestinian conflict at the end of the 1970s.
It’s the second recent foray into world of Le Carré, born David Cornwell, from his sons, Simon and Stephen Cornwell — a follow-up to their successful mini-series, “The Night Manager,” which ran on the BBC and AMC in 2016.
That series starred Hugh Laurie and Tom Hiddleston, then about to become a tabloid obsession thanks to his brief relationship with Taylor Swift. The Cornwells’ coup this time was to secure Park, a celebrated art-house director known for films like the violent revenge fantasy “Oldboy” and the erotic thriller “The Handmaiden” who has never previously worked in television.
The cast includes Alexander Skarsgard (“Big Little Lies”), Michael Shannon (“The Shape of Water”) and the relatively unknown Florence Pugh (“Lady Macbeth”), in the central role as the young British actress Charmian Ross, known as Charlie.
“Little Drummer Girl” is the rare Le Carré work built around a female protagonist: Charlie’s talents (among them bravura lying), courage and idealism lead the Israelis to recruit her to infiltrate a Palestinian terrorist group planning attacks in Europe.
“My film world is quite dark, and I would say that Le Carré is a big influence on that,” he said, through an interpreter, in an interview at a postproduction facility here.
In the book, he added, there was the similar element of two opposing nations locked in a cycle of violence, which leads to victims on each side. He was also drawn, he said, by the character of the Israeli veteran spymaster, Martin Kurtz (played by Shannon), “more active, dynamic and complex” than Le Carré’s famous puppet-master, George Smiley.
After a meeting, they sent a few scripts to the director but without much hope, as he hadn’t done television before, Stephen Cornwell said in a telephone interview. To their surprise, Park agreed — with the proviso that he wouldn’t change his cinematic eye. He also said there was only one person who could play Charlie.
“We nearly burst out laughing when he said Florence, because we were huge fans of ‘Lady Macbeth’ and of her, and she was at the top of our list,” Cornwell said.
She added that it was “rare to find a character who was just normal. There is something raw and wonderful and believably unlikable about her in the book, and I wanted to show that,” she said. When the series made its debut on the BBC in October, Pugh’s not-always-likable Charlie won raves from British critics.
In the novel, Le Carré scrupulously offers the reader both sides of the story, and Park and the writers, Mike Lesslie and Claire Wilson, were careful to maintain its even-handedness.
More than the sex and violence Park is known for, “Little Drummer Girl” shows the director’s mastery of visual composition and order. From Charlie’s block-color dresses to sweeping views of the Acropolis by night, every detail tells a tale.
