When an actor dies suddenly during his D.I.Y. home renovation in Washington Heights, friends and family come together to complete his vision.
When James Colby, an actor, died suddenly last February, he was immersed in an ambitious D.I.Y. endeavor: the redesign and renovation of the Washington Heights apartment he shared with his wife, Alyssa Bresnahan, and the couple’s 8-year-old daughter, Shannon.
But what had most definitely been conceived as a one-man show was about to become a group project.
But it was just as likely that people knew him simply as that strapping, gregarious man they often saw out and about with the family’s large mixed-breed dogs, Dempsey and Doolin.
So it is no surprise that this community stepped up to help complete Mr. Colby’s final project.
Mr. Colby and Ms. Bresnahan met in 1998 during a production of “A Streetcar Named Desire” at Hartford Stage, and were very much a couple, if not quite living together, when they moved to Washington Heights the following year and bought apartments across the street from each other.
Mr. Colby, a skilled carpenter and cabinetmaker, renovated both places. “Jimmy had an incredible eye for detail and was truly gifted at visualizing space, and was also a bit of a perfectionist,” recalled Ms. Bresnahan, whose own talents in this arena extended no further than scraping window frames and handing her boyfriend tools as he requested them.
They sublet the two apartments and moved for a time to the Los Angeles area, where they lived on a boat that Mr. Colby had refurbished and where he found steady work on TV shows and in movies.
Back in New York in 2006, the couple sold Ms. Bresnahan’s co-op and moved into Mr. Colby’s. Apartment 4-G was a shoe box (500 square feet), but also a jewel box. Mr. Colby took the apartment down to the plaster, then refurbished every square inch to a fare-thee-well: He installed recessed lighting; made the tongue-and-groove cabinets in the kitchen; carved out his-and-hers closets, complete with inlaid mirrors; and conjured a coffered ceiling for the doll-sized entryway.
Even so, it was still only a one-bedroom, and what with the two dogs and, subsequently, a baby, the family needed space to spread out.
In January of 2015, Mr. Colby, a habitué of open houses in the building, looked out the kitchen window across the courtyard, then gestured up to the top floor of the building. “I think that apartment is empty,” he said.
So it was. The owner, an older woman who had lived there for 30 years, had recently died. While just a bit bigger than their own place, the freshly vacant apartment had windows that faced the Hudson and the George Washington Bridge.
Eager to test the waters, the couple put their property on the market. By the first evening they had three cash offers, so they were able to sell the apartment and buy the other one the same day.
What he wrought, mostly over the next two summers, was a two-bedroom apartment whose handmade curved walls, interior windows and built-ins suggest a boat. Mr. Colby gutted two closets and built a wainscoted, arched dining nook in their place; fashioned mahogany and walnut runners to conceal the electrical wires coiled in the ceiling; and tiled the bathroom, among other projects.
Work stopped for a time when he was cast in “Sweat,” which ran for two months at the Public Theater at the end of 2016, and then on Broadway for three months in 2017. When Mr. Colby died, nearly everything in the apartment was finished except for the kitchen.
Almost immediately, friends and acquaintances stepped in to lend expertise and a hand. The owner of a locksmith a few blocks away came by and replaced the threshold under the front door. Donald Fried, a neighbor and a stage manager whose credits include “Sweat,” volunteered to help build the kitchen cabinets. Mr. Fried, who sometimes borrowed tools from Mr. Colby for his own D.I.Y. projects, also advised Ms. Bresnahan to polyurethane the floors rather than staining them, and urged her to hold onto the scrap wood stacked in various corners of the apartment.
And Juan Carlos Munoz, the super in a building across the street, who moonlights around the neighborhood as a contractor, has been helping with the plumbing and assorted other tasks.
She walked into the kitchen and ruefully looked down at the orange terra-cotta floor.
Mr. Colby, she confessed, would also not have been in favor of travertine on the kitchen wall. Another series of mental arguments. Another victory for Ms. Bresnahan.
“It’s been a gift to work on the apartment, because it’s a combination of creative place to put the mourning of him and also a way to actualize moving on,” she continued quietly.
