So, did anything big happen in the world of climate change over Thanksgiving weekend?
In a word, yes. Here on the climate team we were of course all over the Black Friday publication of the National Climate Assessment, the federally mandated report prepared by the nation’s top climate scientists every four years about global warming in the United States.
As my colleague Coral Davenport reported, the timing of the release was no accident. The Trump administration hoped to bury the assessment’s grim findings in the Thanksgiving weekend news cycle leftovers and avoid having to respond to its major conclusion: that unchecked rising temperatures will cost the American economy hundreds of billions of dollars by the end of the century.
That’s likely because it conflicts with his oft stated yet scientifically erroneous worldview that climate change may or may not be occurring and may or may not be caused by humans. It also collides with the president’s policy objectives of promoting fossil fuels, particularly coal.
Coral and I also detailed how Mr. Trump’s energy policies are virtually ensuring that planet-warming emissions will rise despite the known risks to the planet and the economy.
Brad Plumer and Henry Fountain summarized other key parts of the report, including the ways in which climate change could cause political instability abroad, as well as how rising greenhouse gas emissions will also worsen air quality.
Global warming has already resulted in more forest fires out West, the report says, and the future could see more of the country burn. Kendra Pierre-Louis and Nadja Popovich took a look at the data.
And Brad takes a deep dive into how the United States is, and is not, prepared to adapt to the consequences of climate change.
Finally, Somini Sengupta gets at the central question around coal: Why is it so hard to quit? Coal, Somini writes, “is a powerful incumbent.” She traces its grip on politics from South Asia to Australia to the United States.
There’s a lot more still to unpack from the 1,656-page assessment, so keep watching this space as we continue to report on this important story.
Every year, smartphone makers unveil their newest models, faster and sleeker than the dinged-up devices in our pockets. Building-size ads tempt us to buy a new phone for loved ones this holiday season, or to take advantage of upgrades for ourselves.

The problem isn’t the power needed to charge and use the phone — although that can add up — but rather, the tremendous energy needed to mine 60-plus metals and assemble them into a new device. A 2015 study found that producing an iPhone 6 released the equivalent of 178 pounds of carbon dioxide, about as much as burning nine gallons of gas or running a modern refrigerator for a year.
What’s more, the average person hangs onto a phone for only two years. “This is not driven by the fact that these smartphones become obsolete in functionality,” said Lotfi Belkhir, an entrepreneur and engineering professor at McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario. It’s because of a business model that promotes frequent upgrades while masking the true financial and environmental costs of phones, he said.
This short lifetime, combined with the rapid spread of smartphones worldwide, is set to drive a 730 percent increase in their carbon footprint between 2010 and 2020, Dr. Belkhir’s research found.
Hanging onto your phone for as long as possible can help. Extend your phone’s life by fixing it when things break, cleaning the charging port and swapping out dying batteries. If you must replace your phone, recycle your old device and consider buying a used one.
Purchasing fewer new phones will send a powerful message to industry that it needs to change, Dr. Belkhir said. “The amount of resources we are digging out of the earth to make new cellphones only to have them wasted at the end of their shelf life is simply not sustainable,” he said.
Here’s one more thing you can do: Write for this newsletter! We’re asking you, our readers, to contribute to our “One Thing You Can Do” series. Send your full submission, around 250 words, to |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| it could be published here. You can still meet our first-round deadline: Dec. 1.
It will be a lot easier to tackle climate change if the world can figure out how to make various clean energy technologies — like carbon dioxide removal or electric vehicles — much, much cheaper. But what’s the best way to do that?
That’s a question that three researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology recently explored in a fascinating study on solar panels. Solar power, after all, has become remarkably cheaper in recent decades: Between 1975 and 2015, the cost of photovoltaic solar modules declined by roughly 99 percent.
The researchers found that there hadn’t been a single big breakthrough that made solar panels cheaper. Instead, a dizzying array of small improvements added up over time.
Scientists in labs were steadily able to boost the efficiency of the panels themselves. But manufacturers also found ways to use less silicon per panel by improving production techniques. And solar factories got progressively larger and were able to cut costs through automation and better quality control.
What helped make this possible, the researchers found, were policies in countries like Japan and Germany, and later the United States and China, to install a bunch of solar power when it was still relatively pricey. These countries didn’t just wait around for someone to invent a dirt-cheap solar panel, they subsidized deployment early on. Costs then fell as production ramped up and manufacturers got bigger and more skilled.
The researchers concluded that these “market-stimulating” policies, such as tax credits or mandates for renewable energy, helped drive about 60 percent of the decline in solar costs, in part by spurring private investment. Publicly funded research also played a crucial role, especially in the early years.
One lesson here? If countries want cheaper new sources of clean energy, they should continue funding early-stage research and development. But just as importantly, they also need to take technologies that are close to commercialization and help create larger markets for them, which can push down prices.
The climate scientist Kate Marvel is answering your questions about understanding climate change, how we’re affecting our planet and actions you can take to help protect the earth.
Ask her a question here, and see the answers she’s provided so far.
