Tech companies and their employees love big cities, but Amazon needs to do better for people who live in any city chosen for its second headquarters.
Ms. O’Mara, a professor of history, is the author of a forthcoming book about the history of Silicon Valley.
The prune capital of America. That was the future Silicon Valley’s greatest claim to fame in the 1920s, when it was a sleepy landscape of fruit orchards and farms far removed from the nation’s industrial might. Seattle was a city of fishing and timber, where a young entrepreneur named Bill Boeing had so few customers for his airplanes that he briefly pivoted to making furniture. The most innovative companies in the world clustered in the ferociously inventive cities of the East and Midwest — cars in Detroit; cash registers in Dayton, Ohio; light bulbs in Cleveland.
The high-tech geography began to flip in the 1950s, as electronics and aerospace boomed. Before the Eisenhower era was over, cities across the country and across the globe had started racing to capture some of the West Coast’s high-tech magic. Silicon Valley and Seattle are now a long way from biplanes and prunes.
No surprise, then, that when Amazon’s founder and C.E.O., Jeff Bezos, announced last fall that his company would build “a full equal to our Seattle headquarters,” 238 places bid to become HQ, including Detroit, Dayton and Cleveland. The 50,000 tech jobs promised by Amazon are well worth a city’s spending millions in tax breaks and infrastructure. Amazon is now reportedly close to announcing a decision to divide the next headquarters between Long Island City, Queens, and Northern Virginia.
So what can the new HQ2 city or cities learn from high-tech history?
First and foremost: Yes, tech companies are a prize worth chasing. They offer jobs that are well-paying and productive, and attract a highly educated work force. Under the right conditions — the presence of strong research universities, access to capital and a quality of life that draws people in and keeps them there — a well-rooted tech community can seed several successive generations of companies, with the entrepreneurs of one era becoming mentors and investors and civic philanthropists in the next.
This is what happened in Boston, in Silicon Valley and in Seattle, whose tech scene includes not only Amazon and Microsoft but also a wide variety of spinoff companies, as well as Facebook, Google, Alibaba and Baidu.
Second: The new HQ2 will have to resolve a central paradox of the modern technology company. Silicon Valley and Seattle have both grown during an era of mass suburbanization. The technology firms they nurtured developed a preference for amenity-rich, self-contained corporate campuses, turning away from the older and more crowded cities where the high-tech industry had started: New York City, once home to Bell Labs; Philadelphia, the birthplace of the first all-digital computer. The most dramatic recent example is Apple’s giant new glass-and-steel spaceship, which just landed in Cupertino, Calif.
Now an increasing number of tech companies — Amazon among them — have chosen to locate or expand in the urban core. But the tech bubble has often come with them, resulting in self-contained environments with tight security, filled with free food and perks that keep workers at their desks rather than exploring the streets outside.
San Francisco and Seattle were ill prepared for the tech wave that hit in the past decade. Current responses range from the promising but piecemeal (Amazon subsidizing additional city bus service in Seattle) to the impractical and divisive (San Francisco considering a ban on employee cafeterias in new office buildings to force tech workers to patronize local restaurants). Although tech companies and cities often find themselves fiercely opposed in these debates — most hotly in the recent attempt by Seattle to tax large employers like Amazon to pay for homeless services — there is some recognition on both sides that the current patterns are unsustainable.
Growth challenges are already familiar ones in New York City and metropolitan Washington, D.C., where once-affordable neighborhoods have morphed into upmarket enclaves, and aging and overloaded transit systems create daily headaches for their millions of riders. Just as in San Francisco and Seattle, HQ2’s arrival could make them far worse.
This doesn’t have to happen. HQ2 is an opportunity to do things differently. Amazon has an opportunity to forge a new approach, one where big tech is neither savior nor antagonist. Jeff Bezos and his leadership team can apply the strategic thinking that has made Amazon such an extraordinary company to the task of building a tech hub that encourages growth and widens opportunity.
This means breaking out of the bubble and redefining the corporate bottom line to include measures that reduce inequality, sustain existing small businesses and protect housing affordability, and, yes, even supporting cities in raising the tax revenue they need.
This isn’t an impossible dream. The secret of Silicon Valley wasn’t tax breaks and cheap real estate; it was a postwar era of generous public spending on research and education, as well as on affordable housing and public infrastructure. These investments were designed to help everyone, but they were critical to helping tech flourish.
No place or industry rules forever. Ask Detroit, once the most innovative place in America. The new capitals of tech should not take this prosperity for granted.
