Europe|10 Years in Prison for Exaggerating Her Elementary School Record?
10 Years in Prison for Exaggerating Her Elementary School Record?
ATHENS, Greece — A prosecutor on Greece’s Supreme Court is set to intervene in a case of educational fraud that has roiled the country and united political parties, labor unions and rights groups: A 53-year-old cleaner is serving 10 years in prison for falsifying her primary school diploma to get a public sector job.
An initial court ruling two years ago handed the woman a 15-year prison term for defrauding the public; the sentence was reduced this month, and she has been in Thiva prison in central Greece ever since.
An online petition for her release had drawn more than 20,000 signatures by Friday afternoon.
The unidentified cleaner had worked at a state kindergarten in Volos, in central Greece, for 18 years, until a review in 2014 revealed that she had doctored a certificate to show she had completed six years of primary education (roughly elementary level) instead of only five. Six years is the required term for primary school students to complete their education.
“She didn’t steal! She didn’t embezzle state money! She worked for it! So that she could respond to the needs of her family,” according to a statement by the union of cleaning workers in the region of Magnisia to which Volos belongs.
The case triggered such a storm on Greek social media that a prosecutor, Xeni Dimitriou, decided to review the sentence. A court in central Greece is to rule on her request for release on Wednesday, pending the Supreme Court’s review in the coming days.
Meanwhile, the justice minister, Michalis Kalogirou, visited the 53-year-old in prison on Friday.
“She went to get a job to support her two children, with a sick husband. She had to find work,” he said, adding that the woman’s spouse is disabled.
In comments published by the regional newspaper Tachidromos tis Thessalias on Friday, the woman said she had faked her diploma to help her family.
“I’m ashamed, but I wanted my kids to have a better life than mine,” she said from jail. “I was terrified that they might grow up in an institution like me.” She said she was one of 10 siblings and grew up in an orphanage.
After Greek court heard her appeal against the conviction this month, her sentence was trimmed to 10 years, and she was jailed. The woman and her lawyer then appealed to the country’s top court. According to Greek television, the Supreme Court prosecutor will look into “dozens” of similar cases of forged certificates that had led to convictions.
