The week features a meeting of 9-1 teams, the Saints looking for a ninth straight win, and a huge battle in the N.F.C. North.
Two of the most exciting offenses ever to take the field will square off on Monday night. Nearly everything on Sunday seems like an appetizer before the Chiefs and the Rams.
Here is a look at N.F.L. Week 11, with all picks made against the point spread.
The N.F.L. could hardly have asked for a more exciting Monday night game. The Chiefs and the Rams, both 9-1, have widely been considered Super Bowl contenders all season and are the best teams in football, along with the New Orleans Saints.
The talent is off the charts. Patrick Mahomes has already set the Chiefs’ franchise record for touchdown passes in a season (31) with six games to play. He is flanked by ultrafast skill players like Tyreek Hill and Kareem Hunt, and he has a knack for knowing when to take advantage of coverage mismatches on tight end Travis Kelce.
The Rams were the top-scoring offense in the N.F.L. last season, and they have mostly picked up where they left off, with Jared Goff commanding an offense that has Todd Gurley, the best running back in football, and a group of wide receivers that manages to be top-notch even once you account for the loss of Cooper Kupp, who is out for the year with a torn anterior cruciate ligament.
While Los Angeles has plenty of big-name players on defense as well, neither team has done much defensively of late, which has led to the record-breaking over/under of 63.5 points.
Hugely hyped matchups can tend to disappoint, but the all-offense, very-little-defense approach both teams have employed in recent weeks should be a recipe for a game that delivers. The only disappointment is it won’t be in Mexico City’s Azteca Stadium as a result of the field conditions being judged unsuitable for an N.F.L. game.
Mike Zimmer may be the coach of the Vikings (5-3-1), but he invoked the name of a Minnesota great to describe the quarterback of the team he is facing this week.
There are two games this week that are entirely irrelevant as far as the playoff picture is concerned: The Chiefs-Rams matchup, in which both teams are essentially assured a spot no matter what happens, and this one, in which the Raiders (1-8) and the Cardinals (2-7) have both been given a zero percent chance of qualifying for postseason play by The Upshot regardless of this week’s result. Pick: Cardinals -5.5.
