I interview C.E.O.s for the business section, and we often end up on the topic of meditation.
As the Corner Office columnist and a business reporter, it’s my job to stay in touch with chief executive officers around the country. We usually talk about what’s going on at their companies, or what’s happening in Washington.
But sometimes, we chat about meditation. Yes, that’s right: meditation.
I’ve been practicing mindfulness meditation for 20 years now, sometimes writing about it for The Times. And recently, mindfulness has become increasingly popular in the business world. While a few years ago the subject was somewhat taboo to discuss at work, with skeptics dismissing meditation as a frivolous pursuit, these days, some C.E.O.s take pride in the practice.
Since I took over the Corner Office column this year, the subject has already come up in several interviews.
Marc Benioff, the chief executive of Salesforce, has installed meditation rooms throughout Salesforce Tower in San Francisco, and often hosts Buddhist monks at his house. When I asked him how his meditation practice had informed his leadership style, he responded in what almost sounded like a koan.
Mark T. Bertolini, the chief executive of Aetna, was severely injured in a skiing accident in 2004 and used meditation to help him get back to work. After experiencing the benefits of meditation firsthand, he started offering mindfulness classes to Aetna employees, and before long, he said, the corporate culture had changed.
Eileen Fisher, the designer, didn’t overtly mention meditation and mindfulness when I interviewed her for Corner Office. But it was implicit. I had met Ms. Fisher years earlier through meditation circles, and knew that her interest in mindfulness had led her to improve the working conditions for factory workers in China and offer more generous benefits for employees in New York.
And Mark Hoplamazian, the chief executive of Hyatt Hotels, who has dabbled in meditation, spoke about the importance of empathy and mindfulness to his strategy.
These C.E.O.s are not alone in embracing mindfulness. Today, plenty of other companies, including Google, Ford and McKinsey, are offering meditation programs in the office.
My own meditation practice goes back further than that. After reading a book about Buddhism in college, I started practicing Zen meditation. My curiosity was piqued, and I spent my junior year of college in India, first through the Antioch Buddhist Studies program, and then traveling on my own. For the better part of a year, I roamed the country, living in monasteries, going on 10-day silent meditation retreats and learning from Buddhist teachers. In a matter of months, mindfulness meditation was making me less stressed, more patient and even a bit kinder.
Since then, my meditation practice has ebbed and flowed, though the benefits have remained the same. There are stretches during which I diligently make time to sit on my cushion every day, quietly observing my thoughts, emotions and sensations. Then I’ll go awhile without any formal practice. Then I’ll go on retreat again, as I did this spring, going off the grid for days at a time.
My writing about meditation for The Times is similarly sporadic. I’ve published three guides for the Well section (How to Meditate, Mindfulness for Children and How to Be More Mindful at Work). But ever since a weekly column, Meditation for Real Life, ended last year, we haven’t had a regular feature on the topic.
These days, my meditation coverage mostly turns up in the Corner Office, where, even when a C.E.O. isn’t specifically talking about meditation, the answers to my questions are often informed by the practice of mindfulness.
When I asked Mr. Benioff whether companies had a responsibility to benefit society, his response might as well have come out of a Buddhist scripture.
