Representative Claudia Tenney, a first-term Republican who aligned her re-election campaign to President Trump, has lost her bid for a second term in New York’s 22nd District in Central New York.
After a drawn-out vote count, Ms. Tenney was unable to make up her Election Day deficit to Anthony Brindisi, a centrist Democratic state assemblyman, in a district that stretches from Lake Ontario to the Pennsylvania border.
Leading by roughly 1,000 votes after the initial vote count, Mr. Brindisi, 40, had declared victory over Ms. Tenney. But Ms. Tenney, 57, refused to concede. The Associated Press called the race on Wednesday.
With Mr. Brindisi’s victory, Democrats have now picked up 39 House seats in the midterm elections. Two House races remain to be called: one each in New York and California.
Ms. Tenney becomes the third Republican in New York to lose a congressional seat this cycle. Antonio Delgado defeated Representative John J. Faso in New York’s 19th District, and in Staten Island, Max Rose defeated Representative Dan Donovan.
“As the votes have been counted the last several weeks, it has become clear that while we remain on the right side of the issues and history, we came out on the wrong side of a very close race,” she said.
Mr. Brindisi’s victory comes in a district where registered Republicans outnumber Democrats by 30,000. But the district has a history of electing moderate Republicans, and Mr. Brindisi, who has an “A” rating from the National Rifle Association, was endorsed by two Republican House members who held the seat before Ms. Tenney.
Ms. Tenney, a fervent supporter of Mr. Trump, campaigned with the president in September, and members of Mr. Trump’s family joined her in the days leading up to the election.
But Ms. Tenney’s rhetoric has drawn ire from some of her constituents, including her hard-line stance on immigration and her statements calling Democrats “un-American” when they did not clap for Mr. Trump during his State of the Union address. Among the most controversial was a comment she made after the Parkland, Fla., shooting.
