Illustrated. 289 pp. Crown Archetype. $27.
Illustrated. 231 pp. Cornell University Press. $25.
“So much has been written about Monty Python,” notes Eric Idle, who as a charter member of that brilliant comedy troupe created memorable sketches like “Nudge Nudge,” in which he played the world’s most annoying pub patron, as well as the absurdly cheerful song that gives his book its name, which he sang at the conclusion of the mock biblical epic “Monty Python’s Life of Brian” while being crucified.
He’s not wrong. (He doesn’t mention that one of those books was “The Pythons Autobiography,” published in 2003, which included contributions from all the Pythons, including Idle himself.) The question is how much Idle has to say on the subject that hasn’t already been said.
The answer: enough.
“Always Look on the Bright Side of Life” is probably more for the hard-core Python aficionado than the casual fan, who may be baffled by unexplained references like “Orson Welles was on the panel and he must have loved Mr. Creosote.” But there is plenty here that all fans, casual and otherwise, will appreciate.
I was particularly taken by Idle’s recollection of how he came to write “Bright Side,” and how he came to record his vocal in a hotel bedroom in Tunisia while under the influence of a powerful local beverage. And I was touched by the mixture of pride and surprise with which he discusses how that song, which “was supposed to be ironic,” has taken on a life of its own as an anthem sung by British troops, British football fans and even mourners at British funerals, where Idle says it has replaced “My Way” as the most requested number.
I would have liked more stories about the creative process behind Idle’s Python work. I would have also liked more about the Rutles, the Beatles parody band he created in the late 1970s with the frequent Python collaborator Neil Innes. Idle calls “The Rutles: All You Need Is Cash,” the hilarious fake documentary he wrote, co-directed and co-starred in (as the Paul to Innes’s John), “probably the most fun I ever had filming.” But for some reason — perhaps because it was Innes and not Idle who wrote the songs — this phase of his career gets relatively short shrift.
And I would have liked a lot less about Idle’s many, many, many famous friends.
Of course, there’s no reason he shouldn’t write about his friends. “I didn’t seek them out,” he sensibly observes. “They found me. What am I supposed to say?” It’s just that so much of what he has to say about them consists of little more than dropping their names. (“Marty Scorsese threw us a party”; “All of the Stones trooped in”; “Suddenly I was making Steve Martin and Robin Williams laugh”; “I have known Salman for some years.”) Still, when he writes in depth about friends like George Harrison, who loved — and, in the case of “Life of Brian,” helped bankroll — the Pythons, and whom Idle clearly loved back (“He was irresistible”), the payoff can be powerful.
“Always Look on the Bright Side of Life” has its share of weak jokes: “By an odd coincidence, I was born on my birthday.” “Steve is a polymath, which is not a parrot good at algebra.” After a few of those clunkers, I had visions of Graham Chapman materializing in his colonel’s uniform to proclaim such wordplay unforgivably silly and urge Idle to move on.
And, perhaps inevitably for a man in his mid-70s, Idle does a fair amount of reflecting.
In addition to being the Python with the most high-profile performing career, John Cleese has for two decades had an academic one, as a professor at large and later a visiting professor at Cornell University. “Professor at Large: The Cornell Years,” a hodgepodge of lectures and conversations, is less for the Python fan than for the Python completist.
Naturally, Monty Python is among the topics Cleese addresses. But even the 2004 talk “What Is Religion? Musings on ‘Life of Brian’” is about more than just that film; while using “Brian” as a starting point, Cleese offers smart and sometimes surprising observations about spirituality, organized religion, and the parts he says were left out of the Bible.
The sublime silliness of Monty Python has always had an intellectual underpinning; not many comedy troupes have sung about Heidegger and Descartes or joked about summarizing Proust. In “Professor at Large,” Cleese brings the underpinning to the surface. While rarely silly, Professor Cleese is often funny, frequently perceptive and, unlike many professors, never dull.