The following reports compile all significant security incidents confirmed by New York Times reporters and stringers throughout Afghanistan. It is necessarily incomplete as many local officials refuse to confirm casualty information.
In the past week, the Times confirmed that 118 members of the security forces were killed, a significant increase over the previous week, but, unusually, there were no confirmed deaths of civilians. Fighting spread to nine provinces, but the emphasis shifted to the south as cold weather intensified in the north. An entire battalion of Afghan border soldiers was wiped out in western Farah Province, and the Taliban tried — unsuccessfully so far — to take over Jaghori District in Ghazni, an anti-insurgent stronghold.
The Taliban attacked a local police outpost in Ark Elek village of Qiasar District. Reinforcements arrived as fighting intensified. Five local police officers and one soldier were killed and the security outpost was captured by the Taliban. The post was retaken later by security forces.
The Taliban attacked a police outpost in Khogyani district, killing three police officers, including the acting district police chief, and wounding five others. The insurgents captured the outpost and seized all weapons and equipment there, but the outpost was recaptured with reinforcement forces arrived to the area.
The Taliban attacked a military base in Dasht-e-Archi District, killing four soldiers.
The Taliban attacked a military base in the Saf Qorogh area of Khwaja Ghar District, killing 12 soldiers and wounding 13 others. Security forces prevented the Taliban from capturing the base.
The Taliban attacked an army outpost in Muqur District, killing five soldiers and wounding 10 others. Three soldiers were taken prisoner.
American airstrikes targeting an Islamic State-affiliated group hit Afghan army and pro-government militia outposts in the Murcha village of Naziyan District, killing two soldiers and three pro-government militia members. A spokesman for the American military said an investigation was underway.
Taliban fighters from Gelan District attacked security outposts in Jaghori District, but were repelled by reinforcements. Three local police officers were killed and five others were wounded, including a commander of the local police force. A police outpost was abandoned when the officers ran out of ammunition, but it was later retaken by reinforcements.
The Taliban attacked a police outpost in the Diyak area of Farah City, the provincial capital. Two police officers were killed and two others were wounded. Five Taliban fighter were also killed, and nine others were wounded.
The Taliban attacked a pro-government militia outpost in the Barikab area of Batikot District, killing three pro-government militia members.
A Taliban “Red Unit” attacked security outposts in the Sang-e-Zard area of Pashtoon Kot District. Four pro-government militia members were killed and two commandos were wounded. Five security outposts fell to the Taliban, three of which belonged to commando units. Two Taliban fighters were also killed in the clashes.
The Taliban captured the battalion headquarters of the Afghan Border Force in Poshti Koh District and wiped out an entire unit of border force soldiers, killing 20 and taking 25 others prisoner. Only three soldiers escaped, with minor wounds.
The Taliban attacked security outposts in Sancharak District, killing three pro-government militia members. One pro-government militia member and five local police officers were wounded. One security outpost was captured by the Taliban and then burned down. Ten Taliban fighters were also killed and 20 others were wounded in the fighting.
The Taliban attacked an army outpost in the Chel Dokhtaran area of Shindand District with the help of an insurgent who had posed as a soldier. Seven soldiers were killed and four others were wounded in the clashes.
Five police officers were killed and seven others were wounded in Taliban attacks on security outposts in the districts of Maruf and Arghistan. Thirty Taliban fighters were also killed in the clashes. Police forces were aware of the Taliban’s plan and ambushed them.
The Taliban attacked a police outpost in the Mandigak area of Khakrez District. Twelve police officers were killed and two others were wounded in the fighting. The Taliban captured the post and seized the weapons and equipment inside, then left the area.
A roadside bomb hit a police vehicle in the Spinghar area of Qalat, the provincial capital. One police officer was killed and two others were wounded.
The Taliban attacked an outpost of border forces in the Morichaq area of Bala Morghab District, killing one soldier and wounding three others. At least 10 Taliban insurgents were killed or wounded in the clashes.
A joint military and police outpost fell to the Taliban only two days after it had been set up, with six police officers and seven soldiers killed and three others wounded. Six Taliban fighters were also killed and 10 others were wounded. The Taliban attacked security outposts in other parts of the province, but there were no casualties among Afghan security forces.
Two Humvees of Afghan border forces were ambushed by the Taliban in the Shahr-i-Kohna area of Dasht-i-Qala District. One Humvee was hit by a rocket and another hit a roadside bomb. One soldier was killed and another was wounded.
One of the 17 Afghan National Civil Order Police abducted from a military base in Dawlat Abad District on Nov. 2 was killed by the Taliban.
The Taliban attacked a police outpost in the Nagahan area of Arghandab District, killing two police officers.
A Utah mayor serving in Afghanistan was killed and another service member was wounded when an Afghan commando opened fire on them in Kabul.
The Taliban attacked army and police outposts in the Nawaarea of Trinkot, the provincial capital. When insurgent fighters attacked the army outpost, police officers fled their outpost in Humvees. Twenty soldiers were reported missing after the fighting and all of the equipment and weapons from both security outposts were seized by the Taliban.
The Taliban attacked security outposts in the Yakatot area of Pashtoon Kot District, capturing one of them. An Afghan commando was killed; another commando and two pro-government militias were wounded in the fighting.
The Taliban attacked police outposts in the Nawa area of Tarinkot, the provincial capital, killing one police and wounding six others.
The Taliban attacked an Afghan National Civil Order Police base in Dawlat Abad District. The base commander and two other members of the security forces were killed. At least 17 security forces were taken prisoner by the Taliban. The insurgents seized weapons and four Humvees from inside the base.