The Lodge at the Presidio, set within a 1,500 acre national park, has one of the city’s best vantage points for viewing and visiting the Golden Gate Bridge.
Opened in late June, the Lodge at the Presidio has the unusual perk of having a San Francisco address in the heart of a 1,500-acre national park — the Presidio, an iconic former army post, now home to miles of forested hiking and biking trails, plus museums, restaurants, and even a bowling alley. The sister property to the smaller Inn at the Presidio, which opened in 2012, this is the closest lodging in the city to the Golden Gate Bridge, where, on a recent visit, foghorn blasts sounded from a seemingly invisible source socked away in white, misty drifts (a.k.a. Karl the Fog, in local parlance). The hotel is situated in a restored 1897 brick Colonial Revival barracks building that housed successive waves of soldiers throughout much of the 20th century. A long front porch lined with teak rocking chairs faces the Presidio’s Main Post, a vast, grassy field that hosts frequent events and is an ideal place for picnics, Frisbee games, and afternoon naps. Inside, the three-story building opens up to a bright, light-filled lobby with classy navy-blue wall accents, oversized historic photographs and an art display that includes Ohlone stones discovered during excavation, and beautiful hardwood floors that are inlaid with a darker “ghost pattern” to show the original floor plan of the military company offices and artillery storage rooms.
There is no in-house restaurant, but the Main Post has notable restaurants just steps away, including the chef Traci Des Jardins’ Arguello — specializing in Mexican cuisine and named after Luis Antonio Arguello, a former commander of the Presidio and the first Mexican governor of Alta California — and her more casual Commissary, which features Spanish-accented dishes like Ibérico broth with mushrooms and fregola sarda. Both restaurants are run in partnership with the Presidio Trust. A five-minute drive will take you to the Presidio Social Club, a cheerful all-day restaurant with a line of bar stools at the counter that’s pleasantly reminiscent of an old-school diner.
