The party didn’t get everything it wanted. But it got what it and the country need.
I wanted a sweeping repudiation of President Trump’s ugly politics, an undeniable statement that this country is bigger than his smallness and brighter than his darkness.
I got a vital safeguard against his worst impulses in the form of a significant Democratic majority in the House, the exact size of which wasn’t yet clear early Wednesday morning.
I’ll take it, and I’ll let others quibble over whether it amounts to a big wave, a modest one or a slosh of something wet and reassuring. It’s enough for the time being, even if doesn’t make me feel as good about America as I’d like to or as sure about the future as I yearn to.
It won’t humble Trump as thoroughly as he needs humbling. He’ll dwell on the Republicans’ success in the Senate, where they built on their majority. He’ll brag that he concentrated his own campaign-trail energy on that chamber of Congress and on those races, and he’ll be right. He’ll note — or others in his party will — that Democrats didn’t fare as well in these midterms as Republicans did two years into Barack Obama’s presidency, when they picked up 63 House seats. Now that’s a tsunami.
He’ll find a way to feel validated and vindicated. He always does.
And there were disappointments for Democrats, many of which should cause concern and prompt careful re-examination of their strategy going forward. High-profile progressives, including Andrew Gillum in Florida and Beto O’Rourke in Texas, didn’t fulfill the dreams that so many Democrats had for them. There may well be a lesson for 2020 in that, and I’m not confident that the party will learn it.
I also worry that House Democrats, flush with the newfound ability to torment a president who has earned it, will go too far, and become the foils against which he thunders profitably as he reaches for a second term. There are ways to contain and expose him shy of an all-out subpoena-palooza. The answer to a freak-show presidency isn’t a carnival that leaves Americans confused about where the most blinding lights and obnoxious noise are coming from.
But let’s save all of that for other columns. Let’s use this one to rejoice. Trump needed a comeuppance, and the decisive swing of the House into the Democratic column was precisely that. You know what else was? The profiles of the Democrats who made that swing happen.
Many of the candidates for the House who turned red seats blue were women. A record number of them ran for Congress this year, and it seemed likely early Wednesday morning, even before all the counting of ballots was done, that the next Congress would also contain a record number of them: more than the 107 currently there. So a president who has acted and spoken with such vulgar disregard for women will deal with more female lawmakers than any of his predecessors did. That’s a measure of sweet justice.
Many of the candidates for the House who turned red seats blue were people of color. I think of Antonio Delgado in New York, whose blackness was something that Republicans dwelled on. I think of Colin Allred in Texas, who defeated a previously invincible Republican, Pete Sessions, who has been in Congress for two decades. I think of Lauren Underwood in Illinois, who was making her first bid for political office and wasn’t initially given much of a chance. She proved the naysayers wrong.
Allred and Underwood are in their 30s, which speaks to another theme in the Democratic takeover of House: the number of young candidates behind it. Nancy Pelosi, 78, may be poised for a new stint as the Speaker of the House, but what happened among Democratic candidates throughout the country on Tuesday represented a changing of the guard and a diversifying of the ranks.
In a bellwether House race in Kansas, Sharice Davids defeated the Republican incumbent, Kevin Yoder. She’s 38, openly gay and will be one of the first Native American women in Congress. The other, also elected on Tuesday, is Deb Haaland, a New Mexico Democrat.
Ah, Kansas: Trump won the state in 2016 by more than 20 points, but on Tuesday, in the governor’s race there, Kansans rejected a far-right candidate who was a darling of the president’s — Kris Kobach — for a Democratic woman, Laura Kelly.
She won handily, and Democrats picked up other governorships that had belonged to Republicans, for instance in Michigan, Illinois and Wisconsin, where Scott Walker was denied a third term. Democrats will now govern all three states — Michigan, Wisconsin and Pennsylvania — that handed Trump his margin of victory in the Electoral College.
I can look at the way Trump has governed — unabashedly spreading hate, gleefully shattering norms and sowing chaos at every turn — and wonder why more didn’t go Democrats’ way on Tuesday. I can tally their possible mistakes. Too many Democrats still haven’t figured out the difference between talking to and talking down to Americans, and too many engage in a kind of oppression Olympics that turns off voters in the middle.
But on Tuesday, in House elections, Democrats prevailed among independents. They prevailed in suburbs. They prevailed in swing districts with candidates who showed plenty of prudent moderation.
And they prevailed despite low unemployment numbers, wage growth and an overall economic picture that most Americans find positive. It wasn’t “the economy, stupid” that drove what happened on Tuesday. It was Trump.
He repeatedly told his supporters in the days leading up to the midterms that he was essentially on the ballot, and for once he wasn’t boasting idly. Americans weighed in on him, and if it wasn’t quite the spanking he had coming, it certainly wasn’t a hug.
