KHOST, Afghanistan — A bombing deep inside an army base in Afghanistan during Friday prayers at a mosque killed at least 27 soldiers and wounded dozens, officials said, once again highlighting the vulnerability of the country’s security forces.
The attack was inside the headquarters of the Afghan Army’s 1st Brigade, 203rd Corps, in the southeastern province of Khost, said Capt. Abdullah Sargand, a brigade spokesman.
A senior official said at least 27 soldiers had been killed and an officer inside the base said more than 20 died. But other officials gave varying accounts of the casualty toll, some lower.
“The explosion happened when army personnel were getting ready to pray,” Captain Abdullah said.
Gul Mohammad-din Mohammadi, the deputy head of Khost’s public health department, said 79 wounded soldiers had been taken to hospitals. Jawed Ghafoor, a spokesman for the Afghan Ministry of Defense, said helicopters had reached the base to evacuate the wounded.
The blast came days after another bombing that targeted a religious ceremony in Kabul, the capital, killing at least 55 people. A suicide bomber detonated his explosives inside a wedding hall where hundreds of religious scholars and students had gathered to celebrate the Prophet Muhammad’s birthday.
Members of the security forces in Afghanistan have been dying at alarming rates in recent years, as a resurgent Taliban have mounted attacks across the country. This year, officials put the daily death toll at 30 to 40.
President Ashraf Ghani said this month that more than 28,000 members of the country’s security forces had been killed since 2015. Other officials have suggested that the true number could be higher.
Particularly alarming has been the insurgents’ reach and their ability to strike deep within some of the government’s most heavily guarded institutions.
In the spring of last year, a Taliban squad made its way past half a dozen checkpoints, deep into the largest army base in northern Afghanistan, just as soldiers were standing for Friday prayers. The insurgents left a scene of carnage, with at least 140 soldiers dead.