EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — Matt Barkley had just put the finishing touches on a stunning victory when he jogged over to the sideline, found his mother in the stands and handed her his well-deserved game ball.
It was quite a moment for Barkley, the Buffalo Bills quarterback who looked nothing like a guy who had no job and an uncertain future just a few weeks ago.
Barkley ignited Buffalo’s bumbling offense with two touchdown passes, including one to offensive tackle Dion Dawkins, LeSean McCoy broke out of a season-long slump with 113 yards rushing and a pair of touchdown runs, and the Bills embarrassed the Jets, 41-10, on Sunday.
Barkley made his first start in nearly two years and looked better than any of the other quarterbacks the Bills (3-7) had trotted out this season. Barkley, a 28-year-old journeyman, was 15 of 25 for 232 yards while helping Buffalo end a four-game losing streak as the Bills put up 451 yards of total offense.
Barkley got the nod from Coach Sean McDermott ahead of the ineffective Nathan Peterman, despite having just two weeks of practice with the Bills since signing on Oct. 30. The rookie Josh Allen has missed four straight games with a sprained right elbow, and Derek Anderson is sidelined with a concussion. Barkley’s last start came in the 2016 season finale for Chicago.
Meanwhile, the hot seat under Coach Todd Bowles reached a boiling point as the Jets (3-7) were completely manhandled by a team that entered with a league-low 96 points and had two touchdowns in its previous four games.
The Jets have a bye-week break, and the future of Bowles, in his fourth season, is in serious doubt. The owner Christopher Johnson declined to comment to reporters after the game.
The Jets started 39-year-old Josh McCown in place of the injured rookie Sam Darnold, but he couldn’t prevent the Jets from their fourth straight loss in front of a frustrated fan base that booed lustily throughout.
Barkley certainly didn’t look rusty, launching a 47-yard pass to Robert Foster on the Bills’ first offensive play. Foster, just promoted from the practice squad, beat the top Jets cornerback, Trumaine Johnson, who had missed the previous five games with an injured quadriceps.
The 14-play, 73-yard drive was prolonged by a fake punt on fourth-and-6 from the Bills 47 when the ball was snapped directly to tight end Logan Thomas, a quarterback at Virginia Tech. Thomas then completed a 19-yard pass to Foster for the first down.
The Bills outgained the Jets by 186-1 after one quarter and added to their lead less than two minutes into the second quarter on a 54-yard field goal by Stephen Hauschka that made it 17-0.
If there was any doubt as to where this game was headed, the Bills added in some trickery on their next drive.
Dawkins lined up as an eligible receiver on first-and-goal from the 7-yard line. Barkley found Dawkins, a 6-foot-5, 320-pound lineman, wide open for a touchdown.
The Jets had another brutal sequence on their next possession, when they had three holding penalties called on one play. Then McCown, facing a blitz, threw the ball down the left sideline, and Matt Milano picked it off.
Seven plays later, McCoy ran it in from the 1 to put Buffalo up, 31-0.