There were marriages forged, nights that turned into mornings, and rock stars spotted and worshiped.
On the heels of our oral history of the Pony, a rock club in Asbury Park, N.J., readers shared their own memories with The New York Times.
Lee Lerner, Lake Mary, Fla.
In June 1982, I finished my sophomore year of college in Florida. On my final day of classes, my head was focused on exams, but my 19-year-old heart was already on summer break at the New Jersey shore.
To reach my promised land on time, I swore I’d drive all night. My friends had given me a heads-up that Bruce Springsteen was making surprise appearances at the Stone Pony in Asbury Park on Sunday nights with the house band, Cats on a Smooth Surface. I couldn’t miss that opportunity.
In my 1967 Ford Galaxie convertible, I sped the 1,100 miles up Interstate 95. My lasting memory from that nonstop drive from Orlando, Fla., to Jersey was one infectious song that floated hourly from my FM radio: “From Small Things (Big Things One Day Come),” sung by Dave Edmunds.
I arrived Sunday at my mom’s house in West Long Branch, about seven miles from Asbury Park. I took a nap, a shower, gave mom a hug and wolfed down her specialty of mussels marinara.
Larry, Greg and I entered the Stone Pony to the pop sounds of Cats. This band was fronted by Bobby Bandiera, a shore music mainstay for years to come. We bought Miller Lite longnecks and watched them play.
Minutes later, pandemonium as Springsteen takes the small stage with Cats. The crowd pushes in. Standing on the dance floor, we’re 12 feet from our local hero. To my wonder, one of the first songs is “From Small Things,” the catchy tune from my overnight trek.
Big things, indeed, came that magical summer. We saw Bruce four more times at the Pony, each set featuring vintage covers from Chuck Berry and the like. It was electric, a concoction of Springsteen’s energy and a sweaty throng in a boardwalk bar.
Aug. 22, 1987. My cousin and I are visiting Asbury Park, from Italy, with the secret hope to meet Bruce.
The Pony is closed, and we can’t get in for the evening show since we are just 18. But we sneak in an open door and ask a man if we can at least take a couple of pictures of the place. He says no problem.
A couple of minutes after, he says, “But why don’t you take a picture of him?” We turn, and we can’t believe our eyes. Bruce has just come inside. It’s just the four of us, and we ask if we can take a picture with him. “Sure!” he says.
He’s the kindest and most down-to-earth guy.
Jan. 6, 2018. After 30 years of hearing about this iconic venue and wishing on hundreds of occasions that I could teleport myself there, I finally made the long trek from Australia for the Light of Day festival.
I was at art school in New York when I read about a benefit concert happening at the Stone Pony. On Jan. 20, 1986, I skipped classes and took the bus from N.Y.C. to Asbury Park on a hunch that Bruce, being Bruce, would surely play the benefit at the Stone Pony in solidarity with workers striking over the closing of the 3M plant in Freehold, N.J.
When I arrived it was foggy and wet, but the boardwalk at Asbury Park was just as I imagined it would be. I arrived early in the day, and at first wondered why so few fans were waiting in line. Did they know something I didn’t?
I worried Springsteen might be on tour elsewhere. Once we were let in, other local bands played throughout the day and into the night. I didn’t know most of them, as my local scene was far away in Canada.
The crowd thickened throughout the evening, with intense anticipation in the air. The stage went black around 10 p.m., and when a roadie brought out a certain beaten-up Fender Telecaster and set it on its stand, I knew Bruce would play after all.
Lisa A. Carlson, Warren, N.J.
Around the time of my divorce, Clarence Clemons died. The juxtaposition of his death, my divorce, and Father’s Day, remains one of thousands of fond Asbury Park memories. On the Sunday after his death, an impromptu memorial was erected as fans gathered in front of the Stone Pony.
I had recently met Clarence at an after party at a restaurant on Cookman Avenue, as he was in town for a film festival and I had taken a shot of him. This would be my addition to the pile of offerings.
My children and their father found me near the stage. There we sang, danced and were swept up in the magic of the moment and of the place. I count myself among the lucky patrons who have been graced by the ghosts shut up in the bones of that place.
Michael Goodfriend, Medford, N.J.
I saw many shows at the Pony in the ’70s and ’80s. Southside Johnny, George Thorogood, Twisted Sister, but my recollection of them is a bit, let’s say, hazy. After a long hiatus, in the summer of 2016, I returned with my then girlfriend, now wife, Laura, to see the Struts. It was a magical night. I felt all the old ghosts of the Jersey Shore past.
If walls could talk, and objects have a soul, then yeah, the Pony was speaking to me.
We planted ourselves against the front bar with a good view of the stage. I asked Laura if she was O.K. here, cause we weren’t moving until the show was over. No need to worry about getting to the bathroom, because anything we drank we sweated right out. It was stifling hot, loud, crowded and superb.
As the crowd drifted out of the bar, we lingered for just a bit, our ears ringing, our faces smiling, our belief that rock ’n’ roll really can save your soul reaffirmed. We downed our last beer, tipped the bartenders generously — they earned it — and headed out.
We strolled across the street onto the beach, the moon glistening off the ocean, the waves rolling in hypnotically, soothing our senses. We climbed atop a lifeguard chair, her head on my shoulder, the salt air filling our lungs, our ears ringing the echoes of a night we will never forget.
I complain a lot about living in Jersey — the high taxes, the traffic, the torrid pace of life. But it’s moments like that night that make it all worth while.
I don’t know anywhere else on this good earth we could experience a night like that. Jersey born and bred, baptized in the sweat, smoke and sounds of the Stone Pony. Wouldn’t trade it for anything in the world. Jersey rules. You got a problem with that? Cause I sure as hell don’t.
Morris Shamah, Jersey City, N.J.
I slammed the trunk, yelled to my brother that he’s going to have to wait a few hours, and sped down Ocean Avenue.
The intersection at Second and Ocean in Asbury Park was completely full of people, dancing along to the barnburner that was happening inside. Not content with staying outside, and with the confidence of my youth, I walked straight up to the front door, ignoring the bouncer. The bouncer didn’t ignore me, though, and I was back on the street.
Time passed, songs were played, and I could not find an opening to get through that front door. It was a party on the streets of Asbury Park that night, but I was not satisfied until I would get inside that fortress of cold, white brick.
When the opening to “Rosalita” rang out, I panicked. I can’t miss “Rosie.” I walked around the building, through the parking lot, up to the green fence that surrounds the SummerStage, which was closed for the season. I figured I could jump it. Worst case scenario, I get arrested. But before I attempted the climb, I tried the door.
Howie Chaz, Mount Kisco, N.Y.
The Pony was packed that night. So packed that I decided to stand in the back by the kitchen to watch the show. Midway through the show, this woman comes to where I am, obviously too hot and crowded for her as well, and decides to watch the show from the same spot.
 We caught eyes a couple of times, but I couldn’t figure out where I knew her from.
After a couple of more songs I started to walk away, and as I did she called me by name and reminded me that we were in the same Springsteen Facebook group. We spoke for an hour or so. The Pony would turn out to be the venue for many other events where we would hang out together.
We are now engaged to be married.
Peter Howes, Goshen, N.Y.
April 17, 1977. The Jukes were scheduled to play, and a friend and I are there with some photos we had just taken in March at a Bruce concert in Boston. The club was packed, and the Jukes hadn’t started playing yet, so we moved near the back bar where it was slightly less crowded.
After a short while, we see Bruce squeezing through the crowd and taking a seat at the back bar. After working up our nerve, we approached him and asked if he’d like to see our photos.
He led us through a door to the backstage room. After looking through the photos, he autographed a few.