WHITEWATER, Calif. — There was the five-mile dusty drive to a remote wilderness reserve on the outskirts of Palm Springs, to talk about her efforts to protect the pristine deserts and mountains that make up so much of California.
A few days later, it was off to Salinas for a tour of a mushroom farm with members of the powerful United Farm Workers. And on Thursday, Senator Dianne Feinstein, the California Democrat, was posing in front of a C-130 firefighting air tanker outside Sacramento as she got a briefing from state officials about the coming fire season.
At a time when other members of this state’s Democratic old guard are moving toward retirement, Ms. Feinstein, 85, is running again, closing out what will likely be her last campaign with a statewide tour that has all the markings of a career valedictory.
And weeks after she was pummeled by Republicans, including President Trump, for her actions during the confirmation hearing of Justice Brett M. Kavanaugh to the Supreme Court, she appears to be cruising to victory over her opponent, Kevin de León, the former Democratic leader of the State Senate.
As she traveled around the state, she drew no criticism for how she handled her role as the senior Democrat on the Judiciary Committee.
Her apparent lead suggests that at a time of generational and ideological upheaval, California — the face of the liberal resistance — still has an appetite for a politician who embraces political moderation. And in an interview, Ms. Feinstein said the Senate needed a mix of political ideologies — and of younger and older leaders.
The visit to Salinas, 50 miles south of San Jose, was only one of three campaign appearances she made last week. Though she had been making stops around the state, her pace was far less busy than would normally be expected with Election Day so close.
Mr. de León, in an interview, called her “out of touch” with California values and how politics is now conducted in Washington, but Ms. Feinstein declined to address any of his criticisms.
And in a show of just how much money the Feinstein campaign has to spend, it treated 100 supporters to a three-course sit-down lunch at Lulu California Bistro in Palm Springs. Typically, these kinds of luncheons are fund-raisers, which require attendees to contribute to attend.
Mr. de León has struggled since the June 5 primary, in which he drew 11 percent of the vote — enough to qualify him for the November contest against Ms. Feinstein, who got 44 percent.
Ms. Feinstein has $4.2 million cash on hand, according to the latest Federal Election Commission report, compared with $294,361 for Mr. de León. Ms. Feinstein leads Mr. de León by 43 percent to 27 percent in a poll by the Public Policy Institute of California released last week.
Even the relatively light pace of this campaign has proved tiring for Ms. Feinstein, as she has remarked more than once, showing the wear and tear that comes from being a candidate running in a state this vast. “I’m glad the campaign is over in five days,” Ms. Feinstein said with a laugh at a women’s luncheon in Sacramento on Thursday.
Mr. de León, 51, said he did not think Ms. Feinstein was too old to serve, but argued that she was out of of step ideologically and in her embrace of bipartisanship.
Ginny Foat, a Democrat and a retired member of the Palm Springs City Council, said she did not agree with the argument that Ms. Feinstein wasn’t in tune with her state.
Barbara Boxer, 77, a Democrat and former California senator who retired in 2016, said she saw no reason Ms. Feinstein should join her in retirement.
“Seniority is the name of the game in the United States Senate,” she said.
Ms. Feinstein has been helped by the rallying of the state’s establishment around her, no matter the vote of the Democratic Party. “Dianne Feinstein’s seniority and experience are too valuable for Californians to give up,” The Los Angeles Times said in endorsing her.
Ms. Feinstein appeared engaged as she campaigned, lingering to talk to voters and reporters. In a 30-minute interview, she was eager to present herself — after some equivocation earlier in the campaign — as a steadfast critic of Mr. Trump.
At the same time, Ms. Feinstein did show some signs of fatigue. Her return to the campaign trail came after a grueling stretch in Washington where she served as the senior Democrat on the Senate Judiciary Committee during the Kavanaugh hearings. Throughout the hearing, Republicans attacked her for her handling of a letter from Christine Blasey Ford, a research psychologist, alleging that Mr. Kavanaugh had sexually assaulted her when they were teenagers.
“I think I’m in good physical condition,” Ms. Feinstein volunteered as she discussed his attacks on her. She nodded when asked if she felt as sharp as she did 20 years ago.
Eileen Stern, 69, a fund-raiser who lives in Palm Springs, said she thought Ms. Feinstein was needed in Washington, particularly now, given her experience.
