STANLEY CAVELL & THE COMEDIES OF REMARRIAGE at Anthology Film Archives (Nov. 23-29). Cavell, who died in June, may have been an eminent professor of philosophy, but that lofty pursuit didn’t stop him from using his noodle to elucidate the popular art form of movies. In his book “Pursuits of Happiness: The Hollywood Comedy of Remarriage,” Cavell unpacked a particular strain of Hollywood screwball comedy in which a man and a woman who are at each other’s throats wind up in love (or back in love) by the end. His wife, Cathleen Cavell, will introduce “His Girl Friday” on Saturday. Other classics showing include “It Happened One Night” (on Friday and Sunday), “The Awful Truth” (on Friday and Sunday) and “Adam’s Rib” (on Sunday, Tuesday and Thursday).
COMIN’ BACK AT YA! 35MM 3-D at the Quad Cinema (Nov. 23-25). This encore presentation of a series from last year offers another rare chance to see over-under 3-D, a process used during the format’s revival in the 1980s. Each frame of the film strip is divided into two halves: one for the left eye and one for the right. A churl might argue that the technology is more interesting than the movies it produced, but if you ever plan to see “Jaws 3-D” (showing on Saturday), the time to dive in is now.
RITA HAYWORTH 100 at Film Forum (Nov. 23-29). Elvis people and Beatles people, a new challenge for your consideration: Do you prefer Hayworth (1918-87) in black and white — as an international femme fatale in “The Lady From Shanghai” (on Friday, Saturday and Wednesday) or singing “Put the Blame on Mame” in “Gilda” (on Friday, Saturday and Thursday)? Or is her signature (dyed) red hair best seen in color, as in the musical “Cover Girl” (on Sunday, Monday and Wednesday)? Fortunately, Film Forum’s tribute in honor of her 100th birthday embraces such a spectrum of her work, including Raoul Walsh’s not-color “The Strawberry Blonde” (on Tuesday), that it doesn’t force anyone to choose.
MAKING WAVES: NEW ROMANIAN CINEMA at BAM Rose Cinemas (Nov. 26-Dec. 2). Is the so-called Romanian new wave — sightings of which began more than a decade ago — still with us? This BAM series puts a spotlight on some newer or perhaps lesser-known directors, from Adina Pintilie, whose “Touch Me Not” (showing on Monday) surprised observers when it took the top prize at the Berlin Film Festival in February, to Radu Jude, whose “‘I Do Not Care if We Go Down in History as Barbarians’” (on Nov. 30) is a hall-of-mirrors, fourth-wall-breaking feature about a theater director (played by Ioana Iacob) who mounts a staging of a real-life 1941 massacre of Romanian Jews. Jude’s “Scarred Hearts,” released in July, screens on Dec. 1.
SILENT COMEDY INTERNATIONAL at the Museum of Modern Art (Nov. 23-Dec. 2). Think silent screen comedy begins and ends with Keaton and Chaplin? Broaden your horizons with this MoMA retrospective, which highlights the ways in which American and European schools of humor influenced each other. Two programs (one on Friday and Dec. 1, the other on Monday and Dec. 1) showcase the influential physical comedy of the French funnyman Max Linder, while another, Transatlantic Teamwork (on Thursday and Dec. 2), looks at comic teams on both sides of the ocean, from Laurel and Hardy to the Danish comedians Pat and Patachon.
