Ntozake Shange called it a choreopoem, and it began as performance poetry. But when she brought it from San Francisco to New York, “For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide/When the Rainbow Is Enuf” became a play — first downtown, where the producer Woodie King Jr. gave it a stage, before Joseph Papp brought it to the Public Theater in the summer of 1976.
From there it went to Broadway and became a long-running hit, starring seven black women — including Ms. Shange — whose characters were named for the colors of the rainbow. Bolstered by an Obie Award and a Tony nomination for best play, it entered the canon.
“For Colored Girls” remains the best known work by Ms. Shange (her full name is pronounced en-toh-ZAH-kee SHAHN-gay), who was 70 when she died on Saturday.
This week seven playwrights who came powerfully onto the scene in the decades after Ms. Shange’s debut spoke about her impact and legacy. These are edited excerpts from those interviews.
Dominique Morisseau, a 2018 MacArthur Fellow, has had what she said is “an ongoing relationship” with Ms. Shange’s plays since high school.
There have been so many of us who have found our entry point into playwriting through her work. For me that’s very particularly true because I was a spoken-word artist who had never written a play.
“For Colored Girls” is written with no punctuation and no capitalization and with all these slash marks, and that really inspired a different kind of pentameter than Shakespeare, a different kind of rhythm and heartbeat to the work. And that revolutionized the way I saw myself as a participant in theater in general, as an actor and a writer. So when I wrote my first play in college, it was a choreopoem.
Ms. Nottage, a two-time Pulitzer Prize winner, watched the success of Ms. Shange — who was just 27 when “For Colored Girls” opened on Broadway — but also her struggles later on.
I think it’s really hard on an artist when you’re in your 20s and suddenly the world’s spotlight goes on you and you’re being asked to be the voice representing a generation. That was an incredible gift and burden that was placed on her shoulders.
She certainly was writing at a time when the resistance was not only the white establishment but also black theaters that really defined theater as that which was written by men. And she was putting things onstage that for a long time no one dared to speak of in mixed company. Abuse within the black community. There were people who felt that she was airing dirty laundry — black men who as a result resented not only her writing but her success.
The playwright and actress Anna Deavere Smith still detects Ms. Shange’s rhythmic influence in her students at New York University. Ms. Smith, who depicted Ms. Shange in her documentary play “Fires in the Mirror,” first saw “For Colored Girls” at the Public in 1976.
It was a phenomenon at the time, and I frankly don’t believe that any of us would be here without Zake — not just black artists and not just women.
African-American women, we get punished for running our mouth. If I run my mouth too much, I’m going to pay for it. And what I loved about Zake was, she didn’t care. She ran her mouth.
She gave us such a great gift. And even if people thought it was an indictment of men or an indictment of white people, what she brought with her was an incredible love of human beings.
Aleshea Harris, the Obie Award-winning author of “Is God Is,” was, like Ms. Shange, a performance poet before she became a playwright.
Jackie Sibblies Drury, whose plays include “Fairview,” credited Ms. Shange with making experimentation “part of the lifeblood” of black female playwrights.
I’m pretty sure that I purchased my first copy of “For Colored Girls” when I was 14 or 15 years old. It was one of the first plays I bought that had a black woman on the cover. I thought that it wasn’t really a play, that it was a series of poems, because I was really tied to those kinds of formal designations.
It still is completely insane to me that that show was on Broadway at all, just because it’s miles ahead of anything that anyone is doing right now in terms of form, and in terms of speaking directly to a group of people who are often not represented on theater stages. It’s so essential.
Ngozi Anyanwu, currently starring Off Broadway in her own play “Good Grief,” grew up going to predominantly white schools and didn’t encounter Ms. Shange’s work until college.
She very much encouraged black women to appreciate the fullness of themselves and to speak from their perspectives, not trying to fit into anyone else’s structure. What now you’re seeing is a flourishment of black women and women of color just writing how they really want to write. Because I think we’re very much children of her.
The Pulitzer Prize winner Suzan-Lori Parks credited Ms. Shange as one of the people who paved the way for her own career — and also as a fiery inspiration.
Poetry onstage was an old thing, but she was one of the people who brought it into the now. It sounded like people you knew, which is beautiful, but like Shakespeare, too. “Bein’ alive and bein’ a woman and bein’ colored is a metaphysical dilemma I haven’t conquered yet”: Hello. That’s very alive, bristling with intellect and passion. And beautiful architecture.