Credit...From left; Lucas Jackson/Reuters, Jared Soares for The New York Times, Joshua Bright for The New York Times, Kevin Lamarque, via Reuters, Joshua Bright for The New York Times, Jared Soares for The New York Times.
SAN FRANCISCO — What a farce.
That was one of the immediate reactions when word leaked out on Monday that Amazon’s much-ballyhooed search for a second headquarters outside of Seattle would result in not one, but two new locations. On Twitter, people used farce, sham or stunt to describe what had happened.
Amazon’s critics were apoplectic at what they called a bait-and-switch.
From the company’s point of view, however, things seem to be working out rather nicely.
Amid the guessing game, the company got information from dozens of cities about how much they would pay for a strong Amazon presence, valuable data that it will no doubt use to expand.
This, after all, is how Amazon sees its destiny: to become not just the everything store, as it was branded a mere five years ago, but the everything company. People will buy groceries from Amazon, be entertained by Amazon shows, pick up snacks at Amazon Go stores, see all the ads they need on Amazon, find a plumber through Amazon, communicate through Amazon’s Alexa virtual assistant — and that is just the beginning.
Set against such ambition, the words “second headquarters” or, in Amazon parlance, “HQ2,” which proved so beguiling to the media, politicians and local governments ultimately mean little.
Qinghai Wang, a finance professor at the University of Central Florida who has studied corporate headquarters, agreed.
At least one expert realized some time ago how the game would end.
“Don’t be surprised if later this year, Amazon announces that it’s going to have more than one HQ2,” the City Observatory, a think tank in Portland, Ore., said in an essay posted in January. One reason: “If a single winner is announced, and its competitors are dismissed, then Amazon’s negotiating position becomes much weaker,” the essay said. Having multiple winners, on the other hand, would allow the company to play one off the other.
Even as the news sank in on Monday, some people rued the lost chance that Amazon would do something truly transformative — not just for the company, but for its new home.
Washington and New York already have lots of tech talent, which of course explains why Amazon would move to those places. “Amazon could have pulled a new region of the country onto the ‘haves’ list and pioneered much of the world’s future in the process,” Mr. Phillips lamented.
Instead, while nothing official has been announced and things could shift at the last minute, it appears HQ2 will rank with the company’s proclamation that drones would deliver packages. When the chief executive, Jeff Bezos, unveiled that initiative on “60 Minutes,” he said the drones would come in “four, five years.” That was almost exactly five years ago.
The drones have not taken flight, but many articles about them did. Amazon likewise gained enormous amounts of raw publicity from its search for a second headquarters.
It gained something else as well.
Amazon is always expanding its market power. Consider a recent routine news release: “Amazon Announces 14th Inland Empire Fulfillment Center in Beaumont,” it said. Fulfillment center is a fancy term for warehouse. The Inland Empire is a vast area east of Los Angeles. To build 14 warehouses there in six years is a feat. Amazon said it was now the largest employer in the region.
Amazon likes to release news on its own schedule. But the headquarters story leaked to outlets including The Washington Post — owned by Mr. Bezos — and The Wall Street Journal. It was a rare stumble for a company that excels at controlling the narrative.
