Jennifer and David Buckwald, who live in Colts Neck, N.J., struggled with how to impart their financial values to their two children.
Both wanted to ensure that their children, ages 14 and 12, were motivated to succeed in their own right. Mr. Buckwald, in particular, was concerned that their children would think that the affluent town where they live, an area of horses and golf clubs, was reflective of the wider world.
These stories work better, though, when they’re not just focused on joy or success. Mr. Buckwald said he told stories about his financially challenging childhood. But as part of an exercise with Mr. Savlov, Mr. Buckwald also told his children about a relative who ran a speakeasy during Prohibition.
Being explicit with the lessons works well. Stephanie Eras, an engineer in New Mexico, said she used the benefits package offered by her daughter’s part-time job at Panera Bread as an opportunity to discuss savings.
As an inducement for her daughter to save the maximum amount allowed in the company’s 401(k) plan, Ms. Eras matched her daughter’s contribution. She also shared stories about her father and mother, who lived frugally.
When her daughter announced that money wouldn’t buy them happiness, Ms. Eras pointed out that although that was true, money bought the things that they needed and wanted. “I listed them,” she said.
Lisa Bealhen, who lives in Albuquerque, said she was always ready and willing to talk to her three stepdaughters about financial decisions. But she would wait for the right moment.
Yet she and her husband, Scott, who died this year, led by example. They had owned a booming custom home business in the Southwest, developing entire subdivisions. He had been the president of the homebuilders association.
Your children will almost invariably figure out how much your home and cars cost — thank the internet for that — and they may also view those assets in comparison with what their friends have. But deciding when to tell them how much you make is up to you, and it may be years before they have the maturity to understand what that number means.
Mr. Buckwald said his teenage son often asked him how much he earned, but he is not ready to tell him. Yet as a family, they have started to talk about expenses, including their grocery bill.
Any of these talks will require intentionality. Mr. Savlov plays a game with families where he lines up 100 pieces of licorice on a table. He then leads a discussion about all the people in the world who have less and more than they do. At the end, he asks them to remove licorice sticks to show where their family stands financially in the world.
Janet and Bob Serier, a New Mexico couple both married for the second time, said they fell into that category with their three sons from their first marriages. The couple were able to stop working in their 50s, and they are living comfortably in their early 70s.
Mrs. Serier said that when her children were young, she was divorced and focused on her career to provide for them. “I’m not sure I ever said anything to them directly,” she said.
It might be best to focus on a series of planning behaviors, like making sure financial and health care documents and passwords are organized, and having discussions about who will manage their affairs, said Ronald Long, head of regulatory affairs and elder client initiatives at Wells Fargo Advisors.
“Skip the Black Friday shopping and spend a half an hour talking to each other,” Mr. Long said.
That’s good advice at any age.