LONDON — In June 2001, as the great and the good of the international art world convened at the Venice Biennale, Maurizio Cattelan, the Italian contemporary artist (and prankster), persuaded a group of about 150 of them to fly to a decidedly less glamorous destination: a garbage dump outside Palermo, Sicily, where he had installed a life-size replica of the giant Hollywood sign parked in the Californian hills.
The plane was chartered by another Italian: Patrizia Sandretto Re Rebaudengo, an art collector and patron who hosted a lunch on the Palermo landfill (which was managed by one of her husband’s companies) and then flew everyone back to Venice.
Today, Ms. Sandretto Re Rebaudengo, 59, counts among Europe’s best-known collectors and owns works made in the last two or three decades by artists like Mr. Cattelan, Damien Hirst, Doug Aitken, Jake and Dinos Chapman, Sarah Lucas, Alicja Kwade and Matthew Barney.
She also runs a foundation in a converted tire factory in her birthplace — Turin, Italy — that stages exhibitions and funds artists’ residencies and educational programs.
Next year, the foundation is opening a satellite outpost (designed by the architect David Adjaye) in the Matadero Madrid arts complex, a sprawling former slaughterhouse in the Spanish capital.
Ms. Sandretto Re Rebaudengo got an enviable head start in life: Her father was an industrialist whose company she worked for as a graduate in economics from Turin University.
In the early 1990s, after marrying a Turinese aristocrat with whom she now has two sons, Ms. Sandretto Re Rebaudengo started collecting contemporary art. Her father, initially puzzled by her decision, gave her the cash to do it: “He said, ‘If you do it, do it well,’” she recalled in a recent interview.
After a trip to London in the early 1990s — and a memorable visit to the studio of the sculptor Anish Kapoor, where she was dazzled by his powder-pigment sculptures — she said she started buying works by young British artists, which she then showed in an abandoned loft at her father’s plant.
The exhibition traveled to a museum in Modena, where Ms. Sandretto Re Rebaudengo met the curator Francesco Bonami, who was until 2014 the artistic director of the foundation she set up in her name in 1995; it was based originally outside Turin, then expanded into its current premises.
During a recent visit to London, Ms. Sandretto Re Rebaudengo spoke about the opening of the Madrid space — an ambitious next step and the first time that her foundation will take its mission outside Italy.
The following conversation has been translated from the Italian and has been edited and condensed.
What was it like when you first started collecting contemporary art and displaying it in your house in Turin?
Today, everybody is busy buying contemporary art and filling their homes with it. Was it difficult for you as a woman to set up a collection and an art foundation?
I was always lucky enough to be involved in activities where I didn’t have to ask anyone for anything. I never had to go look for work; I worked for my father, even if he never treated me like the owner’s daughter. When I got into the art world, I can’t say that life was very complicated. I started collecting, I was able to set up a foundation, and was lucky enough not to have to find a job. That made a big difference. So my personal trajectory as a woman was not difficult.
What I did realize right from the start was how difficult life was for women artists.
Women artists weren’t taken seriously. The other day, a friend of mine told me the story of an artist in her 80s who was in a gallery in Rome that was hosting an exhibition of her work back in the 1980s.
A male collector walked in, said he liked the works and asked the gallerist who the artist was. As soon as he found out, he said, “Oh, but she’s a woman — I’m not buying.” And he didn’t.
We once put on a show focusing on the presence of female artists in Italian collections. And we realized that male collectors in Italy almost never bought work by female artists, whereas female collectors did.
The difference in price between a female artist and a male artist is staggering, even today. If you look at the auctions, the situation may have improved, but it’s still very very tough.
Do you think the #MeToo movement is helping change things?
The #MeToo movement is absolutely essential. It has raised a great deal of awareness. But a lot remains to be done for ordinary women, because for them, things aren’t yet changing, and there’s a lot of catching up to do.
I live in a country where feminicide is a common occurrence.
Women endure physical and psychological violence inside the walls of their own home.  We women have to solve this problem on a political and social level, but I also believe that culture has a role to play.
In our foundation, we show lots of works by women on issues to do with violence, which schoolchildren come and see. It’s also important for us mothers to educate our sons.
Why have you decided to open a foundation in Madrid?
I felt the need to get out of my city. I believe we have experiences to share in other places. I looked around, at some of the big cities in Europe. In London, there’s too much already. I looked at Lisbon, but it’s a little geographically off-center. I looked at Berlin, but the sky wasn’t the color I wanted. So I went to Madrid, because I spent time in Spain as a child and speak Spanish.
You’re not a museum: you’re a private collector with a finite number of works. A lot of private museums have opened and then closed because they weren’t sustainable. How will you keep yours going?
I think you find a balance if you don’t just create a home for your collection, or open an exhibition venue, or focus on education, but combine all three elements. Then, in my view, it works.
What happens decades from now when you’re no longer able to run your foundation?
Thankfully, I have two sons who are strong believers in this project. My eldest son, Eugenio, is already active in the art world. My other son, Emilio, is involved in events management and in food. They’re both interested.