Sometimes it seems as if we’re living under a constant barrage of heavy news. But it isn’t all bad out there. This feature is meant to send you into the weekend with a smile, or at least a lighter heart. Want to get The Week in Good News by email? Sign up here.
NASA’s InSight lander touched down on Mars.
The spacecraft’s safe landing ended a journey of more than six months and 300 million miles.
More airports are becoming bike-friendly.
Getting to the airport can often be a hassle. For some commuters and airport employees, cycling saves time and money.
The Harvard Crimson will be led by a black woman for the first time.
Editors of The Harvard Crimson have gone on to big things in politics (two became United States presidents), law, business, academia and, of course, journalism — a powerful lineup that has been mostly male and overwhelmingly white.
Now, Kristine E. Guillaume will become the third black president of The Crimson, and the first black woman to lead the organization, 145 years after it was founded.
The Times spoke to Tenzin Niles and Athan Sporek, who are alternating in the coveted part of the Prince in “George Balanchine’s The Nutcracker” at the David H. Koch Theater in Manhattan. The role is a critical one, and each boy brings something special to the part.
Why did they pursue ballet?
“My grandmother used to show me videos of Baryshnikov. I was really obsessed with how high he jumped and how many turns he could do. My grandmother was like: ‘You should go and train. You could be as good as him,’ ” Athan said.
Reggae made the Unesco list of humanity’s cultural treasures.
It’s rousing, cool, collected and classic. Now, reggae will be included in Unesco’s list of the intangible cultural heritage of humanity.
These volunteers have come together for decades to make savory pastries for Hanukkah.
Many call the gatherings at an Atlanta synagogue Bureka Tuesdays, named for traditional pocket pastries stuffed with spinach and cheese. It has become a tradition for the group to meet and bake recipes passed down to them from their grandmothers and great-grandmothers.
Our readers shared photos of the pets that made their weddings complete.
You can’t help but smile at these pictures — very special days, made even more special by furry (or feathered) friends decked out in top hats, dresses, ties and ribbons.
