The comedian, writer and animal activist Elayne Boosler tries her hand at solving a Friday puzzle by Robyn Weintraub.
A note from Deb Amlen: Every once in a while, I like to change things up. It’s good for the brain to try something different, so today we are going to hear from the comedian, writer and animal activist Elayne Boosler. She is a longtime solver who has appeared on Wordplay before and has even made a celebrity crossword with Patrick Merrell.
Another thing that’s good for the brain is to be open to learning new things, which we try to do every day on Wordplay. Today, for example, I learned that I never want to be on Ms. Boosler’s bad side, because she will go nuclear on a puzzle when she’s frustrated.
I’m kidding. She’s a mensch and a sweetheart. Don’t make her angry. And she has a new DVD boxed set called “Elayne Boosler — Timeless.” For every $22 box sold (five hours of great comedy, including a new CD), Ms. Boosler’s Tails of Joy charity will donate $25 to the animal rescue of your choice. This works because, as she says, she took math in public school in Brooklyn.
And on Friday, Nov. 30, I’ll be watching Ms. Boosler guest star on “Crazy Ex-Girlfriend” (9 p.m. Eastern on the CW).
FRIDAY PUZZLE — Hello, everyone. I have a long history with the New York Times Crossword, and I’m dropping in today to show you how to struggle gracefully with a Friday puzzle.
I really enjoyed this puzzle by Robyn Weintraub. It had a sly wit, and I appreciated that even the one or two more common words used in crosswords had creative clues.
The thing is, I have dyslexia, so I see everything jumbled and upside down (Why didn’t they ask me to do the upside-down jumble?) and part of that means I tend to jump from place to place in a puzzle.
I hope we’ll still be friends after this, and if you need aspirin, it’s on me.
I didn’t turn off the online crossword timer when I took a sanity break to eat, drink a glass of wine (O.K., a bottle) (O.K., scotch), and get up to scream out the window, “You think you’re having a tough day at work?!” and “Turn off your TVs! I can’t think!” So the timer registered this puzzle at 99.59. And three days. About the same as my SATs.
Hang on tight. I got through a Friday puzzle, and so can you.
1A. CROCE. (Love him.) 6A, you got me.
10A. I knew “Hill worker” wouldn’t be SEN or REP, as they don’t work. ANT. So far, so good.
After 10A, I headed right for 1D. CHEZ works, so 19A is ZEN. It was either Ohio or Zen. I am terrible at geography. An “Eastern state” is always Ohio or Zen.
5D stopped me so it was off to 13A. What?
16D. “Possible reason to forgo mascara.” Because he didn’t call? Because he never calls? Because I’m going to stay in and eat pizza and drink a whole bottle of pinot grigio? O.K., scotch?  Right. STYE.
21A. “Kind of dog found in New York City.” Yorkie? New Yorkie? Stray? But I’ve got that NANNY STATE crossing to ruin stray. Nanny goat? It’s New York City, it’s possible. I’ll have to come back to this.
23A. “Follower,” and the Y from NANNY STATE is there, so ACOLYTE becomes easy. I just realized that the game show “Wheel of Fortune” isn’t helping in the bonus round by giving you the common letters. We need Y, Z, W or something with some pizazz. That’s what leads you to the answer. No wonder few contestants win the car.
My dyslexia leads my ACOLYTE to 24A, CHE, to 28A (I’ll come back to it) to 31D (nope, not yet) to 32D, “Cubs’ places.” POSTSEASON GAMES doesn’t fit, so I’ll go with DENS.
30D. “‘Something’ can be heard on it.” Grapevine? Cellphone in a tunnel? Oy. Moving along.
I’m tired of 22A already. Is it SNUG? Is it? Well, 6D is “Acts as a decoy for, possibly,” so it could end in S, which kills SNUG. How about ARRGGHH? I’m going to hold off on this one and look for some short words to help.
34A. “___ anniversaire.” BON! This is the only time in 50 years it was worth choosing French over Spanish at Sheepshead Bay High School.
30D. “Bon” didn’t give me much. 30 Down still isn’t coming to me.
Hey! Something shiny! 38A’s “Mountaineer’s tool” is PITON. Yes!
31D. “Bigwigs may have big ones.” Hey, get your mind out of the gutter. This isn’t The New York Post.
35A. “County in a Pulitzer-winning play title.” Oh dang, where the heck was that jumping frog from? Calaveras? Doesn’t fit.
21D. “Like many laundromat appliances.” Living in New York, I’ll say “broken.” Ahh, “COIN OPERATED. Only because they don’t take twenties.
So now we’re in the bottom-right quadrant. I should start watching “Dora the Explorer”; she sure comes up a lot. No idea. 52D, DUI might work. Not yet, though, since I’m doing the puzzle in website pen. Ooh! 47A is short. “Plastered.” Hmm, drunk? Three letters. Wait, it’s 47D. Four letters. Drunk still doesn’t work. 48 Down: “Bit of kindling.” TWIG? I’ll go for it.
49D. Should be ONTO. Which brings us to the actual 47A, “‘Vette alternative.” I’m old enough to know that one: “GTO.” Did I ever tell you about Billy Lucchese from Gerritsen Beach, with the powder blue 1968 GTO? Remind me later.
So, with the G in place, 47D’s “Plastered” could now be GONE. Which means 52D, Dora’s spinoff friend, could be DIEGO.
O.K., 52 Down is definitely “DUI.” Which makes 51- and 54A I STILL HAVE NO IDEA.
35A. Ahh, Twain’s frog made it all the way to OSAGE County. Which makes 31D’s bigwig “big ones,” EGOS. I told you The Times runs a clean ship.
21A is C _ N _ Y. The dog found in New York City? CONEY (Island hot dog?) No, I don’t think they’re allowed to do that to us. Where is the complaint department? Does Will know about this? Does he?
9D could be -IVE, as in “secretIVE.” That sure makes everything that crosses it a challenge.
45A. At least a Russian woman’s name might end in an A. So 46D gives us ANNO, and yes, a Russian woman’s name should definitely contain two As.
54A. “Employer of some shepherds” so far ends in UNIT. All I keep coming back to is Moon Unit Zappa, because taking lots of acid in the ’70s had no ill effects on me whatsoever.
56 Across should be UDON, but hey, there’s a black square at the end of that word and before the next one. What? Why does it look weird to me? Is it me, or is it hot in here?
Trust me, you don’t want to know all the clues I just looked at and abandoned for the last five minutes. O.K., 42D is REYES, thank goodness for the car trips we take when I’m home in California.
Checking, checking, checking all the clues … and … zippo. Need to eat. Taking a break at 53 minutes and eleven seconds, which is probably a future longitude clue I won’t get either. Back soon.
So 26D could be ELIE, but then nothing near it is coming easily. 40D is “Fiddler’s aid.” ROOF? Probably not. ROSIN? Why not, nothing else is working for me. I need some crossword rosin. Hey, the crossword rosin works! The “Employer of some shepherds” is CANINE UNIT, no Zappa involved. 51 Across is “Tone it down” (you’d think I’d know that one, heard it enough). 30 Down is “Abbey Road.” Well, that is “Something” ...
10D is AS COLD AS ICE, making 18A CNET. Ha! I’m still on AOL.
I knew 15A was about construction. (We just got a new roof. The money! Don’t ask.) So, the answer is SAWS, making 12D TWEET. Then 24D should be RETWEET. No. Curse my jumbled thinking.
36A should be TEST TUBES, making my 25D, NUTS, wrong. O.K., so 27D should be FIRST DANCE, knocking out NEUTER. But neutering is never wrong! So spay and neuter your pets. Deb! Back off!
I’m changing 4D from CIA to CDC. So 17A is EPIC POETRY, making -IVE for 9D wrong. But the longer clue for 13A is not finished in the Across Lite clues, so I’ll have to come at it another way. Perhaps from the Poconos. Ahh, 9D is -ARY, so without knowing the whole clue, I’ll say 13A is HOLD MY BEER because I need a drink.
7D. “Mother of Artemis.” Were any of the Greek gods named BETH? No? 20A could be TUTOR, which would make 14D YOUNG for “Fawns, e.g.”, and again, I need to talk to Ms. Weintraub about her odd use of animals in puzzles.
22A. Ahh, SYNS, which is short for “synonyms.” Well played, ma’am, well played.
All I have left open is 6A. I doubt 7D is VETO, as the gods were Greek, not Italian. I guess 8D could be TERRAPINS, but I hate colleges and college teams and I don’t care! Ahem, pardon me. So, at 7D we have _ ETO. I will put in an “L” since the only true Greek god I know is Jared Leto, and that’s good enough for me.
Deb here again. Thank you, Ms. Boosler, for your alarmingly passionate dissection of Ms. Weintraub’s puzzle, and thanks for being brave enough to try a Friday crossword. Your persistence — and a certain amount of adult beverages — made all the difference.
As a mom, I know I’m not supposed to have a favorite child, but I’m really quite fond of this puzzle. I think all ten 10-, 11- and 12-letter entries are solid, and nine of them make their New York Times Crossword debut today. I especially like HOLD MY BEER and SAVE THE DATE.
Admittedly, SYNS and ARY are terrible, but even the happiest of families have a few black sheep, right?
Deb Amlen will be on vacation the week of Dec. 3. Caitlin Lovinger will be sitting in for her, poor thing.