The self-ruled island’s political landscape was shaken up by voters who delivered a sharp rebuke to President Tsai Ing-wen’s governing Democratic Progressive Party, or D.P.P., in elections contesting more than 11,000 seats from city mayors to neighborhood wardens. The results of the election, which was seen as a referendum on Ms. Tsai’s first two years in office, have given the Kuomintang a new lease on life and complicated Ms. Tsai’s bid for re-election 14 months from now.
Shortly after it became apparent that the D.P.P. would lose crucial mayoral races, Ms. Tsai resigned her position as party leader, raising the possibility that she would be challenged for her party’s nomination for the presidential election in January 2020.
Han Kuo-yu, the Kuomintang’s candidate for mayor in Kaohsiung, emerged as the story of the election, defeating his D.P.P. opponent, Chen Chi-mai, who at the outset of the election campaign had been expected to win easily.
“All of Taiwan, all of the ethnic Chinese worldwide, can see the change in Kaohsiung,” Mr. Han said in his victory speech at a large rally. Before the election, he attained celebrity status for his populist and occasionally politically incorrect style. In the final weeks of campaigning, he took that popularity on the road, stumping for Kuomintang candidates around Taiwan, which may have helped decide several close races.
Ko Wen-je, the independent mayor of Taipei and one of the most popular politicians in Taiwan, appears to have barely defeated his Kuomintang opponent, Ting Shou-chung. The close outcome may make Mr. Ko less likely to throw his hat into the ring in the presidential campaign. Mr. Ting has contested the result.
Mayors in Taiwan are similar in stature to governors in the United States, and the Kuomintang mayors offer potential new dialogue partners for Beijing, which refuses to engage with Ms. Tsai and could use them to further isolate her and increase China’s involvement in Taiwan politics.
While China is always a factor, Taiwanese voters also had plenty of local concerns in this election, including stagnant wage growth and severe air pollution in the island’s south.
Several referendum questions concerned same-sex marriage, with voters expressing overwhelming opposition to it. They also supported the removal of gender equity content from school textbooks, which is seen as a major factor behind the strong support for gay rights among Taiwanese youth.
A ruling last year by Taiwan’s constitutional court gave the government until May 2019 to legalize same-sex marriage. The referendum results increased the likelihood that Taiwan will adopt separate civil union status for same-sex couples rather than offering them the same legal status as heterosexual married couples.
A referendum question asking whether the island should be referred to as “Taiwan” rather than “Chinese Taipei” at the Olympic Games and other international sporting events failed to pass after a last-minute push by opponents, including some Taiwanese athletes, who warned that the name change could lead to Taiwan being banned from the Olympics.
Speaking at an election result viewing party in the Wenshan district of Taipei, a Kuomintang volunteer, Lin Mei-chuan, said she disapproved of the Tsai administration’s handling of the economy as well as relations with China.
