Opinion|Will Amazon Ruin or Revitalize New York City?
Will Amazon Ruin or Revitalize New York City?
New York’s not ready for Amazon’s HQ2, but here’s how the city can get there.
After a nationwide campaign, Amazon selected Long Island City in New York as one of two locations for expanding its headquarters. The company’s decisions about whom it hires and how quickly, and where those workers choose to live, will affect how much the expansion changes the city. Jenny Schuetz from the Brookings Institution and Elizabeth Goldstein from the Municipal Art Society offer two views on how to prepare.
Ms. Schuetz is a fellow at the Brookings Institution’s Metropolitan Policy Program.
With Amazon’s HQ2 announcement, residents of Long Island City, Queens, are worried that the rapid growth in housing prices that has plagued the South Lake Union area of Seattle, where Amazon has its headquarters, will soon come to their neighborhood.
They certainly have cause for worry: The steepest increases in housing prices in Seattle have occurred in the past five years as Amazon has rapidly expanded. The expected buildup for Amazon’s HQ2 outpost in New York, 25,000 employees over 10 years starting next year, mirrors the company’s recent growth in Seattle.
But there are no indications that the impact on New York will be apocalyptic. First, the number of jobs is small relative to the city’s labor market and population. Second, Long Island City is better equipped than many parts of the city to accommodate a corporate campus and the additional office space, housing and services it would require. The neighborhood’s zoning rules allow for taller buildings than in areas like, say, brownstone Brooklyn.
Still, there are many unknowns.
How many of Amazon’s highly paid employees will want to live close to the campus? Young workers without children are likely to prefer living within one or two miles of the office, driving demand for studio and one-bedroom rental apartments, and amenities such as coffee shops, restaurants and bike paths.
By contrast, highly paid employees with school-aged children are more willing to tolerate longer commutes to live in neighborhoods with larger apartments, high-performing public schools and family-friendly parks, such as TriBeCa, Carroll Gardens and Jackson Heights.
Another question is how many lower-paid employees Amazon plans to hire. Administrative assistants and maintenance staff workers will earn much less than the $150,000 average salary Amazon promises for HQ2. The proposed campus is near the nation’s largest public housing development, Queensbridge Houses, and the community district that includes Long Island City has nearly 19,000 subsidized housing units. But low- and moderate-income workers who don’t already live in subsidized or rent-stabilized apartments may get priced out of the area.
The city needs to build more housing, more cheaply, especially in affluent neighborhoods closer to business districts. The aging and dwindling supply of subsidized and rent-stabilized units will require infusions of public resources to remain habitable and affordable.
Finally, it’s not yet known how many current city residents Amazon will hire. If it recruits engineers from Google or Twitter in Chelsea, or from Facebook near Union Square, that won’t create demand for new apartments, although those engineers might move to shorten their commutes.
With so much unknown, the city and the state can make smart choices now by investing in more housing, school capacity and upgraded transit citywide.
Ms. Goldstein is the president of the Municipal Art Society.
To Jeff Bezos, I want to say, “Welcome to Queens!” I want to tell you more about the neighborhood you and Amazon are moving into.
Long Island City is an exhilarating, diverse and rapidly growing community. Much of this growth was the result of a 2001 rezoning in which the city sought to spur commercial development in what had been a manufacturing area. But a boom in commercial development is not what we got.
Instead, the zoning changes led to the construction of 10,000 new residential units, vastly more than the 300 projected, according to the Municipal Art Society’s latest report. Residential neighborhoods need things that commercial districts do not, and it turns out that if you underestimate the number of new residences by more than 3,200 percent, something has to give.
Your arrival may indeed catalyze the central business district envisioned in 2001. But Long Island City is now a primarily residential neighborhood with critical needs that must be addressed.
Today, seven out of nine elementary schools in Long Island City are overcrowded; one of them operates at 212 percent of capacity. Ridership at the neighborhood’s two subway stations, Court Square and Queensboro Plaza, has increased at seven times the citywide rate.
With one-third of an acre of open space for every 1,000 people, Long Island City residents enjoy only one-fifth of the median open space available to New Yorkers. And the Anable Basin, on which Amazon’s proposed campus sits, is within a federally designated high-risk flood zone.
Meanwhile, median household income in Long Island City jumped to $123,000 from $53,000 from 2000 to 2016. The housing that has been built is largely high-end luxury, out of range for the average New Yorker.
Even the affordable units planned as part of a recent rezoning of Anable Basin now appear to be in jeopardy, as the site will instead be used to create office space for as many as 25,000 Amazon workers.
The company cannot insulate itself from the difficulties facing this neighborhood by relying on the same campus model used in Seattle and Silicon Valley. A self-contained office park is a distinctly un-New York concept. Amazon employees may want to live in Long Island City to be close to work, and the fragile state of mass transit and overburdened schools will be an everyday issue. Amazon won’t be able to ignore the subway crisis with corporate shuttle buses.
Mr. Bezos, your influence over the politics of New York is enormous right now. Our governor and mayor spent months to win you over, and your satisfaction is important to them.
But you will also have to contend with a large and diverse City Council that has so far been cut out of the process that brought you here. Will you choose to leverage that attention to demand long overdue relief for the residents of this neighborhood, and work with our local leaders to build a vision for a strong city of the future?
Elizabeth Goldstein is the president of the Municipal Art Society. Jenny Schuetz, a fellow at the Brookings Institution’s Metropolitan Policy Program, is an urban economist who studies housing markets.