Family|Hard Knock Life: What Are the Turtles Telling Me?
Hard Knock Life: What Are the Turtles Telling Me?
Nothing much makes sense these days, including the visits from my reptilian friends.
Twice, I heard a rapping at our front door, and twice I looked out the window to see no one. Either I was losing my mind, or someone was playing a practical joke.
The third time, I yanked the door open. Ah ha!  Frank the turtle, to be exact.
Later that morning I heard a scuffle at the door. “Well, well, well … Look who it is.” This time Frank took a few steps into the house, looking around. I picked him up and relocated him to the yard.
Like all humans, my mind is wired to look for the story in any situation. (Admittedly, as a writer who spends a lot of time around books, I may lean that way more than some.) Where’s the beginning, the middle, the twist, the end? And what’s the moral?
The bottom of our door has a shiny brass kickplate affixed to it, and because Frank is only about four inches tall, it probably functions as a big looking glass to him. We guessed he was picking a fight with his own reflection. If I wanted to explain his behavior with a story, I could weave a parable about how everyone’s fighting an inner demon. Like Frank, we all have an enemy in the mirror, and our greatest danger is that we could destroy ourselves while battling it.
Several weeks into Frank’s pranks, my husband shook my shoulder at 6 a.m. “Come see.” This time when we opened the door, we saw someone new.
This turtle was a bit smaller, slightly more vividly colored. “That’s a different turtle, right?” he said. We couldn’t figure out whether it was male or female, so I Googled “how to sex turtles” (a search phrase which, in retrospect, could have gone terribly wrong). Turns out, there are signs — subtle differences in shell shape and eye color — but most people can’t tell for sure without the help of a vet. I wasn’t going to subject this turtle to a veterinary examination, and I certainly wasn’t going to pressure my new friend on gender identity. We named this one Fancy and decided to use they/them pronouns.
Fancy showed up several days in a row, but never knocked, only stood quietly before the door’s shiny surface. When we opened it, Fancy froze, then slowly turned and walked back into the bushes, as if we’d both agreed to look away and pretend the encounter hadn’t happened.
I imagined that Fancy just wanted to gaze at their reflection to better know themself. Who among us hasn’t wondered, “Who am I?” We feel you, Fancy.
One day, as I watched Fancy nibble grass, I began to doubt our theory that Frank and Fancy were two different turtles. I pulled up pictures I’d taken of each.
“I think Frank and Fancy might be one and the same,” I told my husband. “We never see them together, and they both have this handprint marking on their backs.” Perhaps Frank was a much more complex individual than we first suspected. Who isn’t?
“Nope,” he disagreed. “Different turtles.” In that case, we hadn’t seen Frank for days. Where was he? And what did Fancy know?
You could spin all sorts of theories — from the tragic (in which they’re the abandoned pets of our home’s former owners) to the “Poltergeist” (in which the house was built on a turtle burying ground) to the practical (in which they’re begging for food). I put out some cherry tomatoes, spinach and a dish of water, just in case. The cherry tomatoes disappeared fast. No one ate the spinach.
This wasn’t the first time turtles had played a part in our family’s story.
When my son was in preschool, he learned the “I Have a Little Dreidel” song, but either misheard or mispronounced “dreidel” as “turtle.” He mangled the lyrics until it became a whole different song, a rhyme he asked us to sing each night: “Turtles, turtles, turtles / How I love you so / Turtles, turtles, turtles / Never let you go.” It was our bedtime routine for a decade.
If I really wanted to, I could read my turtle visits as a sign from the universe that my role as a parent is changing. My son is in high school now; college is on the horizon. Turtles, turtles, turtles / time to let him go?
Or I could look at myself in the mirror and sternly say, no, the universe doesn’t know about that song and is definitely not sending me a sign.
It’s just that assigning meaning to events is so satisfying. I want themes, threads, a plot that proceeds toward resolution. I want people to learn their lessons and change their ways and for the moral of every story to make us better as a species. But look at the news — full of arbitrary injustices and disasters, human beings treating each other with cruelty. The part of my brain that wants the world to conform to a story that makes sense crashes against the rock of reality again and again. My soul sometimes feels as battered as Frank’s head must after banging on my door.
Several friends suggested I identify the turtles by marking their shells with nail polish, but I couldn’t bring myself to do it. The fun is in guessing, not knowing. I haven’t heard them rattling their breakfast dish to demand tomatoes for a few weeks now, anyway.
This is the story of turtles who came and left for reasons of their own. They’re turtles. It’s not their job to teach me anything.
Mary Laura Philpott is the author of the memoir-in-essays “I Miss You When I Blink,” coming in April.