Illustrated. 374 pp. Thames & Hudson. $70.
Newcomers to Beijing are often startled by the scale and modernity of the city, with its population — of over 20 million — that seems to stretch forever. Mercedes-Benzes and Porsches in every size and color, yellow Lamborghinis and men and women decked out in high-end European fashion labels (not necessarily fakes) are only the most flagrant signs of a heady consumerism. Not so obvious are the boom in plastic surgery salons and fitness spaces, and the growing obsession with healthier food.
The huge spending spree looks dazzling enough on its own, but it is even more impressive measured against China’s recent past. “Magnum China,” edited by the English writer and photographer Colin Pantall and the Chinese photo editor and curator Zheng Ziyu, presents the back story that led us to the country we know today. The images, ranging from World War II to the present, are by some of the world’s pre-eminent photographers who witnessed conflicts like the Communist victory, the squashing of the student uprising in Tiananmen Square, and the high-speed economic transformation.
The photos are spread over more than 300 pages in a hefty, glossy coffee-table production. “Magnum” refers, of course, to the photographic cooperative founded in Paris and New York in 1947 by Robert Capa and Henri Cartier-Bresson (with George Rodger and David “Chim” Seymour), and gradually expanded to embrace select artists around the world.
The black-and-white images — Capa’s of the Sino-Japanese War, and the post-1945 work of Cartier-Bresson — remain the most startling in the collection, reminders of the pre-Communist era. Capa traveled to China in 1938 on the heels of his brilliant work during the Spanish Civil War. He captured the Japanese occupation, the haughty Madame Chiang Kai-shek and a Chinese boy soldier, in uniform, whose stern face appeared on the cover of Life magazine with the title: “A Defender of China.” He spent less than a year in China, a short stint for a photographer who liked to dig in. Capa wrote of the experience to a friend: “Everybody suspects that you are a spy or that you want to make money at the expense of other people’s skins.” These are sentiments sometimes felt by foreign correspondents today as they travel the country under intense surveillance.
 A 1957 image of a Chinese woman wearing a long black cape trimmed with white fur captures the remnants of the late-1950s bourgeoisie (Riboud himself describes the figure as “one of the last aristocrats”). Behind her, pedicabs and workers in drab proletarian gear make their way along Wang Fujing Street, now the center of a bustling business district.
By 1979, Eve Arnold was shooting color, her subjects women on communes and assembly lines and handling heavy factory machines. With more social freedoms after the death of Mao Zedong, the proliferation of gambling, prostitution and private dance parties offered racier subjects. And, by the early ’90s, some young Chinese could afford jaunty versions of the American look. Riboud caught a couple strolling hand-in-hand outside the Forbidden City: She is wearing a miniskirt, fashionable white trainers and a large-brimmed hat, and both are sporting outsize black-framed sunglasses, as if ready for Hollywood.
The collection is organized into four historical phases; however, its emphasis is on the portfolios of the artists over an easy-to-follow narrative of the nation’s dramatic upheavals. There is not much context on the decade-long Cultural Revolution that unfolded in 1966, probably because of these photographers’ lack of access, as foreigners, to the mainland during that period.
If I had to choose just one image to sum up contemporary China, I might choose Martin Parr’s 2010 shot of a wedding couple posing on a beach in Qingdao. They look happy, well coifed and prosperous. Her strapless gown and his white tuxedo reveal a new glamour.
Unspoken in the photo is one of the premier questions facing China today: How much liberty will the pair get to enjoy as the current Communist Party tightens its grip on power? The answer will require a new megavolume, and perhaps some talented Chinese photographers as well as visiting ones.