Fernando Alonso has slowly fallen out of love with Formula One. After 17 seasons, the last few with the uncompetitive McLaren team, he will finally have the opportunity to devote his attention to the important things in life.
On Sunday in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, Alonso, 37, widely regarded as one of the sport’s best drivers, will start a grand prix for the 312th and final time as he leaves a sport he entered in 2001. His career has yielded two world titles, 97 podium finishes, which include 32 wins, the last of which came in 2013 in his home country, Spain.
“To be honest, what I have achieved was unexpected because if I look back to when I was a kid in go-karts, I never thought I’d become a Formula One driver,” he said in an interview. “Formula One was just a wild dream for a Spanish kid like me.
But now is the time to say goodbye to Formula One, which he describes as “a bubble, something that is not real,” and in which he has often had to put on a performance.
“You need to be a character, someone that you build over the years,” Alonso said. “Sometimes you can be a little more humble, sometimes a little more rude, sometimes a little more arrogant.
Next year, Alonso will still be racing, competing in three rounds of the World Endurance Championship, and he will make a second attempt to win the Indianapolis 500 and complete a version of motorsport’s triple crown — the 24 Hours of Le Mans and the Monaco Grand Prix are the other events — previously achieved only Graham Hill.
So Alonso still has a need for speed, but not the effort required to remain in Formula One.
Alonso knows it was luck that enabled him to climb the motorsport ladder, from his early karting days, into single-seaters and eventually Formula One. “Right time, right opportunities, and then delivering on those,” he said.
His two world titles with Renault in 2005 and 2006 are the obvious highs. Trying to put them into context, he said: “They are moments that are difficult to explain with words. What comes to your mind are all the sacrifices, the traveling, the study, the difficulties.
“In go-karts or single-seaters, you need to give up a lot of school time. You find yourself studying in the back of the car, coming up with a different way of living because when you are at home you don’t go out to play football with your friends or to a bar on a Friday night.
In his attempts to add a third championship, there were painful near misses: by a point in 2007, four points in 2010 and three in 2012.
After racing for Ferrari from 2010 to 2014, he rejoined McLaren for 2015 in a bid to revive the team’s fortunes, but the last four years have been frustrating because he had to retire from about 30 percent of his races over mechanical problems, draining his enthusiasm.
Lewis Hamilton of Mercedes, the five-time drivers’ champion, said that Alonso’s persistence to not give up was a great example to others. “I really respect how he has handled himself at a difficult time with McLaren,” Hamilton said in an interview.
“It’s been tough for him, to continue pushing, to keep driving, to having that will to keep turning up, even though he would know the car wasn’t there. And then he’s had the guts to take on other challenges in IndyCar and W.E.C., to utilize his ability elsewhere. That has been really cool.
Carlos Sainz, a fellow Spaniard who drives for Renault, said Formula One would miss Alonso.
“His talent is unquestionable, one of the best in the history of our sport,” he said. “For the pinnacle of motorsport to be without its most complete driver is a big loss.
For the last three years, Alonso also has been running a karting school for children in his home region of Asturias in Spain.
Asked what he would say to his younger self who first competed in Formula One at the age of 20, and to those who attend his school, he said, “You learn things from the journey, and the biggest thing is to enjoy every moment.
“We are privileged people, doing what we love to do. We drive these amazing cars for amazing teams full of talented people.
