Janet Paisley, a prolific and versatile Scottish writer whose husband’s fits of violence toward her and their sons, one of whom was gay, informed her novels, plays and poetry, died on Nov. 9 in Denny, Scotland. She was 70.
The cause was lung cancer, her son David Paisley said.
Ms. Paisley wrote in multiple genres and formats — poetry, short stories, historical fiction and nonfiction, television scripts and dramas for theater and radio.
Her best-known works include “White Rose Rebel” (2008), a historical romance set during the Jacobite rising of 1745; “Not for Glory” (2001), a collection of interwoven short stories; “The Lasses, O” (2010), a play in which five women remember the poet Robert Burns; and the poetry collections “Reading the Bones” (1999) and “Sang fur the Wandert” (2015).
Ms. Paisley’s work, though not well known in the United States, was translated into more than a dozen languages and widely anthologized at home and throughout Europe. She wrote in English and in Scots, the Scottish language, which she championed. “It’s the language Scots invented to talk about their selves,” she once said.
Among her most significant works was her first play, “Refuge” (1996), for which she won the prestigious Peggy Ramsay Award and £50,000 for the year’s best new play. It is set in a shelter for battered women, where several characters reflect on their experience with domestic violence — a subject Ms. Paisley knew all too well.
It was not until 2000 that she revealed the details. The moment she chose was in the midst of a vituperative battle in Scotland over whether to keep legislation that barred schools from discussing homosexuality. Homophobic billboards had been posted all over the country in a well-financed campaign to keep the legislation in place.
“I write because I can’t be silent any longer about the continuing public abuse of many of our children,” Ms. Paisley wrote in an open letter to the newspaper The Scotsman. She went on to say that her son David was gay and that her husband had beaten him viciously because of it.
“My son continued to be regularly beaten to knock ‘it’ out of him,” she added.
Ms. Paisley turned to writing in her late 30s, after losing one son in infancy and experiencing her own brush with death during the birth of another. She started with stories and poems. But she had to write clandestinely, she said, because her husband, Bill Paisley, did not approve. At one point he smashed her typewriter.
He was also violent toward her, though she rarely discussed this publicly.
Ms. Paisley did much of her writing “in my head” while she changed diapers and made the beds, she told the Scottish newspaper The Herald in 1996.
Leave she did, in 1985, divorcing her husband after 16 years of marriage. She raised her six remaining sons on her own, struggling to eke out a living as a writer while managing a house full of boys.
Her work blossomed as she drew on her life experience. She became a lecturer in writing at Glasgow University, taught creative writing in Scots and tutored with a group called Survivor’s Poetry. She also raised money for women’s shelters.
“She was extraordinarily sensitive to abuse and exploitation in society, whether by men of women in the structures of the patriarchy or by any authorities of any potentially vulnerable people,” Alan Riach, a poet and professor of Scottish literature at the University of Glasgow, said in an email.
Despite its often dark origins, Ms. Paisley infused her writing with humor. She also liked performing, inhabiting her characters during readings at literary festivals throughout Europe.
Janet Violet McNaught was born on Jan. 12, 1948, in Ilford, Essex, England. Her mother, Harriet McNaught, a nurse and seamstress, left her womanizing husband and raised Janet and her two sisters, Joan and Sheila, in Avonbridge, a village in central Scotland, where they lived with Harriet’s father.
She recalled her teenage years in the 1960s as joyous and exuberant. But one day, before she started classes at Callendar Park College of Education, she was raped. After Ms. Paisley died, the BBC program “The Last Word” aired a segment on her in which she discussed the incident, saying that her life “nose-dived” afterward.
She graduated in 1969 and married shortly after, at 21.
and destitute, my arms raged.
In addition to her son David, she is survived by her five other sons, Michael, Jonathan, Mark, Laurence and Matthew, as well as four grandchildren. Her former husband died this year.
It was while giving birth to David in 1979 — when she almost hemorrhaged to death — that Ms. Paisley had an awakening. She decided to start writing, realizing her time could be short.
