U.S.|How Old Were You When You First Encountered Racism?
How Old Were You When You First Encountered Racism?
Race/Related is a weekly newsletter focused on identity and culture, with provocative stories from around The Times.
The granddaughter of a Ku Klux Klan member. A former lawyer turned professional stand-up comedian who also happens to be an Indian-American Muslim born and raised in Chicago. A black expat in Japan. A woman of Chinese descent who travels back and forth between a white, liberal enclave in Massachusetts and an African-American spiritual community. A man born and raised in Canada as a Roman Catholic but who is often mistaken for a Hindu or a Muslim.
All from different walks of life. All people who subscribe to Race/Related.
This week we sent an email to New York Times subscribers requesting ideas for the newsletter. I received hundreds of letters, and, of course, some hate mail. After reading them — yes, all of them — I’m struck by the diversity of our nation and the diversity of the tales shared by all of you.
 Mr. Fenton wrote that he was “walking on air” when she agreed to go out with him. “Then the bad things started happening to us,” he wrote. His letter ended there.
A number of you who are in the scientific community pointed out — rightly — that race is a cultural phenomenon and warned that discussions of race as a physical reality can be dangerous.
I read many confessional tales of heartache, confusion, grief and anger. Some of you gave me the impression that you have never shared your thoughts on race and racism before because you don’t want to get it wrong, seem out of touch or make matters worse. I share the same fear. There is no panacea for America’s racial inequities, but the one thing every letter suggested to me is the need for more voices and more perspectives.
One standout letter came from Louise Kiernan Jones of Florida, who said she would like to read more stories that explore how people develop their racist beliefs. In her case, it had to do with her grandfather and his dog Whitey.  He would show me how Whitey would get aggressive when he saw a black person,” she wrote.
We lived in a city and I used to see black people walking their dogs, who definitely did not appear to hate them. I began to pay attention to how my grandfather and uncles talked about black people, using derogatory terms, claiming they were dirty.  I always tell people a dog taught me about racism.
Do you have a similar story about encountering racist beliefs as a child? Write to us at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| “Birds of a feather flock together.” This was an aphorism that was repeated to me as a child.  White people should stay with white people. For me, that’s a classic, seemingly innocuous example of a racist belief. I look forward to your examples.
Lastly, this week on the desk we talked about the latest F.B.I. report on hate crimes in America, which are up for the third consecutive year. (Nearly three out of five hate crimes in 2017 were motivated by race and ethnicity.) Also, as you’ll see in this story from my colleague Adeel, there was a frightening image of out of Baraboo, Wis., featuring more than 60 students giving what appears to be a Nazi salute. An investigation is underway.
