WASHINGTON — In 2012, American sailors injured in a terrorist attack won a $314 million default judgment against the government of Sudan. The award was at risk at the Supreme Court on Wednesday over what might otherwise have seemed a minor and technical question: whether the sailors had properly served Sudan by sending their lawsuit to its embassy in the United States.
Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. said he was inclined to say yes.
As the argument developed, though, several justices voiced doubts about allowing service of process at embassies in light of a federal law on the question and some doubts about how best to let foreign countries know that they are defendants in an American lawsuit.
The case, Republic of Sudan v. Harrison, No. 16-1094, arose from the 2000 bombing of the destroyer Cole in Yemen by Qaeda operatives, an attack that killed 17 American sailors and injured 42 more. Fifteen of the injured sailors and three of their spouses sued Sudan, saying it had harbored and supported Osama bin Laden and other members of Al Qaeda in the years before the bombing.
Kannon K. Shanmugam, a lawyer for the sailors, said there was no question that Sudan knew about the suit and chose to ignore it. Christopher M. Curran, a lawyer for Sudan, was more equivocal but said his client was aware of the suit before the default judgment was entered.
The justices tried a variety of thought experiments to explore the meaning of the law, initially suggesting skepticism of Sudan’s position.
Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr. asked Mr. Curran, a lawyer with White & Case in Washington, whether he would receive mail addressed to him if it was sent to the firm’s New York office.
“It might get to me,” Mr. Curran said. “It should.” But he said such mail would not have been, as the law requires, “addressed and dispatched” to him.
Mr. Curran countered that although Justice Alito supervises the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, in Philadelphia, sending mail to him there was not a sensible way to reach him.
Erica Ross, a lawyer for the federal government arguing in support of Sudan, said the United States did not accept service of lawsuits at its embassies. Such service, she added, undermined the protections of embassies ensured by the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations.
As the argument wound down, the momentum shifted, with several justices wondering what harm would come from requiring service at the foreign ministry of the nation being sued. Embassy personnel, particularly ones representing smaller nations, may not be able to make sense of American legal papers, Justice Stephen G. Breyer said.
