Illustrated. 259 pp. Henry Holt & Company. $30.
God bless the evil headmasters: the deformers, the belittlers, the squashers of dreams, the ones who leave their oppressed subjects in such a condition of churning anonymous rage that the only possible remedy, post-school, is greatness. “You’ll never make anything of your life, Daltrey,” promises Mr. Kibblewhite, nemesis-like, as he expels 15-year-old Roger Daltrey from Acton County Grammar in West London. Sixty years later, with the title of his new memoir, Daltrey offers a tip of the hat. Or a middle finger. Same thing, at this distance.
“Thanks a Lot, Mr. Kibblewhite” begins where the Who’s rock opera “Tommy” begins: in grayness, in the muffled trauma of post-World War II England. “Captain Walker didn’t come home / His unborn child will never know him. …” Daltrey’s father did come home: “He was a gentle man, but kind of empty. That’s what the war did to him. … My dad just wanted quiet and that never changed. I’m sure he was shellshocked for the rest of his life.” The men of his father’s generation, Daltrey writes, were “knackered”: “They were strangers in their own homes. A lot of them just caved in. That’s what we grew up with.” The Daltrey style, as you can see, is short-fingered and London-inflected. (On his unreadiness for math: “Algebra? Trigonometry? Sin, cos, tan and all that stuff? Do me a favor. Horses for courses.”) As a boy he got in a lot of fights, cultivated “a kind of rabbit sensitivity,” suffered from an infected facial fracture that left him magically anesthetized — “after the jaw got better, I never felt any pain when someone punched me in the face” — and was the victim of some serious bullying. “It was break time and I was in the playground, alone, trying to look busy, trying not to look alone. I looked ahead … I had years of this to go. There was no end to it. I walked out of school and I went home, feeling completely empty.” Later, he would know what to do with that space inside him — but not yet.
Daltrey’s favorite Who album, revealingly, is “The Who by Numbers” (1975): the most sozzled, vulnerable and desperately libidinous set in their catalog. “I saw the lyrics and I thought, this has to be sung.”  “He’s being so kind / What’s the reason?” The tender emphatic lapse, the little downward drunken swoop or sigh, that Daltrey achieves on that word “kind” — it’s one of the Who’s greatest, quietest moments.
Moon dies; Entwistle dies. Daltrey and Townshend endure. “Years passed.” It takes a robust lack of vanity to include that sentence in your own autobiography. But Daltrey’s peculiar swaggering selflessness is the key to this book, and a key (one of four) to the Who. “Most of those songs were written from a place of pain, as well as spirit. I struggled at first to find that place and you can hear the struggle. But then I inhabited it.” Cripes, as Daltrey might say. Cor blimey. How many rock memoirs actually have a meaning?