Most of these rumors were at their apex when dial-up was the norm and YouTube didn’t yet exist — there were no 34-year-old man-children making hundreds of thousands of dollars off video game walk-throughs. I was 5 when Pokémon Red and Pokémon Blue came out, too young to know the difference between bogus and legitimate sources of information, and too young to use the internet. Even when I was old enough to wait 15 minutes for AOL to boot up, I was more likely to stumble on a forum of adolescents swearing by the existence of some hidden magical portal in the game than to find reliable intelligence.
In later versions of Pokémon, developers started indulging the rumors by planting items that corresponded to the rampant speculation online. These hidden items were referred to as Easter eggs. Some Easter eggs helped players advance in the game; some provided insight into the story line or clarified loose plot points; some seemed to have no purpose other than enabling players to boast about having found them.
In the same way that the green light on Daisy’s dock across the bay in “The Great Gatsby” is a detail imbued with symbolic purpose, every object in a video game has the potential to affect our understanding of the game’s logic and our progress through the plot.
Blow’s point was theoretical; it’s unlikely that readers of formally experimental fiction like Calvino’s (or any work of fiction, really) would reach the sort of total understanding that Blow imagined. (As he put it, most of us have to settle for “some appreciation of a partially understood clue structure.”) Nor would such a total understanding be possible for players of even the most straightforward video game. Readers and players implicitly decide how close they want to try to get to this final understanding upon starting a book or game; they must determine how much effort they are willing to expend analyzing content that points away from all but the most literal meaning of the plot.
This is to say that the general expectations a player has upon starting a game are not very different from those a reader has upon starting a book. As is the case with many novels, there are games whose objective is unstated, where figuring out the objective is part of the game. However, to my knowledge, there are no games where the stated goal and the actual goal are completely different. That would be a violation of the fundamental, if unspoken, maker-player contract.
What would a video game look like that ignored the implicit guarantee of resolution? Imagine beginning a game and being told that a group of bandits has captured a princess and whisked her away to foreign lands, and it’s your job to go and find her. You spend four or five minutes preparing for your expedition and being sufficiently briefed about the world. Then, 20 minutes into your sword-and-arrow journey, you’re mauled by a lion and the game ends, and there is absolutely no way to avoid the same catastrophe on your second, third and 254th attempts. The game ceases to be interesting and becomes more like a practical joke — funny the first time but quickly wearing thin.
Video games are supposed to be, to borrow Jorge Luis Borges’s favorite motif, labyrinthine. Regardless of how trapped players may feel when confronting a particular obstacle, they can generally assume that there is a puzzle to crack and a way to crack it — a way to reach the center of the labyrinth. This is why I found video games so fulfilling, and no doubt why my introduction to “serious” literature as a teenager was primarily through 20th-century modernists like Virginia Woolf and Hermann Hesse. In their novels, personal improvement seemed to be a matter of process; their characters fight indecision or internal conflict by scaling their own psychological summits or, to draw a comparison to video games, by taking a crack at solving their own inner puzzles. The idea of a challenging yet well-ordered world so prevalent in modernist literature may seem dated now, but as a young reader and video game player I found it tremendously appealing.
At the end of his lecture on Calvino, Blow mentioned that his game The Witness, a quiet, haunting indie puzzle, is a mystery even to him, saying that it “goes somewhere that I don’t totally see.” This is the allure of enigma: the promise of fulfillment that is mysterious, hidden, just out of reach. We never quite reach the center of Borges’s labyrinths, nor is Hesse able to completely answer his own questions. As his protagonist Harry Haller puts it at the end of “Steppenwolf”: “I would traverse not once more, but often, the hell of my inner being. One day I would be a better hand at the game. One day I would learn how to laugh.” Rarely, if ever, do we attain the sort of ultimate understanding of a work of literature or a video game that Blow envisions, but the idea that we could spurs us to make the effort. We have faith that the labyrinth has a central point, but as readers and players we must accept that we’ll never quite reach it.