SEATTLE — After a shaky beginning, Russell Wilson got hot in the fourth quarter and kept the Seattle Seahawks in the middle of the N.F.C. playoff race.
Wilson threw for 225 yards, and his 15-yard touchdown pass to Ed Dickson with 5 minutes 8 seconds left was the difference in the Seahawks’ 27-24 victory over the Green Bay Packers on Thursday night.
In a key matchup in the battle for the two N.F.C. wild-card spots, Seattle (5-5) broke a two-game losing streak by overcoming an early 14-3 deficit. Wilson was shaky at times early in the game, but he was outstanding at the end, capping the winning drive by recognizing a blitz and hitting Dickson quickly for his second touchdown pass of the night. Seattle still has not lost three straight games since the middle of the 2011 season.
Seattle ran out the clock, thanks to a pair of runs from Mike Davis.
Chris Carson rushed for 83 yards and a touchdown, overcoming the mistake of fumbling on the first play of the game and setting up Green Bay’s opening score. Tyler Lockett had two key receptions late in the fourth, and Doug Baldwin had his first touchdown catch of the season for Seattle.
Rodgers was 21 of 30 passing, with 10 of those completions going to Adams for 166 yards receiving. The backup tight end Robert Tonyan had the first catch of his career go for a 54-yard touchdown to give Green Bay an early 14-3 lead. The Packers led by 21-17 at halftime after Aaron Jones caught a 24-yard touchdown pass from Rodgers in the final minute of the half, but Green Bay’s offense was stymied in the second half.
The Packers gained just 114 yards in the second half, half of which came on the one throw from Rodgers to Adams. That pass set up 36-yard field goal by Mason Crosby with 8:23 left, but Wilson had one more answer.
Wilson hit Lockett on consecutive plays for 18 yards and 34 yards to the Green Bay 16. Two plays later, facing another third-and-long, Wilson recognized the blitz and hit Dickson quickly over the middle to put Seattle in front.