PARIS — A Tokyo court approved a 10-day extension of jail time for Carlos Ghosn, the head of the Renault-Nissan alliance, on Friday as prosecutors assess allegations of financial misconduct. An ocean away, the corporate titan’s problems were on show at the Group of 20 summit meeting: President Emmanuel Macron of France, where Renault is based, met with Japan’s prime minister to discuss the alliance.
Mr. Ghosn, a charismatic leader in the auto industry, is being investigated after a whistle-blower within Nissan, the Japanese automaker, alleged he vastly understated his compensation on securities filings. He has been in detention since Nov. 19, when he was arrested on his private jet soon after landing at Tokyo’s Haneda Airport.
Mr. Ghosn, who forged the alliance as a groundbreaking industry model for sharing technology and cost savings, has yet to be charged. But the Nissan board voted unanimously to fire him as chairman last week. Mitsubishi Motors, a Japanese automaker that joined the alliance in 2016, removed him as its chairman on Monday.
Greg Kelly, Mr. Ghosn’s former chief of staff and a Nissan board member, who was arrested at the same time, will also be detained for 10 more days. A former head of human resources and an American, Mr. Kelly has been described by the company as a “mastermind” of the alleged financial wrongdoing. Both men were in Tokyo for a board meeting.
Under Japanese law, prosecutors can detain suspects for up to 22 days without filing charges, and can legally question them without a lawyer present.
The extended detentions give the Japanese authorities more time to interrogate the men, search Nissan’s offices for evidence and determine whether to press charges. Prosecutors have said they suspect Mr. Ghosn earned around 10 billion yen, or about $88 million, at Nissan from 2011 to 2015 but reported only half of it. The other half was to be parceled out as deferred compensation after Mr. Ghosn, 64, retired.
Mr. Kelly is also alleged to have overseen the surreptitious purchase of millions of dollars’ worth of housing for his boss through a Dutch company, Zi-A Capital, whose financial reports are opaque. Mr. Ghosn kept homes in Paris, Amsterdam, Rio de Janeiro and Beirut, Lebanon.
Despite his accumulated wealth, Mr. Ghosn’s outsize compensation packages at Renault and Nissan were a matter of contention at both companies, and each had sought to rein in his pay. Mr. Ghosn received around 8 million euros, or about $9 million, from Renault in 2017 and about the same amount at Nissan.
Mr. Ghosn has denied the allegations, the Japanese public broadcaster NHK said this week. Mr. Kelly has also denied wrongdoing, according to his attorney, Yoichi Kitamura.
Mr. Kitamura told The New York Times that Mr. Kelly maintained that Mr. Ghosn had the right to set his own pay, and that the executive had decided to pay himself ¥1 billion a year as chief executive. Mr. Ghosn and Mr. Kelly are accused of underreporting his compensation in required securities filings. Mr. Kelly said the securities report did not understate the pay, Mr. Kitamura said.
Mr. Kitamura said Mr. Kelly maintained that he had consulted with an outside lawyer about a plan to defer Mr. Ghosn’s compensation. According to Japanese media, Mr. Kelly has said he asked that lawyer to get approval from Japan’s Financial Services Agency to ensure the plan was correct and that it did not need to be reported as current compensation.
Mr. Kitamura said Mr. Kelly believed that the plan was legal under Japanese law after consulting with an outside lawyer.
Bruno Le Maire, the finance minister, has stated several times that France has “no evidence” of wrongdoing by Mr. Ghosn, and called on Nissan to turn over its dossier. Last week, he asked his Japanese counterpart to come to Paris to make a joint public statement on the matter.
At the G-20 meeting in Buenos Aires on Friday, Mr. Macron told Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan that he wanted to maintain the alliance between Renault and Nissan after Mr. Ghosn’s arrest. Mr. Macron “reiterated his commitment to preserving the alliance as well as the stability of the group,” the president’s office said in a statement.
In the talks, Mr. Abe said that a stable Nissan-Renault-Mitsubishi alliance was important but that its future should be decided by stakeholders in the private sector rather than either government, according to a Japanese official who was not authorized to comment publicly and spoke on the condition of anonymity.
Since Mr. Ghosn pulled Nissan from the brink of bankruptcy over a decade ago, it has become the alliance’s more profitable partner. In recent years, executives inside the company had raised the issue of rebalancing the relationship.
Renault holds a 43 percent stake in Nissan, and the Japanese company holds a 15 percent stake in Renault, the same share as the French government. There have been tensions within the alliance — which accounted for 10.6 million car sales last year — as Renault has been the dominant partner.
On Thursday, officials from Renault and Nissan consulted in Amsterdam, where the alliance has its headquarters, and issued a statement that the board of directors of all three companies “individually and collectively emphatically reiterated their strong commitment to the alliance.” The Japanese officials dialed in by teleconference.
Mr. Macron, who is facing low poll numbers and social unrest at home, can ill afford problems at Renault, which employs 47,000 people in France. Yet when he was France’s economy minister in 2015, he helped inflame concerns within Nissan about Renault. Mr. Macron, a former Rothschild banker, ordered a surprise increase in the French government’s stake in Renault, which was designed to double the state’s voting rights.
The move, which Mr. Ghosn opposed in a bitter fight with Mr. Macron, rattled Nissan. Nissan has no voting rights in Renault, despite its 15 percent stake. Nissan threatened to leave the alliance’s master agreement.
Some French newspapers have questioned why and how Mr. Ghosn was being held for weeks without charges. On Thursday, the deputy head of the Tokyo prosecutor’s office, Shin Kukimoto, rebuffed the criticism as naïve.
