A precocious masterpiece can cast a long shadow. Such has seemingly been the lot of “Les Rendez-vous d’Anna” (“The Meetings of Anna”), the Belgian director Chantal Akerman’s 1978 follow-up to her monumental “Jeanne Dielman, 23 Quai du Commerce, 1080 Bruxelles,” from 1975, which has largely obscured it.
Playing for a week at BAM in a new 4K restoration (and streaming on FilmStruck), “Anna” reappears as an illumination of the filmmaker’s inner life, all the more affecting in light of her suicide three years ago, at age 65.
Like “Jeanne Dielman” (1975), which devoted three-and-a-half hours to the daily routines of a Brussels housewife-prostitute, “Anna” is a portrait of a woman, actually a self-portrait. Anna Silver (Aurore Clément), a 28-year-old filmmaker who is the Belgian-born child of Holocaust survivors, is a stand-in for Akerman, traveling from one European city to another to introduce screenings of her movie.
“Anna” opens on an empty, symmetrically framed train platform in Essen, West Germany. Anna arrives, makes an unheard phone call and checks into a featureless hotel. She stays for a night, which includes an unsatisfying tryst, then returns to Paris, stopping en route in Cologne and Brussels. In each city, she interacts with someone who is, in some sense, displaced, including her mother (Lea Massari).
Reviewing “Anna” when it was shown in the 1979 “New Directors/New Films” series at the Museum of Modern Art, the New York Times critic Janet Maslin wrote that Akerman’s grave, solitary alter ego “is both so fearless and joyless she’s almost a ghost.” Anna is haunting a gray, transitory landscape that is itself haunted by the memories of World War II. As much as anything, “Anna” evokes the feelings of a Jew traveling alone in postwar Germany.
Like “L’avventura,” “Anna” has a seemingly placid surface narrative roiled by mysterious clues: the necktie a previous occupant left in Anna’s hotel room; her off-handed reference to the two daughters, each with a biblical name, she might have had; the corridor of a Brussels-bound train that suddenly fills with “guest workers”; the German who complains that his wife “ran off with a Turk”; the casual revelation that, like Franz Kafka, Anna twice broke her engagement to the same fiancé; the jaunty Edith Piaf ballad, “Les Amants d’un Jour” (“Lovers for a Day”), that she unexpectedly performs for her occasional lover (Jean-Pierre Cassel).
