But in Washington, Mr. Wang lobbied against a resolution introduced by a representative from California, Dana Rohrabacher, that called for the federal government to ramp up investigations into reports of such discrimination.
In 1990, the Education Department concluded that U.C.L.A.’s math department illegally gave preferences to whites over Asian-Americans. Later that year, the department cleared Harvard of discrimination charges, but noted that Asian-Americans were admitted at a lower rate than white applicants, which the department attributed to preferences given to the children of alumni and to recruited athletes.
Berkeley’s chancellor, Michael Ira Heyman, would appear with Mr. Wang and other activists at a news conference and apologize.
“I felt very much vindicated,” Mr. Wang said.
The reports from universities caught the attention of conservative government officials, including Mr. Rohrabacher and parts of the Justice Department’s leadership, who already had affirmative action in their cross hairs.
In a recent interview, Mr. Rohrabacher, who lost his re-election bid last week, according to The Associated Press, said he was appalled at the accusations then of outright quotas that he believed had held Asian-Americans back in universities.
Mr. Wang, who is now retired, said he met with Mr. Rohrabacher at some point to express his opposition to the resolution. Mr. Rohrabacher said he did not recall the specific meeting, but that it was consistent with several meetings he had about his resolution, including with those who opposed it.
Mr. Wang remembers carrying a legal-size printout of Mr. Rohrabacher’s resolution, reading it to the congressman, and pointing out why he disagreed. He did not sway Mr. Rohrabacher.
But Mr. Wang felt his lobbying helped bring attention to discrimination against Asian-Americans while also helping stop Mr. Rohrabacher’s resolution. At Berkeley, the proportion of Asian-Americans in its freshman class has increased to 46 percent in 2015 from 34 percent in 1990, according to a Times analysis last year.
“The most satisfying part is that I managed to successfully separate what we were asking for from affirmative action,” Mr. Wang said.