Perhaps your inner child can conquer David Steinberg’s puzzle.
SATURDAY PUZZLE — We were all young once, as hard as that can be to remember. I’m sort of in the middle of the two cultural references David Steinberg makes in the stacks of this grid, one at the very top, one at the very bottom. The first entry was new to me, but I was able to recognize the lower reference, a classic that goes all the way back to 1958. I’m guessing that the top entry, Mr. Steinberg’s seed for today, will become a classic as well.
I hope everyone had a relaxing, safe and terrific Thanksgiving!
I think the rest of the triple stack entries were doable and fun; there were some contemporary references, like JESSIE and NAE NAE, that I can only have absorbed from background noise in my life. Mostly, though, I just enjoyed the little confluences that I noticed, like Japanese apartment fittings and kitties.
19A: I’m pretty sure I’ve never seen the word “Mephitis” in my life; it sounds like a medical condition, which didn’t really help or hurt my eventual discovery, after most of the crosses, of STENCH. Skunk lovers, this entry was definitely for you, since the striped skunk’s scientific name is Mephitis mephitis; those with medical knowledge (alternative, that is) might recognize mephitis as basically a diluted extract of skunk spray, as a treatment for a vast range of diseases.
As a further reminder that the ancients were just like us, Mephitis was the Roman goddess of bad smells, and there were temples to honor her on Mount Vesuvius (which belched up all sorts of gases), presumably on all sides, in an effort not to run AFOUL of her powers.
35A: Funny, I never imagined standard computer keyboards becoming anachronistic, but I don’t think you see this correlation when solving on mobile devices or tablets, so plenty of us probably don’t see that the # is right over the THREE.
40A: I had several wrong entries here: “sits down” (which really makes no sense), “eats crow” (which really makes more sense to me than the actual answer, but them’s the breaks), and finally EATS DIRT. I was equally taken in by “It’s a wrap” at 26D and had “sarie” and “sarai” before SARAN.
53A: Maybe my favorite clue of the day, for its cleverness and the nature of my misdirection — I had the first three letters, BEE, and tried for a while to come up with something apian that might work as an “Ancestor of a cell” — as in, a chamber in a beehive. We’re actually looking for something that also buzzed, if I remember correctly, as well as making its stated noise — a BEEPER. Amazing to see this entry in Mr. Steinberg’s puzzle; a beeper is practically an archaeological artifact to him.
7D: I think this is the most famous quote from Friedrich NIETZSCHE, although I’ve gotten confused before and thought it was someone else’s. Nietzsche makes fairly regular appearances in the puzzle every decade or so, with a few absences. The cross at 22A, MHZ, was of great assistance in spelling this correctly.
13D: “Spark” made me think of “ignition” here, but the correct term was INITIATOR, which has been in the puzzle many times. Not a word I see very much, and often used to refer to a chemical catalyst, but perfectly valid as clued.
When I noticed that SWIPER NO SWIPING was 15 letters long, I knew I had to seed it into a themeless. When I was younger, I used to watch “Dora the Explorer” for the sole purpose of seeing what mischief Swiper the Fox was up to — the rest of the show was boring! My favorite episodes were the ones in which Swiper (temporarily) got away with swiping and said, “You’re too late!” Building on the Swiper vibe, I seeded in another 15-letter entry I’d been saving, THE CLAWS COME OUT. As per usual with grids that have two triple stacks, most of the rest of the fill was locked into place by the 15-letter entries. Fortunately for me, I didn’t get stuck with too many short entries that I wouldn’t normally use.
Want to get your paws on some answers?
