Plus, the F.D.A. moves to ban flavored tobacco, Brexit hits the skids and Amazon’s HQ2 draws critics in New York.
Hello! Welcome to the second edition of With Interest. Once again, we’re sending you the most important business and tech news, highlighting the essentials from the past week and what’s in store for the next. Our goal is to keep this succinct and informative.
Facebook scrambled to mount a defense after The New York Times published an article on Wednesday describing how company executives ignored, then denied or obfuscated, signs that its power could be exploited — specifically, to disrupt elections, broadcast viral propaganda and inspire deadly campaigns of hate. Mark Zuckerberg, the chief executive, and his No. 2, Sheryl Sandberg, pleaded ignorance to the actions of a Washington-based consulting firm, Definers Public Affairs, which had orchestrated smear campaigns against Facebook’s critics, including the billionaire philanthropist George Soros. (The company fired the firm.) Mr. Zuckerberg reiterated that he would not step down. In Washington, lawmakers called for Congressional hearings and more regulatory scrutiny. Advertisers — Facebook’s real constituents — are displeased. And Facebook stock closed on Friday at a low for the year.
With much fanfare and little surprise, Amazon announced on Tuesday that its second headquarters (or “HQ2”) will be split between Arlington, Va., and Long Island City in Queens. The retail giant, however, isn’t getting the warmest of New York welcomes. Yes, Amazon expects to create an estimated 25,000 jobs, and both Mayor Bill de Blasio and Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo hailed it as a win. But they also promised Amazon, which generates $178 billion in annual revenue, significant state tax breaks and $1.525 billion in incentives — plus allowing a helipad for Jeff Bezos. That hasn’t sat well with some residents and local officials, who question if New York needed to sweeten the pot so much.
The Food and Drug Administration on Thursday proposed a ban on menthol cigarettes and flavored cigars, its most aggressive move against the tobacco industry in over a decade. Intended to curb teen use of tobacco (flavored products are more popular with young people), the action would prohibit the sale of about a third of the roughly 250 billion cigarettes purchased annually in the United States. Meanwhile, Juul Labs — whose products account for about 70 percent of the country’s e-cigarette market — suspended sales of most of its flavored products and discontinued its social media promotions.
In Britain, the challenges will continue for Prime Minister Theresa May as she attempts to woo support for her much-derided Brexit proposal. She has finally secured cabinet approval for her long-awaited plan — but critics argue that there are too many concessions to the European Union, which may prevent a necessary “aye” from Parliament. Two of her cabinet members, including her chief Brexit negotiator, quit in protest last week, and if others jump ship, Ms. May could be dumped by her own party. So much for a Brexit process that she claimed would be “smooth and orderly” (to which the House of Commons laughed uproariously).
Expect fewer stampeding hordes on Black Friday this year, as more customers choose to shop on the web instead of lining up in mall parking lots at dawn. Last year, Cyber Monday was the largest day of online shopping in American history; this year, analysts predict, will break that record by 17.6 percent, reaching $7.7 billion in total sales. Post-Thanksgiving discount bonanzas are hardly confined to just one day (or even post-Thanksgiving) anymore. To get a competitive edge, Walmart and other retailers will kick off their online offers even earlier — 10 p.m. Eastern on Thanksgiving Eve, before turkey-induced lethargy sets in.
Move over, football: The nation’s largest e-sports facility opens in Arlington, Tex., on Saturday. That will be a venue for people to watch other people play video games. Buoyed by slick marketing, glitzy production, multimillion-dollar prizes and the outsize personalities of many celebrity gamers, the e-sports audience is predicted to reach 380 million worldwide by the end of 2018, with a yearly revenue of $900 million. Arlington invested $10 million in the new stadium, which accommodates 2,000 people and features tricked-out reclining chairs and giant overhead screens.
Forget Tesla’s woes — Elon Musk’s SpaceX held its 18th successful launch this year, shooting a Falcon 9 rocket into orbit from Florida on Thursday. Back on earth, Beyoncé severed ties with Topshop, the co-owner of her Ivy Park clothing label, after the retailer’s chairman was accused of sexual harassment.  Here’s a handy guide to making it work. It also offers guidance on private spots to cry, when it’s that kind of day.
10: The dollar value of the newest Canadian bank note, which enters circulation on Monday. The bill features Viola Desmond, a civil rights activist who was jailed for sitting in a whites-only section of a Nova Scotia movie theater in 1946.