NYON, Switzerland — The centuries-old traditions that define Swiss watchmaking are a world apart from blockchain, the technological revolution that promises to change our lives forever, even if not everyone understands what the term actually means.
Minute mechanical movements assembled by hand and a global, yet ephemeral, web of traceable data are opposites in terms of scale, albeit equally complex. And yet Hublot married these unlikely partners earlier this month with the introduction of its Big Bang Meca-10 P2P, a $25,000 watch exclusively available for purchase with Bitcoin, the digital currency powered by blockchain.
This union of watchmaking tradition and 21st-century innovation is an apt one for the LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton-owned brand. “The Art of Fusion” has been its motto since Jean-Claude Biver took its helm in 2004.
Ricardo Guadalupe, who followed Mr. Biver to become chief executive in 2012 and who has worked at the company since 2004, was in the room when Mr. Biver, laying out his vision for the brand, coined the phrase. Mr. Guadalupe said that Mr. Biver recognized an opportunity: The house could respect tradition but, at the same time, distinguish itself from more traditional brands by integrating high-tech materials like ceramic, carbon fiber and its proprietary Magic Gold (a fusion of liquid gold and ceramic) into its watches.
“That was the genius idea,” Mr. Guadalupe said during a recent interview at Hublot’s appropriately high-tech headquarters in Nyon, Switzerland. “Nobody had done this before.” It was a vision that has paid off.
A little more than six months after that initial inspiration, Hublot had developed the first Big Bang for the 2005 Baselworld watch fair — and the watch remains its pillar timepiece today. That initial model took the form of a bold 44-millimeter watch with an innovative multilayered case construction that also stayed true to the brand’s earlier combination of gold and rubber.
In the first year of Big Bang production, Hublot almost doubled its sales, going from 20 million Swiss francs to 35 million Swiss francs, or what today would be $19.9 million to $34.8 million.
“The year after, we did 80 million; the year after that, 150 million,” said Mr. Guadalupe, 53. “We doubled every year at the beginning.” LVMH acquired Hublot in 2008.
In a later email, Mr. Guadalupe said that this year the company’s sales would exceed 600 million Swiss francs.
Hublot’s Big Bang Meca-10 P2P watch, exclusively available for purchase with Bitcoin.
So whether it is capturing the appeal of contemporary art with a Big Bang codesigned by the graffiti artist Shepard Fairey or the tattoo artist Maxime Buchi or tapping the technological zeitgeist around Bitcoin, Hublot uses the same kind of strategy that Supreme or Gucci do in fashion: marketing around the desirability of a luxury product that few ultimately will be able to acquire.
For example, the brand said that many (although it wouldn’t confirm exactly how many) of the 210-piece limited edition Big Bang Meca-10 P2P sold out in presales even before details were released Nov. 6 in Hong Kong.
As for marketing, what better platform could there be than the world’s most popular sporting tournament?
This year, for the third consecutive time, Hublot was the official timekeeper to the World Cup. For the occasion it debuted its first smartwatch, the snappily named Big Bang Referee 2018 FIFA World Cup Russia, which was worn by all referees and 12 team managers, including Didier Deschamps of the winning French team. (Mr. Guadalupe wore it during his interview, too.) Although its $5,200 price is considerably more than that of many other smartwatches, including the $1,400 entry-priced model offered by TAG Heuer, the 2,018-piece limited edition sold out in two months.
Mr. Guadalupe declined to share the cost of the tournament timekeeping role but he said the return on investment, as far as brand awareness was concerned, was worth every penny.
Mr. Guadalupe was born in Neuchâtel, Switzerland, to Spanish parents. Unlike many Swiss children, it wasn’t clear that his future lay in watchmaking — but he was working at Bulgari when he met Mr. Biver, then chief executive of Blancpain, at the 1994 Basel fair and went to work there afterward.
“Sometimes, I also have my own ideas,” he added with a wry smile.
The approach has been valuable as chief executive of a brand that now boasts 90 stand-alone boutiques around the world and has plans to have 150 at the end of the next five years.
Mr. Guadalupe said that he did not believe the time was right for Hublot to have a full e-commerce site, but that he hoped its new digital boutique service would appeal to people used to buying items with a few taps on their phones.
When it comes to brick-and-mortar stores, the soccer fan was in his element in September, when he was joined by four members of the Hublot-sponsored Chelsea soccer team during London Fashion Week to open the brand’s first independently operated boutique in that city.
