With 350 pieces, the Warhol retrospective at the Whitney sets aside the icon’s persona and focuses on his art.
Nov. 12; whitney.org.
Andy Warhol is a natural feature of the contemporary art world. His influence as a personality and a pioneer of mass-market-oriented fine art is so total that it’s difficult to set aside for long enough to make a fresh judgment of the art work he actually made.
There’s something viscerally satisfying — thrilling, even — about watching Viola Davis’s mist-shrouded eyes turn steely cold: She may weep but she will not weaken.
As Veronica Rawlins in Steve McQueen’s “Widows,” opening on Friday, Nov. 16, Davis is ejected from the security of her marital bed when her husband, Harry (Liam Neeson), and his band of armed robbers are killed on the job. Then Jamal Manning (Brian Tyree Henry), a would-be Chicago alderman, gives Veronica a month to reimburse him the $2 million that went up in flames along with Harry. She enlists the wives (Michelle Rodriguez and Elizabeth Debicki) of his fallen crew members in an intricate, high-stakes heist that no one would assume they had the audacity to undertake.
Nov. 14 to Dec. 8; metopera.org.
One of the more unlikely successes in the Metropolitan Opera’s recent slate of new productions was an opera mostly forgotten to history except for a single, popular duet: Georges Bizet’s “Les Pêcheurs de Perles” (“The Pearl Fishers”). Under the direction of Penny Woolcock in a new staging unveiled at Met’s New Year’s Eve gala in 2015 — the first time the company had tackled the opera in almost a century — Bizet’s exoticist fantasy acquired an unusual dramatic clarity. The New York Times declared it the “sleeper hit” of that season.
Nov. 16; itunes.apple.com.
Over her three decades in the music business, Mariah Carey has had a comeback or four. But unlike attempts by other veteran divas, Carey’s returns to the spotlight generally succeed, thanks to her enviable ear, superlative vocal talent and willingness to bend her initially sugarcoated pop to new trends.
Throughout the ’90s, Carey leveraged her star power toward collaborations with hip-hop artists who, without her exposure, might not have become household names: “Fantasy (Remix)” with Wu-Tang Clan’s O.D.B.; “Honey” featuring Mase and The Lox; and “Heartbreaker” with Jay-Z. That trend continued even as she became less of a force on the pop charts — the more creative control she had, the more Carey worked within hip-hop and R&B.
Nov. 11-Dec. 8; themovementtheatrecompany.org.
The playwright Aleshea Harris had her breakthrough production early this year, with “Is God Is” at Soho Rep. A darkly comic, blood-soaked contemporary Western about twin sisters on a quest to avenge their dying mother, it won Harris an Obie Award, and a deal to write a film adaptation for the producer Scott Rudin.
This week another of her plays arrives on a Manhattan stage, and it’s very different in form — though, like “Is God Is,” it juxtaposes laughter with flaying pain. “What to Send Up When It Goes Down,” directed by Whitney White for the Movement Theater Company, is about the relentless mortal danger of being black in the United States.
Nov. 11; hbo.com.
Anyone watching Sally (Catherine Shepherd) watch David (Alex Macqueen), her boyfriend of 10 years, exfoliate his cruddy feet — then blow dry his toes — would surely understand why she hesitated when he tearfully proposed. And why, after he bid her to wear his mother’s wedding dress — with a large yellow stain from “an overactive gland” — she beelined from their bed in the middle of the night into a lesbian relationship with the seductively sociopathic Emma (Julia Davis).
It was, as far as Sally was concerned, a matter of life or death.
Nov. 15-18; peakperfs.org.
In the face of a global crisis, can art move people to action? With “Cut the Sky,” the Australian dance-theater troupe Marrugeku addresses one of the most urgent and inescapable issues of our time: climate change. An international collaboration — featuring artists from Africa, Asia, Europe and Australia — the ambitious, genre-blurring project centers on the Aboriginal people of Australia’s remote regions, who are among the most vulnerable to the threats of climate change on that continent.
