Election Day has come and gone. Where do we go from here?
Welcome to The Edit. Each week in our newsletter, you’ll hear from college students and recent graduates about issues going on in their lives. Sign up here to get it in your inbox.
Ebony: I was shocked that Democrats took the House. I hoped to see a lot of progressive candidates win, but I thought it wouldn’t happen because I’ve been kind of discouraged since the presidential election.
I live in Washington State and we had several high stakes initiatives on the ballot. One would have brought a carbon tax, which would impose fees for carbon emissions in an effort to curb climate change. I was pretty surprised that it didn’t pass given how serious people in the state are about environmental issues. On the flip side, there was another ballot initiative that did pass, which will require police in the state to undergo mental health and de-escalation training. That initiative was born out of grass roots efforts, so it was really cool to see it pass.
Claire: Most people on my campus at Smith College seemed pretty disillusioned after the 2016 election, but since then a lot of them have channeled that energy into organizing. I saw a lot more people actively working toward changes they wanted to see.
Joe: Things are weird here in Arizona. Our Senate race was just called this week. I went in thinking I would be disappointed, but I’ve been pleasantly surprised. Looking at how close some of these races were, it very much feels like Arizona is going from being reliably red to a genuine swing state.
Ian: I was disappointed in the choices we had in Illinois this year. Our former governor was Republican and he did not pass a budget for two years, which stopped all funding of programs. The Republicans hated him, the moderates hated him and, of course, all the liberals hated him. So this was a year that felt like an easy win for Democrats in Illinois. Part of me wishes that the party would get a vision of how to build bridges with people from Central and Southern Illinois. It’s a really diverse state and sometimes it feels like everyone outside of Chicago and Springfield are forgotten.
Ebony: In King County, where I live, it’s pretty small but it’s the most heavily populated area in Washington. So it’s always interesting seeing that Washington is consistently a blue state but it’s all because of this little epicenter. I’ve lived in more rural parts of the state as well and it’s like you’re in a different country almost. Parts of the state are incredibly conservative and very red. We’ve even got some white nationalists up in there.
Ian: Yeah, hiding in the mountains. There’s a whole video game about that: Far Cry 5.
Ebony: It’s a very stark contrast because Seattle is so progressive. Then you go 20 or 100 miles out and it’s completely different.
Ian: I can see that. In Illinois, we have rural farmers who love their guns and who go hunting on the weekends, yet some of them are deeply Democratic. 
Joe: I don’t know the exact number but over 100 women were elected. For the women in the group, what does that mean to you?
Claire: That was one of the things that I got out of the elections that made me feel the most hopeful — the sheer number of women, women of color, and queer candidates who were elected. Seeing candidates that look more like me brings me a lot of hope, because I know that they will do a better job representing me.
Ebony: I feel similarly. The Brett Kavanaugh hearings really showcased how male-dominated the Senate was. I kept thinking about how different that could have gone if there was more representation.
Claire: It’s also a lot younger, which has been interesting to see. Wasn’t there one person who got elected who can’t even afford to get an apartment in D.C. because she’s a millennial, and doesn’t have the salary for it yet? As depressing as that is, it’s relatable.
Ebony: She even said that she was working at a restaurant just a year ago. That’s such an important representation of what’s happening in our country.
Joe: What do you guys hope to see in 2020? Were there any candidates you’d like to see go for president?
Claire: Kamala Harris! Please run.
Ian: I think that Stacey Abrams, whether she wins or not, I think she should run. If she can fight an uphill battle there with a guy who’s in control of the voting system and get it this close, that might be a good person to fight the powers.
Ebony: I’ve heard a lot of talk of people wanting Beto O'Rourke to run.
Ian: There’s this deeply, principled moderate part of me that still wants a Kasich-Biden ticket. It was something that was floated a while back, and even though I know nobody will vote for it because everybody wants to do the party thing, I would vote for that. There’s also a part of me that, because I live in a conservative area and there are parts of me with some conservative leans, would like to see someone rise up on the Republican side to challenge the Trump vote. Someone who has the gusto to say, “No, I’m going to stand for our conservative values that aren’t represented by this man, and it’s O.K. if I split the vote and lose.” I want to see someone take that kind of stand just for the sake of political courage.
Joe: I don’t think it’s that unlikely of a scenario, a second Republican candidate, given how messy this presidency already is. If he becomes so mired in scandals that he can’t functionally do the job I wouldn’t be surprised if someone came up, not even as an act of political courage but just because they want to keep the power and this guy can’t do it.
Ian: How can our younger voting block hold both the people in power and the media accountable?
Joe: For me, it comes down to deciding what you put your eyes on. I try to limit my time on Twitter just because it makes me mad and I don’t like being mad all the time. I just read the news in the morning and at night. 
Ebony: I also try to limit my intake because I get anxious and upset. Not that I shouldn’t be informed, but I try to allow myself to process what’s happening and then focus on the important things. I also think about how people who maybe aren’t in positions of power can create change. There are lots of organizations you can get involved with that are doing the work, from the ACLU to Black Lives Matter.
Getting Into Harvard Is Hard. Here Are 4 Ways Applicants Get an Edge. A federal case against Harvard has brought to light many of its closely guarded admissions secrets.
5 Cheap(ish) Things to Help You Sleep Better First fix your habits and schedule. Then see about some gadgets.
Survivors of Thousand Oaks Shooting Return to Campus Students who were there that night at the Borderline Bar & Grill spoke about the shooting, gun control and their efforts to move on.
Are You Ready for the Nanoinfluencers? Influencers are so 2014. And microinfluencers are so last week. Now advertisers see value in people with as few as 1,000 followers: the nanoinfluencers.
Juul Suspends Selling Most E-Cigarette Flavors in Stores Juul will restrict sales of nearly all its flavored pods to the internet, and stop most social media promotion to combat youth vaping, bowing to government and public pressure.
How to Tell if Those Black Friday Deals Are Actually Worth Buying Black Friday and Cyber Monday mean hundreds of online deals, discounts, and in-person doorbusters, but these tips will help you tell which ones are really worth your money.
Claire: To start, why did you decide to end the internship program and replace it with the fellowship?
Theodore: When I made the pitch to the leaders here, I explained how the interest in The Times is like the ocean, and some of our existing programs were like building little sand castles on the beach. I was saying, “Guys, we need to have something much more robust.” The internship program had value, but it’s so short. It’s 10 weeks, and if you think about it, one week is really onboarding, another week is offboarding, so it’s really eight weeks. It’s not much time for the participants to grow in a role, and with a timeline that short your summer is really dictated by “Oh, did your editor go on vacation during this period,” “Was someone sick,” “What happened,” “Was there any breaking news in this short time that kind of really changed your workload,” just all these kind of variables.
And likewise, in the newsroom, we found that sections were a little bit reluctant to take on an intern, someone that’s going to be here and then be gone. We feel that with a longer runway, this will give sections more incentive to think: “We’re going to have this person for an entire year, let’s invest in them, let’s maybe put them on this mini-beat, or let’s do this project.” And the other thing is that over a year you really get a sense of someone’s personal growth.
Claire: So what are you hoping that the participants will get out of the new program?
Theodore: Well, we’re hoping that they get a real comprehensive experience here. Unlike maybe some other internships or fellowships, folks are going to come in and do staff work. So if you’re a reporter, you’re going to report. If you’re on our photo team, you’re going to take photos and go on assignments. You’re going to get a real chance to build clips and build a portfolio. You’re going to get a chance to work with some of the best journalists in the business, you’re going to have opportunities that you probably wouldn’t have at other places, and we’re going to try to provide as much support and mentorship as we can.
Claire: So it sounds good for the participants, but what is the Times hoping to get out of this?
Theodore: One, is that we want a more stable work force. I think this provides more value for our sections, for someone to be in there for a whole year. They get to know the place a little bit more, they get more comfortable, and the editors and managers get more comfortable with them. We want people to have a great experience, but also be excited about The Times, so when they leave they can say, “That experience was amazing! I’d love to go back!” In some ways we’re selling our newsroom, and we’re playing the long game.
Claire: Who should apply for this fellowship?
Theodore: We’re looking for folks that are graduating from college, graduating from grad school, or who are a couple years out. We didn’t want to put an age limit to this, just in case there are candidates out there that might be coming from a different background. What I don’t want is to have just five-year, 10-year journalists using this program as their entree into The Times. This is really meant to be kind of a program for journalists that have had internships and have some work experience, but are still breaking into the business.
Claire: What are you looking for in these potential applicants, in terms of qualities or where they’re coming from?
Theodore: The thing we always say here is that we are looking for a diverse group of people to kind of build our newsroom around. We really have a global audience now, and in order to cover that audience now we need a staff that is diverse and has different perspectives and backgrounds. We can’t cover the world now unless we have that.
My mantra is that I don’t care where you went to school, and I don’t care what your background is — what I do care about is that you demonstrate a commitment to journalism. Sometimes that comes in the form of internships, and the kind of work that you’re doing there. Are you part of the campus newspaper? Are you in a leadership position? Are you doing impact journalism there? Are you part of journalism groups, are you networking? Are you getting every scholarship that you can? That is a commitment to journalism.
But generally we find that the people who do the best, that flourish, are the ones who do have that commitment to journalism, and who are students of journalism. So they’re always consuming — not only are they thinking about their own work, they’re looking at other people’s work and they’re getting a sense of oh, how did they do that, who do they talk to, that was an interesting way to add context to that story. They’re really just excited about the field, and doing quality work. We find that those are the people who tend to have the most success.
Joe Jurado, Ebony Miranda, Claire Haug and Ian Caveny are contributors to The Edit.