KENT, N.Y. — When Maureen Fleming first ran for local office, an incredulous colleague approached.
“I can’t believe you’re admitting you’re a Democrat in this county, and you’re running for office,” she recalled him saying.
Cathy Croft got a similar introduction to the political dynamics of Putnam County, when she mentioned the name of the lawyer she was using to handle her home purchase.
Such is life in Putnam County, a northern suburb of New York City that, despite its proximity to the city, has stood resolute as the last Republican stronghold in downstate New York.
It was untouched by the blue wave of the 2018 midterms: Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, a Democrat, won the five New York City counties, as well as Rockland and Westchester, but lost Putnam. Letitia James, the Democratic candidate for attorney general, won all four suburban counties bordering Putnam, but lost Putnam.
The contrast was even more dramatic for Senator Kirsten Gillibrand, who captured every county along the Hudson River and beyond, all the way to the Canadian border — except for Putnam.
The county seems like a curious outlier, a land that Democrats forgot along the Metro-North line, a place that, at its southernmost point, is roughly 50 miles to the New York City border and yet a world away.
Republicans, who outnumber registered Democrats in Putnam by about 3,000 people, have dominated politics there for decades; the only Democratic presidential candidate to win Putnam County in the last century was Lyndon B. Johnson.
Ms. Fleming, who unsuccessfully ran as a Democrat for county executive this year, and Ms. Croft, the county’s Democratic elections commissioner, know what they are up against. But you don’t have to be a politician to understand how the political dynamics can shape their lives.
“As a general rule, I do avoid talking about politics because the majority of the people that live here are highly conservative, and their viewpoints are very different from mine,” said Paula Bryan, a county resident who said she had been harassed in Facebook groups.
Without any cities, the six towns in Putnam are defined by their winding roads and expansive properties. The county, which has a population of just under 100,000 and a median household income of $97,606, is also overwhelmingly white: 91.8 percent, according to the Census Bureau.
These demographics combined with a lack of urban centers, residents say, shape the politics of the county.
Ms. Odell also pointed to historical trends to explain Republicans’ dominance in politics. She said that many public safety workers, particularly police officers and firefighters, moved to Putnam County in the 1960s from places like the Bronx, Queens and southern Westchester.
Ms. Odell said the values of Putnam County were captured in her campaign platform: supporting seniors, respecting veterans and delivering services to taxpayers.
See full results and maps from the New York midterm elections.
But some Democrats say the emphasis on tradition serves to exclude and divide residents, particularly newcomers and minorities.
Melinda Montanaro, a Southeast resident, said that when she ran for local office last year as a Democrat, a voter told her to downplay her Puerto Rican background.
“Some people around here may not like that,” Ms. Montanaro said she was told.
Kathleen E. Foley, who managed Ms. Fleming’s county executive campaign, said the lack of diversity — ethnic and economic — contributes to a sense of exclusivity.
And yet, there seem to be signs of change.
The number of new registered Democrats in the county is outpacing new registered Republicans. And this year, a Democrat in Phillipstown, a left-leaning town in Putnam, won a seat on the County Legislature, which had previously been all Republican.
A Democrat also won the countywide sheriff’s election last year, ousting a 16-year Republican incumbent who lost a defamation lawsuit after he accused the district attorney of interfering with a rape investigation.
And with these changes, some residents say, divisions between longtime residents and newcomers have intensified.
In Brewster, for example, other debates have raged — at school board meetings and in Facebook groups — over issues of student residency fraud, a topic that some say has become increasingly politicized.
Last year, after concerns were raised regarding ineligible students attending Brewster schools, the school district conducted a residential reverification process, requiring all parents to provide proof of residency.
Some residents argued allegations of residency fraud were thinly veiled racism, targeting Brewster because of its sizable Latino population.
Proponents of the reverification disputed that notion, arguing the process was necessary because of lax enforcement in the past.
The school district has yet to identify any students who are not residents of Brewster, a spokeswoman for the school district said, but added that the re-registration process was still going on.
Earlier this year, a raffle was held to benefit the Kent Volunteer Fire Department, with a Windham AR-15 semiautomatic rifle and a 20-gauge shotgun slated as two of the prizes.
Not long before the drawing, the high school shooting rampage in Parkland, Fla., took place. Suddenly, raffling off two guns did not seem like such a great idea to some members of the community. There was a heated back-and-forth, and ultimately, a compromise was reached: The raffle winners received gift certificates, in the value of the two guns, from a local gun shop, rather than the guns themselves.