The novelist and screenwriter has built an enormous following, especially among women, by portraying women at their worst.
The day before I visited the novelist and screenwriter Gillian Flynn at her house in Chicago in September, a pulpy headline was making the rounds on the internet: “Author of ‘How to Murder Your Husband’ charged with murdering husband.” In 2011, Nancy Brophy, a romantic-thriller writer, published a blog post detailing the pros and cons of various methods of husband elimination — “Guns: loud, messy, require some skill”; “Poison: considered a woman’s weapon”; “Hiring a hit man: Do you know a hit man? Neither do I”; “Hiring a lover: Never a good idea” — presumably for the benefit of anyone who might want to write a plot in which such information might be useful. Seven years later, Brophy’s husband was shot dead at work.
The day after the story broke, I was talking with Flynn and her husband, Brett Nolan, in her office. Semi-underground and brightly lit, it’s less lair than rec room. Flynn frequently works down here while clocking miles on a treadmill desk, her laptop placed precariously on a box and a stack of books. Nolan was joking about how he used to come upon disturbing Post-its scattered around the house when Flynn was deep in a project, and this inspired him to gift her the whiteboard that covers one wall, where she jots character motivations and bits of setting in the precisely loopy handwriting of a prom queen. When I was there, her grimly matter-of-fact brainstorms were interspersed with her kids’ drawings.
“ ‘Dead body floating ...’ ,” Nolan said, referring to the kind of notes Flynn would leave next to the refrigerator or on the coffee table. He had always assumed the Post-its were evidence of something his wife was working on professionally, and not literal evidence, but did we see that article yesterday, about the woman who wrote about how to kill her husband and then was indicted on a charge of killing her husband?
“I had multiple people forward that to me,” Flynn said, laughing.
To experience Flynn’s work is to submit yourself to a series of increasingly incredulous what?s: a deliberate first act of unsettling exposition and character development sets up a chain of wild twists in the second. The stories are propelled by female narrators who lay bare their nastiest impulses to the audience — but not, crucially, to the people in their lives — adding psychological depth and the sense of illicit confession to the cheap thrills of her high-wire plots. Her debut novel, “Sharp Objects,” follows Camille Preaker, an alcoholic journalist with a baroque self-harm regimen (she carves vulgar words into her skin), as she reports on a string of murders of young girls in her Missouri hometown; Camille stays with her mother, who we eventually learn has Munchausen syndrome by proxy and has been poisoning her daughters (but that discovery is hardly where the story ends). Flynn’s second novel, “Dark Places,” centers on Libby Day, who witnessed — or believed she witnessed — her brother murder her mother and sisters when she was 7; but when she meets a group of true-crime enthusiasts debating the old case, she begins to question her memory.
These books sold well, but neither Flynn nor her publishers anticipated the omnipresent best seller — or object of scorn — that “Gone Girl” would become. Since then, she has also benefited from a trend in feminist cultural criticism: These days representations of the “messy” lives of “flawed” women are celebrated as indications of a multifaceted (and maybe even “radical”) portrayal of the gender. Though “Sharp Objects” didn’t garner much critical attention in 2006 — when, as she says, the biggest conflict female protagonists faced was “can she get the boy and can she get the shoes and, oh, she’s had a cosmo again!” — over the summer it became a relentlessly dissected limited series on HBO starring Amy Adams, with Flynn as an executive producer. Next year, Amazon will host the series “Utopia,” about a group of online friends investigating government conspiracies, with Flynn adapting it from the British series as creator, executive producer and showrunner. And this month “Widows,” a film she adapted from the 1980s British TV series of the same name with the director Steve McQueen, will be released. Viola Davis stars — in a cast that includes Liam Neeson, Daniel Kaluuya and Colin Farrell — as the ringleader of a group of women who plan a robbery after their husbands are killed trying to pull off a different heist.
“Gone Girl,” of course, made Flynn “the writer of ‘Gone Girl,’ ” as the trailer for “Widows” trumpets, and the film marks the beginning of a new phase in her career: She is now an event, a shorthand, a writer whose name conveys a mutually understood, reliable sensibility. While a heist movie is something of a departure from her crime/mystery/whatever-you-want-to-call-them novels, “Widows” nevertheless flashes several Flynn calling cards in the way it focuses on mostly realistic women solving unrealistic problems — committing crimes or uncovering others — which always involve, and are complicated by, the people in their lives. 
Like this movie, Flynn’s books fall into a category you might call anti-middlebrow: packaged as thrillers, written in the knowing pop-cultural cadence of mid-2000s blogs and comprising a disorienting blend of genre influences, they avoid the striving pretensions of bad literary fiction, despite also being fairly dense and containing, sneakily, many of the pleasures of a digressive social novel. She often uses setting and minor characters — the portrait of sleepy Wind Gap, Mo., in “Sharp Objects,” or the evocation of post-recession malaise in “Gone Girl” — to flow into incisive cultural critique, and even employs postmodernist flourishes like metafiction. Still, it takes an open mind to compare her with someone like Zadie Smith or Philip Roth; Flynn says that people at parties and other passive-aggressive spaces sometimes let her know that they “don’t normally read this kind of book,” which she takes in stride. She cares more about the work than the labels on the work.
“Miss Minnie Cat (no relation to Minnie Mouse) was at the beach when she was kidnapped by some pirates who are holding her for hostage.
In a 2013 review of “Gone Girl” for Bookforum, the author Mary Gaitskill wrote of the novel, “I felt I was reading something truly sick and dark — and in case you don’t know, I’m supposedly sick and dark.” Things in Flynn’s novels do not get bad; they start out far beyond it and deteriorate as we learn how they got that way. In the early pages of “Dark Places” the narrator sets the scene: “It was a miserable, wet-bone March, and I was lying in bed thinking about killing myself, a hobby of mine.  Spatter, splatter.” In “Sharp Objects,” to choose one part that made me feel physically sick, a 13-year-old Lolita figure takes blood from a cut on her chest and rubs it on her adult half sister’s lips. If one thing unites Flynn’s women, it’s that they’re not fussy about getting blood on stuff.
Because of this, Flynn says her friends often have to field blunt questions about her: “Oh, is she crazy? How [expletive] up is she?” People expect from Flynn, at minimum, a brooding goth, world-weary and unpleasant, so when they encounter a chipper straight-talker with a wholesome dependency on Cherry Coke Zero and a Midwestern accent — she pronounces Missouri Missourah, drops her -ings to -eens and is so bad at cooking she can’t boil an aygg — they start to suspect something even more sinister lurking beneath her crooked CVS reading glasses. But beyond wearing a lot of black, the 47-year-old mother of two — Flynn, 8, and Veronica, 4 — seems pretty normal, even nice, the kind of person who will, according to one friend I spoke to, email you at 10 p.m. demanding to talk about a schlocky horror movie she just watched. Feminist critics often complain about the sexist expectation that female characters be “likable,” by which they mean accommodating, charming, easy to talk to and not bleeding everywhere. Flynn’s writing has been read, both charitably and not, as a refusal to comply with that dictate, but the author herself embodies likability as much as anyone I’ve ever met.
Amy Adams, who had been a fan of Flynn’s work since she first read “Dark Places,” also expected there to be some angstiness to Flynn when she met her; as she studied Camille, the protagonist of “Sharp Objects,” she began to assume that some part of Flynn identified with the character. But even though not much about Camille’s biography overlaps with Flynn’s, Adams came to believe that there still was a connection, that the real-life novelist and fictional journalist may share a desire to “get at what’s inside” themselves so other people can see it.
Flynn grew up in Kansas City, Mo., to parents who make a lot of sense. Her mother was a reading-comprehension professor at the local community college. Her father was a film professor at the same school, and the movies he took her to see before age 10 were rarely, in her words, “princess-led”: “The Great Santini,” “Alien,” “The Elephant Man.” After college at the University of Kansas, Flynn moved to California, planning to establish residency and apply to Berkeley to get a graduate degree in English. In the meantime, she found a job working at a trade magazine for human-resources professionals based in Orange County. When it came time to apply for graduate school, she went to Northwestern for a journalism degree instead, and from there moved to New York. She got a job at Entertainment Weekly, where she worked for 10 years, serving as both the “Lord of the Rings” beat writer and the television critic. She was able to move back to Chicago, a city she felt was “her place,” and keep the job, until she was laid off in 2008, not long before her second novel was to be published.
She went for a depressing meal at a diner called the Hollywood Café and briefly wondered if she’d have to respond to the Help Wanted sign in the window. She’d been a waitress before, she reasoned; she could do it again. But she’d already written two novels, and her time as a journalist had instilled in her a helpful work ethic and lack of preciousness: She could write fast, under pressure.
Though she didn’t have an idea for a new novel when she got laid off, she decided to use her severance to work out the first chapter of “Gone Girl.” She sold the book on the strength of those pages, not expecting that it would go on to become a massive hit — just as a reactive mode of feminist critique was starting to shape online discourse. Headlines like “Is ‘Gone Girl’ Feminist or Misogynist?” and “How ‘Gone Girl’ Is Misogynistic Literature” gave way to editorials outlining Flynn’s transgressions against women: though, of course, not all female characters must be likable, none of hers were, except maybe Amy’s sister-in-law, Go, who nevertheless has what one writer deemed stereotypical “daddy issues.” Amy was seen to fortify all sorts of harmful clichés about women, particularly for the craven way she falsifies a rape allegation, but also because she’s superannoying.
The book is told in his-and-hers alternating viewpoints, and at first Amy’s side of the story comes in the form of grating diary entries written in the semi-ironic, overadjectived voice of a young person trying to conceal that she really wants to be a writer but is too in love with how clever she is to manage it. In fact, she is a 38-year-old woman who only recently lost most of her trust fund because her parents — rich off a long-running series of children’s books called “Amazing Amy” — overspent. She lies about everything, which we know because she tells us, smugly. Though her husband, Nick, is not innocent of the crimes of lying and of writerly obnoxiousness (they’re both writers, sort of), he’s at least self-hating and working class. Given the choice, Amy is not the one you would rather hang out with.
Flynn’s response to these questions is refreshingly pragmatic: She wrote a character, and she wanted to see what that character would do under certain conditions. Still, the furor upset her. Though she has always been aware of feminism in general, and identifies as a feminist, she says she could be better versed in feminist theory, and was blindsided by the occasionally vitriolic accusations of misogyny she faced.  Flynn remembers one negative review in particular — of the movie adaptation, directed by David Fincher — which she paraphrased for me: “It ended by saying that Fincher and I had found in each other evil soul twins of death, that we were riding off into the sunset into hell and that on the back of our car it said, ‘Just Married.’ ” Reading it made her wonder, only half-jokingly, if she’d “killed” feminism.
Flynn drives a cherry red Jeep Wrangler Rubicon convertible, which is a little dirty, the floor inside covered in dead leaves. The day after I visited her office, she suggested we drive to her old Chicago neighborhood, Ukrainian Village, to recreate the daily “walk of woe” she took while writing “Gone Girl.” “Girls’ trip!” she said, in a sardonic imitation of a Valley Girl accent, as she got in the driver’s seat. “Let’s talk about female empowerment!” As we pulled out of her garage, she dropped the ironic act to earnestly make sure I had sunscreen; the top was liberatingly down.
On the way, we talked about women’s issues: her skin-care routine (standard), her torn labrum (an injury common to writers and baseball players) and her resistance to meditation (she just doesn’t want to!). When we arrived at the skinny Victorian she used to live in, the trees she and Nolan had planted outside still there, she looked up at it fondly and reminisced about the neighbors.
Then things got kind of dark. Flynn wrote “Gone Girl” next to a space heater in the basement. Surprisingly, given how meticulous she is, Flynn doesn’t plot out her stories beforehand, writing them straight through, from beginning to end. So when she wrote the beginning of “Gone Girl” — a book unimaginable without its twist halfway through — she had no idea where it was going. Working out the winding narrative was maddening, and she crafted entire story lines that never made it in. This was, in part, because she became pregnant and had her son “literally smack in the middle” of writing the novel, and because she was “weirdly insistent” on taking a “traditional” maternity leave, she didn’t look at the book for three months. When she read through her partial draft afterward — during nanny time, three days a week — she realized she had made “a grave, grave error” in taking such a long break.
“I was like, I don’t know what the [expletive] this is,” she said as we strolled down the leafy streets leading to Wicker Park. I imagined this reckoning taking place where all artistic reckonings take place, outside in the dead of Chicago winter. “I don’t know where it was, I don’t know what I’m doing, I don’t know who this character is. What is this?” She couldn’t remember what she’d planned on doing with the half-novel she had in front of her. The labyrinthine plot she’d constructed was full of dead ends; characters’ motivations were opaque to her. A dead bird we passed on the sidewalk seemed symbolic somehow. Obviously, she ended up finishing the book — only six months past deadline.
The realities of child care are representative of the realities of being a woman, the wall you come up against no matter how many other advantages you have: There are things you can do to ameliorate the difficulties, but you can’t escape them altogether, because the kid is always there. In “Gone Girl,” having a child is Amy’s trump card, the way she ensnares her husband for life, despite all she’s put him through. (Crazy liar, or finally having it all?) “Widows” is marginally less gruesome than Flynn’s previous work, but it presents a similarly bleak image of society as one in which some people will do whatever it takes to survive, and even those who resist this interpretation of life are nevertheless forced to recognize its advantages.
Flynn’s approach to gender in the movie is flexible, neither totally subversive nor traditional: One woman poses as a battered mail-order bride to get help buying guns; another bursts into tears when she fails to complete her assigned task. Babysitters have to be coordinated for the night of the heist. Flynn’s script draws a shrewd contrast between the men’s approach to robbery, which is stoic and ruthless, and the women’s, which involves the characters panicking and bickering, yes, but also taking care of one another.
The mainstreaming of feminism (and online surveillance thereof) has made many women I know — and myself — anxious about conforming to stereotypes, lest we perpetuate the same conditions we find so constraining. At the same time, self-consciously rejecting even harmless or positive ingrained ideas about women for the sake of doing so feels ridiculous, maybe even regressive. If there’s any way to escape this double bind and establish some agency, it may be to approach womanhood like Flynn does, as just another perversity among many. Ultimately, women’s issues are particular in the same way anyone’s are: How do we keep going, given the circumstances? After we finished the “ ‘Gone Girl’ walk of woe,” and I was thinking about Flynn, frustrated that she had taken time off her book to nurse her infant son, I realized we had been talking about female empowerment the entire time.