Across the state, diverse liberal candidates are redefining its politics.
That question summed up the most-watched Senate race in America. It isn’t merely a contest over political power, though a quarter-century-old Republican monopoly is on the line. It’s an existential struggle over which Texas emerges, with national consequence.
One version is being sold by Republican Senator Ted Cruz, the incumbent. A shibboleth of tall tales and 10-gallon hats, it’s a story the Republicans have been telling for years to persuade new arrivals, refugees from the Rust Belt, that being Texan meant driving pickups and caring only about God, gays and guns.
Most Texans know this isn’t true. But Republicans have made a bet that “their” Texas will turn out to vote in just enough numbers to win, as long as the party manages to whittle down the rest of the electorate through sleights of hand like voter ID laws and gerrymandering.
In that Texas, during Mr. Cruz’s first Senate campaign in 2012, hardly anyone voted. He claimed that “millions of Texans” were “rising up” to support him. But in fact he won in a squeaker, edging out another Republican in a runoff by 150,000 votes — a whopping 1 percent of registered voters. If margins were bass fishing he’d have had to throw his back. And back then, general elections against Democrats were an afterthought.
Defeated in his bid for the Republican nomination by Donald Trump, Mr. Cruz has run for re-election as a born-again good old boy. That’s why this Canadian-born product of Princeton and Harvard Law opened his campaign at the Redneck Country Club. “Texas is tough,” he told the crowd, adding that he would now be known as “Tough for Texas.” It didn’t stick.
He wears fancy ostrich cowboy boots; started listening to country music only after the Sept. 11 attacks; complains about Willie Nelson, who has endorsed Mr. O’Rourke; and prefers Toby Keith — who’s from Oklahoma.
On the other hand, there is real Texas, today.
When other Americans think of Texas they probably think of Dallas, Austin, San Antonio and Houston, the cities where 75 percent of the state lives, though the triangle they form counts nearly 20 percent of its landmass. That’s real Texas. So are the 20 or so suburban counties that surround these cities and swing elections. But these are far different from the rootin’ tootin’ Texas of the Cruz campaign.
Real Texas has the largest Muslim population in the country. Vietnamese is our third language; Chinese is our fourth. Missouri City, near Houston, may be one of the most ethnically and racially diverse spot in America. It’s also one of the most densely populated. People are crammed in at nearly 2,600 per square mile — over twice that of New Jersey. The surrounding county was bedrock Republican but flipped for Hillary Clinton in 2016.
This is not Ted Cruz’s Texas. Neither is Mr. O’Rourke’s hometown (and mine) of El Paso. It’s a tattooed, blue-collar, Latino city of nearly one million. Mr. Cruz hardly comes here; his last visit he attracted just 2,000 people at a West Side high school — on a Saturday. This Texas hasn’t benefited from a quarter-century of unbroken Republican power. The biggest employer, the Army, ships people out just as quickly as it ships them in. A sprawling city of rail yards and refineries, El Paso has one of the highest illiteracy rates in America and some of its worst access to health care.
There’s a lot more of this Texas: the Lower Rio Grande Valley, San Antonio, South Dallas, East Austin and inside the Loop in Houston. This is a young Texas, about which there is a prevailing myth: It doesn’t vote. But that myth is being sorely tested. Some 15.6 million people are registered to vote this year, 1.6 million more than in 2014. More than four million have voted so far; so far in El Paso this year’s turnout has looked more like a presidential contest than a midterm.
There’s another myth about Texas: “Yeah, but it’s still Texas.” Which is to say, whatever the personalities and trends might indicate, in the end, Texas will vote as it always has, for crimson-red candidates.
As Erica Grieder at The Houston Chronicle has pointed out, that’s about the laziest thing that non-Texan experts on politics can say. The number of Texans who identify as conservative has flattened, according to the Texas Politics Project at the University of Texas at Austin, while the number who identify as progressive has swollen.
The Cruz-O’Rourke race may be the main event, but the ballot is full of competitive matchups. Attorney General Ken Paxton, a Republican, may lose to a Houston lawyer named Justin Nelson. Agriculture Commissioner Sid Miller has his hands full with his Democratic opponent, a retired Air Force colonel named Kim Olson. Up in Dallas, Representative Pete Sessions, a Republican, is hearing the footsteps of the former N.F.L. player Colin Allred. In the western Houston suburbs, the Democrat, Lizzie Fletcher, is just a few points behind the incumbent, John Culberson. The Texas Tribune reports that Republicans may even lose their supermajority in the State Senate.
Another myth? Latinos don’t vote. In fact, Latino turnout in Texas has been creeping up, though it’s not yet at the same rate as Anglos. It’s a chicken-and-egg problem: Candidates spend so much time talking to Anglo voters they get around to Latinos late, so they’re less motivated.
The Senate race has always been Mr. Cruz’s to lose. If Mr. O’Rourke wins, the American electoral map will be tossed in the air just in time for 2020. In the modern era, after all, no Republican has won the White House without winning Texas’ 38 electoral votes.
But the impact of the O’Rourke candidacy can’t be measured by a simple W/L. The Democrat has helped sweep up new and motivated voters, people who will also vote in House, state and local races. After next week, Democratic donors will figure that spending on Texas is no longer gambling.
Whatever happens on Tuesday, one thing is clear: What Texas is not. It is not Ted Cruz’s pandering, ten-gallon circus act.
