They are throwing a $5 million fund-raiser for President Trump this winter, and are quick to make it known that they have the president’s sons’ cellphone numbers on speed dial. They have poured more than $50,000 of their own money into supporting the president, who smiles in photos on the bookshelves of their home.
But Bill White and his husband, Bryan Eure, are not red state evangelicals or die-hard right-wingers. In fact, for years, they were key players among a cohort that Mr. Trump loathes: Manhattan’s liberal elite.
Mr. Trump is an unconventional commander in chief who ran an unorthodox campaign. As such, he has cultivated unusual allies, including Kanye West and Roger Stone. Mr. White and Mr. Eure used to back strident, anti-Trump Democrats, but now dine with Fox News anchors and plan rounds of golf at Mar-a-Lago.
The couple are standouts among the president’s small contingent of visible supporters in his hometown, New York City.
Broad-shouldered with a silver buzz cut, Mr. White is a former president of the Intrepid Sea, Air and Space Museum in Manhattan, credited with bringing it back from financial collapse.
Mr. White parlayed that role into a little black book so thick that in 2011, he hired Aretha Franklin as the wedding singer at his marriage to Mr. Eure, where Democratic officials and Barbara Walters sang along with other guests at the Four Seasons restaurant in Manhattan.
The two men were not only longtime backers of left-wing causes, but firm supporters of Hillary Clinton who put their clout and cash behind her two White House bids. President Barack Obama was the guest of honor at a $39,500-a-plate truffle risotto fund-raiser dinner they hosted once in their Chelsea townhouse.
Mr. Eure, 39, a commercial insurance broker, grew up in North Carolina, and met and fell in love with Mr. White in an AOL chat room 18 years ago. A Republican, he nonetheless steered substantial sums to the liberal causes that his husband once supported.
The couple say they have been condemned not just for hypocrisy, but for what has been seen as a betrayal of their own community, by backing a man who has scaled back L.G.B.T. protections.
They dismiss such concerns. “I don’t like identity politics,” Mr. Eure said.
As they have risen in the Trump pantheon to attending cocktail parties with Trump acolytes, they’ve lost friends, the couple said, from liberal politicians they once lavished with campaign contributions to a former employee of Mr. White’s who sent excoriating Twitter messages.
Their former allies offer a succinct view on who Mr. Eure and Mr. White are now: craven turncoats.
At a dinner the couple hosted early this year in their Chelsea apartment, Corey Johnson, a Democrat and the openly gay speaker of the New York City Council, became irate when the couple suggested he meet Mr. Trump to discuss the city’s infrastructure needs, Mr. White said.
Mr. Johnson declined to comment. The former friends have not spoken since, the couple said.
On the other side, there are few complaints about Mr. White and Mr. Eure’s switch.
The genesis of the couple’s reversal can be timed to about midnight on Nov. 8, 2016. Inside the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan, at Ms. Clinton’s election night event, Mr. White stood watching the returns in an increasingly funereal atmosphere.
He got in his Chevrolet Suburban and drove to the New York Hilton in Midtown, where Mr. Trump was celebrating his win.
Mr. White rejects claims that Mr. Trump holds racist views by citing improved black employment numbers. Mr. Eure rejects claims that Mr. Trump has advanced an anti-gay agenda by citing his appointment of Richard Grenell, an openly gay man, as ambassador to Germany.
Mr. Trump’s falsehoods? “Embellishing,” Mr. Eure said.
Since 2016, the couple has made a gradual shift from life in the liberal enclaves of the Hamptons and Manhattan, where they had long flipped homes as a hobby, to Atlanta, where they recently purchased property.
They now split their time between New York and Georgia. In the South, they are closer to Mr. Eure’s parents and found that they can wear red pro-Trump hats in peace.
Chatting inside their latest project, in the Buckhead neighborhood, they described a litany of slights by Democrats as motivation for switching sides.
There was the time, earlier this year, at Ralph Lauren’s Polo Bar in Midtown Manhattan, when Mr. White spotted Chelsea Clinton across the dining room.
Donald Trump Jr. acknowledged the two have become friends. “It’s much easier to be a sheep and buy into the narrative than it is to decide for yourself,” he said.
Then there was the time in 2016 when Mr. Eure said he had headed to Philadelphia from the Hamptons to watch Hillary Clinton speak at the Democratic National Convention.
A windstorm had grounded all the commercial aircraft, so he pulled gilded strings to borrow a friend’s helicopter, he said. But as the couple rushed to say hello to the candidate, a staffer blocked them.
“This was about because we didn’t write a $25,000 check” in the final stretch of her campaign, Mr. Eure said.
Ms. Clinton’s campaign rejected the claim.
Since boarding the Trump Train, as they call it, for every morsel of recognition the Trumps have offered, the couple has responded with a feast — sometimes literally.
Over the summer, they hosted a private dinner for Donald Trump Jr. and his girlfriend, Kimberly Guilfoyle, the former Fox News host. The occasion? Celebrating that the couple were dating.
For Mr. Eure, the fealty feels natural. The son of a chicken and soybean farmer who put himself through college, Mr. Eure sees his father as a parallel to Mr. Trump, whose oft-pushed narrative is that he is a self-made man — nevermind that the president’s story is false.
His husband also said Mr. Trump’s travails resonated.
In 2008, Mr. White abruptly resigned as president of the Intrepid, pushed out, he said, after the state began an investigation into whether he had engaged in unlicensed commercial fund-raising.
He was not charged with any crime, but agreed to pay $1 million in restitution to the state as a settlement.
Mr. White, who said he had done no wrong, still winces when he speaks of the pillorying that followed.
The pair said their behavior was in keeping with a lifelong focus on mission over party, namely fighting for veterans and gay rights.
They have supported a few Republicans before Mr. Trump. They’ve also jumped political ship: In 2012, they made headlines by demanding a refund from Mitt Romney, which they did not get, after the G.O.P. candidate for president said marriage was exclusively between a man and a woman.
And for Mr. Eure, the bumpy ride has been less of an evolution than a return to his Republican roots. “My parents are thrilled,” he said.