New York|Night of Partying Ended in a Grisly Murder. A Jeweler’s Surrogate Son Is Guilty.
Night of Partying Ended in a Grisly Murder. A Jeweler’s Surrogate Son Is Guilty.
The men did not know each other and their meeting at a Manhattan nightclub was happenstance, but it started off a long night of revelry. By 4:30 a.m., they had met some women and moved the party four miles away to James Rackover’s luxury apartment on the East Side, where they continued to drink and snort cocaine.
The good times ended the next morning with the grisly murder of one of the men, Joseph Comunale, a 26-year-old Hofstra graduate from Stamford, Conn.
On Friday, a jury convicted Mr. Rackover, 27, of murder and related charges after a day of deliberations. Prosecutors said he and another partygoer, Lawrence Dilione, 30, beat and stabbed Mr. Comunale to death, then buried his body in a shallow grave on the Jersey Shore.
Prosecutors said the two men pushed the corpse out a fourth-floor window and stuffed it into a car trunk before driving to New Jersey, where they doused the body in gasoline, set it ablaze and buried it. Mr. Dilione is being tried separately next year.
After a jury returned a guilty verdict, the audience in State Supreme Court in Manhattan erupted in applause. Mr. Comunale’s family members and friends hugged one another, as many sobbed and shouted with victory.
Yet precisely what happened on Nov. 13, 2016, inside of Apartment 4C at the Grand Sutton — a luxury residential tower near the Roosevelt Island Tramway — remains something of a mystery. During Mr. Rackover’s two-week trial, prosecutors acknowledged they had no eyewitnesses who could explain what precipitated the murder of Mr. Comunale.
Mr. Rackover and Mr. Dilione left behind a trail of evidence: spatters of Mr. Comunale’s blood throughout Mr. Rackover’s apartment; several garbage bags full of blood stained items including bedsheets, clothes and towels; used cleaning products; and Mr. Comunale’s wallet, identification and credit cards. All were discarded at Mr. Rackover’s building.
Their movements, from Mr. Rackover’s apartment on East 59th Street to a wooded area in Oceanport, N.J., nearly 60 miles away, were tracked by cellphone towers and license plate readers.
Shortly before 7 a.m., security cameras recorded Mr. Comunale and Mr. Dilione leaving the building briefly. That was the last time Mr. Comunale was seen alive.
Still, a lawyer for Mr. Rackover, Maurice H. Sercarz, argued to the jury it was Mr. Dilione, not Mr. Rackover, who killed Mr. Comunale. He said his client — who was drunk and high — had only assisted in moving Mr. Comunale’s body out of his apartment because his lavish lifestyle was suddenly in jeopardy and he had to protect it.
A third man, Max Gemma, is accused of hindering prosecution and tampering with evidence. He also will be tried next year.
That Saturday night began normally enough for Mr. Comunale. He and three friends traveled from their homes in Stamford, into the city to have drinks at the Gilded Lily, a club in Manhattan’s Chelsea neighborhood. There, Mr. Comunale met Mr. Dilione and Mr. Gemma, lifelong friends and roommates who had come into the city from their homes in Jersey City, N.J.
Mr. Rackover was home in bed after watching an Ultimate Fighting Championship match on television. At about 3 a.m. on Sunday, he received text messages from Mr. Dilione, whom he knew. Mr. Dilione asked if he could bring people to Mr. Rackover’s place to continue the party there, according to court records and defense lawyers. Mr. Rackover asked if Mr. Dilione had cocaine.
“I need a line to keep me going,” Mr. Rackover wrote to Mr. Dilione in a text message. Mr. Dilione replied that he had a little.
Mr. Rackover had been born James Beaudoin II. He changed his last name in 2015 to that of his intimate partner, the Manhattan jeweler Jeffrey Rackover, whose clients include Oprah Winfrey, Jennifer Lopez, and first lady Melania Trump, according to a civil lawsuit filed last year by Mr. Comunale’s father.
The lawsuit alleges Jeffrey Rackover legally adopted Mr. Beaudoin and showered him with gifts in exchange for sex: drugs, money, a Mercedes-Benz and an expensive apartment. They had met in 2013 and lived together in Jeffrey Rackover’s apartment for two years. Then James Rackover moved into Unit 4C in the same high-rise building, the lawsuit said.
James Rackover was originally from Florida. He had been convicted of robbery as a juvenile, had pleaded no contest to a burglary charge and had multiple probation violations, records show. He had served 18 months in prison at the South Bay Correctional Facility before being released in 2013. His aunt said he moved to New York for a fresh start.
The morning he died, Mr. Comunale was among four men and three women who arrived at Mr. Rackover’s apartment at about 4:30 a.m. Wearing only jeans, Mr. Rackover greeted the group and welcomed them into his home. He boasted that his father was a popular jeweler and showed off framed photos of the two of them, according to testimony at trial.
The women there that morning testified that Mr. Rackover was “all over the place,” loud and “joking around.” He and Mr. Dilione engaged in a sophomoric competition to see who could give a better lap dance to one of the women. Mr. Comunale, one woman said, was “pretty drunk” and sat quietly, laughing at the ruckus.
Over the next two hours, the group drank beers and snorted cocaine, prosecutors said.
At 6:48 a.m., Mr. Comunale and Mr. Dilione walked the women out of the building to help them get into an livery cab and then went back inside, security camera video introduced at trial showed. Forty-five minutes later, Mr. Gemma left the building in different clothes than he wore when he arrived, the video showed.
At some point, prosecutors said Mr. Dilione and Mr. Comunale got into an argument — perhaps over the lack of more cocaine, prosecutors said, but they acknowledged that they were not certain — and a fight broke out.
Prosecutors said Mr. Dilione beat Mr. Comunale mercilessly, pummeling him until he was unconscious, and then he and Mr. Rackover stabbed him 15 times.
It did not take long for Mr. Comunale’s father to realize that something was wrong. The father and son spoke daily by phone and saw each other at least five times a week, he told the jury through tears. The day of the murder, they had plans to watch a football game together.
By Monday, Pat Comunale had reported his son missing to the New York police. He had also tracked down contact information for Mr. Rackover and Mr. Dilione, enlisting the help of his son’s friends and his brother, a police sergeant in Bedford, N.Y., a northern suburb of the city.
During closing arguments, Mr. Rackover’s lawyer did not dispute that Mr. Rackover helped dispose of the body and had vigorously cleaned the apartment afterward.
“The truth in this case is that my client is a terribly flawed young man, that he made a horrible, criminal decision,” Mr. Sercarz told the jury. “I know innocence does not apply.” But he argued his client was not guilty of second-degree murder.
One damning piece of evidence came from Louis Ruggiero, the son of Rosanna Scotto, host of “Good Day New York,” and the only person in whom Mr. Rackover confided what happened to Mr. Comunale.
Hours after he buried Mr. Comunale’s charred body, a pale and anxious Mr. Rackover met with Mr. Ruggeiro in a sixth-floor men’s locker room in an Equinox gym on the Upper East Side.
Then Mr. Rackover admitted to Mr. Ruggiero they had buried Mr. Comunale and bleached the apartment.
