Gorey, however, isn’t the easiest target for a biographer, as Dery himself admits. Part of this has to do with what seems to be the enormous gap — or the yawning crevasse, to put it in high-flown Goreyland terms — between art and artist. Even some of Gorey’s most ardent fans assumed he had to be British and long deceased. Such intricate, gothic scenes were supposed to unfurl from the pen of a wan, wraithlike neurasthenic holed up in a garret — not some towering Midwesterner partial to floor-length fur coats and busy days attending the New York City Ballet. There’s only so much biographical material Dery can wrest from the work.
And the outsize persona was in some ways a red herring. Other than his memorable attire and committed balletomania, Gorey’s life was, as Dery says, “disappointingly normal.” A cousin recalled that a typical Gorey evening involved “watching ‘Buffy the Vampire Slayer’ with a bunch of cats hanging on his shoulders and maybe reading a book at the same time or doing a crossword puzzle.” Gorey, who lived alone, insisted on routines, saying he would “go to pieces” without them; every day for breakfast and lunch he went to Jack’s Outback, a Cape Cod restaurant close to his house, and unvaryingly ordered some combination of two eggs, white toast and a fruit cup.
At least the melodramatic name was real. Edward St. John Gorey was born in 1925, the only child of a newspaperman turned publicist for fancy hotels and a mother who bragged about her son’s spectacular I.Q. to anyone willing to listen. His family moved around Chicago a lot, for what Gorey said was no discernible reason, and his parents divorced sometime around 1937 — only to get back together a decade-and-a-half later.
About any emotional turbulence, Gorey would always remain tight-lipped. Asked by an interviewer in 1991 about his parents’ divorce, he said, “I don’t think I had even noticed they parted.” He was similarly mum in his childhood diary, which was largely filled with entries about cats.
For the rest of his life, Dery says, Gorey would speak of sex with either “Swiftian disdain” or “Victorian mortification.” “I am fortunate in that I am apparently reasonably undersexed or something,” he told a reporter in 1980. “Every now and then someone will say my books are seething with repressed sexuality,” he said — and that, according to Gorey, was that.
