And here you thought the midterms would be over after the special election in Mississippi on Tuesday.
No such luck. Twenty-four days after the polls closed on Nov. 6, three House races remain at least nominally unsettled (as do 210 state legislative seats, not that anyone’s counting). In two of the House races, the winner seems clear, but the margins of victory are small enough — less than 1 percentage point — that The Associated Press has not issued an official call. In the third, in North Carolina, The A.P. retracted its initial call after allegations of absentee ballot irregularities threw the result into question.
Here’s a look at where the uncalled races stand.
Of all the House races in California that might have dragged on to the very last moment, District 21 — a largely rural slice of the Central Valley — would not have been most people’s guess. The Republican incumbent, David Valadao, was heavily favored, and indeed, The Associated Press called the race for Mr. Valadao on election night.
But three weeks later, The A.P. was forced to retract its call after absentee and provisional ballots gave Mr. Valadao’s Democratic challenger, T.J. Cox, a narrow lead — about four-tenths of a percentage point — that looks likely to hold. Mr. Cox declared victory on Wednesday, but Mr. Valadao has not conceded. A definitive result will have to wait until California officials certify vote totals on Dec. 14.
If Mr. Cox does win, Democrats will have gained seven House seats in California alone — a historic wipeout for Republicans, who had long dominated certain regions of California despite being outnumbered statewide.
Representative Chris Collins, a Republican, was expected to cruise to re-election in this rural and very red district in Western New York — until August, when he was charged with insider trading. Mr. Collins quickly said he would suspend his re-election campaign, but changed course a month later and remained on the ballot.
Democrats saw an opening to pick up a seat in one of the most conservative parts of New York, but it looks like Mr. Collins eked out a victory by about 2,500 votes. An election official in Erie County, which is part of the district, said it was “mathematically improbable” that the outstanding ballots would change the result, and Mr. Collins’s Democratic opponent, Nate McMurray, conceded on Monday.
But the race remains technically undecided in the eyes of The A.P., and may remain so until New York certifies its election results. After all, Mr. McMurray essentially conceded once before, on election night, only to decide the next day to pursue a recount.
The certification deadline is Dec. 15.
For three weeks, the result in this race was unquestioned: a slim victory for Mark Harris, a Republican.
But this week, the state’s elections board voted not to certify the results, citing irregularities in absentee ballots. The margin between Mr. Harris and his Democratic opponent, Dan McCready, is less than half a percentage point.
Several voters said in affidavits that people had come to their doors to collect absentee ballots, which is illegal in North Carolina. In one case, a voter reported that the woman who collected her ballot “said she would finish it herself.” The bipartisan state elections board will hold a hearing by Dec. 21 to investigate the allegations and decide how to proceed.