Oprah Winfrey referenced the history of racial discrimination surrounding the right to vote during a campaign appearance for Stacey Abrams, the Democratic nominee for governor of Georgia.
I’m here today because of Stacey Abrams. And I’m here today — and I’m here today because of the men and because of the women who were lynched, who were humiliated, who were discriminated against, who were suppressed, who were repressed and oppressed for the right, for the equality, at the polls. And I want you to know that their blood has seeped into my DNA. And I refuse to let their sacrifices be in vain. All those who paved the way that we might have the right to vote: And for anybody here who has an ancestor who didn’t have the right to vote, and you are choosing not to vote — wherever you are in this state, in this country — you are dishonoring your family.
Mr. Trump did not elaborate and offered no evidence for his assertion, which seemed to be a potential preview of the political message he will deliver on Sunday, two days ahead of the election, at a Georgia rally for Brian Kemp, Ms. Abrams’s Republican rival.
But the decision of the president, who has been criticized for inflammatory language, to invoke Ms. Abrams’s background so broadly was a distinct escalation in his attacks on her bid to become the first black woman to be elected governor in the United States. Ms. Abrams, a former Democratic leader of the Georgia House of Representatives, has staked out an array of liberal positions during her campaign, but her tenure in the Legislature has drawn measured praise from the Republicans who led the State Capitol.
Mr. Trump had previously attacked Ms. Abrams on Twitter, but he had not made any overt references to her background until Thursday.
A spokeswoman for Ms. Abrams did not respond to messages seeking comment.
Polls show a very close governor’s race, in which both candidates have accused the other of being too radical for the state. It has long been expected to attract presidential attention, big money and plenty of star power. And if there were somehow lingering questions about the contest’s prominence, they all vanished on Thursday.
Mr. Trump first began speaking about Ms. Abrams, although not by name, in Washington on Thursday when a reporter asked him about the day’s dueling campaign events in Georgia: a series of rallies featuring Vice President Mike Pence, and a pair of town hall meetings led by Ms. Abrams and Oprah Winfrey.
Ms. Winfrey was energetic in her praise for Ms. Abrams and her policy proposals, but she focused her most impassioned remarks on voting rights, delivering a pointed rebuke to people who might willfully stay home along with a stirring evocation of her native South’s racist past.
Mr. Pence and Ms. Winfrey were but two of the prominent figures campaigning in Georgia ahead of Tuesday’s balloting. President Barack Obama is scheduled to campaign with Ms. Abrams on Friday in Atlanta, and Mr. Trump plans to travel to Macon on Sunday.
All are wading into a race that officials in both parties said could tip either way.
A poll, commissioned by WSB-TV and The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, released on Thursday showed a fractured electorate. Ms. Abrams drew the support of 46.9 percent of respondents to the poll, while Mr. Kemp won the backing of 46.7 percent. Nearly 5 percent of respondents said they were undecided, while 1.6 percent said they intended to support a libertarian candidate.
The poll, which had a margin of error of 3 percentage points, was the latest to suggest that the Election Day vote could end with Mr. Kemp and Ms. Abrams advancing to a December runoff if neither receives a majority of the vote.
Fund-raising reports released on Thursday again showcased the scope and fervor of the race: Ms. Abrams and Mr. Kemp had both pulled in at least $20 million through Oct. 25. The public disclosure reports showed that Mr. Kemp had about $4.2 million remaining, while Ms. Abrams said her campaign had about $3.9 million on hand.