Dez Bryant, the out-of-work star wide receiver, will be joining the New Orleans Saints, giving them another weapon in their increasingly plausible quest for an N.F.L. championship.
Bryant, 30, has been out of the league since April, when he was released by the Cowboys in a salary cap move.
Bryant worked out with the Saints on Tuesday. While there was no formal announcement from the Saints yet, Bryant on Wednesday retweeted several posts saying he had signed.
The passionate Bryant is known for highlight reel catches. A three-time Pro Bowler, he led the league with 16 touchdown receptions in 2014. Last season, he played all 16 games for the Cowboys and finished with 838 yards and six touchdowns, both team highs. When he was released, the news came as a blow to much of the Dallas fan base, which had made him one of the team’s most popular players.
Bryant has caught 73 touchdown passes in his career, fifth among active players.
This season, the Cowboys (3-5) have turned, with mixed results, to receivers Cole Beasley and Michael Gallup. No Cowboy has more than two receiving touchdowns.
The Saints will face the Cowboys in Dallas on Nov. 29.
The Saints (7-1) are being mentioned as Super Bowl favorites, especially after a victory on Sunday over the previously undefeated Los Angeles Rams. Bryant will join a receiving corps that includes Michael Thomas, with 880 yards and five touchdowns. Thomas thrust himself onto the national stage on Sunday after a touchdown by pulling out a hidden flip phone and pretending to make a call, a homage to a stunt pulled by Joe Horn 15 years ago.
Led by the future Hall-of-Famer Drew Brees at quarterback, the Saints have the N.F.L.’s seventh-ranked passing offense entering Week 10, averaging 290 yards per game.
Bryant’s most memorable moment may have been on an incomplete pass. In the 2014 playoffs against the Packers, he appeared to catch a fourth-down pass near the end zone late in a close game. But after a review, it was ruled that he failed to control the ball. The Cowboys lost and have not won a playoff game since.
Expect to see Bryant throw up the X in Saints colors in the near future.