ISTANBUL — The Turkish police searched a Saudi-owned mansion south of Istanbul on Monday as part of the investigation into the murder of the Saudi dissident Jamal Khashoggi, whose remains have not been found.
Irfan Fidan, the chief prosecutor of Istanbul and the leader of the Khashoggi investigation, ordered the search of the mansion, a sprawling building with a columned central portico, set amid trees in the village of Samanli, about 60 miles south of Istanbul. The area, on the Marmara coast, is a popular tourist spot known for its thermal springs.
Police officers searched the area with drones, and forensics officers, a fire brigade and sniffer dogs were at the scene on Monday, Turkish news outlets reported. The newspaper Hurriyet said that the mansion belonged to a Saudi businessman, and that it had been unoccupied for the past month. A second house, adjacent to the mansion, was also being searched, Hurriyet reported.
Mr. Fidan’s office issued a statement Monday afternoon saying that the search was conducted because one of the Saudi suspects in the Khashoggi case had contacted the occupant of the mansion the day before Mr. Khashoggi was killed, and the conversation may have been about disposing of his body.
Mr. Khashoggi, who wrote columns for The Washington Post, was killed after entering the Saudi Consulate in Istanbul on Oct. 2. Turkish officials say that a team of 15 Saudi officials arrived in Istanbul earlier that day, killed Mr. Khashoggi, dismembered and removed his body, and left the country hours later.
The killing of Mr. Khashoggi, 59, has heightened tensions between Turkey and Saudi Arabia, and tarnished the reputation of the Saudi government and its crown prince, Mohammed bin Salman, the day-to-day ruler of the kingdom.
Turkish officials, speaking on the condition of anonymity, and Western intelligence analysts have said that given the complexity and political sensitivity of the operation, the killing was almost certainly carried out with the consent of the prince.
Turkey’s government has maintained pressure on the Saudis with a steady string of leaks about the case, but it has refrained from making any public statements about Prince Mohammed’s possible involvement.
Turkish investigators had previously looked into other properties in Yalova Province, which includes the mansion that was searched on Monday, after a vehicle belonging to the Saudi Consulate was tracked in the area around the time of the murder. The authorities said they were investigating a Saudi-owned property in the region but released no other details.
Turkish news outlets have reported that the counterterrorism police had also raided a smaller house in Yalova that was occupied by an Arab family in mid-October, but the trail appeared to have gone cold.
The Saudi authorities have detained 18 people in connection with the case, brought criminal charges against 11 of them, threatened five with execution, and pledged to cooperate with the Turkish investigation.
But Turkish officials have complained that the Saudis failed to answer questions about where and how Mr. Khashoggi’s remains had been disposed of.
The Saudi prosecutor, Saud al-Mujeb, who visited Istanbul at the end of October, said that after Mr. Khashoggi was killed inside the consulate, his body was handed to a “local collaborator” for disposal. Saudi officials have not revealed the identity of the local collaborator, despite repeated Turkish requests, leading officials to doubt the information.
The Turkish defense minister, Hulusi Akar, said last week that the Saudi hit team might have carried Mr. Khashoggi’s dismembered body in suitcases back to Saudi Arabia, using diplomatic immunity to avoid baggage searches. Other Turkish officials have suggested that his body was dumped somewhere in Turkey or dissolved in acid.
The mansion searched on Monday was occupied by Mohammed Ahmed A. Alfaozan, according to the Turkish prosecutor, Mr. Fidan. In his statement, Mr. Fidan said that one of the Saudi group involved in the killing, Mansour Othman M. Abahussain, had contacted Mr. Alfaozan on Oct. 1, the day before the murder.
“It is considered that this contact was about destroying/hiding the body of the journalist Jamal Khashoggi, who was killed and dismembered,” the statement read.
Mr. Abahussain, 46, is among the 18 men officials arrested in Saudi Arabia, 17 of whom the United States Treasury Department has imposed sanctions on in connection with Mr. Khashoggi’s murder.