Alison Emma Schumer and Elizabeth Anne Weiland are to be married Nov. 18 at 501 Union, an events space in Brooklyn. Rabbi Rachel Timoner is to officiate.
Ms. Schumer (left), 29, works in Manhattan as a product marketing manager at Facebook. She graduated from Harvard.
She is a daughter of Iris Weinshall and Senator Chuck Schumer, Democrat of New York.
Ms. Weiland, 33 is pursuing an M.B.A. at Columbia. Until 2017, she was the director of advertising and licensing at Teaching Channel, an educational technology company in San Francisco. She graduated cum laude from the College of William and Mary.
She is the daughter of Linda C. Weiland and William H. Weiland of Houston.
The couple’s timing was off in January 2015 after they were first introduced online and then met over a beer at Duboce Park Cafe in San Francisco.
In May 2016, Ms. Weiland reached out to her on Facebook.
“What’s the statute of limitations on getting a cup of coffee?” Ms. Weiland said.
Ms. Schumer said she was “thrilled” to hear from her, and they soon met for dinner at Ragazza in Lower Haight in San Francisco.
But her concerns quickly dissolved. “Honestly I remember us gazing at each other during dinner,” Ms. Schumer said, and they began hanging out.
In July, when Ms. Weiland mentioned that Crater Lake National Park in Oregon was on her bucket list, Ms. Schumer quickly said, “O.K., let’s go,” and they embarked on a seven-hour car ride in Ms. Schumer’s Volkswagen Golf named Schmidt.
The night before they got to the lake they stopped at an Airbnb tepee two hours away. Ms. Weiland built a fire and cooked Hebrew National hot dogs on a stick, explaining they were her favorite food.
“And being a girl from Brooklyn, meeting someone with a fondness for Hebrew National, I knew she was someone special,” Ms. Schumer said.
The next morning they parked at the top of the caldera and hiked down to the lake.
They decided to jump into the lake — and further into the relationship.
“We thought it would be a summer romance,” said Ms. Weiland, who knew that Ms. Schumer would move back to New York that fall.
Instead they decided to continue the relationship. After Ms. Weiland got into Columbia, Ms. Schumer first insisted they get separate apartments, but later took her best friend’s advice.
“I proclaimed, ‘Let’s live together,’” Ms. Schumer said, and in May 2017 after signing the lease on their apartment in Brooklyn, their first mission was to get a couch.
“We both hate shopping and we had sort of girded ourselves,” Ms. Weiland said. “We saw this one couch,” she added, and that was it.
Ms. Schumer said they looked at their relationship in much the same way. “When you know you know,” she said.
In January 2018, Ms. Schumer eagerly suggested a picnic on Georgica Beach in East Hampton, N.Y., in 34-degree weather, to which she took along champagne and a sandwich of fresh mozzarella and prosciutto on a homemade bun from Paisanos Butcher Shop in Brooklyn. There were also rings made from the stones of each of their grandmother’s rings.
