Heroes come to life at the Library of Congress this week by way of a major comics, toys and memorabilia collection.
Mickey Mouse, Popeye, Superman, Captain America: These and other characters are among the 37 items on display at the Library of Congress, courtesy of a gift this year by Steve Geppi, a comics distributor and owner of the Geppi Entertainment Museum, which closed in June.
Of donating his collection, Geppi said,“When you own something, it’s no fun sitting in the corner with no one to share it with.” He added that he hopes the gift will elevate comic books and pop culture.
You will believe that a mouse can fly if you look at the first page of “Plane Crazy” (1928), the animation storyboard that depicts the first drawing of Mickey Mouse. “It survived from 1928 on very thin paper,” Duke exclaimed. The resulting animated short shows Mickey reading a “How to Fly” book, with a portrait of Charles Lindbergh and the notes “Ace of Aces” and “Lindy.” It also includes Minnie Mouse and a crash landing eased by Minnie’s bloomers doubling as a parachute. Duke said that “Plane Crazy” was the first Mickey drawing, though “Steamboat Willie,” the third animated short, was the first one with Mickey to be theatrically released.
This G.I. Joe prototype from 1964 came five years after the first Barbie doll was made but they had a lot in common. “You make the money on the accessories, the clothing and the accouterments,” said Amanda Zimmerman, a reference assistant. G.I. Joe was conceived by Stan Weston, a licensing agent, who took the idea to Don Levine, in research and development for the company that would become Hasbro. “Weston sold the rights to Hasbro for $100,000, opting not to take the risky option of 1 percent of future sales,” Ms. Zimmerman said. (He would have made millions if he had instead chosen the royalty deal.) But Levine took the idea and ran with it, she noted, and coined the term “action figure” to combat the notion that boys would not play with dolls. Another Barbie link: “They took a Ken doll and shaved his face down to make him less baby faced and more rugged.” The prototype has a hand-sewn uniform and bars that indicate that G.I. Joe was a sergeant who had served time overseas. When it went to auction in 2003, it sold for just over $200,000.
The exhibition will be on display through Feb. 11 in the Great Hall of the Thomas Jefferson Building in Washington; loc.gov/visit.