An illustrated account of my grandmother’s escape from Lithuania as Europe was heading toward the Holocaust.
Leah Goren is an illustrator.
The afternoon of Oct. 27, I lay down on a bench, my legs dangling over the edge, and cried. I texted my mom. “I’m really sad,” I told her.
There have been countless tragedies in recent years, but after the attack on the Tree of Life synagogue in Pittsburgh, for the first time I didn’t know what to do with my grief. Days passed, and I started writing and drawing. That attack is part of the story of my people, a story of persecution and genocide. I learned about the Holocaust as a kid in Hebrew school — and from my grandmother, Tutti.
Above is a portrait of my grandmother with her friends in Memel, Lithuania. She is now 93 and lives in Pennsylvania. The other two died in concentration camps.
Her father was a textile distributor and traveled for work, importing wool from Britain and lace from Belgium. This gave him a vantage point many in Memel did not have, and he saw Europe becoming gripped by anti-Semitism.
My family members were able to flee only because they had money and relatives in America. They escaped Europe mostly by boat because they had heard that Jews were being pulled off trains. They crossed the Atlantic to New York City on the Queen Mary. “War is coming,” her father said. “I want you to remember Europe how it was.” Everyone they left behind was killed.
Growing up in the late 1990s and early 2000s, I was very aware of my Jewishness made me different. I lived in a pocket of San Diego County that had no other Jewish families, as far as I knew. I so badly wished I could get presents on Christmas and go to Disneyland like everyone else (my family thought of Walt Disney as a Nazi sympathizer). I only grudgingly went to Hebrew school and had a bat mitzvah under protest.
But at the same time, I was, and still am, a middle-class white girl living in America at a time when everything is in my favor. Most of the times I’ve felt like an outsider were in my head.
I moved to New York City when I was 20 and only then began to appreciate my heritage. I found, to my surprise, that there were a million other Jews just in New York, and millions more people of every country and faith imaginable, and for the most part everyone lived in peace.
When Donald Trump was elected president my grandmother said, “Everyone laughed at Hitler, too.” Everyone in Memel had a beautiful life and no one thought anything could ever happen there. They thought the Lithuanian government would keep them safe.
