COLLEGE PARK, Md. — Two University of Maryland athletic trainers who attended to a football player who died after contracting heatstroke at a spring practice are no longer employed there, a university spokeswoman said on Wednesday.
The development marks another rebuke of the University System of Maryland’s Board of Regents, a majority of whom had wanted to retain the trainers, according to several people with knowledge of the situation who spoke anonymously to describe confidential conversations and proceedings. In a chaotic series of events last week, the university president fired the head football coach in defiance of the board’s public wishes, after which the board’s chairman resigned.
Late Wednesday afternoon, the board elected a new chairwoman, Linda R. Gooden, who was already a regent. In a statement, she apologized for the board’s advocating last week that Coach D.J. Durkin keep his job, a stance that spurred campus protests, criticism from politicians and national opprobrium.
“While the board’s decision was far from unanimous, and many members voted a different way, everyone on the board now understands that the board’s personnel recommendations were wrong,” she said.
She also offered an apology to the parents and relatives of Jordan McNair, the 19-year-old player who died two weeks after the May practice in which he sustained heatstroke. “For that, we apologize to the McNair family, the University of Maryland, College Park community, and to the citizens of our state,” she said.
An outside medical report conducted for the university and released in September found that McNair, an offensive lineman, was not cared for appropriately after displaying symptoms of heatstroke during the practice. Cold-water immersion, a standard treatment, was not conducted, and it was more than an hour before anyone dialed 911. He died two weeks later.
The two trainers had been on paid administrative leave since mid-August. While the university has declined to name them, they are widely known to be Wes Robinson, the head football trainer, and Steve Nordwall, an assistant athletic director and director of athletic training.
A lawyer for Robinson confirmed that his client was no longer employed by Maryland, and said that the university had said there was no cause for his firing. Nordwall could not immediately be reached.
Their terminations came a week after the board recommended retaining the head football coach, D.J. Durkin, and the athletic director, Damon Evans, after a report into the football program’s culture found dysfunction but only partially blamed Durkin and Evans for it.
A day after the board’s public show of support for Durkin, President Wallace D. Loh made his dramatic decision to buck the board’s wishes and use his authority over personnel at the university to fire the coach.
Loh — who also announced, under board pressure, that he would retire in June — had initially disagreed with the board, believing that Durkin and Maryland ought to part ways, according to the people familiar with the situation. Also, Loh encountered widespread outrage, both on campus and nationally, after the announcement that Durkin would be retained.
The board’s former chairman, James T. Brady, resigned last week after Loh’s surprise firing of Durkin.
As early as two weeks ago, a majority of the board had advocated retaining the two trainers, the people said.
The trainers were placed on leave in August shortly after ESPN published an article describing a “toxic” culture at the program. Around the same time, Loh, who, according to the people, had by that point seen a preliminary draft of the medical report, accepted “legal and moral responsibility” for McNair’s death on behalf of the university and started a second investigation that culminated in last month’s report into the football program’s culture.
Also in August, the university and Rick Court, the football program’s strength and conditioning coach, reached an agreement to part ways, after Court was identified in the ESPN article as the ringleader of a culture of bullying and humiliation that is widely deemed to belong to an older, retrograde vision of football.
On Tuesday, the Terrapins, who are 5-4 under the interim head coach Matt Canada, tried to put the past several days’ events behind them as they prepared for Saturday’s game at Indiana (5-4).
“A week ago, we were sitting here, and then suddenly there were different events,” Canada said.
Maryland players elected not to make any members of the team available to the news media after Saturday’s game, a home loss to Michigan State. Tuesday marked the first time current players spoke publicly to reporters since last week’s developments.
Indeed, should Maryland hire a new head coach this off-season, it would be the program’s fifth head coach, including interim appointees, in five seasons. Maryland has struggled to keep up on the gridiron with rivals in the Big Ten, the football-centric conference it joined before the 2014 season.
Maryland would need to win two of its final three games — at Indiana, versus No. 8 Ohio State and at No. 21 Penn State — to have its first-ever winning season in conference play.
