WASHINGTON — And then there were none.
A Democratic insurgency seeking to force Representative Nancy Pelosi to abandon her bid for speaker and install a fresh crop of leaders at the helm of their new majority suffered a setback on Tuesday, when Representative Marcia L. Fudge, the sole lawmaker to flirt openly with a challenge, dropped the idea and endorsed her.
Ms. Fudge’s sudden reversal was the result of a swift and relentless bit of deal-cutting by Ms. Pelosi, a legendary negotiator and vote-counter who has insisted that she will have the support to claim the speaker’s gavel despite a rebellion in Democratic ranks.
It sent a group of dissidents who released a letter on Monday calling for new leadership back to the drawing board to find a Democrat willing to directly challenge Ms. Pelosi, 78, who has led her party for 15 years, handily dispatching would-be challengers along the way.
Ms. Fudge, who is African-American, said she had changed her mind after Ms. Pelosi gave her the opportunity to play a key role in safeguarding voting rights and assured her that black women would “have a seat at the decision-making table” in the new Congress.
Ms. Fudge said that this month’s elections clearly demonstrated the need to strengthen election protections, and the new post would allow her to work to reinstate voting protections struck down by the Supreme Court in 2013.
Her turnabout came after several days of quiet conversation with Ms. Pelosi, who hosted her for a 45-minute meeting on Friday in her Capitol office suite. Ms. Fudge emerged saying she would decide over the Thanksgiving holiday whether to pursue the speakership, but on Monday, her name was conspicuously absent from the letter calling for new leaders, which she had originally signed.
On Tuesday, Ms. Fudge’s prospects appeared to dim when it was revealed that she wrote a letter in 2015 pleading for leniency for Lance Mason, a former state lawmaker and judge in Ohio, after he was convicted of brutally beating his wife in front of their two daughters, and who is now the prime suspect in her killing.
But in the end, the issue was moot; Ms. Pelosi had already struck a bargain with Ms. Fudge that removed her from the running for speaker.