Opinion|We’re Suing the Florida Governor. He Should Not Oversee His Own Election.
Mr. Bassin is the founding executive director of Protect Democracy.
These actions shouldn’t be surprising, but they’re in stark contrast to what we’re seeing from those overseeing the close statewide races in Georgia and Florida. In Georgia, Brian Kemp, as secretary of state, used his office to accuse his opponents, without evidence, of hacking into the state election database; he posted this unfounded allegation on the same secretary of state website where voters go to check their polling location. In Florida, Gov. Rick Scott made similarly evidence-free allegations of electoral fraud and then ordered state law enforcement to investigate the county officials who oversee the vote count in two counties where his opponent performed well.
What could be the reason for such opposite approaches? Here’s one glaring difference: Mr. Kemp and Mr. Scott are also the candidates in those close races; Ms. Reagan and Mr. Ducey are not.
The practice of government officials overseeing elections in which they are also candidates is inherently disturbing, but it is not uncommon. What is uncommon is the degree to which a growing number of such officials are misusing their office in egregious ways to try to tilt the electoral playing field in their favor.
Today, Protect Democracy filed a lawsuit on behalf of the League of Women Voters and Common Cause of Florida against Mr. Scott to bar him from having any further official role in overseeing the Florida election in which he is a candidate.
Our organization filed a similar lawsuit last week against Mr. Kemp. It argued that his position as a judge in his own case was a violation of the Constitution’s due process clause. Just as an emergency hearing in that case was about to begin this past Thursday morning, Mr. Kemp’s lawyers informed the judge that Mr. Kemp was submitting his resignation as secretary of state. He claimed it was to turn his attention to planning a transition, but it certainly looked as though he realized his dual role was untenable and was trying to avoid losing in court.
In addition to these cases, this year Kansas Secretary of State Kris Kobach used his office to advise county election officials on how to count ballots in a primary for governor in which he was a candidate. It was only after the election and after he had a razor-thin advantage of less than 200 votes that he agreed under pressure to recuse himself from further involvement as secretary of state. Mr. Kobach went on to win that primary.
The problem these cases have exposed extends far beyond Georgia, Florida and Kansas, and these emergency lawsuits should not be the ultimate solution to this problem.
We should all find this chilling. How will he react if he’s trailing as votes are tallied in 2020? How might he use the levers of the federal government at his disposal to tilt the playing field in advance in his favor? These are not speculative questions. After all, he deployed more than 5,000 military personnel to the Mexican border in what was a transparent political stunt designed to turn out his base rather than address any real national security need.
What if he accuses his opponent of an invented wrongdoing and orders his Department of Justice to investigate in the run-up to the election?
These are the tactics authoritarian strongmen use around the world. And we don’t have sufficient safeguards in place yet to prevent them. But there are things that can be done now.
First, courts should make clear that government officials may not use their offices to interfere in races in which they are a candidate. They can start by doing that in the case we just filed against Mr. Scott.
Second, Congress should hold hearings this year on ways the federal government can be misused to interfere in an election and enact appropriate legislation to guard against such behavior. Among other things, Congress should consider how best to codify longstanding internal Justice Department rules that limit what investigative and prosecutorial steps may be taken and announced about a candidate in the window leading up to an election.
Third, states should pass laws requiring government officials to recuse themselves from any role overseeing elections in which they are also candidates.
It will probably come as a surprise to many that we’ve tolerated these sorts of obvious conflicts of interest for as long as we have. But we can’t any longer.
Ian Bassin (@ianbassin) is the founding executive director of Protect Democracy (@protctdemocracy), a nonpartisan nonprofit dedicated to preventing American democracy from declining into a more authoritarian form of government.