Cedric Paquette broke a tie with 5 minutes 41 seconds left, and the Tampa Bay Lightning ended the visiting Buffalo Sabres’ franchise-record-tying winning streak at 10 games with a 5-4 victory on Thursday night.
Dan Girardi, Alex Killorn, Nikita Kucherov and Steven Stamkos also scored, and Luis Domingue made 18 saves.
Sam Reinhart had two goals for Buffalo, and Zemgus Girgensons and Tage Thompson also scored.
Buffalo had evened the score at 3-3 when Jack Eichel’s pass from the left wing boards into slot went off Reinhart’s skate at 5:39 in the second.
Kucherov put the Lightning up by 3-2 from the slot during a 3-on-1 with 4:05 left in the first. Kucherov also had an assist and has an eight-game point streak (three goals, 17 points). He set a career high for points in a single month with 23.
After Girardi opened the scoring, Girgensons and Reinhart scored 63 seconds apart midway through the first. Killorn knotted the score at 2-2 just 43 seconds after Reinhart’s goal.
Girardi couldn’t put any weight on his right leg after a collision with Thompson five minutes into the game but returned 10 minute later.
Tampa Bay defenseman Ryan McDonagh went to the locker room at 11:50 in the first after being hit at the end boards by Eichel, who received a two-minute boarding penalty.
SENATORS 3, RANGERS 0 Craig Anderson stopped 27 shots for his first shutout of the season as host Ottawa beat the Rangers, 3-0.
It was Anderson’s 10th win this season, his first shutout since Dec. 16 and the 41st of his career.
Henrik Lundqvist had a rough start but finished with 31 saves for the Rangers.
Trailing by 2-0, the Rangers thought they had cut the Senators’ lead in half near the midpoint of the second period but the goal was waved off because the referee had blown the whistle before the puck crossed the goal line.
Ottawa did go ahead 3-0 late in the second after an impressive passing display that ended with Duchene scoring his team-leading 12th goal.
BRUINS 2, ISLANDERS 1 Ryan Donato scored the decisive shootout goal in his return to the N.H.L., Tuukka Rask made 28 saves and Boston outlasted the visiting Islanders, 2-1.
Donato, recalled Wednesday after a demotion to Providence of the A.H.L., tucked the winner past Islanders goalie Robin Lehner on the Bruins’ fourth attempt. Boston has earned at least 1 point in five of its past six games.
The Islanders had a goal waved off with 3:47 to play in overtime after Anthony Beauvillier fell behind Rask in the crease before Mathew Barzal flipped the puck over the goaltender.
