When this Patrick Berry puzzle tells you what it is, believe it the first time.
SUNDAY PUZZLE — I so wanted to pull everyone’s leg and go on and on about how clever and esoteric Patrick Berry’s well-hidden theme was today — this constructor is so innovative and subtle that I figured the ruse might be believable. But the boss admonished me that we are here to elucidate, not obfuscate, so I’m playing it straight.
I also couldn’t remember ever having solved a themeless Sunday before, and thought it would be a public service to find out if this was actually a first. I emailed this query to Jeff Chen, the guru of xwordinfo.com (a site you must bookmark if you care enough about puzzles to, say, be reading this sentence).
I believe it's the very first one! It's possible that there might have been one under another editor. Jim, do you know?
Thus, Jeff threw the question to Jim Horne, the original Wordplay guru and another font of crossword wisdom.
David, do you recall if there were there any pre-Shortz themeless Sundays?
Caitlin, I don’t know of any either, but David will probably know for sure. There have certainly been none since Will Shortz became editor in 1993.
Thus, Jim threw the question to David Steinberg, who you might recognize as a constructor, but is also the guru of something relevant and momentous to the question at hand: “The Pre-Shortzian Puzzle Project,” which has resurrected New York Times crossword puzzles from 1942 to 1993, and made them available on Jeff Chen’s site.
The Sunday NYT crosswords were all "themeless" (unless you consider being news-related a theme) until the mid 1950s. Themeless Sundays were common throughout Margaret Farrar's editorship (early 1969). Will Weng ran a few themelesses at the beginning of his editorship, though to the best of my knowledge, he and Eugene T. Maleska published only themed Sunday puzzles from the mid-1970s onward. Really looking forward to seeing Will Shortz run a themeless on Sunday!
I’ll be very interested to see what difficulty level people will put on this grid. I thought it was a jumbo Friday, at least, if not a Saturday, and a real trove of fabulous cluing. I loved TOETAGS, BRIARS, ROCK OUT, PORTERS, RADIO CAR; honestly, there were too many witty entries today to count, or list without spoiling the solve. There was also a very refreshing lack of obscurity and idiom, and the entire grid had a great natural flow.
23A: A debut and a reference to a form of technology I wasn’t familiar with, WIRE RECORDERS, which at first made me think of newswires, but actually used real wires, magnetized in a particular way to replicate sounds. Wire recordings still exist and are actually the sole source of live Woody Guthrie music; a 1949 concert was resurrected, amazingly, and won a Grammy in 2008.
56A: I loved this clue and the one for the entry right above it; a “party of 13,” for some boys, is a BAR MITZVAH, a rite of passage at the age of 13. This rolls around very infrequently in the Times puzzle, and its female counterpart still waits in the wings.
88A: The two horizontal stacks in the corners of this grid were almost all debuts, including this entry, AS BIG AS A HOUSE. I don’t know how tricky these corners were for solvers, but didn’t want to leave a big blank spot in the hints.
19D: I just took a class in “Pests of Northeast landscape plants,” but the fruit these guys prey on is sort of tender, so we didn’t cover the FIGEATER beetle — it’s a scarab, like the Japanese beetle, with a flashy iridescent underside and what’s lyrically described as a “velvet” green top. They’re native to the Southwest, where they eat cactus fruit and grapes as well, and they’ll probably bumble up here sooner or later. Good luck eating my figs, beetle, because they’re as small and hard as marbles, always, even though I keep trying.
32D: I appreciated the vertical passage of BEAVIS and MORLEY down the middle of this grid. I don’t think poor Beavis had a last name.
34D: Stephen King (whose name I misspelled in these virtual pages once, I’m pretty sure) is so prolific I figured this would be something I’d have to piece together; I haven’t followed him since I reached an age and/or neurosis level where horror stopped being fun. But this is actually one of his golden oldies — PET SEMATARY — from 1983. Super creepy story about pet zombies, although I had a dog once that I’d completely accept and adore even as a semi-resurrected monster. Sigh!
65D: I mis-entered “Cordelia” instead of CORNELIA here, on the crosses, having vague knowledge of Calpurnia, Caesar’s “middle” wife, but neither of the others. If you’re interested, someone’s put together a cast of Cesarean characters with first person reviews of the Roman leader (presumably speculative). Cornelia dishes quite a bit of dirt.
