Deutsche Bank’s efforts to escape a history of scandal, wrongdoing and mismanagement suffered a serious setback Thursday after the German police raided its headquarters in Frankfurt as part of an investigation into whether the lender helped criminals launder money through offshore tax havens.
Arriving in a fleet of blue-and-white police vans, 170 prosecutors, federal agents, police officers and tax authorities searched the headquarters and five other sites in the area, prosecutors in Frankfurt said. The officers seized paper documents and electronic records related to the case, which involved hundreds of millions of euros, and were still at the bank late Thursday.
The investigation stems from information contained in the so-called Panama Papers and Offshore Leaks, a trove of confidential documents that helped to expose the workings of global money laundering and tax evasion, prosecutors said. Deutsche Bank employees, who were not identified, are suspected of guiding customers to establish companies in offshore tax havens and transfer money earned through criminal activity using Deutsche Bank accounts, the prosecutors said. A subsidiary in the British Virgin Islands is under intense scrutiny.
Deutsche Bank, Germany’s largest lender, said in a statement it was “cooperating fully” with investigators and expressed surprise at the raid. “We have already provided the authorities with all the relevant information regarding Panama Papers,” Jörg Eigendorf, a Deutsche Bank spokesman, said on Twitter.
The size of the raid and sums of money involved suggest that a yearslong effort to remake the bank’s culture and improve compliance has fallen short. During the last decade, Deutsche Bank has paid billions of euros of fines for an array of misconduct, including deceiving buyers of mortgage-backed securities, colluding with other banks to rig benchmark interest rates and manipulating foreign exchange trading to the detriment of customers.
“This says they are not genuine and sincere about changing this culture of noncompliance and changing this culture of impunity,” said Jimmy Gurulé, a former United States assistant attorney general who is a professor of criminal law at Notre Dame Law School and has written several books on terrorism financing.
Such regulatory and enforcement action, combined with management mistakes, have taken a toll on profits. Deutsche Bank reported net earnings of 750 million euros, or $854 million, during the third quarter on revenue of €19.7 billion. That is considered a paltry return for a bank, and was less than half the earnings a year earlier.
In April, Christian Sewing, who had just become the bank’s third chief executive in three years, said Deutsche would scale back its investment banking unit, the source of most of the trouble. The decision effectively ended a costly 20-year quest to compete with the likes of Goldman Sachs and JPMorgan Chase.
Deutsche Bank has previously faced scrutiny related to money laundering. Last year, the bank paid a $425 million fine in New York for helping clients of its Moscow office illegally move $10 billion out of Russia. Also last year, the Federal Reserve fined Deutsche Bank $41 million for failing to have an effective system for complying with bank secrecy laws and laws to prevent money laundering. In September, the German bank regulator said it had appointed a monitor to ensure that Deutsche Bank had adequate measures in place to prevent money laundering and financing of terrorism.
Deutsche Bank has also been drawn into scandal at Denmark’s Danske Bank, which faces criminal investigations over suspected money laundering in its Estonian branch. Deutsche, among other banks, handled certain transactions for Danske. Deutsche Bank says it stopped doing work for the Danske Bank Estonian branch in 2015.
Police raids are nothing new at the bank, either. The authorities conducted large-scale searches in 2015 and 2012 in cases involving alleged tax fraud.
The latest investigation focuses on two employees, who were not publicly identified but whose ages were given as 50 and 46, as well as other people whom investigators have not yet identified. In 2016 alone, prosecutors said, a Deutsche Bank subsidiary in the British Virgin Islands served 900 customers with transactions worth 311 million, or more than $350 million.
Deutsche Bank employees are accused of neglecting their duty to report suspicious transactions “although ample grounds existed,” prosecutors said in a statement.
“Deutsche Bank helped customers found offshore organizations in tax havens by transferring illegally acquired money without alerting authorities to suspected money laundering,” prosecutors said. Nadja Niesen, a spokeswoman for the Frankfurt prosecutors, declined to comment beyond information given in the written statement.
The raids were the latest example of how the Panama Papers have, over the past two years, shed light on the methods that people and companies use to hide their wealth and avoid taxes.
The papers — millions of confidential documents from the Mossack Fonseca law firm in Panama — identify international politicians, business leaders and celebrities involved in webs of suspicious financial transactions. They included hundreds of Deutsche Bank customers.
The documents were obtained by the newspaper Süddeutsche Zeitung and shared with news organizations around the world through the nonprofit International Consortium of Investigative Journalists. The result was a series of exposés in 2016 on how rich and well-connected individuals and companies were able to skirt tax laws.
The revelations spurred enforcement action and unveiled routine corruption in the global financial system. They also exposed how offshore banking — meant to help ease cross-border business — had become a tool, in some cases, for excessive tax avoidance.
The documents themselves were not proof of wrongdoing, but news reports tracked close associates of President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, relatives of President Xi Jinping of China, members of the Chinese Communist Party’s Politburo Standing Committee and even the father of Prime Minister David Cameron of Britain as maintaining accounts for tax advantages.
Thursday’s raid marked a new low for Deutsche Bank, which has never quite recovered from the turmoil of the 2008 financial crisis. This year, the bank’s arm in the United States failed a Federal Reserve stress test, which found that it had “material weaknesses” in its operations. Deutsche Bank has also faced special scrutiny by European regulators because of concerns about its holdings of risky derivatives and other assets.
The bank is in the middle of a restructuring plan that is expected cut more than 7,000 jobs by the end of 2019.
Although an earnings preview suggested there would be some good news after years of restructuring, the report of the raid sent shares down more than 3 percent Thursday. The shares have lost half of their value since the start of the year.