Stephen Colbert expressed sympathy for the victims of the wildfires sweeping California — then slammed the less sympathetic response President Trump issued over the weekend. On Twitter, Trump blamed poor “forest management” for the fires and threatened to withhold federal funds for disaster relief.
Colbert found that response laughably insensitive.
Trevor Noah is watching the election results in Florida closely. Both the senator’s and governor’s races there remain too close to call, with a recount underway and uncounted ballots still surfacing. Some Republicans have accused Democrats of election fraud, though no evidence of that has been provided.
Noah poked fun at Andrew Gillum, the Democratic candidate for governor, for first conceding the election and then changing his mind.
Noah then pivoted to discussing Trump’s recent trip to France, where world leaders on Sunday commemorated the 100th anniversary of the end of World War I. The president canceled a visit to an American military cemetery there because of the rain, though the weather didn’t stop other world leaders from making similar cemetery visits.
Jimmy Fallon found a different way to make light of Trump’s weather-induced cancellation.
Stephen Colbert bid adieu to Stan Lee, the creator of Marvel Comics, who died on Monday at 95. Colbert proudly declared himself a Marvel fan, and pointed out that the “Late Show” set features Captain America’s shield.
“Thanks for all the stories, Stan — and I know you’re hearing this a lot today, but, excelsior,” Colbert said.
It might seem hard to believe (especially after you watch this), but Trumpy Bear is a real thing.
Stephen Colbert led a selfie campaign to promote his new, Trump-quoting children’s book.
Dick Cavett, a late-night TV luminary, will sit down with Seth Meyers on Tuesday.
The actors and activists Ruby Dee and Ossie Davis were a prominent husband-and-wife pair on Broadway, in Hollywood and in the civil rights movement, where they bridged divides between divergent factions. Now their collected papers have arrived at the Schomburg Center in Harlem. Here’s a glance at the materials.
