“You never know who’s behind that door,” says Angel Darcourt, who has knocked on many thousands of doors in the six years she has worked as a canvasser for Working America, the community-organizing arm of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., whose unions represent some 12.5 million workers. She has knocked for issues, politicians and donations in the rain, snow and triple-digit heat in Florida, Minnesota, California, Illinois, Missouri, Michigan and West Virginia. Don’t prejudge people based on the car they drive, their Rottweiler, their race, gender, religion or age. If a child answers the door, don’t introduce yourself; just ask for a grown-up.
Dress for the weather in comfortable clothes (avoid suits unless you’re knocking as a Mormon missionary). Expect that people are watching you, even when you’re halfway down the block. Keep your hands out of your pockets. Take a step back once you’ve knocked, and don’t make any fast movements. Introduce yourself while making eye contact; talk loudly and slowly. “Build a relationship before you jump into persuasion,” Darcourt says. Ask questions and listen to answers. Darcourt often starts by asking, “What issue is most important to you and your family?” Tailor your pitch — whether it’s for an idea, a candidate or a product — to the person and his or her interests. You’ll get better with practice. When Darcourt trains new canvassers, she has them role-play door-knocking scenarios before talking to real strangers.
Plan your escape. If someone answers the door and seems particularly kind — offering you water, say — consider that address a safe house where you might seek help or refuge if you encounter some kind of threat. Don’t argue, ever. “You’re the visitor,” Darcourt says. Sometimes people will be rude or bigoted or mean. You can always just walk away. But if you suspect they’re open to conversation, talk to them. Darcourt is a 28-year-old, copiously tattooed Latina lesbian who knocks on up to 80 doors in a single evening (she considers 6:30 p.m. to 8:30 p.m. “the power hours”). Some of the most moving conversations she has had while canvassing were with people who had never talked to someone like her before. Rarely will people tell you that you’ve changed their mind, but you’ll feel a subtle shift; you’ll see their body relax. “We’re way more alike than we are different,” Darcourt says.