Good morning. Hanukkah gets underway on Sunday night, so of course we’ve polished the silver in our collection of best Hanukkah recipes. We’ve got latkes and challah if you’re celebrating, sufganiyot (above) and kugel, briskets for days.
I like the idea of making Danny Bowien’s pastrami recipe this weekend. One of our readers, Jake, has made the recipe twice with brisket he brined overnight, instead of using store-bought corned beef and desalinating it for two days. “Still absolutely perfect,” he wrote in a note at the bottom of the recipe. So let’s get to it, however we ready the meat. Pastrami would make a great Sunday night meal, and great sandwiches at the top of the week as well.
Or you could make Melissa Clark’s recipe for coconut red curry with tofu. Or Yotam Ottolenghi’s pan-seared salmon with celery, olives and capers.
Have you made Taiwanese three-cup chicken for dinner yet this year? Or Mark Bittman’s recipe for curry-spiced lamb burgers? Kim Severson’s recipe for potato cavatelli is a marvelous weekend cook-up. So is Francis Lam’s recipe for caramelized-scallion noodles.
Additional culinary inspiration may be found on our Instagram, Facebook and Twitter pages. You can come to my own efforts on Twitter and Instagram for bad jokes, fish pictures and plenty of food.
Reach out for help if you run into trouble with a recipe or with our technology. We’re at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Reach out to me if you’re feeling passionate about it; I am here to absorb blows and pass along praise |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Now, you couldn’t get much further away from bay scallops or salted almonds, but I’m thinking you should probably take a look at Oyinkan Braithwaite’s “My Sister, the Serial Killer,” a Nigerian noir that Parul Sehgal, one of The Times’s book critics, said was “built to move, to hurtle forward.” Yes!
Greg Bishop on Drew Brees in Sports Illustrated? Yes, please.
This is not in any way a new book, but would make for a fine gift for yourself or for anyone interested in the world and culture of provincial Canada: John Gimlette’s “Theater of Fish,” about his travels through Newfoundland and Labrador.
Finally, please take some time to read Joe Sexton’s breathtaking story for ProPublica, “I Don’t Want to Shoot You, Brother.” It’s about the police and lethal force. But it’s not what you think. You’ll be thinking about it a good long while. I’ll see you on Sunday.