SYDNEY, Australia — The Western Pacific nation of Palau has become the first country to ban many kinds of sunscreen, in a move to protect its coral reefs from chemicals that scientists say cause significant damage.
Damage to coral reefs worldwide from climate change has been widely reported, but scientists say there is growing evidence that chemicals from sunscreen, which washes off swimmers or enters the ocean through sewer systems, also causes grave harm.
Palau passed the ban into law last week. President Tommy Remengesau called it “especially timely,” saying that a major impetus was a 2017 report that found sunscreen products to be “widespread” in Jellyfish Lake, one of the country’s Unesco World Heritage sites.
What threat does sunscreen pose to coral?
It has been estimated that 14,000 tons of sunscreen are deposited in the world’s oceans each year, and scientists say a number of studies have shown the product’s adverse effects on coral reefs.
Researchers found that even a low concentration of sunscreen in the water can hinder the development of young coral, said Dr. Selina Ward, a lecturer in coral reef ecology and physiology at the University of Queensland in Australia. Studies have also shown that chemicals in sunscreen can cause localized coral bleaching, and can disrupt the reproduction of fish by interfering with their hormonal systems, Dr. Ward said.
Chemicals in sunscreen can be “bigger than climate change” in causing damage to reefs, Craig Downs, the executive director of the Haereticus Environmental Laboratory in Virginia, said this year. In 2015, Mr. Downs led a team that found that oxybenzone, which is commonly used in sunscreen, stunts coral growth and is toxic for the algae that live within reefs, providing their color and performing other vital functions.
Have there been other sunscreen bans?
In May, Hawaii became the first state to ban the sale of sunscreen containing oxybenzone or octinoxate, another chemical that scientists say is damaging to coral. The ban is scheduled to go into effect in January 2021.
Nonbiodegradable sunscreen is banned in some parts of Mexico. At Xel-Há, a tourist development on the Riviera Maya, visitors can swap banned sunscreen for more coral-friendly varieties and get their own back when they leave.
The most common commercial sunscreen brands contain oxybenzone, Dr. Ward said. But she also warned against mineral-based sunscreens containing zinc oxide. They were once considered safer for coral, she said, but a recent study found that zinc oxide can cause coral bleaching as well as microbial enrichment, causing more bacteria to form in the water.
Sunscreen manufacturers, not surprisingly, opposed the Hawaii ban. But they aren’t alone in arguing that commercial sunscreens do more good than harm.
Currently, Ms. Walker said, there is no accepted standard for what constitutes “environmentally friendly” sunscreen. “We would be concerned if Australians stopped using sunscreen more generally,” she said.
