Smarter Living|Stop Trying to Master One Skill. Instead, Build a Skill Set.
Stop Trying to Master One Skill. Instead, Build a Skill Set.
Master of none? Exactly.
Let’s talk about the Power Rangers.
More specifically, the Power Rangers and their Dinozords.
All the Power Rangers, you’ll recall, had their own individual Dinozords: The Red Ranger had the T. rex, the Pink Ranger had the pterodactyl and so on. Separately, these Dinozords were pretty powerful. They could handle small-scale baddies, sure, but once the episode’s primary villain showed up, they were toast.
It was only when they combined into a single fighter — the Megazord, with each Dinozord transforming into a part of its body — that the Rangers could finally defeat the building-size werewolf-alien thing or whatever.
Dinozords? Megazords?? What are we talking about here?!
The idea is that instead of focusing your efforts on becoming singularly great at one specific skill or task, you should strive to get proficient at a few related skills that can be woven together into a wider skill set that does make you singularly good at your profession or some general life ability.
Think about your career development and where you are on your journey right now. Have you been hyper-focused on cultivating one skill as a path to success? Or have you strategically tried to build a web of interconnected skills you’re decent at that build on each other to make you exceptionally, but broadly, good?
Let’s say you want to make a living writing novels. Yes, it’s crucial that you become a good writer. But it’s entirely unnecessary for you to become a great writer. The world is full of successful novelists (and, ahem, newsletter writers) with perfectly average writing chops. But in addition to being a strong writer, most successful novelists also need to be competent marketers, publicists, negotiators, public speakers, S.E.O. experts and more.
“The idea is that you can raise your market value by being merely good — not extraordinary — at more than one skill,” Mr. Adams writes.
This isn’t just faux-tivational “build yourself up” fluff: From career coaches to chief executives, professionals of all stripes see broadening your skill set as a proven way to directly increase your value in the job market.
How to Clean the Most Common Cat Messes From fur balls to, ahem, stains, here’s some help.
The Upside of Feeling Bad Being in a funk isn’t always all bad.
How to Stay Healthy While Traveling It really is possible to have a good time, enjoy local cuisine and get in some exercise without depriving yourself of a true vacation.
Get Better TV Sound (Without a Lot of Wires) Flat-panel HDTVs are too thin to house good speakers. These simple tips and gear upgrades can give you great sound without a lot of work.
This Is How You Can Be a More Patient Person Relax. It’s going to be O.K.
How to Take Charge of Your Medical Care Walking into a doctor’s office or hospital can be intimidating. But when you go armed with the right tools and frame of mind, you can walk out of that appointment or hospital stay feeling more confident and satisfied.
This week I’ve invited friend of S.L. Micaela Marini Higgs to teach us how to stop making vague plans we know we’ll never follow through on.
For years I approached making plans with new people the way many of us do: parroting “Yes! We should definitely hang out!” back and forth until someone eventually moved to another country.
Filled with good (or at least polite) intentions, we’re all waiting for someone else to like us enough to make a move.
So how do you break out of plan-promising purgatory, actually make new friends and shed that vague sense of guilt whenever you run into someone you swore to schedule with?
First, if you have no intention of making plans, stop lying. Expressing a fake desire to hang out isn’t any more polite than saying, “It was great running into you.” It also spares you from having to make excuses in the future about how you meant to reach out but were sooo busy.
And if you do want to hang out, get specific: “Are you free on Thursday evening?” is much easier to answer than a general “When are you available?” You’ll get an immediate answer, and if they are busy, people are usually good about suggesting an alternative.
Naming specific activities — offer up a restaurant you want to try, a bar you want to go to or a museum you both love — is also an easy way to get everyone more excited and serious about finalizing a plan.
Trying to make friends is a bit like dating. You might get ghosted. You might not have chemistry. You might discover your favorite person ever.
But to find out, you’ve got to actually hang out.