Ryan McCarty tries to make us tense.
SATURDAY PUZZLE — We’re officially in the homestretch of 2018. Ryan McCarty, who started this year as a newbie, has become a steady weekend constructor and developed a flair for building chewy grids around a combination of newfangled/classic and high/low references. I found myself significantly misdirected more than once today, which might have been just me, but Mr. McCarty’s counterintuitive cluing added a fun, intriguing little something to the challenge of a Saturday.
Structure buffs will notice that this grid is a little wider than it is tall, something that I usually gloss over as a solver unless the rest of the design strongly refers to the dimensions. If you have ever wondered about the ramifications of messing with these configurations, read the notes today for a constructor’s perspective, as well as mention of Mr. McCarty’s other talents (he’s a singer and composer).
’Tis the season to be surrounded on all sides by sniffles and sneezes, so I triumphantly entered “Sinus infection” for 36A, “Head shot,” almost at the very beginning of this grid. And it worked for a long time! Look at all the letters it has in common with BOTOX INJECTION: Look at them! I also had “Seneca” for HORACE and got stuck with a couple of answers that I was sure were right but just wouldn’t expand or contract to fit — “vision test” for INKBLOT TEST, “Billie” for HORNE — that further slowed me down.
20A: The capital U in this clue denotes a certain magazine that you may not even know about if you are living off the land, for example, or have found some other way to avoid grocery store lines. “Us” is a gossip rag, and CELEBs keep it afloat.
38A: Great Saturday cluing — much too vague to figure out on its own, I think, but after solving 46D I surmised PARTNER DANCING with a few crosses. Speaking of 46D, if you’re feeling chilly this winter, just put on a little SAMBA and try to follow along.
26D: A couple of decades after its debut, IRON SHOT returns to the grid. It was clever to coincide this entry with the puzzle’s two “head shot” clues, wasn’t it? I’d have gotten it much sooner if it had referred to ball bearings or supplemental jabs. Upon looking this up, I learned that, in the gruesome sport of golf, even perfect IRON SHOTs “can be followed by a complete duff, or a thinned rocket that can cleanly remove someone’s kneecaps.” As I’ve always said, golf is terrifying.
36D: Absolutely my sentimental favorite today, I think; I was searching for one of those fanciful old vehicles. (Hupmobile? Some adorable flying car?) I’d forgotten those big wavy flaps on the back of the BATMOBILE, some of which were, indeed, very batty. This video puts the “craft” in aircraft and helps justify AIRPORT BAR at 62A, don’t you think?
37D: I’m old school “Star Wars,” so I don’t know from these millennial characters; I knew I’d seen Boba Fett before, in pop culture at least (and he has appeared in the Times puzzle a few times). His sort-of father, or at least the original to Boba’s clone, is JANGO, which is a debut, useful for when “Django” is too long and “Jenga” isn’t quite right.
Also, if anyone’s in the D.C. area I have not one but two concerts at the Kennedy Center today — a set of Reba McEntire songs with the Capital Hearings, and Britten’s War Requiem with Choral Arts and the N.S.O. Here’s hoping your puzzle solving isn’t as exhausting as my day!
Seeing things? Wish you were seeing more things?
