Midterm election results suggest that the power of the N.R.A. may be diminishing.
Mr. Spitzer has written five books on gun policy.
It is an unsettling coincidence that mass shootings bookended the 2018 election, from a Pittsburgh synagogue on Oct. 27 to a bar in Thousand Oaks, Calif., on Nov. 7. The election that took place in between, though, demonstrated that Democrats and even some Republicans found gun-safety advocacy a boon to their campaigns in a way not seen in a long time. In comparison with previous elections, the gun-rights forces’ customary blaring megaphone seemed nowhere near as loud as usual — or as effective. This is borne out by an examination of public attitudes, candidate positions, money and exposure.
Consider first the public environment. According to Pew Research Center analysis, more Americans now favor gun regulation (52 percent) over gun rights (44 percent), a reversal from 2016. And 57 percent say gun laws should be stricter, compared with 52 percent in 2017. A recent Kaiser Foundation poll found gun policy to be the third most important concern of voters, behind health care and the economy. Similarly, Election Day exit polling found the same rank order, except that gun policy was bumped to fourth by immigration — a position it probably would not have lost but for President Trump’s strenuous efforts to exploit immigration anxiety. An NBC News exit poll reported that 60 percent of voters favored stronger gun laws, including 42 percent of gun owners.
Candidates embraced the gun-safety agenda this cycle to a degree not seen since at least the 2000 elections, when Al Gore, the Democratic presidential candidate, made it key to his campaign messaging. According to Mark Kelly, who founded the gun-safety organization Americans for Responsible Solutions with his wife, the former House member Gabrielle Giffords, only four of 36 candidates listed on the Democratic Party’s “red to blue” list in 2016 included the gun issue in their platforms. (The “red to blue” list refers to Republican-held seats Democrats hope to gain.) This year, 38 of 59 candidates on the list included the issue. Candidates for Congress and other offices around the country aggressively touted their support for stronger gun measures, in races in Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, Georgia, Nevada, Pennsylvania, Virginia and elsewhere. Consider it no coincidence that many of these states suffered recent mass shootings.
Members of Congress, including ambitious ones like Tim Ryan, the Ohio Democrat who ran against Nancy Pelosi to be party leader in 2016, and Brian Mast, a Florida Republican, both had A ratings from the National Rifle Association. But both reversed course, trading their A for an N.R.A. F after recent mass shootings. In Pennsylvania’s First Congressional District, representing Bucks and Montgomery Counties, both the Democratic and Republican candidates for Congress advertised their support for stronger gun laws, leading gun-safety forces to split their endorsements between the two (Brian Fitzpatrick, the incumbent Republican, won narrowly).
In the money race, gun-safety groups apparently topped the N.R.A., which has spent about $11 million in the midterms. Combined gun-safety group spending was about $12 million — a first at the national level. If the amount of N.R.A. spending seems low, it is: The organization spent twice that in 2014 and five times that amount in 2016. By its own admission, the N.R.A. has money problems. It has also suffered political black eyes from corporate boycotts, allegations of improper ties with Russian agents seeking to influence the 2016 elections and relentless political attacks by the student-led movement that arose from the Parkland school shooting.
In five targeted congressional races — Colorado Sixth, Georgia Sixth, Minnesota Second, Texas Seventh and Virginia Seventh — gun-safety groups spent major money on behalf of gun-safety supporters, and all won. Especially notable is Georgia’s Sixth District, where Lucy McBath, a Democrat whose son was killed in a racially motivated shooting, defeated a recently elected Republican in a district once represented by Newt Gingrich. Jason Crow, a Democratic military veteran, defeated an incumbent Republican in Colorado’s Sixth District, which includes the site of a 2012 movie theater shooting. He also embraced the gun-safety issue, with a boost from Vote Vets (they allied themselves with the Giffords-Kelly group). In at least three House races — Florida Twenty-fifth, Minnesota Eighth and North Carolina Thirteenth — the N.R.A. spent significantly on pro-gun-rights candidates who won.
The Senate tally was roughly a draw. N.RA. money helped bring down Democrats in Indiana, Missouri and Tennessee, but it fell short against Democrats re-elected in Montana and West Virginia. In the one Senate race where the opposing sides spent heavily, the Democrat, Kyrsten Sinema, edged out her opponent in Arizona. And in Florida, the Republican Rick Scott left the N.R.A. with no one to back in this traditionally gun-friendly state after he broke with the organization to sign several new gun measures into law as governor. Among governor’s races, N.R.A. efforts helped the vote leaders in Florida and Georgia (both are subject to recounts as of this writing) and the Oklahoma winner, but they fell short in Nevada, Oregon and Wisconsin.
Even more telling has been the explosion of political ads supporting stronger gun laws. According to an analysis by The Wall Street Journal, pro-gun-law ads aired more than 100,000 times as of September 2018 — an increase by a factor of 22 over 2014. The ratio of gun-control to gun-rights ads this year also favors the control side much more. For example, the swing states of Florida and Nevada aired no pro-control ads four years ago. This year, they aired more than 45,000. For tossup races as defined by the Cook Political Report, gun ads were more likely to support stronger laws. In tossup House races, 93 percent of the gun-related ads supported stronger gun laws.
So why the sea change in public attitudes and emboldened candidates running squarely on gun safety? The answer begins 18 years ago. After Al Gore’s 2000 defeat, Democrats decided, rightly or wrongly, that the gun issue was a poison pill for them, so they all but abandoned it. This left the national gun debate mostly in the hands of the gun-friendly Bush administration and gun-rights supporters. That one-sided national debate turned public attitudes more strongly in favor of gun rights. Democratic silence ended with the 2012 Sandy Hook school shooting and President Obama’s decision to promote stronger gun measures in Congress. The effort failed, but it began a new kind of political momentum as new and well-funded gun-safety groups formed, grass-roots mobilization and fund-raising dedicated to gun safety increased, mass shootings continued and candidates began to speak about the issue.
The victory of President Trump, backed by fervent support from the N.R.A. with Mr. Trump’s full embrace of its agenda, ensured that there would be no movement on stronger gun laws, at least during the first two years of his presidency. Still, more and more public officials and candidates recognized that the winds on the issue had shifted. Nancy Pelosi, the House Democratic leader, has already pledged to push a bill to improve gun background checks. Yes, the N.R.A. continues to be a formidable political force, but the gun third rail has been deactivated. Could this election be the tipping point supporters have been hoping for?
