Our shopper visits the new Amazon 4 Star store, which stocks items with customer review ratings of four stars or better. Brick and mortar never had it so rough.
I have a faint memory of an article I read some years back detailing the grim life of a shelf picker in an Amazon warehouse. It described the arrangement of products on shelves — unlikely juxtapositions determined wholly by algorithm.
A worker’s life was disorienting; you never knew where anything might be. Nail clippers might be next to stone humidifiers or HVAC filters or picture frames. The worker was given a product location and ran to it. Then another. And again. The warehouse was a game, the products little more than flippers in search of a pinball to thwack.
This holiday season, you are the pinball.
Amazon has recently opened Amazon 4-Star, a catchall gift shop in SoHo — about 100 feet from Balthazar and the MoMA Design Store — that’s part of the company’s slow seep into physical retail. It is grim. A permanent store with the harried, colorless mood of a hastily assembled clearance-sale pop-up. Lot-Less Closeouts stores have more vim and charm.
Amazon 4-Star asks what would happen if the logic of the warehouse writ raw was applied to a traditional storefront. Who needs a warehouse picker when the customers can do the work themselves?
Some of the items Amazon 4-Star hawks are Amazon products, naturally: the Amazon Echo home assistant (which ordinarily answers to “Alexa”), the Amazon Fire HD 8 tablet, the Amazon Fire TV Stick, plenty of AmazonBasics items, including a five-way headphone splitter ($9.49, $8.07 for Prime; 4.4 rating). Run-of-the-mill vertical integration stuff. Not my ecosystem, but fine.
Some sections are arranged logically: children’s toys, kitchen items, smart-home tools. (I use “section” very loosely. On the wall, each one is perhaps a couple of feet wide.) And each item tag has a price, a lower price for Amazon Prime members (sometimes) and an average star rating (along with the number of customers who rated it).
About that 4-Star name, though. Thing is, I know there’s a fifth star. Four stars out of five is already a concession. What’s on offer aren’t the most premium products, but rather ones that are pretty good.
Add to that the fact that I found several items in the store that actually have a rating below four stars. Say, the iRobot Braava Jet 240 wet mop ($199/$169; 3.8), or Don’t Lose Your Cool, ($19.99/$10.42; 2.4), a party game that includes a contraption you strap to your head that measures rises in heart rate and which presumably was tested on customers shopping here.
“Trending Around NYC on Amazon.com.” Taxonomies I have never pondered and which are utterly useless.
On the Trending table, a Lego advent calendar ($29.99; 4.7) was next to a Panasonic Arc 5 electric razor ($199.99/$99.99; 4.5), which was next to a tub of CeraVe moisturizing cream ($15.06; 4.6) and just inches from Michelle Obama’s memoir, “Becoming” ($32.50/$19.50; 4.8).
A couple of tables away, a Big Gulp-size Yankee Candle in a surprisingly not acrid Christmas Cookie scent ($17.99; 4.1) was next to “Less,” a novel by Andrew Sean Greer that won the Pulitzer Prize ($15.99/$10.87; 3.7).
These are chaotic arrangements, on tables set among floor paths that resemble a field maze. Decoration and filigree is minimal. There were a couple of afterthought cardboard trees on the electronic gift guide table, but not much beyond that. Almost every 10 minutes, a UPS handler would roll in a hand truck filled with those signature Amazon boxes, presumably loading up the store with inventory.
Now look, I rely on Amazon Prime just like the next hypocrite, and I understand how one’s needs aren’t cleanly categorizable. But this store treats commerce like a tornado. On one table, there was a tossed-together collection of light winter jackets less organized than what you’d find in the Times Square H&M; underneath the table was a set of cardboard boxes with sizes written in marker on the side. Forget farm-to-table; this is pallet-to-checkout.
Maybe I was using the wrong approach — absorbing the store as a whole, and not like a warehouse picker in search of a specific item. So I went through my mental inventory of home problems that need solving.
Inspired by a friend’s recent purchase of a 75-inch television (insert drool emoji), I sought out the electronics section. But there was only one option, a meager 55 inches. There was an impressive-looking Sonos Beam Soundbar ($399/$349; 4.1), but that felt like something to address later, once the main itch had been scratched.
Then, a manageable ask. Over Thanksgiving weekend, my mother gave serious side eye to the pan I use to make eggs, which after years of use resembles something extracted from a barn on “American Pickers.” Easy enough. I went to the kitchen section but found that there were none.
Well, strictly speaking, there was one: a tree-ornament version, the 3.5-inch Lodge miniature skillet ($6.25/$4.69; 4.4), good for a single egg or a quick wallop on the head, which, by this point, would have been sweet relief.
