1. A blue wave ended one-party rule in Washington after months of disciplined campaigning by Democrats and the transformation of the Republican Party into the party of President Trump.
Democrats claimed the House of Representatives with at least 31 new seats, and the Senate will remain in Republican hands. Democrats also flipped at least seven governorships, including the long-conservative capitals in Wisconsin and Kansas.
Several races remain too close to call, including in Florida, which is going to recounts after lawsuits, protests and allegations of fraud, presented without evidence.
What is certain: Congress will look like it never has before. At least 117 women won seats (a record) and new members will include its first Native American women, first Muslim women and Tennessee’s first female senator.
2. The midterm rebuke of President Trump signaled a check on his power and a renewed identity crisis for Democrats.
Facing a divided Congress, Mr. Trump will struggle to turn his agenda into law, though Democrats have extended an offer to cooperate on infrastructure and drug costs. Armed with subpoena powers, they have also all but promised investigations into his tax returns and alleged malfeasance by his cabinet members.
But with 2020 already on their minds — and inspired by the galvanizing, if failed, Senate campaign of Representative Beto O’Rourke in Texas — Democrats face a dilemma: Do they want leaders who are moderate, progressive or somewhere in between?
3. California is grappling with two tragedies: the aftermath of a mass shooting and wildfires.
Late Wednesday, a gunman killed 12 people at a country music club in Thousand Oaks, outside Los Angeles. The victims included a college freshman, a sheriff’s deputy and a man who had survived the Las Vegas shooting that killed 58 people.
And the state’s grief was compounded by new threats: infernos in the north and south.
At least 23 are dead in the so-called Camp Fire, about 100 miles north of Sacramento, above, which has consumed 6,700 structures, left charred forests in its wake and became the most destructive fire in modern state history. Two others have died in fires near Los Angeles.
In Southern California, fires forced evacuations of Thousand Oaks and Malibu. A combination of climate change, Santa Ana winds and humans have made California even more prone to fires than normal, our climate reporter writes.
4. The armistice that halted World War I was signed a century ago today in Northern France, leading to celebrations around the world (and previously unpublished photos, one above).
As leaders gather in France to commemorate that occasion, a question hovers over them: Has the world forgotten the lessons of the war to end all wars?
France’s centrist president is isolated at home and abroad. Britain is at odds with the Continent and itself. Germany’s leaders are looking inward at rising populism, their chancellor on her way out.
And unlike the American president who traveled to France in 1918 determined to bind nations together, President Trump has arrived eager to upend the world order.
5. Attorney General Jeff Sessions was fired, and replaced by a loyalist who will take charge of the special counsel investigation into Russia’s election interference.
Mr. Sessions, who never recovered his standing with the White House after he recused himself from the Russia investigation, was asked to resign after two years in office.
President Trump named Matthew Whitaker, above left, the former chief of staff to Mr. Sessions, above right, as acting attorney general. Mr. Whitaker proved instantly controversial: He has criticized the Russia investigation, called the courts “the inferior branch” of government and sat on the board of a company accused of scamming customers out of millions.
Our Washington correspondent looked at what the shake-up means for the Russia investigation.
6. Google overhauled its policies on sexual misconduct, ending its practice of forced arbitration after 20,000 employees walked out of work in protest, above. Facebook followed suit a day later, reflecting a new era in Silicon Valley of employee activism and public scrutiny.
Tesla, with a deadline looming from its settlement with federal regulators, replaced Elon Musk on its board and named a veteran tech executive its new chairwoman.
And Amazon, although it has not made an official announcement, is nearing deals to create two new bases in the Long Island City neighborhood of Queens and Arlington, Va.
7. On “Saturday Night Live,” Pete Davidson, above center, apologized in person to Dan Crenshaw, above left, a former Navy SEAL who was recently elected to the House. Last week, Davidson mocked Crenshaw’s looks in a widely criticized “Weekend Update” segment.
“In what I’m sure was a huge shock for people who know me, I made a poor choice last week,” Davidson said.
8. As a last resort, the United States Olympic Committee moved to strip U.S.A. Gymnastics of its power, sending waves of relief through a sport struggling to recover from a sex abuse scandal.
Our reporter spoke with the athletes who have forced their leaders to reckon with the sport’s blighted culture and systemic abuse.
And another young athlete, Leo Borg, and his family are facing their own reckoning: the shadow of his father, one of the greatest players in tennis history.
9. Archaeologists, in a cave deep in the jungles of Borneo, found the oldest figurative art in the world: the image above of a spindly-legged animal, drawn in reddish ocher, more than 40,000 years old.
And DNA drawn from ancient people has shed light on one of the enduring mysteries of history: how humans from Siberia spread across the Americas, branching southward, some disappearing, others mixing. The expansion may have taken only centuries.
10. Finally, don’t miss our Best Weekend Reads.
This week, we include a profile of the Silicon Valley doomsayer tech leaders love; interview Gillian Flynn, above, the writer of “Gone Girl”; and dive deep on the Beatles’ pursuit of perfection on the White Album.
And in case you need it, here’s the Week in Good News, featuring marathon runners and ballet dancers of color.
For more suggestions on what to read, watch and listen to, may we suggest the latest small-screen recommendations from Watching and our music critics’ latest playlist.