I hope you all survived your Thanksgiving holidays. My takeaway: Who needs turkey when there’s pie?
As we mentioned before the holiday weekend, you’re going to be seeing us a bit less frequently. With election season (nearly) over, we’ll be coming into your mailboxes on Mondays and Thursdays.
There are still votes to be counted, of course: Still good old Mississippi.
Unsurprisingly for the Trump era, the Senate runoff campaign has become a heated mess of polarized politics, racial controversy and the president.
Political strategists who are being honest with themselves (you know who you are!) will admit that no one knows exactly what’s going to happen in Tuesday’s election between Senator Cindy Hyde-Smith, a Republican, and former Representative Mike Espy, a Democrat.
Yes, runoffs are notoriously hard to poll. And yes, politics have become less predictable since Mr. Trump’s election. But that’s still a pretty striking admission by Mr. Barbour, given that this is Mississippi.
Historically, it doesn’t get much more Republican than the Magnolia state. The last Democrat was elected to the Senate in 1982. President Trump won the state by 18 points in 2016 and has a 56 percent approval rating, according to an NBC News-Marist poll of registered voters last month.
So why all the uncertainty? Part of it is Republican PTSD from the Alabama Senate race last year, where Democrats won a surprise upset against Roy Moore, the G.O.P. candidate brought down by allegations of sexual misconduct with underage girls.
But Alabama is not Mississippi, which is less affluent, suburban and educated than its neighbor.
It’s also perhaps the most racially polarized electorate in the country. VoteCast, a wide-ranging survey of the electorate conducted by The Associated Press, showed that Mr. Espy won support from about 80 percent of black voters in the first round of voting, compared to about 20 percent of white voters. White voters typically outnumber blacks in Mississippi by a two-to-one margin.
Assuming that margin holds on Tuesday, Mr. Espy would have to win 30 percent or more of white votes, says The A.P. That’s a tough bar in Mississippi.
Could he do it? Maybe. Mr. Espy is well-known in the state and has run as a moderate, “Mississippi First” kind of candidate. Democratic turnout groups have flooded the state.
And then, there are the questions involving race, which have overshadowed every other issue in the campaign in its final weeks.
It would be an offensive comment anywhere in the country, but it was particularly shocking coming from a United States senator in Mississippi, which had more lynchings than any other state between the Civil War and the civil rights era. Since then, she has drawn fire for attending a private segregated high school, wearing a Confederate uniform and embracing Confederate history throughout her political career.
Mr. Espy recounted how racist insults were hurled at him and his twin sister, who were among the 17 black students who integrated the all-white Yazoo City High School in 1969.
“I guess you could juxtapose my experience with her experience,” he told The Associated Press.
Under pressure from consumers, a stream of companies demanded her campaign return their donations.
Of course, corporations don’t cast ballots. And while her comments mobilized black voters and progressive whites against her candidacy, they also energize rural and exurban white Republicans behind her. That’s part of the reason Ms. Hyde-Smith refused to offer a full-throated apology for her remarks during the candidates’ recent debate, as my colleague Jonathan Martin detailed over the weekend.
It’s also why Republicans are bringing down Mr. Trump for two rallies on Monday evening, hoping the president can get her across the finish line.
“If you want an ally to Trump, you vote with Cindy Hyde-Smith,” Mr. Barbour said.
But being “too Washington” has its advantages, particularly when it comes to wrangling votes.
Ms. Pelosi faces the first major test of her power on Wednesday, when Democrats meet to decide on their new House leadership. The secret ballot should be an easy victory for Ms. Pelosi, who needs a simple majority of her caucus to advance to the House floor on Jan. 3.
• At least four newly elected Democrats did not sign the letter, but campaigned promising not to back Ms. Pelosi and have said they will keep that pledge.
• Nine Democratic members of a bipartisan coalition calling itself the Problem Solvers Caucus released a statement on Monday insisting that Ms. Pelosi embrace their proposals for changing the House rules or risk losing their support.
Known as a master vote-counter, Ms. Pelosi has spent much of the past few weeks wooing and wrangling incoming Democrats who’d expressed skepticism of her during the campaign. She’s had some success: Over the weekend, incoming Representative Sharice Davids, a Kansas Democrat who expressed skepticism of Ms. Pelosi during her campaign, said she plans to back her for speaker.
Ms. Davids’ support underscores a huge factor working in Ms. Pelosi’s favor: So far, no one has stepped up to challenge her. What’s that old political adage? If you come at the king...er, the queen?...you best not miss.

• Exorcisms are back. Demand for exorcisms is up, The Atlantic reports, and the church is training new exorcists in Chicago, Rome and Manila.
