Race/Related is a weekly newsletter focused on identity and culture, with provocative stories from around The Times.
I hope you all had a wonderful Thanksgiving. I flew from New York to Colorado, where I celebrated the holiday with my fiancé’s family in a little mountain town outside of Denver. There were 14 of us. I was the only black person. Everyone got along fine. I did miss my mom’s cooking.
One thing I’m very thankful for this year is all of your letters. I have been in awe of how many of you have taken the time to write in and be candid about your experiences. Last week, we asked for childhood memories of encountering racist beliefs. It was fascinating to learn what memories have stayed with you.
Baker Blanding of Georgia remembered asking a white classmate in kindergarten, in 1992, if he could borrow a crayon and being rebuffed because he was black.
Candace Hill wrote about a hot summer day in Dothan, Ala., watching white children splash around in a segregated swimming pool in which she and her siblings were not allowed.
These were just some of your earliest recollections of racism, and, I would guess, certainly not your last.
What I found most intriguing about your letters was the number of tales that described encountering racist beliefs at home. The black, Jewish and Latino friends who could not be invited over for dinner. The aunt who was disowned for her interracial marriage. The angry grandparent who hurled racial epithets across a room.
At home we are often taught to avoid controversial subjects, and I find this disconnect — encountering racism at home while also being discouraged from discussing it openly — interesting.
I thought about it as we sat at the table for Thanksgiving enjoying our turkey and sharing our pleasantries. I wondered what it would take to get more people to speak freely and frequently about racism at home among family and what good that would do. The things that are left unsaid may not always be the most memorable, but in their own way they stay with us too.
