 The walkouts followed a New York Times report that the tech giant paid millions of dollars in exit packages to male executives accused of harassment.
For decades, Silicon Valley has been ground zero for a vaguely utopian form of individualism — the idea that a single engineer with a laptop and an internet connection could change the world, or at least a long-established industry. Class consciousness was passé. Unions were the enemy of innovation, an anchor to the status quo.
But the issues that contributed to the walkout at Google — the company’s controversial work with the Pentagon on artificial intelligence, its apparent willingness to build a censored search engine for China and above all its handling of sexual harassment accusations against senior managers — proved too large for any worker to confront alone, even if that worker made mid-six figures. They required a form of solidarity that would be recognizable to the most militant 20th-century labor organizers.
Google, for example, points to countless ways for workers to communicate with senior executives: Employees can raise a concern with the chief executive at a T.G.I.F. meeting that happens a few times each month. They can ask questions on an internal company platform before meetings, and management will respond to the ones that receive the most “up-votes.” Workers can even circulate petitions, and those that prove especially popular can earn their authors a sit-down with management.
Though unusual, there is precedent for well-paid, in-demand workers who stand up to their employers.
The workers, joined by customers who boycotted the store, worried that the ouster of the company’s beloved chief executive, Arthur T. Demoulas, would undo its practice of paying generous wages and benefits and turning a profit through high productivity. The protest ended when a group including Mr. Demoulas struck a deal to buy the portion of the company they did not own. Thomas A. Kochan, a management professor at the Massachusetts Inistitute of Technology, has called it the most successful strike of this century.
But, according to Daniel A. Gilbert, an expert on the baseball union at the University of Illinois, the owners’ demeaning posture helped galvanize members — including a famously counterproductive 1969 meeting in which the St. Louis Cardinals owner aired concerns that “players are getting fat” and that they “only think of money.” The players, many of whom were well compensated by this point, would within a few years overturn league rules that had prohibited them from accepting offers from rival teams.
The question is how far this sense of individual powerlessness has spread within Google. The walkout organizers argue that the feeling is quite widespread — extending from software developers to hardware engineers and from employees to contractors.
Some observers agree. Michelle Miller, co-founder of CoWorker.org, which educates workers in tech and other industries on how to assert their labor rights, said that employees at Google “had to start thinking of themselves as some kind of collective” last year after a memo by an employee asserted that women tend to be innately less capable of certain technical work.
She said workers who criticized the memo and defended diversity efforts on internal forums were threatened by people sympathetic to the memo’s author, James Damore, and had to band together to defend one another.
Since Mr. Damore’s ouster, Google workers have steadily received evidence that management will heed only collective action, Ms. Miller argued. That includes an ad hoc worker revolt that preceded the end of the company’s controversial Pentagon contract.
“If employees at Facebook are looking at this and saying, ‘Wow, that was impressive,’” Mr. Bodie said, then Facebook may have to follow suit.
Still, Bob Kocher, a partner at Venrock, a venture capital firm, expressed skepticism that Google would have to meet any of the organizers’ demands. He pointed out that most employees appeared to enjoy working there and were satisfied with the way they were treated and compensated.
