Over the 20th century, this traditional Japanese theatrical form went from little-known to practically ubiquitous. Its scenic austerity, symbolic gestures and ritualized drama captivated artists. The long list of playwrights and composers looking to Noh for inspiration includes Samuel Beckett, Harry Partch, Bertolt Brecht and Benjamin Britten.
And, now, the composer Kaija Saariaho and the director Peter Sellars. Their most recent collaboration, “Only the Sound Remains,” an operatic reinterpretation of Pound’s translation of two Noh plays, arrives for its American premiere in Lincoln Center’s White Light Festival, on Nov. 17 and 18.
It will be a homecoming of sorts. Ms. Saariaho first discovered Pound’s poetry in an apartment she sublet during a Carnegie Hall residency in 2012. Two years later, she composed a large part of the opera in the city.
Both of the one-acts that make up the work — “Always Strong” (originally “Tsunemasa”) and “Feather Mantle” (originally “Hagoromo”) — dramatize encounters with the invisible world. In “Always Strong,” a priest summons the unhappy spirit of a young lute player and performs a religious service using the ghost’s instrument. “Feather Mantle” depicts a fisherman’s argument and eventual reconciliation with a tennin, or angel, whose robe he has found and intends to keep.
“The bass strings are something like rain; the small strings talk like a whisper,” a vocal quartet sings delicately above trilling strings and piccolo, while the kantele creates a resonant cascade of sound. The bass-baritone Davóne Tines represents the human roles; the countertenor Philippe Jaroussky, supernatural ones. In “Feather Mantle,” real-time electronic manipulation spins out the angel’s voice into reverberating crystalline shards.
Ms. Saariaho and Mr. Sellars have collaborated for years, but their turn to Noh was not an obvious choice. Although Mr. Sellars had staged “Hagoromo” in the 1980s, and Ms. Saariaho set two of Pound’s austere “Cantos” in her chamber piece “Sombre,” their earlier stage works, like “L’Amour de Loin” and “La Passion de Simone,” focused on women.
As they searched for a new subject, though, Ms. Saariaho was looking for something entirely different, something suitable for an intimate chamber ensemble with electronics. “Something like a fairy tale or traditional story,” she said. Mr. Sellars proposed Indian texts; Ms. Saariaho felt they didn’t resonate with her music. But when they arrived at Pound’s Noh translations, it felt like a match.
Pound’s translations also came about through collaboration. In 1913, he acquired a cache of the papers of Ernest Fenollosa, an American expatriate who had undertaken a prolonged study of Noh as an academic in Tokyo. Pound worked alongside W.B. Yeats as he refined Fenollosa’s rough, often fragmentary translations.
What he missed was the plays’ religious subtleties, their references to Buddhism and Shintoism. Critics and scholars faulted him for misunderstandings, inaccuracies and omissions. Despite these flaws, Mr. Sellars sees Pound’s work and the broader artistic ferment of early-20th-century modernism as transformative.
In “Feather Mantle,” the encounter culminates with the angel, sung by Mr. Jaroussky but danced by Nora Kimball-Mentzos, teaching the fisherman a dance meant to alleviate humanity’s sorrows in exchange for her cloak’s return. This conclusion, Mr. Sellars suggested, has a special resonance now.
