A tiny wedge of a park on the East Side of Manhattan is a haven for the older people who fill its benches and often park walking canes and wheelchairs beside them.
But soon the bicycles will be coming.
As part of an ambitious plan to complete an unbroken bike-and-pedestrian path around Manhattan, city officials plan to install a ramp alongside the park that would give access to a new esplanade on the East River.
Longtime parkgoers are furious. And their anger reflects a broader debate about a cycling boom sweeping New York that is increasingly leading to conflict with another trend — the city’s growing number of older residents, many of whom say they cannot dodge bikes fast enough.
Cycling has increasingly emerged as an alternative to the city’s troubled subways and buses, and as a way to help reduce car congestion on already crowded streets. It allows riders to go where they want, when they want, without being limited by routes and schedules. And it offers the benefit of exercise and fresh air. About 460,000 bike rides take place in the city every day, up from about 180,000 bike rides in 2006, according to the city. There are now 1,208 miles of bike lanes, 268 of which have been added since 2014.
But in recent years, the growing bike presence has drawn complaints from residents and community leaders who say that some cyclists ignore traffic rules and pose a safety hazard to pedestrians. Cyclists, in turn, have countered that pedestrians often walk in bike lanes, or dart in front of them with little warning.
Mary Dodd, 64, said she recently had two close calls with cyclists while crossing First Avenue on the Upper East Side. Both times, she said she looked toward oncoming traffic before crossing. And both times, she said she was nearly flattened by cyclists speeding from the opposite direction against traffic. Ms. Dodd, the director of the social services unit for the Carter Burden Network, a community-based social service agency, said she’s heard many stories of older people having near misses.
Critics oppose the bridge and the ramp because they say it will funnel too many bicyclists into the area and create a hazard for older residents.
Still, pedestrians are far more likely to be killed by cars than bikes. A 63-year-old man on the Lower East Side was killed last year in a crash with a cyclist who did not end up being charged with a crime. It was the first time a cyclist had killed a pedestrian since crashes in consecutive months in 2014 in Central Park killed a 75-year-old jogger from Manhattan’s Upper East Side and a 58-year-old Connecticut woman, according to city records. Another 315 pedestrians were injured last year in 365 crashes with cyclists, about half of which took place in Manhattan.
But those figures are dwarfed by the 107 pedestrians who were killed in motor vehicle crashes last year and the more than 10,500 other pedestrians who were injured.
The new East River esplanade is one of the final pieces in a more than two-decade effort to create a 32.5-mile bicycle and pedestrian circuit around Manhattan, known as the Manhattan Waterfront Greenway. The esplanade, which will cost $100 million, will run between East 53rd and East 61st streets.
Lori Kupfer, an architect who has lived in the neighborhood for five years, displays blown up images of existing esplanades that are in areas near Clara Coffey Park that she believes the city should work on improving before building a new one.
A bridge connecting to the esplanade will be built at the eastern end of 54th Street and run over the F.D.R. Drive. The ramp to the bridge will cut through a corner of Clara Coffey Park in Sutton Place, where residents are more accustomed to seeing wheelchairs than bikes. As a result, more cyclists are expected to pass in front of the park’s entrance.
“Closing the gaps along the Manhattan Waterfront Greenway will provide a seamless connection to world-class open space and will help make our city more accessible and equitable,” said Stephanie Báez, a spokeswoman for the New York City Economic Development Corporation, which is leading the project.
Ms. Báez said officials have been responding to community concerns, and “the design will provide safe access for bicyclists, pedestrians and those looking to enjoy peace and tranquillity on the East River waterfront.” The bridge and esplanade will be accessible to people with disabilities, she said. Under the current plan, 50 percent of the esplanade will be designed for pedestrians compared with 35 percent for cyclists (15 percent will be shared space).
Perry Pazer, 87, a retired lawyer who lives in Sutton Place, said he looked forward to being able to walk along the riverfront instead of on the street. “It’s a place for us elderly people to get exercise,” he said.
But many residents are against the project, saying that bringing more bikes to their neighborhood will turn even routine trips into a frightening obstacle course. The city has secured some but not all of the approvals for the project, which is on track to begin construction next year.
Residents recently gathered in the park to discuss the project. “It’s an escape from the noise and the bicycles,” Marjorie Posner, 77, a retired financial manager, said of the park.
Some opponents say the new bridge and esplanade will primarily benefit people who are younger, physically fit or active, and not a neighborhood filled with older residents. About 61 percent of Sutton Place residents are over the age of 55, compared with roughly 24 percent citywide, according to an analysis of census data by Social Explorer, a research company.
Sheldon Fried, 85, a retired lawyer who uses a walking cane, said he may have to stop going to the park. “I wouldn’t like to dodge bicycles because I might fall,” he said.
Residents have also questioned whether the $100 million could be better spent on more pressing needs, such as fixing the subways or helping the homeless. Others have called the project “a bridge to nowhere” because there would still be a gap just south of the new esplanade behind the United Nations. There is currently no funding yet to fill the gap, but the city has said it intends to complete this section.
Supporters of the esplanade have dismissed the objections as simply not-in-my-backyard opposition.
David Halle, 71, a sociology professor at the Graduate Center of the City University of New York and a cyclist, said that crossing the entrance to the new bridge would be no more dangerous than crossing the bike lanes on nearby First Avenue.
