WASHINGTON — Representative Jim Jordan is facing the kind of slowly percolating scandal that would bring down other politicians in other times, as new accusers step forward by the day to say the wrestling coach turned politician was aware of sexual misconduct at Ohio State University but did nothing to stop it.
But like the man Mr. Jordan doggedly supports, President Trump, the Ohio Republican has the kind of stalwart supporters who do not lose faith easily, and they are already defending the conservative powerhouse, saying he is the victim of the same “deep state” conspirators — liberal bureaucrats embedded in the government — who are trying to bring down the president.
Next week will be another big moment for Mr. Jordan: He will be front and center in joint House hearings with the F.B.I. agent Peter Strzok, the man in the middle of what some see as the federal law-enforcement plot to take down Mr. Trump.
Mr. Jordan served as an assistant coach on the Ohio State wrestling team in the late 1980s and early 1990s, during which time Dr. Strauss is accused of showering with athletes and touching them inappropriately. The university announced in April that it had begun investigating the allegations against the doctor, who killed himself in 2005.
Mr. Coleman and four other wrestlers have now said that Mr. Jordan was aware of the abuse but did nothing to stop it. Another former Ohio State wrestler, Mike Schyck, said in an interview on Friday that he and other former team members planned to “collectively say some things together,” adding that the scandal is not about Mr. Jordan.
But even as more wrestlers step forward, Mr. Jordan’s base has mounted a defense. The conservative news media has questioned the motives and truthfulness of his accusers.
One of those accusers, Mike DiSabato, scoffed at suggestions that his motivation in calling out Mr. Jordan was political or part of a personal vendetta.
Mr. DiSabato said he was saddened by the congressman’s response.
The allegations have cast a cloud over the congressman at a time when he is ascendant. Mr. Jordan has emerged as one of the president’s staunchest defenders, helping to lead a Republican counterinvestigation of F.B.I. and Justice Department officials who are looking into potential connections between the Trump campaign and Russian election interference. A founder of the House Freedom Caucus, Mr. Jordan has also been floated as a possible successor to Speaker Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin, who has announced he will retire at the end of the year.
Some of his backers have suggested that Mr. Jordan’s accusers are also part of a “deep state” conspiracy to derail his political future.
His supporters have tried to amass evidence of that conspiracy. One of the leading talking points, which Mr. Jordan referenced on Friday night, is the choice of the investigative law firm retained by Ohio State in the Strauss matter. The firm, Perkins Coie, worked for Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaign and the Democratic National Committee, and helped to pay for a dossier of unconfirmed accusations linking the Trump campaign to Russian intelligence.
The Daily Caller has also encouraged its readers to question the accusers’ motivation and scrutinized their “sketchy history,” reporting that one of the accusers served an 18-month jail sentence for a fraud scheme.
Mr. Jordan has tried to discredit his accusers, especially Mr. DiSabato, and his office has sent statements to the press from figures in the wrestling world defending the Ohio Republican, including from the team’s former coach.
In one email, a former Ohio State wrestler’s widow condemned Mr. DiSabato as “vindictive and manipulative,” citing a dispute she had with him over a memorial fund set up in her husband’s name.
As Congress prepares to return to Capitol Hill next week, Mr. Jordan indicated on Friday that he would continue to maintain his innocence.
