HELSINKI, Finland — President Trump stood next to President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia on Monday and publicly challenged the conclusion of his own intelligence agencies that Moscow interfered in the 2016 presidential election, wrapping up what he called a “deeply productive” summit meeting with an extraordinary show of trust for a leader accused of attacking American democracy.
In a remarkable news conference, Mr. Trump did not name a single action for which Mr. Putin should be held accountable. Instead, he saved his sharpest criticism for the United States and the special counsel investigation into the election interference, calling it a “ridiculous” probe and a “witch hunt” that has kept the two countries apart.
Mr. Trump even questioned the determinations by his intelligence officials that Russia had meddled in the election.
“They said they think it’s Russia,” Mr. Trump said. “I have President Putin; he just said it’s not Russia,” the president continued, only moments after Mr. Putin conceded that he had wanted Mr. Trump to win the election because of his promises of warmer relations with Moscow.
The 45-minute news conference offered the spectacle of the American and Russian presidents both pushing back on the notion of Moscow’s election interference, with Mr. Putin demanding evidence of something he said had never been proved, and Mr. Trump appearing to agree.
When asked directly whether he believed Mr. Putin or his own intelligence agencies about the election meddling, Mr. Trump said there were “two thoughts” on the matter: one from American officials like Dan Coats, his director of national intelligence, asserting Russia’s involvement; and one from Mr. Putin dismissing it.
“I have confidence in both parties,” Mr. Trump said.
He then changed the subject, demanding to know why the F.B.I. never examined the hacked computer servers of the Democratic National Committee, and asking about the fate of emails missing from the server of Hillary Clinton, his campaign rival.
“Where are Hillary Clinton’s emails?” Mr. Trump said.
His performance drew howls of protests from Democrats and some Republicans, prompting John O. Brennan, who served as C.I.A. director under President Barack Obama, to suggest that the remarks warranted Mr. Trump’s impeachment.
And within hours, Mr. Coats issued his own strongly worded statement that contained an implicit rebuke of Mr. Trump.
Some of Mr. Trump’s own advisers privately said they were shocked by the president’s performance, including his use of the phrase “witch hunt” to describe the special counsel investigation while standing beside Mr. Putin.
Aboard Air Force One back to Washington, Mr. Trump’s mood grew foul as the breadth of the critical reactions became clear, according to some people briefed on the flight. Aides steered clear of the front of the plane to avoid being tapped for a venting session with Mr. Trump.
Some political allies worried that the encounter with Mr. Putin would linger over Republicans heading into the midterm elections this fall.
Both presidents said it was vital to talk to each other because, as leaders of two major nuclear powers, they had a responsibility to engage in dialogue and ensure global stability.
But Mr. Trump’s statements at the news conference were a remarkable break with his administration, which on Friday indicted 12 Russian intelligence officers for cyberattacks intended to interfere in the presidential contest. The indictment explained, in detail, how Russian intelligence officers hacked the Democratic National Committee and the Clinton presidential campaign, providing the most explicit account to date of the Russian government’s meddling in American democracy.
When Mr. Putin was asked by an American reporter whether he had wanted Mr. Trump to win and directed an effort intended to bring about that result, the Russian president quickly answered, “Yes I did, yes I did, because he talked about bringing the U.S.-Russia relationship back to normal.” It was not clear whether he had heard the translation of the second part of the question.
But in return, Mr. Putin, who rolled his eyes and snickered at the notion that he had compromising material on Mr. Trump or his family, said that Russia would expect American assistance in cases of interest to Moscow, including the ability to send Russian law enforcement officials to work in the United States.
He singled out William F. Browder, a longstanding critic of the Kremlin whose associates Mr. Putin accused of evading taxes and funneling millions of dollars to the Clinton campaign, without providing evidence.
Emerging from his one-on-one meeting with Mr. Putin, which was followed by a larger lunch meeting with advisers, Mr. Trump cited a litany of factors that he said had stood in the way of better relations between the United States and Russia. He blamed Democrats’ bitterness over having lost an election that they should have won, and Mr. Mueller’s investigation.
But Mr. Trump claimed to have defused all of that tension in a matter of minutes.
The comment appeared to absolve Moscow of many irritants in the relationship with Russia, including the election hacking, the annexation of Crimea, Russian backing for rebels in Ukraine and for the Assad government in Syria, and Moscow’s suspected use of a nerve agent to poison people in Britain.
For much of the news conference, Mr. Trump appeared to be far more focused on defending the legitimacy of his election victory than on determining who was behind the election hacking.
Later, in an interview with Fox News, Mr. Putin repeated his assertion that Russia had not interfered in the American presidential race. But then he suggested that the hacking itself should not be treated as such an explosive issue, because the emails taken from Democratic officials were accurate.
In the United States, critics of Mr. Trump reacted angrily to his contention that Russia and the United States shared blame for their deteriorated relationship.
The summit meeting capped a weeklong European trip in which Mr. Trump disparaged NATO allies, castigated Germany, criticized the British prime minister on her own soil and branded the European Union a “foe” on trade — while he mused about his wish for warmer relations with Mr. Putin.
As Mr. Putin and Mr. Trump emerged from a longer-than-expected set of talks, which included a 130-minute one-on-one session with no advisers present, they said they had made progress in forging the bond that both were seeking.
Finland, the site of the meeting, shares a long border with Russia and has been the site of past diplomatic breakthroughs. But this round of talks did not appear to have produced any.
The two presidents said they would work together on nuclear arms control, although neither mentioned a concrete set of actions on forging a new treaty to replace the New Start Treaty, which is set to expire in 2021. They also did not address what American officials have said are Russian violations of the Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces Treaty.
The two also said they would work together to secure Israel’s border with Syria, restoring a cease-fire in the Golan Heights, and cooperate to bring humanitarian relief to address the toll of the civil war that has raged in Syria for more than seven years.
Mr. Trump said he had directly confronted Mr. Putin on the election interference, calling it “a message best delivered in person.” But he pivoted almost immediately to criticism of Mr. Mueller’s investigation and a recitation of his success in the Electoral College, blaming the investigation — not Russia’s actions — for the inability of two great nuclear powers to work together.
Peter Carr, a spokesman for the special counsel, had no comment on the idea.