ROME — On Monday, it was Malta’s turn to get tough on immigration in Europe.
Prosecutors brought legal charges against a nongovernmental organization active in the rescue of migrants in the Mediterranean, arguing in a hearing that the captain of the Dutch vessel Lifeline had entered the country’s waters illegally and lacked a proper boat registration.
The ship docked in Malta last Wednesday after a weeklong dispute over who should take in the 234 migrants it was carrying after rescuing them from two rubber dinghies. The island agreed to allow it on the condition that the migrants, who had set off from Libya, would be distributed among European member states.
But on Monday, the Maltese authorities confiscated the rescue boat and began a case against its captain, Claus-Peter Reisch, 57, of Germany. Human rights advocates and other defenders of Mr. Reisch said they thought he was being used as a scapegoat.
Mr. Falzon said that the decision to prosecute Mr. Reisch and the Lifeline had occurred only after comments from local politicians.
Mr. Reisch, who pleaded not guilty, said, “We did the right thing,” adding that he had not committed any crime.
Bail conditions imposed by the court mean that he must stay in Malta for the length of a trial, Mr. Reisch’s lawyers said. He will have to check in with a police station weekly. Should he leave Malta, he will face a fine of 10,000 euros, about $11,600.
His lawyers said that saving people in distress was the golden rule of anyone out at sea, and that governments were using charities’ work as a political statement to press for closed borders at the European Union level.
Malta is not the first country to act against private volunteer groups operating in the central Mediterranean. Italian prosecutors have sought charges against a few nonprofits in the past year for what they said were murky connections with traffickers in Libya.
Last month, judges in Palermo, Sicily, cleared two European organizations of accusations that they had ties to human smugglers and had aided and abetted illegal immigration.
The Maltese authorities on Monday also stopped another vessel, operated by Sea-Watch, one of five nongovernmental organizations active in the Mediterranean, without providing any legal or technical explanation, the group said.
“We receive it as a deliberate restriction of our freedom aimed at preventing the rescue activity,” the group wrote on Twitter on Monday.
A video published on the Facebook page of another group, Sea Eye, showed supporters of the Lifeline protesting with banners in front of the court in Valletta, the Maltese capital, on Monday. “Rescue ships blocked more than 400 dead,” read a white sheet.
An order barring charity ships from docking in Italian ports came last month when the country’s new, far-right interior minister, Matteo Salvini, turned back the Aquarius, a European humanitarian group’s vessel that was carrying more than 600 migrants. That led to an international diplomatic skirmish that solidified Italy’s hard line on immigration and eventually resulted in the ship traveling to Spain.
Human rights advocates expressed concern over the approach taken by Italy and Malta.
The migration agency estimated that more than 200 migrants drowned last weekend off Libya. While the number of migrants arriving to Italy this year is roughly 26,000 — down 80 percent compared with the same period last year — 1,000 people have drowned in the Mediterranean in 2018. Over the weekend, Italian newspapers carried pictures of Libyan Coast Guard officials holding three babies who had died in a shipwreck.
Humanitarian groups arrived in the Mediterranean in mid-2015, after a handful of deadly shipwrecks following the end of Europe’s Mare Nostrum program, in which Italian ships served as the front line in rescue operations. European leaders had reduced funding for the mission and left only some naval vessels patrolling the Mediterranean.