During a news conference with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, President Trump would not say whether he believed Russia meddled with the 2016 presidential election.
Right Now: President Trump is back home after meeting in Finland with President Vladimir V. Putin.
The president’s trip to Europe is over. The head-scratching? Hardly.
Mr. Trump closed out a trip that began with a NATO summit in Brussels with a meeting with Mr. Putin. Afterward, the men held a remarkable news conference where both addressed accusations that Russia meddled in the 2016 presidential election.
Mr. Putin denied it — and Mr. Trump appeared to stop just short of saying he believed the Russian leader more than he did his own intelligence aides.
 “It’s a shame that there can even be a little bit of a cloud over” his election victory, he said.
Here are some of the latest developments.
• Mr. Putin sat down with Chris Wallace of Fox News and rejected accusations of Russian misconduct. Mr. Trump sat down with Sean Hannity.
• Back home, some of Mr. Trump’s fellow Republicans said there was no doubt Russia had interfered in the vote. So did the director of national intelligence, Dan Coats.
• And just hours after the two presidents met with the press, American prosecutors brought charges against a Russian woman accused of trying to influence U.S. politics. Just before Mr. Trump left for his trip, 12 Russian intelligence agents were indicted on similar charges.
• The New York Times offered live coverage of the seven-day, three-nation trip from our White House reporters and European correspondents. Photographs from the trip are here.
Pressed in his interview with Mr. Wallace on Fox about accusations that Russia hacked into Democratic National Committee computers during the presidential campaign, Mr. Putin was defiant.
Asked whether he believes his own intelligence agencies, which say that Russia interfered in the 2016 United States election, or Mr. Putin, who denies it, Mr. Trump refused to say, but he expressed doubt about whether Russia was to blame.
Mr. Trump raised the matter of Russian electoral meddling, the two leaders said at the news conference, and Mr. Putin reiterated his denial of Russian involvement.
Asked directly whom he believes, Mr. Trump changed the subject to what he said was misconduct by Democrats during the campaign.
The president’s ambivalence, after the indictments of 12 Russian intelligence agents over the election hacking, and after the findings of congressional committees, represents a remarkable divergence between Mr. Trump and the American national security apparatus.
He offered to have Russian intelligence agencies work with their American counterparts to get to the bottom of the matter.
“What he did is an incredible offer,” Mr. Trump said. “He offered to have the people working on the case come and work with their investigators with respect to the 12 people. I think that’s an incredible offer.
Republican leaders were largely silent after Mr. Trump’s news Mr. Putin, but a scattering of Republicans were aghast.
“I never thought I would see the day when our American president would stand on the stage with the Russian president and place blame on the United States for Russian aggression. This is shameful,” Jeff Flake, the retiring Arizona senator, said on Twitter.
Senator Ben Sasse, Republican of Nebraska, joined in. “This is bizarre and flat-out wrong,” he said. “The United States is not to blame.
Representative Justin Amash, a libertarian-minded Republican from Michigan, weighed in more tepidly, but with eyebrows arched: “A person can be in favor of improving relations with Russia, in favor of meeting with Putin, and still think something is not right here,” he wrote on Twitter.
Democrats were not so circumspect.
In a feisty 30-minute interview with Mr. Wallace on Fox News, Mr. Putin denied that his nation interfered with American elections, dismissed concerns about the deaths of his political opponents and said he had no compromising materials on President Trump. The former businessman, he said, “was of no interest for us” before he ran for president.
Mr. Putin found himself pressed by the Mr. Wallace on several sensitive topics. At one point, the “Fox News Sunday” anchor tried to hand the Russian leader a copy of the indictment brought by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, against 12 Russian military intelligence officers accused of hacking Democratic Party emails in 2016.
Mr. Putin declined to accept the document.
“But they don’t end up dead,” Mr. Wallace rejoined.
At several points, Mr. Putin used false equivalencies and blatant mistruths to avoid questions. When Mr. Wallace asked about a video released by Mr. Putin’s government showing a nuclear missile hitting an area of Florida close to Mr. Trump’s estate, Mar-a-Lago, Mr. Putin simply denied the claim.
“There was not a caption saying Florida,” he said.
“You can see it on the map,” Mr. Wallace pointed out.
In his interview with Mr. Hannity on Fox News, Mr. Trump once again denounced the investigation into Russian political meddling. “Ninety percent of the nuclear power in the world between these two nations, and we’ve had a phony, witch hunt deal drive us apart,” he said.
Mr. Putin was sympathetic, he said.
A new era of cooperation — but on what?
Both Mr. Trump and Mr. Putin expressed confidence that Russia and the United States were entering a period of better relations and cooperation on global problems, but they did not cite any examples, and their news conference exposed continued areas of disagreement.
Russia seized Crimea from Ukraine in 2014 and continues to support Russian separatists fighting in eastern Ukraine, aggression that the West has condemned. Mr. Trump did not address the matter publicly, either before or after the meetings on Monday, but Mr. Putin was asked whether his American counterpart had made any concessions.
Mr. Putin made a point of noting that the two leaders still disagree strongly on the Iran nuclear deal, which Mr. Trump withdrew from in May, and which the Russian president hailed as a great success.
Speaking to reporters before the meetings, Mr. Trump cited the reduction of nuclear arsenals as a major item on his agenda. “We have 90 percent of the nuclear, and that’s not a good thing, it’s a bad thing,” he had said.
He raised the issue again at the post-summit news conference, but Mr. Putin did not, and it was not clear that the matter had been discussed, much less that any progress had been made.
Mr. Putin said that the war in Syria could be “the first showcase example of the successful joint work” between the two countries. But with Russia supporting the Assad regime, and the United States backing a rebel faction, it is not clear what room there is for cooperation there.
It was also not clear whether the two presidents had discussed another area of conflict: the British government’s assertion that the nerve agent poisoning of a former Russian spy and his daughter in England in March had been carried out by current or former agents of a Russian intelligence service, the G.R.U. The United States has supported Britain’s claim, and expelled dozens of Russian Embassy and Consulate employees.
Mr. Trump began the day of the meeting by blaming the United States for its poor relationship with Russia, casting aspersions on the federal investigation into Moscow’s cyberattack on the presidential election, and saying he felt “just fine” about meeting with Mr. Putin.
That investigation, and “many years of U.S. foolishness and stupidity,” he wrote, are why the United States’ relationship with Russia “has NEVER been worse” — a bold claim, given that the history includes periods like the Cuban missile crisis, and the wars in Korea and Vietnam.
The president’s tweet drew praise and a “like” from the Russian Foreign Ministry.
Mr. Trump did not mention factors that are usually cited in the West as causes for friction with Moscow: Russia’s annexation of Crimea, its support for rebels in Ukraine and for the Assad regime in Syria, its meddling in the elections of the United States and in those of other countries, and the nerve agent poisonings in England.
Mr. Trump, asked at the news conference whether he had warned Mr. Putin not to interfere in the election, instead used the opportunity to lash out at opponents who had suggested that Russian meddling was in any way responsible for his victory or tainted his legacy.
“There was no collusion at all,” said Mr. Trump.
He dismissed as largely irrelevant the indictment of 12 Russian intelligence agents in connection with the hacking of the Democratic National Committee and the Clinton presidential campaign.
During his news conference with Mr. Trump, Mr. Putin took advantage of his time on the world stage to target a longtime Kremlin foe, William F. Browder, a London-based investor, and repeat an accusation that Mr. Browder sent large amounts of money to Mrs. Clinton’s presidential campaign.
Mr. Putin was drawing on material cited in opposition research that Natalia V. Veselnitskaya, a Russian lawyer, offered to members of the Trump campaign in 2016.
Mr. Browder is a longtime target of Mr. Putin’s. The investor was the driving force behind the Magnitsky Act, a 2012 American law that freezes the assets held in the United States by Russian officials responsible for human rights abuses.
Mr. Trump’s body language on this trip alternated between aloof and uncomfortable, with brief moments of warmth — and that was when meeting America’s closest allies.
As he sat with Mr. Putin before their private meeting on Monday, Mr. Trump, who often gesticulates and jokes while making his points, seemed to keep himself uncharacteristically restrained — except for the moment he inexplicably winked in the Russian president’s direction.
Still, Mr. Trump appeared fidgety while seated next to his stony Russian counterpart, whom he has repeatedly tried to flatter before meeting him in Helsinki. In his opening remarks, he did it again.
During the five-minute photo opportunity and brief remarks, Mr. Trump hunched forward in his chair, tapped his fingers together with his hands making an upside-down triangle — a gesture he has made in the presence of other leaders in high-stakes settings. His head swiveled back and forth between the news cameras and his interpreter, but he rarely looked at the Russian president.
Compared with Mr. Trump, who leaned forward toward the cameras, his eyes darting back and forth, Mr. Putin appeared clamped into his chair. The Russian president’s eyes rarely left the floor, and if they did, they were focused on Mr. Trump. His hands rarely left two fixed positions — one on his lap, the other curled backward, gripping the chair.
