David L. Bernhardt, the deputy secretary of the Interior Department, said that the 1973 law had not seen major changes in 30 years and described the proposals as streamlining and improving the regulatory process. He rejected a suggestion that the moves would help the oil and gas businesses, although leaders in those industries have long sought similar changes to the ones outlined Thursday.
Environmental activists criticized the proposed changes, saying they would put species at risk of extinction. “These proposals would slam a wrecking ball into the most crucial protections for our most endangered wildlife,” said Brett Hartl, government affairs director at the Center for Biological Diversity.
The engineering and land management that enabled California’s tremendous growth have left it more vulnerable to climate shocks, which are getting worse.
Rains in Oregon brought new threats after wildfires: landslides now or in years to come.
At a meeting last year, oil and gas industry leaders contradicted public claims that emissions of climate-warming methane are under control.
The changes are in keeping with a broader pattern of regulatory moves in the Trump administration aimed at reducing cost and other burdens for businesses, particularly the energy business. Last month the Trump administration also started the process of rolling back the National Environmental Policy Act, an obscure law that is considered the cornerstone of environmental policy, laying out the process federal agencies must follow when considering major infrastructure projects.
Republicans in Western states have long sought changes to both laws, arguing they are more focused on preventing development than protecting the environment. Oil and gas companies, the timber industry, farmers, rangers and some private landowners have echoed the message. The Endangered Species Act in particular, many have argued, is outdated, costly and allows for too many lawsuits from environmentalists.
Separately, this week Republicans in Congress sought an ambitious overhaul of the law, arguing that only 3 percent of species listed as threatened or endangered have been successfully removed over the life of the act.
Robert Gordon, an adjunct fellow at the Competitive Enterprise Institute, a free-market think tank that opposes the Endangered Species Act, said the law is often a burden to property owners and pointed to the legal case of an amphibian called the dusky gopher frog.
The Supreme Court has agreed to consider whether the federal government’s designation of private land in Louisiana as “critical habitat” for the frog limited the owners’ ability to develop it. Mr. Gordon said if the proposed rules had been in place, the property would have been less likely to be designated as such.
Environmentalists expressed concern the changes will gut protections for the country’s most threatened species and weaken the agency’s ability to address climate change. The changes, they contended, are part of a broader effort by the Trump administration to dismantle ecosystem protections and disregard science when making decisions about the environment.
The Interior Department and the Department of Commerce will give the public 60 days to comment on the changes before finalizing them. Typically, proposals don’t change significantly as a result of the public comment period.
Thursday’s proposals also include a change that, while technical, could give the government greater leeway to play down climate change in judging whether a plant or animal is at risk of extinction. Environmentalists criticized the change — which involves writing a new definition for the term “foreseeable future” — as giving the government greater leeway to discount future effects of global warming.
Bob Dreher, senior vice president for conservation programs at Defenders of Wildlife, an environmental group, said that could put climate change in the cross hairs. “If they define it narrowly, then they’ll close their eyes to the fact that 30 years down the road polar bears will be endangered due to sea-level rise,” he said.
Current rules require agencies to automatically extend protections to threatened species that mirror those of endangered species. Changing the rule could roll back some of those protections.
Mr. Bernhardt on Wednesday also said that a section of the law that provides for consultations among federal agencies when considering permit applications would be streamlined. He described it as “where the rubber meets the road of the Endangered Species Act,” and said he expected the process to be improved.
“Our general intention is to maintain the scope of consultation, but that’s always in the eye of the beholder,” he said.