An Egyptian court sentenced a Lebanese tourist to eight years in prison on Saturday after she posted a video tirade on her Facebook page that Egyptian authorities claimed had insulted the country and its leader.
The news website Ahram reported that Mona el-Mazbouh was initially handed an 11-year sentence and a fine after she was convicted of “deliberately broadcasting false rumors which aim to undermine society and attack religions.” But her sentence was immediately reduced to eight years.
Under Egyptian law, “defaming and insulting the Egyptian people” is a crime.
In the May post on her Facebook page, which went viral, Ms. Mazbouh described being harassed by two men on the street of Cairo’s upscale Zamalek neighborhood and being ill-treated by a taxi driver. 
“You deserve what Sisi is doing to you. I hope God sends you someone more oppressive than Sisi,” she said in the original clip. She also made derogatory comments about Egyptians.
The case comes as Egypt is bolstering its tourism industry and attempting to draw outside investment; critics say the case does nothing to help the country’s global image.
While Egyptian courts often hand down initially heavy sentences that are later reduced on appeal, human rights advocates say that this is the latest in a series of overly severe judgments aimed at stamping out dissent. They have called for the release of Ms. Mazbouh. She will be able to appeal the decision later this month, Ahram reported.
Ms. Mazbouh took the video down from her Facebook page, but not before it had spread widely on Egyptian social media. The backlash was swift. The clip was quickly copied from her page and still appears on other social networks. It angered some Egyptians on social media, who called for her arrest.
The day before being detained, she posted a second video on Facebook apologizing to Egyptians she had offended.
The following day, Ms. Mazbouh was arrested at Cairo airport on June 2 as she prepared to board a plane out of the country, according to Ahram.
Critics of the decision said her sentencing is not only disproportionate, but a bad public relations move for a country looking to boost its international image.
There have been other similar cases brought recently against women in Egypt.
Egyptian activist Amal Fathy was detained in May after she posted an expletive laden video to her Facebook page denouncing sexual harassment and the state of the country. She detailed harassment that she had experienced that same day, and vowed to leave the country with her young son.
She and her son were detained after the video was posted. Months later, Ms. Fathy is still being held, awaiting trial on charges of inciting terrorism over the internet and spreading fake news.
Her husband, Mohamed Lotfy, is a prominent Egyptian human rights activist and launched a campaign for her release. Mr. Lotfy, in his campaign, wrote that his wife is being held at Al Qanater women’s prison north of Cairo and her health is deteriorating.
“Her lawyers presented a report from her psychologist explaining that she suffers from chronic depression and the prison doctor made two reports confirming this and explaining that her health condition deteriorates as a result of her detention,” Mr. Lofty wrote. “She suffers from frequent panic attacks in prison and her recent paralysis seems to be caused by her psychological state."
Before her arrest, she was a vocal critic of the government and its failure to protect women from widespread street harassment.
“It is a dark day when the Egyptian authorities are more concerned with silencing a woman who speaks out about sexual harassment than taking steps to address the issue,” Najia Bounaim, North Africa campaigns director at Amnesty International, said in a statement at the time of Ms. Fathy’s arrest.