Business|Goldman Names a New Chief. Don’t Expect Big Changes.
Goldman Names a New Chief. Don’t Expect Big Changes.
During his weekly staff meeting at Goldman Sachs’s Manhattan headquarters on Tuesday morning, the firm’s head of digital finance noted that its president, David M. Solomon, had just been anointed the next chief executive.
There weren’t any. So he turned the floor over to a colleague who discussed the benefits of operating customer call centers for additional hours on Sundays.
For a company that has had just nine chief executives in its 149-year history, the announcement that Mr. Solomon would succeed Lloyd C. Blankfein in the top job on Oct. 1 marked an important milestone. Yet inside and outside the bank, it was anticlimactic — a reflection of the fact that the succession plan has been on public display for months and the expectation that the bank’s strategy won’t change radically under Mr. Solomon.
Mr. Solomon’s priorities are already clear, after he helped devise a plan last year to rev things up at Goldman. Along with his co-president at the time, Harvey M. Schwartz, Mr. Solomon moved to expand Marcus — the consumer-lending platform that Mr. Talwar runs — as well as broaden investment-banking services into new markets in the United States and offer additional services to corporations, including managing their cash.
That is the world that Mr. Solomon, a longtime investment banker known for his ability to charm both employees and clients, comes from.
The need to refocus on clients has been clear from Goldman’s recent financial results. The combination of post-crisis regulations and new technologies has gutted the trading business and blunted Goldman’s competitive edge. Investment banking, while Goldman dominated in market share, has never been the engine of its profits. And its investment management business, despite substantial growth, is still catching up to its competitors.
The initiative would have been unimaginable at the start of Mr. Blankfein’s reign in 2006, when Goldman prided itself on being a hard-nosed Wall Street aggressor. But since then, the bank has embraced the consumer business. It believes its brand and blank slate give it an advantage in figuring out how to tailor — and make money from — loans and other financial services to people who previously wouldn’t have been Goldman clients.
When Mr. Solomon takes over, the biggest changes will most likely be attitudinal. For example, Goldman executives say that Mr. Solomon — who moonlights as a dance-music D.J. — wants to improve the bank’s financial transparency in order to help analysts, investors and the news media better understand how the bank makes money. He may hold the firm’s first-ever “investor day” in 2019. He also has vowed to significantly increase the number of women the bank hires and promotes.
The firm held its quarterly meeting of managing directors first thing in the morning, and Mr. Solomon choked up when he thanked Mr. Blankfein for the promotion, according to people who were there. In front of a standing-room-only crowd, the two men, who more often make sarcastic jokes about their baldness and dissimilar heights, hugged.
Elsewhere in the skyscraper, executives gathered to field analyst and investor questions about the leadership change and the bank’s second-quarter results. It wasn’t until 40 minutes into the conference call that someone asked about what will be different under Mr. Solomon.
On Wednesday morning, it will be back to normal for Mr. Solomon, who remains the No. 2 executive for another few months. First on his to-do list: speaking to Goldman’s summer interns.