Politics|Trump Invited the Russians to Hack Clinton. Were They Listening?
Trump Invited the Russians to Hack Clinton. Were They Listening?
Donald J. Trump encouraged Russia at a news conference to find Hillary Clinton’s missing correspondence.
I have a real problem when Hillary Clinton, who gives open access to a phony server, is allowed to get these briefings. How does Hillary Clinton get a national security briefing when she’s been probably hacked, when so much of her information — the director of the F.B.I. said it was essentially negligent. But it would be interesting to see. I will tell you this: Russia, if you’re listening, I hope you’re able to find the 30,000 emails that are missing. I think you will probably be rewarded mightily by our press. I have nothing to do with Russia. I said that — I said that Putin has much better leadership qualities than Obama. But who doesn’t know that? Because it’s under audit. I’ll release them [tax returns] when the audit’s completed. Nobody would release what it’s under — I’ve had audits for 15 or 16 years. Every year I have a routine audit. Under audit — when the audit is complete I’ll release them. But zero — I mean, I will tell you right now, zero — I’ve nothing to do with Russia.
WASHINGTON — It was one of the more outlandish statements in a campaign replete with them: In a news conference in July 2016, Donald J. Trump made a direct appeal to Russia to hack Hillary Clinton’s emails and make them public.
As it turns out, that same day, the Russians — whether they had tuned in or not — made their first effort to break into the servers used by Mrs. Clinton’s personal office, according to a sweeping 29-page indictment unsealed Friday by the special counsel’s office that charged 12 Russians with election hacking.
The indictment did not address the question of whether the Russians’ actions were actually in response to Mr. Trump. It said nothing at all about Mr. Trump’s request for help from Russia — a remark that had unnerved American intelligence and law enforcement officials who were closely monitoring Russia’s efforts to influence the election.
But the indictment did offer some clues about what happened, implying that the hacking had occurred later on the day Mr. Trump issued his invitation. He made the statement around 10:30 a.m. July 27 at his golf course in Doral, Fla. It was late afternoon in Russia.
“For example, on or about July 27, 2016, the conspirators attempted after-hours to spearphish for the first time email accounts at a domain hosted by a third-party provider and used by Clinton’s personal office,” according to the indictment, referring to spearphishing, a common tactic used to target email accounts.
The indictment said that on the same day, Russians began an effort to target 76 Clinton campaign email accounts.
Rod J. Rosenstein, the deputy attorney general and the Justice Department official overseeing the investigation by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, said the authorities were not alleging in the indictment that Americans had knowingly been in contact with the Russians about the hacking.
Investigators for Mr. Mueller would like to ask Mr. Trump what he knew about the hackings. The president has refused for several months to sit for an interview.
At the 2016 news conference, Mr. Trump made a series of statements on Russia and raised questions about whether the Kremlin had actually been behind the earlier hacking of emails from the Democratic National Committee. Emails from the committee had been made public days before, on the eve of the Democratic National Convention, creating a significant distraction as the party formally nominated Mrs. Clinton.
Mr. Trump also signaled then that he would be open to recognizing Russia’s annexation of Crimea from Ukraine. The Obama administration and the European Union had considered the seizure illegal and imposed sanctions.
He still is, if his recent statements are any indication, as he prepares to meet one-on-one with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia early next week in Finland.