A Pennsylvania state board has determined that Bill Cosby is a “sexually violent predator,” an assessment that could play a role in how severe a penalty the judge imposes on him when he is sentenced in September.
The determination was made by the state’s Sexual Offenders Assessment Board after a psychologist evaluated Mr. Cosby’s case.
Mr. Cosby has been confined to his home in Montgomery County since being convicted in April of three counts of aggravated indecent assault.
In a filing Tuesday, the Montgomery County district attorney, Kevin R. Steele, who prosecuted Mr. Cosby, asked the judge who had presided at the trial, Steven T. O’Neill, to schedule a hearing on the board’s finding. The hearing must be held before Mr. Cosby’s sentencing, scheduled for Sept. 24 and 25.
The judge will decide whether to uphold the board’s opinion after hearing arguments and witnesses from both sides, lawyers said.
Mr. Cosby, 81, faces up to 30 years in prison after being found guilty of assaulting Andrea Constand, a former Temple University employee, at his home outside Philadelphia in 2004. The trial included testimony by five other women who said they believed Mr. Cosby had drugged and sexually assaulted them in prior decades. Prosecutors argued that Ms. Constand’s encounter was part of a long pattern of predatory behavior. Mr. Cosby was not charged with assaulting the other women.
If the judge agrees with the psychological assessment, and Mr. Cosby were not to receive a prison sentence, he would be required as a sexually violent predator to report monthly to the police for the rest of his life under Pennsylvania law. The law is the state’s version of Megan’s Law, a federal statute that requires the monitoring of convicted sex offenders.
Joseph P. McGettigan, a former prosecutor who is now in private practice, said there doesn’t need to be convictions for multiple assaults for a defendant to be classified as a predator. Other evidence beyond the number of cases, such as the testimony of the five women who spoke against Mr. Cosby during the trial, could factor into the board’s decision.
“Information gathered by the Sexual Offenders Assessment Board that’s related to events other than conviction may be relevant,” he said.
Meghan Dade, the executive director of the board, said it has recommended sexually violent predator designations for about 5,700 people since 2000. Of those, about 75 percent have been accepted by the courts, she said.
Alan Tauber, a criminal defense attorney in Philadelphia, said that if the judge upholds the finding that Mr. Cosby is a sexually violent predator, it could influence sentencing.
But the judge is also likely to take Mr. Cosby’s advanced age and his legal blindness into account when imposing a sentence, and so he may conclude that the entertainer is unlikely to reoffend, Mr. Tauber said.
But Joseph P. Green Jr., Mr. Cosby’s new attorney, argued in court papers that the psychologist who evaluated Mr. Cosby had made the finding on the basis of “irrelevant and improper” information, and without any cross-examination.
“The true facts establish that this defendant is not a sexually violent predator,” Mr. Green wrote.