Despite its title, “Robin Williams: Come Inside My Mind” is a straightforward, conventionally assembled documentary biography of an eccentric, decidedly idiosyncratic comedian and actor. At times that’s a limitation, but overall it’s a good thing. Simply watching Williams in action is probably more interesting than any concerted effort to get inside his head or dissect or approximate his method.
And the nearly two-hour “Come Inside My Mind,” directed by Marina Zenovich (“Roman Polanski: Wanted and Desired”) and premiering Monday night on HBO, delivers the archival goods: copious clips from Williams’s stand-up performances, movies, interviews, his 1988 turn in “Waiting for Godot” at Lincoln Center and the seminal “Mork and Mindy,” debuting on television in 1978. There are ups and downs, particularly among the feature films, but we get to see the irrepressible, unpredictable, inventive Williams on top of his game often enough that the documentary flies by.
Ms. Zenovich proceeds chronologically through Williams’s life, from his cosseted upbringing in the Midwest and Marin County through Juilliard, early difficult days as a stand-up comic, his big break of “Mork and Mindy” and the multipronged stardom that ensued. His struggles — with addiction and depression, with family life, with handling success — are addressed candidly and poignantly, but the offstage Williams never comes completely into focus. This seems to reflect the experience of the people in his life, and to belie the film’s title — interview subjects like Pam Dawber, his “Mork and Mindy” co-star, and Valerie Velardi, his first wife, speak in wistful terms of a man who didn’t always welcome others inside his mind.
Williams’s suicide in 2014 hangs over his story, and “Come Inside My Mind” can’t help adopting, to some extent, a seemingly unavoidable dialectic between melancholy and manic energy. But Ms. Zenovich manages seriousness without sentimentality or mawkishness. She doesn’t solve any mysteries, but she leaves you feeling that you know Robin Williams about as well as he’d let you.