When it comes to air travel, there are plenty of haters. And then there are those who have found love within airport terminals, tarmacs and even cockpits, like Adam Dershowitz, an aeronautical engineer.
The couple were married in October 2001 in New York, their hometown (though not at an airport).
Marriage proposals on airplanes or helicopters, along with weddings at airports or places associated with aviation, have since become more common as couples find special meaning in these locations.
Hanna Liebman and Adam Dershowitz at their 2001 wedding. Mr. Dershowitz proposed to Ms. Liebman in a two-seat acrobatic airplane.
“Some couples meet while working at the airport or flying through an airport,” or even on an airplane, noted Harriet Baskas, who writes the blog Stuck at the Airport, which provides tips for air travelers.
Several airports welcome weddings. A special department of VIP services at Arlanda Airport in Stockholm, for instance, will arrange weddings in the control tower. There’s even a wedding package for same-day departures — just in case the newlyweds want to leave right away for their honeymoon.
In California, Chris Robinson, a lawyer and a notary, regularly performs weddings in public spaces at Los Angeles-area airports. “I’ve been part of dozens of weddings in L.A., Burbank and Orange County airports,” he said, adding that passers-by are always charmed.
Weddings are also popular at airport hotels with views of the runway, like the Sheraton Hartford Hotel at Hartford Bradley International Airport, where more than half a dozen couples each year celebrate their union from a ballroom overlooking the tarmac.
As couples personalize the occasion, “unique venues are on the rise,” said Kristen Maxwell Cooper, the editor in chief of the wedding website the Knot.
Hangars and air museums are also selected as wedding sites, though not just by couples involved in aviation.
Catherine Harbove, an events director at a restaurant in Houston, and Alejandro Capetillo, who works in finance, both 31, decided to hold their wedding this past April in a former terminal building of Houston’s Hobby Airport.
Ms. Harbove admits she can’t tell one jetliner from another, but she says she remains fascinated with the golden days of aviation. When the couple toured the first passenger terminal to be built in Houston, now a city aviation museum, they knew right away they had found their spot.
During the reception, Frank Sinatra tunes and jazz standards played while friends and family explored the Art Deco building, with its period check-in counters, flight crew uniforms and long-forgotten travel memorabilia.
A reminder of times past “makes people emotional,” Ms. Harbove said. Their wedding was an invitation to step back to a time when being in the air was romantic.
Mindy and Kevin Lindheim chose to have their wedding last November at the Valiant Air Command Warbird Museum in Titusville, Fla., not far from their families and their alma mater, Embry Riddle Aeronautical University in Daytona Beach, Fla.
The couple met as students at Embry Riddle Aeronautical, where Ms. Lindheim, now 23, was on a pilot career track and Mr. Lindheim, 25, was majoring in air traffic control. It wasn’t until they graduated and got jobs in separate cities that they discovered there would be diversions en route to happily ever after.
Ms. Lindheim worked as a factory demo pilot and a regional sales director for Textron/Cessna in Chicago, while her fiancé was doing training in Oklahoma. Their career paths converged when both got assignments in Atlanta.
The museum where they got married is at the Space Coast Regional Airport, which operates several hangars filled with vintage military planes.
“I can’t think of one bad hangar party I’ve ever been to,” Ms. Lindheim said.
Few of their friends and family had any connection to aviation, but they all appreciated a special surprise at the ceremony when the ring bearer pedaled down the aisle on an airplane bicycle.
After the ceremony, the newlyweds, slipped out undetected to prepare for their big reveal at the reception: The bride taxied a Cessna 172 to the party hangar with her husband at her side.
Many flying metaphors seem to apply to life, as Lou Rodriguez and Chris Cueva, who live in Boston, discovered while planning their wedding on the tarmac of the Palm Springs Air Museum in Palm Springs, Calif.
Both men are flight attendants with JetBlue, a job that can appear to be more fun than it actually is. “People have a perception that it is glamorous, and certainly it is a great lifestyle and an addiction and a passion,” said Mr. Rodriguez, 30.
In reality, though, it is hard work, requiring empathy, energy and good communication skills.
This training would turn out to be helpful planning a destination wedding for 200 guests in 2015, shortly after the legalization of same-sex marriages.
The parents of Mr. Cueva, 38, were so uncomfortable with his upcoming nuptials that they considered not attending the wedding, creating a drama that played out on “Bride & Prejudice.” The TV series on the FYI network documents weddings of couples who encounter family resistance. Mr. Rodriguez and Mr. Cueva also found wedding service providers reluctant.
Relying on flight attendant training that teaches the importance of prioritization, the couple decided to jettison the small problems. If a business owner had a problem with them, they’d find someone else. They would concentrate instead on the one challenge that mattered: making sure that they did not shred family ties.
They relied on professional problem-solving skills and a dose of understanding. “If people don’t have information, it can intimidate them,” Mr. Rodriguez said of how the couple approached Mr. Cueva’s parents, and specifically his father.
During the ceremony, on the tarmac bracketed by World War II-era planes, the two said “I do,” with all parents and grandparents in attendance, as well as many airline employees.
“Once you’re in, you’re in for life, said Mr. Rodriguez, who is now using his husband’s last name. He was talking about how, despite the difficulties, aviation had won his and his husband’s heart. Only now, the sentiment applied just as well to their lives together.