ALBANY — Four states including New York and New Jersey sued the federal government on Tuesday over a sharp reduction in the deductibility of state and local income taxes, a central part of President Trump’s tax overhaul, saying that the change was an “unconstitutional assault” on their sovereignty.
The suit, filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan, had been promised for months, as Democratic leaders of several states denounced the president’s plans, including Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, who had called the limits on such deductions an “economic missile” at the heart of New York, already a high-tax state, and its economy.
The legal argument leans on interpretations of the 10th amendment — states’ rights — and the 16th, which established federal powers of income taxation, arguing that the new law effectively overturns longstanding precedent that “the federal government’s income tax power was and would remain subject to federalism constraints,” according to the suit.
The suit is the most substantive salvo in Mr. Cuomo’s monthslong campaign against any change in the so-called “SALT deduction” on state and local income taxes, as well as property taxes. Such deductions had typically been revered in states with high property taxes — like New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, all plaintiffs in the suit, along with Maryland — because of the tax relief it provided as well the incentive for homeownership.
Mr. Trump’s tax plan, signed in December, places a limit of $10,000 on combined income, sales or property taxes.
Whether the suit will find a receptive audience in the federal courts — or on a conservative-leaning Supreme Court — is an open question. Brian Galle, a professor of law at Georgetown University, said that the suit was “an original work of scholarship,” basically arguing that when the federal government imposed taxes, it had to reduce the collateral impact on a state’s ability to raise its own funds.
David Carl Kamin, a professor of law at New York University, concurred, saying that the courts had given broad discretion to Congress “on what deductions are allowed and not allowed,” citing the Alternative Minimum Tax.
The suit, which was joined by Barbara Underwood, the New York attorney general, is one of several efforts to fight and mitigate the tax law undertaken by Mr. Cuomo and Gov. Philip D. Murphy of New Jersey, including the creation of charitable funds that residents could donate to and then deduct those donations from federal taxes.
The governor’s remarks were met with a sharp retort from the Republicans who lead the State Senate and are fighting to maintain their single-seat majority in the face of a wave of retirements and Democratic optimism. In a lengthy statement, state Senator John J. Flanagan, the Republican leader, mocked the governor’s timing in filing the suit — long after he threatened one — and a series of recent revenue ideas which the G.O.P. opposed during the most recent budget negotiations in March.
The Treasury Department, which along with the Internal Revenue Service, are defendants in the suit, had little comment beyond saying that they were reviewing it.