New York|One Elite High School Was Diverse. Then It Got Discovered.
At some of New York City’s elite high schools, racial diversity is an issue. At the Brooklyn Latin School, it was considered a core part of the school’s identity.
For years, Brooklyn Latin was the most diverse of the city’s specialized high schools, which admit students based on a single test. In 2013, a quarter of students at the school were black, and 15 percent were Latino. That same year, at Stuyvesant High School, just 33 out of almost 3,300 students — or 1 percent — were black, and 77 students were Latino.
But in recent years, racial diversity at the Bushwick, Brooklyn, high school has been in steady decline. This school year, the incoming class of students at Brooklyn Latin is 13 percent black and 10 percent Latino, and the school has become increasingly white and Asian.
Much of the current debate around diversity revolves around the original three specialized schools, Stuyvesant High School, Brooklyn Technical High School and Bronx High School of Science. But the newer schools, which include High School for American Studies at Lehman College, Queens High School for the Sciences at York College, and Staten Island Technical High School, have similar disparities in demographics.
The newer schools generally require slightly lower scores on the Specialized High Schools Admissions Test, or SHSAT, to earn a seat, and Brooklyn Latin has had the lowest required cutoff score since opening.
In June, Mayor Bill de Blasio announced a pair of proposals meant to help desegregate the specialized high schools. Beginning in the fall of 2019 the city will set aside 20 percent of all specialized high school seats for low-income students who score just below the required score for acceptance to one of the schools. The students will have to complete a summer session called the Discovery program. Last year, 5 percent of students were admitted through the program. City officials said the change is expected to increase the percentage of seats offered to black and Latino students to 16 percent.
The mayor also proposed eliminating the SHSAT entirely, and replacing it with admissions based on class rank and test scores, though that plan faces an uphill political battle as it requires approval from the State Legislature.
Marielis Perez wanted to go to school in the Bronx or Manhattan, but Brooklyn Latin ended up being her only option. Though her charter school in the Bronx provided a small prep course for the required exam, she said she and her parents, who immigrated from the Dominican Republic, weren’t aware of the nuances of the high school application process and couldn’t afford a private tutor to help her prepare for the exam.
She is headed to Boston University in the fall.
In some respects, the decline is a result of the school’s increasing success.
A 2013 U.S. News and World Report article ranked Brooklyn Latin as the top public school in New York State, suddenly exposing it to a wider audience.
Teachers said they began to see a change almost immediately.
“I noticed that there are more white students and more East Asian students at our open house events,” said Jennifer Snyder, a Latin teacher at the school.
The falloff in black and Latino students at Brooklyn Latin comes despite increased efforts from administrators, teachers and students to attract more students of color, including securing grants to create a specialized high school boot camp for students from local middle schools.
With a grant awarded through the United Federation of Teachers, the school created a pilot program in 2017. The pilot included 40 seventh graders who were nominated by their middle schools and ran for eight weeks at no cost to the students. Most of the students who participated were either black, Latino or low-income.
This past year, the program featured a partnership with Kaplan, the test prep company, and was expanded to pair the middle schoolers with high school mentors. It also included sessions run by the school’s faculty dedicated to exposing students to the culture and expectations at Brooklyn Latin. Two students from the pilot program will be attending Brooklyn Latin in the fall, and the most recent group of students will be taking the SHSAT in October.
Middle schools across the city prepare students and their families for the high school application process to varying degrees, meaning that some black and Latino students are left in the dark about the specialized high schools until it is too late, said Malcolm Hill, the assistant headmaster at Brooklyn Latin.
Other families simply can’t afford the test prep that can improve their child’s chances of scoring high enough on the test to earn admission to one of the schools. A prep course at Kaplan starts at $999 for eight sessions. The financial burden of test preparation is one of the reasons the mayor and schools chancellor, Richard A. Carranza, are hoping to eliminate the SHSAT entirely.
Ultimately, Mr. Hill said, the school has little control over which students earn seats in its classrooms. Teachers and administrators can only inform families about their high school options, then hope for the best, he said.
If the number of black and Latino students at Brooklyn Latin continues to wane, students say they fear it will have an irreversible impact on the school’s culture.
Brooklyn Latin’s classical, liberal arts education emphasizes class debates, called Socratic Seminars, and other public speaking exercises. Debates about complex topics such as the extent to which the Reconstruction era was a victory for African-Americans, or the ethical implications of in vitro fertilization, are commonplace in classrooms and at cafeteria tables. No other specialized school has come close to admitting as many black and Latino students. And for those students, the experience of sitting in classrooms and commuting on the subway with a significant number of classmates from the same communities, could be transformative.
Some, like Clara Park, a recent graduate, said that the diversity of the student body helped make those debates more constructive, and gave her a chance to hear points of view she otherwise might not have been exposed to.
