The lawsuit, which a lawyer for the plaintiffs said was the first of its kind at the federal level, named Michigan officials including Gov. Rick Snyder as defendants because the state had played an outsize role in managing Detroit’s schools while the school district, and the city, struggled with a lack of resources.
In his decision on Friday dismissing the suit, Judge Stephen J. Murphy III said that “access to literacy” — which he also referred to as a “minimally adequate education” — was not a fundamental right. And he said the lawsuit had failed to show that the state had practiced overt racial discrimination.
Mark Rosenbaum, a lawyer with Public Counsel, a public interest law firm in California that led the legal team that represented the students, said he planned to appeal the decision. “In 2018, you shouldn’t have to file lawsuits so that kids get access to teachers and books,” he said, calling the condition of the city’s schools a civil rights issue.
“Historically, access to literacy has been a tool to subordinate certain groups and certain communities and to keep those communities down,” he said.
The Michigan attorney general’s office, whose lawyers represented the state and argued successfully to have the lawsuit dismissed, referred questions about the case to Mr. Snyder’s office, which did not respond to requests for comment on Tuesday.
A report from the congressionally mandated National Assessment of Educational Progress found that last year, students in Detroit’s public school district scored lower in reading and math than students in all of the other 26 large urban districts measured.
In his decision, Judge Murphy agreed that state officials bore some responsibility for the quality of education in the district. He also agreed that giving students the opportunity to learn to read was “of incalculable importance,” adding that some level of literacy was necessary for voting, applying for a job and securing a place to live.
“But those points do not necessarily make access to literacy a fundamental right,” he said.
