For live updates of President Trump’s visit to Britain, go here.
Only a few hours into his trip to the U.K., Britons learned that the American president who had just shaken up NATO allies in Brussels was not out of the provocation business.
Around the time a dinner in Mr. Trump’s honor was taking place at an Oxfordshire palace, word spread that he had given an interview highly critical of the dinner’s host. That would be Prime Minister Theresa May.
And so ended Day 1.
• Mr. Trump, fresh from breaking eggs in Brussels, was back in form in Britain, telling a newspaper that Prime Minister May was mishandling the Brexit talks.
• Shortly after he arrived at the ambassador’s residence and again outside the dinner, protesters began to make their voices heard.
• Earlier in the day, in Brussels, Mr. Trump said NATO allies had agreed to his demand for a significant increase in military spending, but other leaders offered differing accounts. Mr. Trump said he remained committed to the alliance.
• The New York Times has live coverage of his seven-day, three-nation trip, from our White House reporters and European correspondents. Photographs from Mr. Trump’s weeklong trip are here.
Near the end of the gala dinner Mrs. May was hosting for Mr. Trump on Thursday night, word emerged that he had given a newspaper interview in which he criticized her handling of the Brexit negotiations and appeared to boost the fortunes of a political rival.
He had much warmer words for Boris Johnson, the ambitious British politician who just quit as foreign minister in an open break with May.
The bombshell interview may give Mr. Trump and Mrs. May something to talk about on Friday — when they are to meet for lunch.
The president and the first lady attended a dinner Thursday evening hosted by Prime Minister May at Blenheim Palace.
The dinner itself was closed to the press, but shortly before 8 p.m., Mr. and Ms. Trump arrived at the place and were greeted by Mrs. May and her husband, Philip.
The Mays emerged from the palace — a hulking, yellow-tinged stone building with Corinthian columns, ornate turrets and statues adorning the top — and strode down red-carpeted steps and across a large cobblestone plaza.

Outside the palace gates, the mood was less celebratory. Hundreds of protesters held signs protesting Mr. Trump’s visit. Many carried signs that read “No to Racism, No to Trump.” The demonstration was peaceful, and photos posted to social media showed families with young children gathered on the streets of the Oxfordshire town.
Thousands of people came out to demonstrate against President Trump. During his visit, Mr. Trump will meet with Prime Minister Theresa May and Queen Elizabeth II.
Protesters across from the ambassador’s residence, where the Trumps were staying the night, unleashed a “wall of sound.” It featured the cries of children detained by U.S. immigration authorities, as well a relentless stream of slogans, whistles and the banging of pots and drums.
As the presidential helicopter descended on the grounds of the ambassador’s residence in Regent’s Park, preparing to whisk Mr. Trump away to a black-tie dinner in a secluded palace outside the capital, protesters raised a cry.
British authorities had set up a metallic cage around the ambassador’s residence, where President Trump is staying overnight, as part of his security.
On Thursday, activists gave a taste of the protests planned on Friday, though the crowd thinned out after the president left for the dinner at Blenheim Palace.
Organizers hope to mount the biggest weekday demonstration in Britain since protests against the Iraq War more than a decade ago.
President Trump reaffirmed his commitment to the alliance and claimed that member nations had agreed to increase their military spending.
I believe in NATO. I think NATO is a very important — probably the greatest ever done. But the United States was paying for anywhere from 70 to 90 percent of it, depending on the way you calculate. That’s not fair to the United States. I let them know that I was extremely unhappy with what was happening and they have substantially upped their commitment. And now we’re very happy and have a very, very powerful, very, very strong NATO. Much stronger than it was two days ago.
Mr. Trump strongly recommitted American support for NATO, a bedrock of Western security policy for generations, on Thursday, comments that at least temporarily calmed fears that he might move toward dismantling the alliance.
But if Mr. Trump’s public remarks were friendly, the tone behind closed doors was much harsher. Officials from other countries voiced fears that even if he had not broken an alliance that was first formed in 1949 to contain the Soviet Union, he had thrown some sand in its gears.
Mr. Trump insisted that despite his criticism of the alliance and some of its member countries, there was no animosity in private meetings with other leaders.
What that would mean was not clear to the officials who were present. White House officials did not immediately respond to requests to explain Mr. Trump’s comment, or to say whether he was suggesting that the United States could withdraw from NATO.
The French president, Emmanuel Macron, dismissed such concerns as unfounded.
“Generally I do not comment on what goes on behind the scenes, but at no moment did President Trump — neither bilaterally nor multilaterally — say that he was intending to leave NATO,” Mr. Macron said.
Mr. Trump has not held a news conference on American soil for more than a year. But on Thursday, flanked by Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and John R. Bolton, his national security adviser, he took questions from reporters for over a half an hour.
Did NATO agree to spending increases? 2 European leaders say no.
Mr. Trump said that other NATO countries had agreed to significant increases in military spending in response to his demands.
But within a few hours, Emmanuel Macron, the French president, and Giuseppe Conte, Italy’s prime minister, said the allies had simply agreed to keep a 2014 commitment to increase military spending to 2 percent of gross domestic product by 2024.
Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, said that her country would consider more spending, but said nothing about making any new commitments. And she undercut the notion that reconsideration of Germany’s defense budget was due simply to American pressure.
“Given the discussion of many European allies here, not just the American discussion, I think we have to ask again and again what else can we possibly do,” she said.
Mr. Trump has insisted that NATO countries meet the 2 percent threshold right away, and that the long-term target be doubled to 4 percent.
Mr. Trump once again hailed himself as a “very stable genius” and took “total credit” for persuading his allies to increase military spending. And he took credit for other NATO countries having increased their military spending by $33 billion in the last year.
Other NATO leaders mostly refrained from responding to Mr. Trump’s disdain and criticism, but the body language at the summit meeting said plenty, and it was not a message of warmth and harmony.
As the leaders walked to the site of a group photograph, many of them chatting easily with one another, Mr. Trump hung back, with the president of Turkey, Recep Tayyip Erdogan.
When they took their assigned spots, Mr. Trump stood near the center, but his counterparts mostly ignored him, giving him no more than sidelong glances, even as several of them continued conversing.
American presidents have long pressed their NATO counterparts to increase military spending. But Mr. Trump’s insistence that the other nations owe money misstates how the alliance works, and the figures he cites are misleading.
NATO has a budget to cover shared costs and some equipment used in joint operations, and all 29 member countries contribute to it. None of the allies has failed to pay its contribution.
Mr. Trump’s complaint is that, while NATO member countries have agreed to spend at least 2 percent of their gross domestic products on military spending, most do not. But none has violated that agreement, because the 2 percent figure is a target to be reached by 2024.
According to NATO, all members have significantly raised military spending since 2014, and eight are expected to meet the goal this year.
Mr. Trump tweeted on Monday that the United States accounted for 90 percent of military spending by NATO countries, but the alliance says the real figure is about 67 percent. And most American military spending is not NATO-related.
Mr. Trump’s first summit meeting with the Russian president will be parsed for countless layers of meaning.
The West’s stance toward Russia is, as always, a central topic at the NATO meeting, and the United States’ European allies are worried that Mr. Trump aims to reduce the American security role in dealing with Moscow.
Russia is waging a proxy war against Ukraine, has forcibly annexed part of that country, has meddled in other nations’ elections, gives crucial support to the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad, and stands accused of using a chemical weapon on British soil.
Mr. Trump’s 2016 campaign is under investigation for links to Russia, and Mr. Trump, who is quick to aim a barb at almost anyone else, has been reluctant to criticize Mr. Putin. Yet he and his aides bristle at accusations that he is not tough enough with the Kremlin.
The meeting with Mr. Putin will be closely analyzed for signs that Mr. Trump is friendlier to his Russian counterpart than to the leaders he is meeting in Brussels.