Many celebrities, politicians and so-called social media influencers found their Twitter followings knocked down a few digits on Thursday as the company slashed tens of millions of suspicious accounts from the totals.
For example, the actor Ashton Kutcher, an active member since the company’s early days who led many other celebrities to embrace the platform, saw his follower count drop by more than a million. On Wednesday afternoon, he had 19.1 million. By Thursday evening, that was down to 18 million, a drop of nearly 6 percent.
Oprah Winfrey, who sent her inaugural tweet in 2009, had her following cut by about 1.4 million between Wednesday and Thursday evening. Ellen DeGeneres lost two million, leaving her at 76.1 million followers.
The basketball star Shaquille O’Neal also lost about a million, dropping from 15.3 million followers. Rihanna lost more than two million — but she still has 86.8 million people watching her tweets. Katy Perry saw her count drop by three million to 107 million.
Aly Pavela, a Twitter spokeswoman, said the work of eliminating the accounts from users’ follower counts would continue over the coming days.
The company is taking the action to restore trust in its platform. Many users have inflated their followings with automated or fake accounts, buying the appearance of social influence to bolster their political activism, business endeavors or entertainment careers.
When the work is done, Twitter expects it will have reduced the total follower count on the platform by about 6 percent — a substantial drop.
The social media company itself was not spared. Twitter’s main account lost about 12 percent of its total followers (about 7.7 million) from Wednesday to Thursday. The Twitter chief executive, Jack Dorsey, had lost about 230,000 followers by Thursday evening.
And in the interest of full disclosure: The main account of The New York Times dropped by nearly 732,000 followers, starting at about 42.3 million on Wednesday and hitting 41.6 million on Thursday evening.
But even more typical users saw losses in the hundreds or thousands. Many journalists with robust Twitter pages saw their followings reduced, although some took it in stride.
Twitter’s move could also be felt in high government offices around the world. Paul Kagame, the president of Rwanda, lost about one-third of his Twitter followers in one day. On Wednesday, Mr. Kagame, who has been Rwanda’s top leader for nearly two decades, had about 1.8 million followers. On Thursday evening, that number dropped to 1.2 million.
Queen Rania of Jordan lost about 300,000 followers, dropping to 10.6 million in one day’s time. Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the president of Turkey, lost more than 200,000, leaving him with 13 million.
Even Pope Francis shed 100,000 from his digital flock. He has 17 million remaining.
An investigation by The Times in January found that one small company in Florida sold fake followers and other social media engagement to hundreds of thousands of users around the world, including politicians, models, actors and authors. The revelations prompted calls in Congress for intervention by the Federal Trade Commission and investigations in at least two states.
In the aftermath of this week’s follower purge, people who have built their celebrity on social media platforms took a hit as well. Kim Kardashian West lost about 3 percent of her Twitter following, dropping down to about 58.5 million as of Thursday evening. Justin Bieber had been stripped of about three million followers so far, while Ariana Grande lost about 932,000.
Some celebrities saw more than just a meager cut. Kathy Ireland, the onetime swimsuit model who presides over a half-billion-dollar licensing empire, lost a whopping 77 percent of her followers between Wednesday and Thursday evening.