A day after President Trump’s remarks alongside President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia led to harsh criticism, Mr. Trump said that he accepts the findings of American intelligence agencies that Russia interfered with the 2016 presidential election.
So I’ll begin by stating that I have full faith and support for America’s great intelligence agencies — always have. And I have felt very strongly that while Russia’s actions had no impact, at all, on the outcome of the election, let me be totally clear in saying that — and I’ve said this many times — I accept our intelligence community’s conclusion that Russia’s meddling in the 2016 election took place. Could be other people also — there’s a lot of people out there. There was no collusion. Now I have to say I came back, and I said, “What is going on? What’s the big deal.” So I got a transcript — I reviewed it. I actually went out and reviewed a clip of an answer that I gave and I realized that there is a need for some clarification. It should have been obvious. I thought it would be obvious, but I would like to clarify just in case it wasn’t. In a key sentence in my remarks, I said the word “would” instead of “wouldn’t.” The sentence should have been: “I don’t see any reason why I wouldn’t or why it wouldn’t be Russia.” So, just to repeat it, I said the word “would” instead of “wouldn’t,” and the sentence should have been, and I thought I would be maybe a little bit unclear on the transcript or unclear on the actual video, the sentence should have been “I don’t see any reason why it wouldn’t be Russia.” Sort of a double negative. So you can put that in, and I think that probably clarifies things pretty good by itself.
WASHINGTON — Under unrelenting pressure from congressional Republicans, his own advisers and his allies on Fox News, President Trump abruptly reversed course on Tuesday and claimed he had misspoken during a news conference with President Vladimir V. Putin about whether Russia tried to influence the 2016 presidential election.
Mr. Trump, reading from a script, said he believed the assessment of the United States’ intelligence agencies that Russia had interfered in the campaign after having seemed to have accepted Mr. Putin’s assertion the day before that Russia was not involved.
The misunderstanding, he said, grew out of an unsuccessful attempt to use a double negative when he answered a question about whether he believed Mr. Putin or his intelligence agencies.
He also insisted that he has “on numerous occasions noted our intelligence findings that Russians attempted to interfere in our elections.” He did not mention the far greater number of occasions on which he has sown doubt about whether Russia meddled.
Mr. Trump also did not retract or explain his withering attack on the F.B.I. and the Justice Department for investigating his campaign’s ties to Russia. He did not withdraw his assertion, standing next to Mr. Putin, that the Russian leader had offered an “extremely strong and powerful” denial of involvement during their two-and-a-half-hour meeting. And he did not amend his answer to a question about whether he believed Mr. Putin or officials like Dan Coats, his director of national intelligence.
The news conference on Tuesday was a hastily arranged, somewhat haphazard effort to defuse a sudden political crisis that had eclipsed the president’s trip to Europe and his meetings with Mr. Putin and the leaders of NATO members and threatened to overwhelm the White House. Dozens of Republicans distanced themselves from the president’s remarks; Democrats called for hearings; and some critics even suggested his conduct, on foreign soil, rose to the level of treason.
Aides said the episode reflected how the persistent questions about Mr. Trump’s ties to Russia have all but paralyzed the president. Baffled by his solicitous tone toward Mr. Putin, some people close to Mr. Trump have concluded that he feels vulnerable to Mr. Putin, even if it is in his own mind, rather than because of any damaging information possessed by the Russians.
Even as he walked back his remarks, Mr. Trump repeated his assertion that there was no evidence of collusion between his campaign and the Russians. That line was scribbled in black marker onto a typewritten sheet of remarks on the table before him.
And he also seemed to undercut his own assertion that he had accepted the findings of Russian involvement.
As in other times Mr. Trump has ignited a furor — notably after his equivocal reaction to the violent attacks by white supremacists on left-wing activists in Charlottesville, Va. — his demeanor was at odds with the message he was ostensibly delivering.
Barely 24 hours earlier, the president had stood next to Mr. Putin under the glittering chandeliers of a ballroom in Helsinki, telling aides after the news conference wrapped up that he was happy with how it had gone. In an interview afterward with the Fox News host Sean Hannity, the president was upbeat, describing the meeting with Mr. Putin that preceded it as productive and speaking of a new era of cooperation with Russia.
As President Trump faces a hailstorm of criticism over his meeting with Russia’s president, his supporters are doubling down. It’s a pattern we’ve seen before.
Several Republicans who normally defend him on television were silent. Among them was Michael Anton, the former communications director for the National Security Council, who called off a long-planned appearance on CNN because he could not “defend” how Mr. Trump had conducted himself with Mr. Putin, according to the host, Erin Burnett.
Mr. Trump’s mood on Air Force One eventually got better, and he watched some of the Home Run Derby staged in Washington as part of the All-Star Game, according to another person briefed on what took place.
But by Tuesday morning, it was clear Mr. Trump could not rely on support from even his most die-hard allies. On “Fox & Friends,” his favorite morning TV program, the host, Brian Kilmeade, spoke directly into the camera, as if assuming Mr. Trump was watching.
Mr. Trump tweeted his gratitude to one of his only advocates, Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky. But he was uncharacteristically subdued, tweeting only three other times in the morning — one of them an anodyne comment about the health of the economy.
He insisted his meeting with Mr. Putin had gone “even better” than that with NATO leaders, at which he claimed, erroneously, to have raised billions of dollars in additional funds for the alliance.
Meanwhile, the Senate Republican leader, Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, showed the pressure Republicans were under to respond to Mr. Trump. After curtly telling reporters on Monday that Russia was not a friend of the United States, Mr. McConnell went further, warning that Congress would take measures against Russia if it continued to meddle.
At the White House, aides added their voices to the chorus of outsiders. The new communications director, Bill Shine, whose last job was running Fox News, has a particular ability to connect with the president. Aides said he was able to help persuade Mr. Trump that a change had to be made soon.
The chief of staff, John F. Kelly, was frustrated and urged people to talk to the president, according to two people familiar with the discussions. The more outside voices that Mr. Trump heard, his aides believed, the greater chance that he would agree to shift course.
Later in the morning, Mr. Trump told aides he realized he needed to make a correction, according to the person who was briefed. His team met briefly to discuss what to say, and the speechwriter, Stephen Miller, drafted something that was rewritten several times. The vice president weighed in on it at one point before the president read his statement to reporters.
For days before his meeting in Helsinki, Mr. Trump’s aides had cautioned him to be measured and careful in his exchanges with Mr. Putin. He and his advisers played down expectations for the meeting in conversations with Europeans. Aides said the donnybrook in Helsinki was less evidence of a plan by Mr. Trump to create chaos than a continuation of his missteps earlier in the trip.
In Britain, Mr. Trump gave an interview to a British tabloid, The Sun, as a favor to its proprietor, Rupert Murdoch. Speaking on the eve of his meeting with Prime Minister Theresa May, he praised Mrs. May’s political nemesis, Boris Johnson, and condemned how she had handled the process of separating Britain from the European Union.
Mr. Trump appeared not to understand how explosive his words were until after he spoke to the newspaper. He was contrite when he saw Mrs. May, several people who witnessed their exchanges said. He had not planned to cause damage, but had done so, and it was hard to unwind it.
Now, Mr. Trump’s aides fear the worst is still to come. If the past is any guide, they said privately, Mr. Trump will spend the coming days digesting the continuing fallout from his encounter with Mr. Putin, and he will look for someone other than himself to blame.
