Aaron Judge, the most dangerous hitter in the Yankees’ lineup, will be out of action for at least the next three weeks with a chip fracture in his right wrist. His absence robs the Yankees of their leader in home runs, on-base percentage and on-base plus slugging percentage, and their co-leader in runs batted in. And it leaves a gaping hole in the batting order, where Judge hit second for 97 of his team’s 101 games.
Many managers would be disheartened by such a loss, especially with the Yankees needing to make up five games in a division race with the Boston Red Sox and a key series in Boston coming next week. To make matters worse, the starting catcher, Gary Sanchez, is also out, with a groin strain, and is unlikely to play before the end of August.
But Yankees Manager Aaron Boone seems just fine.
“Just another day, and we roll,” he said before Friday’s game at Yankee Stadium against the Kansas City Royals was postponed by rain. The game will be made up as part of a day-night doubleheader on Saturday, with Luis Severino pitching the first game at 1:05 p.m. and C.C. Sabathia starting the second at 7:05 p.m.
But he acknowledged being disheartened at having to miss more than 20 games at such a crucial point in the season.
Boone could not completely shrug off the loss of Judge, of course, but he did his best to play down the impact it would have on his team.
Judge, who is fifth in the American League in home runs with 26, was injured by a pitch from Royals starter Jakob Junis in the first inning on Thursday but remained in the game for one more at-bat before Boone removed him for a pinch-hitter in the fifth.
On the advice of the hitting coach Marcus Thames, Judge decided to leave the game after reaching on a soft infield hit in his second at-bat.
Judge’s hand is not in a hard cast, but he did wear a removable brace while presenting an award during a pregame ceremony. He said he would be treated with ice and compression for the rest of the week before beginning a light swinging program next week.
“They told me with this kind of fracture, once the pain goes away and you get range of motion and strength back, you’re good to go,” he said.
In the meantime, Boone said the Yankees would conduct business as usual, with Giancarlo Stanton assuming Judge’s role as both the No. 2 hitter in the Yankees’ batting order and the everyday right fielder.
To fill the void, the Yankees recalled Tyler Wade, an infielder who the team believes is capable of playing the outfield. On Thursday, they had recalled another outfielder, Shane Robinson.
Boone said Clint Frazier, still suffering the effects of a concussion, was not likely to be ready to return before Judge is expected back. Nor is Jacoby Ellsbury, the Yankees’ $153 million center fielder, who has yet to play a game this season because of a variety of back, leg and foot ailments.
With the nonwaiver trade deadline at 4 p.m. Tuesday, the possibility remained that the Yankees might trade for an outfielder after acquiring the relief pitcher Zach Britton and starter J.A. Happ this week.
His optimism may have been bolstered by some good news regarding starting pitcher Sonny Gray, who also left Thursday’s game, after the fifth inning, when he took a grounder off his bare right hand. Gray’s thumb throbbed and swelled, and he was removed from the game despite holding the Royals scoreless on three hits and having thrown only 75 pitches.
X-rays taken late Thursday night came back negative, and on Friday, Gray was able to play catch. He reported no pain and said he expected to make his next scheduled start.
The one downer? Happ, who was expected to be in uniform on Friday, had his flight to New York canceled because of the inclement weather. But like the Judge injury, Happ’s absence hardly caused a ripple in Boone’s buoyancy. Happ is not expected to make his first Yankees start until Sunday.