Glorious surprises seem to lurk everywhere in this grand Norwegian city.
Our columnist, Jada Yuan, is visiting each destination on our 52 Places to Go in 2018 list. This dispatch brings her to Oslo, Norway; it took the No. 26 spot on the list and is the 21st stop on Jada’s itinerary.
Did he know the name of their crew? He did not.
Austin, Tex., has the slogan, “Keep Austin Weird,” and I kept thinking a tweaked version would apply pretty well to Oslo. Glorious surprises seemed to lurk everywhere in this grand Nordic city: an art installation of giant inflatable balloon-bears hanging over the shopping area of Karl Johans Gate; outrageously good food; two of the most idiosyncratic sculpture parks I’ve ever visited. As I texted a friend, “So many nude and phallic sculptures to see, so little time!” Here are some highlights of Oslo, the Great Bizarre.
Climbing through the steep, forested hills of Ekebergparken Sculpture Park on the east side of the city, if you look down, you just might spot a beautifully rendered bronze statue of a woman squatting, pants around her ankles, to urinate.
A 2002 self-portrait of the outspoken Swedish artist Ann-Sofi Siden, it’s called “Fideicommissum,” which is the name of an obsolete, centuries-old Swedish aristocratic law by which property could be handed down only to male heirs. Ms. Siden made her first version of the sculpture as part of a commission for Sweden’s Wanas Castle, which dates back to the 15th century; she’d been wandering the grounds looking for inspiration and had to go. “So in the middle of everything, she’s squatting down, peeing, looking at this property, realizing that ‘this property would never, ever be given to me’,” said Vilde Horvei, a research assistant at Ekebergparken.
The sculpture also turns out to be a fountain — just one that dribbles a thin stream. “Every detail is a copy of her,” Ms. Horvei said. “I had a gynecologist who was very interested in figuring out if — yes, you can see it.” I, of course, looked. That is one realistic bronze vagina.
The park is open for free all year, 24 hours a day — although if you want to see “Ganzfield” and “Skyspace,” James Turrell’s disorienting light sculptures set in an old reservoir, be sure to reserve a spot on a free tour on Sundays. And stick around for Fujiko Nakaya’s “Pathfinder #18700 Oslo,” which at very specific times fills the forest with mist.
You also don’t want to miss Ekebergparken’s polar opposite: The Vigeland Park. It’s a very famous, very impressive and, as Ekebergparken’s Ms. Horvei put it, “very masculine” collection of sculptures from Gustav Vigeland inside Frogner Park in the posh west side of town. Paths are wide and manicured, as at Versailles, and contain more than 200 of the Norwegian master’s bronze, granite and wrought iron renderings of the human form — including a delightfully bizarre one of a man being attacked by four babies. The culmination is a 56 foot-tall monolith of intertwined bodies. (Think the Washington Monument, but covered in naked people.) In total, it is the world’s largest sculpture park made by a single artist. It’s also free to visit and open 24 hours a day.
I could have spent the entire trip walking along Oslo’s five-and-a-half-mile-long harbor promenade. And I would have, if it hadn’t rained torrentially for most of my trip.
One sunset stroll took me past a dozen fishermen sitting on bait buckets to the Akershus Fortress, a medieval castle once used as a royal residence, where you can wander among cannons for free until 9 p.m. — or come by at 1:10 p.m. to follow the changing of the royal guard. The guards march through city streets to the Royal Place, the actual home of King Harald V and Queen Sonja, where you can also wander the grounds for free and pretty late.
Another day, I was overjoyed to hang out with a friend, Sam Chamberlin, the brother of my first New York City roommate, who randomly happened to be in Oslo. Sam makes boats for a living in Maine, so we, of course, had to visit the Viking Ship Museum on the city’s Bygdoy peninsula — after he awoke early to walk along the water and through a working dairy farm with free public paths next to the king’s summer residence. (I overslept and took a bus.) The giant Viking-era ships were impressive, but we both agreed that we would have spent all day at the nearby Norsk Folkemuseum. It’s huge and open-air, featuring actual houses with grass roofs, or on stilts, that you get to walk through to see how Norwegian people lived from the 1500s until now.
— Oslo has some of the least intuitive restaurant hours that I have experienced on this trip so far; many places of note are closed Sundays and Mondays. Maaemo, the one restaurant in the city with three Michelin stars, is closed Tuesdays, too. Le Benjamin, though, is open on Sundays and where all the restaurant people go. “No one eats on Mondays,” Mr. Svensson said.
— Food halls are a way to stave off hunger and try out a billion sumptuous options. Vippa has a hippie vibe and Ethiopian and Mexican fare. The more upscale Mathallen Oslo, next door to Kontrast, is where you get gelato, duck confit sandwiches and reindeer sausage. They’re both closed Mondays. I recommend drinking your calories; Sam and I loved the plant-filled cocktail bar Torggata Botaniske.
Among other stops, I used my pass to run into The National Gallery for 30 minutes before closing and pose in front of Edvard Munch’s “The Scream.” Can’t say I’m proud of it, but I do think I got my money’s worth.
