Politics|This Republican Always Shows Up. That May Not Be Enough This Fall.
This Republican Always Shows Up. That May Not Be Enough This Fall.
STERLING, Va. — Representative Barbara Comstock consistently attends Eid festivals at the Adams Center, one of the largest mosques in the United States. When a young Muslim earns his Eagle Scout Award, she is there reliably, bearing an American flag as a gift.
The same has been true at Diwali, India’s festival of lights, at Korean National Day and Pakistan Day. In the diverse Washington, D.C., suburbs that make up a large swath of Virginia’s 10th Congressional District, Ms. Comstock is known for one trait: She shows up.
But in this midterm election cycle, her dutiful courting, which saved her in 2016 when Hillary Clinton easily defeated President Trump in her district, may not be enough. This November, for many previously reliable Comstock voters, the name that will determine their vote will not be on the ballot: Donald J. Trump.
“On a personal basis, people really like her, but when they walk into the polling booth, they look at it and say, ‘I am voting against Donald Trump and his administration,’” said Robert Marrow, a member of the Adams Center mosque.
Few congressional districts present as great a challenge for a Republican incumbent as Virginia’s 10th. Though it stretches from the suburbs to rural areas, the district has one of the highest concentrations of college graduates in a Republican-held seat and is teeming with a vibrant, successful immigrant presence. It is also an area heavily reliant on connections to the government, and is increasingly seen as a Democratic stronghold in federal races.
Ms. Comstock’s prospects dimmed further when Republicans nominated Corey Stewart as their Senate candidate last month. His positions on immigration, Confederate heritage and other social issues are widely seen as a drag for other candidates. On Saturday, the Fairfax County Republican Party held a “Meet the Ticket” event, headed by Mr. Stewart and two other congressional candidates.
Ms. Comstock was “unavailable,” said Tim Hannigan, the county party chairman.
Late last month, the nonpartisan Cook Political Report moved her race from a tossup to “Leans Democrat,” one of nine Republican House seats in which the newsletter now favors a Democrat to win — but the only one occupied by an incumbent.
If Ms. Comstock loses, it will not be out of complacency. On Saturday, her 59th birthday, her schedule included stops at an Indian-American community event and a Bangladeshi-American soccer tournament. “I am going to celebrate my birthday after 8 or 9,” she said between stops.
Ms. Comstock said she is well known in her district, and has delivered on several legislative priorities of minority business and faith communities, relationships she will need to help her overcome antipathy toward the president. “I think we have a sophisticated electorate that understands that I am my own person,” she said.
Matt Gorman, a spokesman for the National Republican Congressional Committee, said the party still had confidence in Ms. Comstock, even in the face of a recent poll that showed her trailing by 10 percentage points. “We plan to play in this race,” he said.
At the mosque in Sterling, thousands of Muslims show up for Friday prayers, and it is common for politicians to speak after services, or for groups to conduct voter registration or petition drives. Ms. Comstock’s Democratic opponent, Jennifer Wexton, a state senator, attended the same Eid services as Ms. Comstock this month. Ms. Wexton has the strong backing of the state’s top Democrats, including Gov. Ralph Northam and Senators Tim Kaine, who is also up for re-election, and Mark Warner.
In her primary, Ms. Wexton was actually seen as the favored candidate of her party’s establishment.
Still, he said, many Muslims and other minority voters in the district may not have her name in mind when they cast ballots in November. Voters seem exceptionally engaged, he said, measuring their intensity by the increasing numbers who stay after Friday prayers to listen to candidates. When they cast ballots, Mr. Trump may be the politician they have in mind.
But others believe Ms. Comstock’s reach among minority voters has its limits.
