Television|Bobcat Goldthwait Has Moved On. Why Can’t We Catch Up?
He had heard it before, and knew a quick howl would appease the crowd. Instead, he dug in and has remained there since, with a few fleeting exceptions. But his tortured relationship with his own persona remains a preoccupation, including in the first episode of his darkly satirical “Bobcat Goldthwait’s Misfits & Monsters,” a “Twilight Zone”-like anthology series that has its premiere Wednesday on TruTV. It tells the macabre story of a beloved cartoon character named Bubba the Bear who enters the real world to terrorize the actor who gave him his dopey voice (Seth Green).
Mr. Goldthwait, who wrote and directed the series, imagined the episode as “Who Framed Roger Rabbit” meets “Cape Fear,” but once it was finished, his daughter, Tasha Goldthwait, the show’s costume designer, helped him understand its real subtext when she pointed out that he has a Bubba haunting him.
Mr. Goldthwait, 55, projects a cerebral and cheerful presence offstage, but it’s not quite the polar opposite of his former persona. His eyes still sometimes dart around, often downward, and he’s jarringly comfortable displaying vulnerability and sharing his insecurities. Talking to him makes you think there’s more connective tissue between him and his alter ego than you might assume.
“Monsters” represents the latest step in a remarkable comeback for a stand-up prodigy, who started killing in front of crowds as a teenager, became a superstar a few years later, then plummeted fast like so many 1980s character comics (Pauly Shore, Andrew Dice Clay) had before him. The compromises of success have found their way into his work but have also led to his reinvention, helping him move behind the camera to make eccentric independent movies (“Shakes the Clown,” “World’s Greatest Dad”) and an acclaimed documentary (“Call Me Lucky”).
It all began with that voice, whose origins can be traced to a sketch group called the Generic Comic in 1970s Syracuse, N.Y., run by Mr. Goldthwait, born Robert, and his childhood friend Tom Kenny, known now as the voice of SpongeBob SquarePants. As teenage oddballs with a love of punk rock, Andy Kaufman and classic comedy, they pushed each other to perform.
His formally experimental early stand-up arrived a decade before alt comedy, which made it seem all the more out of place amid comics in sweaters making fun of commercials and airline food. But his work holds up remarkably well, and his inspired album “Meat Bob” is one of the absolute funniest of the 1980s.
If so, it worked. Mr. Goldthwait had increasing trouble selling tickets, once playing a show at a casino for only two people. When he tried to pivot to directing, he couldn’t get any work — until Jimmy Kimmel, who knew him from radio, asked him to make taped segments for “The Man Show” and then his talk show. “Kimmel hired me to direct his show when most people were using my name as a punch line,” he said.
He’s still doing stand-up, recently going onstage in Los Angeles to talk about the death of his friend Robin Williams (“We were comedians. We talked about suicide for 31 years. Sometimes we talked about other stuff.”) He says he may want to do a Netflix special, but right now, he just wants to connect with audiences.
