WASHINGTON — The sprint by President Trump and Senate Republicans to install conservative judges to the nation’s courts hit an unexpected speed bump on Thursday after a nominee for a key federal appeals court was pulled to avoid an embarrassing defeat on the Senate floor.
The Senate’s only black Republican, Tim Scott of South Carolina, had concerns about those writings and Mr. Bounds’s inability to clarify how his thinking had changed since then, according to a Senate Republican aide.
“After talking with the nominee last night and meeting with him today, I had unanswered questions that led to me being unable to support him,” Mr. Scott said in a statement.
Republican leaders have no room for error when the Democratic caucus is united in opposition, given that the party has only a 51-to-49 majority, and one Republican senator, John McCain of Arizona, has been absent while battling brain cancer.
At least one other Republican, Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, agreed to join Mr. Scott in opposition to Mr. Bounds’s nomination, according to another Republican aide.
“Tim Scott raised some concerns, and this was new information to most people,” said Senator John Cornyn of Texas, the No. 2 Senate Republican, who said that the White House decided to withdraw Mr. Bounds’s nomination rather than have it fail.
Adding conservative judges to the Ninth Circuit, which covers much of the West and has a liberal reputation, has been a longtime priority of Republicans. But Mr. Bounds, a federal prosecutor in Oregon, had faced strenuous opposition from Oregon’s senators, Ron Wyden and Jeff Merkley, both Democrats.
Senate Republicans moved ahead with the nomination over their objections, generating howls of protest from Democrats, who accused the majority party of running roughshod over the Senate’s tradition of deference to home-state senators.
By custom, home-state senators use a blue-tinted form, known as a blue slip, to signify whether they are on board with a judicial nominee from their state, although the weight carried by blue slips has varied over the years.
Senate Republicans have had striking success at pushing through conservative judicial nominees, a major priority of the majority leader, Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky.
The collapse of Mr. Bounds’s nomination came as the Senate is preparing to consider a much higher-profile nominee: Brett M. Kavanaugh, the president’s choice to replace Justice Anthony M. Kennedy on the Supreme Court.
Senator Dianne Feinstein of California, the top Democrat on the Judiciary Committee, said on Wednesday that the panel “needs access to all documents from his time at the White House and as a political operative.” She estimated that there would be at least a million pages of documents.
Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, quickly tried to use the fate of Mr. Bounds’s nomination to strengthen the argument that Judge Kavanaugh’s records from the years he spent in George W. Bush’s White House are a necessary part of vetting his nomination.
