A migrant mother separated from her children at the border traveled across the country to join them in New York.
Yeni González left her home in rural Guatemala in mid-May. Days later, she crossed the United States border, by night, with her three young children. They were picked up by Border Patrol, she said, and taken to a detention center near Yuma, Ariz.
At 5 one morning, agents woke the children there and took them away.
Ms. González’s children — Deyuin, Jamelin and Lester — are among more than 2,000 young migrants who were separated from their adult relatives under the Trump Administration’s “zero-tolerance” policy.
Despite President Trump’s executive order ending separations and a judge’s order calling on federal authorities to put families back together in no more than 30 days, most families have not been reunited.
This week, Ms. González’s family became the rare exception.
While she was held in detention centers in Arizona, Deyuin, Jamelin and Lester were sent to a shelter in New York, along with more than 300 children. Children separated at the border were scattered across 17 states.
Ms. González cannot yet retrieve her children because of a long list of requirements from the federal government, but she saw them again on Tuesday, after more than five weeks apart.
The relatively swift reunion was the result of Ms. González’s family’s efforts — they contacted a New York immigration lawyer after learning where the children were — and the energetic work of a group of New York-area mothers who heard Ms. González’s story on the radio.
We covered the first and last legs of Ms. González’s four-day journey from Arizona to New York, learning, along the way, about what she had been through.
While Ms. González was in detention, her children were placed at Cayuga Centers, the largest of 10 social services agencies in the New York City area where separated children have been assigned. They have been living with a foster family, along with other children.
They spoke to their mother just twice in their time apart. Jamelin, the little girl, told her mother she had to brush her own hair, and that she had chest pains.  Jamelin said she was not allowed to cry. Her caretakers scolded her. “They told her if she cried, it would slow down her case,” her mother said.
Ms. González was held in two detention centers in Arizona. At the first, outside Tucson, she was kept in a chilled area she called the “hielera” — or “ice box” — for more than two weeks. She said she was held with dozens of other women, with no beds and only foil emergency blankets for warmth.
With the lights constantly on, the women lost track of the hour, Ms. González said, and would often be startled to learn it was the middle of the day, not the dead of night. “We didn’t even have the right to know the time of day,” she said.
On June 28, Ms. González’s bond was posted in New York City by the woman who had started the crowdfunding campaign, Julie Schwietert Collazo, a writer and a mother of three. Hours later, Ms. González was released and emerged from the sprawling Eloy Detention Center with her lawyer from New York, José Xavier Orochena.

The night she was released, Ms. González met with Janey Pearl Starks, an immigration activist based in Phoenix, who was the first of several hosts and drivers. That night, in Phoenix, Ms. Pearl Starks settled Ms. González into her hotel room.
After weeks in the same clothes, she went to J.C. Penney with her lawyer to buy a few new outfits for the road.
Ms. González had befriended other women at the detention center, she said, many of them mothers whose children were also taken away.
At all hours in the detention center, Ms. González said, you could hear women crying. For comfort, they gathered and sang religious songs. “Quietly,” she said, so as not to attract the guards’ attention.
The day Ms. González was released, the women braided her hair and, defying orders not to touch or embrace, they lined up to hug her goodbye.
After setting off from Arizona, Ms. González was handed off between volunteers in several states. With just a backpack, she switched cars every day. Her favorite place on the route, she said, was Chicago, where she marveled at the tall buildings and the lake.
In Pennsylvania, Ms. González sat with Sarah Menkedick on a Pittsburgh porch before Ms. Menkedick’s husband, Jorge Santiago, set out to drive her toward New York. They talked about Ms. González’s work cleaning houses in Guatemala and about their children.
The people she met on the trip wanted to impart the message that there were people in the United States who cared about what had happened to her, Ms. González said. Their meetings often ended with tearful hugs — the human touch Ms. González said she missed while in detention.
With every day on the road, Ms. González opened up a bit more. She sobbed as she recalled being separated from her children.
Finally, on Tuesday morning, Ms. González saw her children. Accompanied by her lawyer, Ms. Pearl Starks, and Representative Adriano Espaillat, a Democrat whose district includes parts of Harlem, she made her way into Cayuga Centers.
The lollipop was a gift from her daughter, Jamelin.
Even as they had played that day, there lurked doubts about the long road ahead. Ms. González’s lawyer filed two sponsorship applications, so that either Ms. González or a relative in North Carolina could take custody of the children, but he was told that there was a backlog on fingerprinting, and it might be 60 days before they were released. Meanwhile, in Arizona, representatives attended hearings in immigration court on Ms. González’s behalf, so that she would not be deported for failing to appear.