A Border Patrol agent who obtained the confidential travel records of a Washington journalist and used them to press her about her sources last year is under investigation for misuse of government computer systems, according to an official briefed on the inquiry.
The agent, Jeffrey A. Rambo, who usually worked in the San Diego area, was temporarily assigned at the time to the National Targeting Center, a facility in Sterling, Va., operated by Customs and Border Protection that stores data on the travel of millions of Americans and foreigners. Such information is supposed to be used only under strict rules by immigration and law enforcement officials.
Now the Department of Homeland Security’s inspector general and investigators from the border agency are examining whether Mr. Rambo used the travel data improperly or illegally and whether anyone else was involved. Press advocates have expressed alarm that a government official would use sensitive private information in what they say amounted to a blackmail attempt against a journalist.
On June 1, 2017, Mr. Rambo, 33, contacted Ali Watkins, a reporter for Politico at the time who now works at The New York Times, saying that he needed to meet her in Washington immediately. He told Ms. Watkins that he worked for the government but declined to give his name or agency.
In a lengthy conversation at a bar near Dupont Circle, Mr. Rambo claimed to be helping the F.B.I. with investigations into leaks of sensitive material to journalists. He eventually revealed that he knew the details of a trip to Spain that Ms. Watkins had taken with James A. Wolfe, security director of the Senate Intelligence Committee, who was then her boyfriend.
According to accounts Ms. Watkins provided to friends and editors, Mr. Rambo hinted that he might disclose their relationship to The Washington Post and pressed her to become his informant and report to him on other journalists and their sources.
Ms. Watkins rejected the request and returned the next day to the bar where they had talked and learned his identity from a credit card receipt. The episode was widely reported last month after Mr. Wolfe was arrested and accused of lying to F.B.I. leak investigators about his contacts with Ms. Watkins and other reporters. He has pleaded not guilty.
News of Mr. Wolfe’s arrest also revealed that Ms. Watkins’s email and phone records had been secretly seized by the Trump administration as part of the leak inquiry. The Times subsequently conducted an internal review of Ms. Watkins’s actions, and she was recently reassigned to its New York newsroom.
Mr. Rambo’s actions raised several questions: What was a California border patrol agent doing in the Washington area? Was he really helping the F.B.I. with leak investigations, as he claimed? Was his anonymous approach to Ms. Watkins, which violated law enforcement standards, part of an authorized operation or the work of a rogue agent?
Law enforcement officials have said they can find no evidence that Mr. Rambo was officially assigned to work on leak investigations. Officials at Customs and Border Protection and its parent agency, Homeland Security, have declined to answer questions about Mr. Rambo’s role, citing the internal investigation.
Mr. Rambo has not replied to repeated requests for comment. But several government officials, speaking on condition of anonymity, have supplied some basic facts.
The officials confirmed that Mr. Rambo had been assigned to the National Targeting Center, which is why he was in the Washington area and might have had access to Ms. Watkins’ private travel information.
It remains unclear whether Mr. Rambo handled or heard about an official F.B.I. request to the center for Mr. Wolfe’s travel records, and, if so, whether that led to the discovery that Ms. Watkins was his traveling companion. According to Ms. Watkins’s accounts, Mr. Rambo spoke with enthusiasm to her about Mr. Trump’s crackdown on leaks, telling her that “we’re finally going to be able to drain the swamp,” raising the possibility that he had searched the database for her records on his own initiative.
Either way, for Mr. Rambo, the venture into combating leaks appears to be the latest expression of an entrepreneurial personality. Public records and internet archives show that starting in his teenage years, he has embarked on ambitious enterprises, although they have produced only modest results.
“The new firm, where Rambo finds himself as Managing Director and CEO, will focus all of its attention to the Branding world,” said the release, written when Mr. Rambo was 17.
But Brandergy went nowhere, according to Kwan Skinner, an experienced programmer whom Mr. Rambo announced as “Operations Director and Chief Technology Officer.” Mr. Skinner said in an interview that he had supplied software to Mr. Rambo but had never received the payments he was promised, and that he had eventually dropped out of the effort.
Mr. Rambo joined the border patrol in 2007, serving in and around San Diego. While there, he created a website, jefframbo.com, where he periodically posted blog items recounting his thoughts on law enforcement, current events and developments in San Diego, sometimes posting photographs.
One 2011 post hinted at a difficult upbringing.
In 2014, again showing a flair for promotional entrepreneurship, Mr. Rambo announced that he and a partner would soon open a microbrewery, Social Jack’s Brewing Company, in San Diego’s Little Italy neighborhood. He had lined up a location and an experienced manager, and the plans were written up in San Diego Eater, a website, and described in a captivating video.
Once again, the business appears to have failed quickly, leaving multiple claims against Mr. Rambo for start-up loans he had not repaid, court records show.
Mr. Rambo’s blog went silent for a long stretch, but in 2016 he used it to promote a new idea: to turn business failure into a kind of success.
Nothing appears to have followed. But early this year, months after his encounter with Ms. Watkins, he added a nicely designed, blue-and-red logo to the blog.
“Dear Failure with Jeff Rambo,” it said. The website is no longer online and can be viewed only in archived versions.