Style|Does a Changing of the Guard at Vogue Signal More Change Ahead?
Does a Changing of the Guard at Vogue Signal More Change Ahead?
As print takes a back seat to digital, two of Vogue’s most influential longtime staffers are leaving their roles for freelance positions.
They are the most recognizable faces at any major fashion show. They fill out a prime block of the front row, one kept sacrosanct, awaiting their arrival. (They are unfailingly, unfashionably, on time.) They are the top editors of Vogue, which remains, to its competitors’ chagrin, the most powerful magazine in fashion.
They have been in their roles, in some cases, for longer than their assistants have been alive. At last, those roles have begun to shift.
Anna Wintour, the editor of Vogue, announced to her staff today that two of Vogue’s longest-serving lieutenants — Tonne Goodman, the magazine’s fashion director, and Phyllis Posnick, its executive fashion editor — will be leaving their staff positions and becoming contributing editors.
As well, Lisa Love, the magazine’s Los Angeles director and a major wrangler for the celebrity-jammed Met Gala, a 28-year veteran of the magazine, will shift to working with CNX, Condé Nast’s in-house creative agency.
Word of their departure was first published in Business of Fashion on July 13.
Virginia Smith, another longtime Vogue hand, will assume Ms. Goodman’s duties as fashion director. “I’m very happy that Virginia Smith’s promotion to fashion director recognizes her many years of hard work and dedication, and just as thrilled that Tonne Goodman and Phyllis Posnick, two of our longstanding — and outstanding — image makers will continue to work their magic in Vogue,” Ms. Wintour told The Times in a statement.
Everyone knows Ms. Wintour, as recognizable as Santa Claus, whose trademark look — that thickly fringed bob and those windshield sunglasses — is so long-established that it could more or less attend shows in her place. But any publicist with hopes of career longevity must know, too, Ms. Goodman, with her regular uniform of turtlenecks and white jeans, sensibly loafered; Ms. Posnick, dark-haired, never flashily dressed but never without jewelry; and Grace Coddington, the magazine’s creative director at large, who herself moved from a staff position to a freelance one in 2016.
Condé Nast, which owns Vogue as well as magazines like The New Yorker, Vanity Fair and GQ, is consolidating staff with fashion and beauty “hubs” that work across several magazines and moving expensive, salaried staff members to freelance positions. Condé Nast expected $100 million dollars less in revenue in 2017 than it enjoyed in 2016.
Historically the company was known for free spending and the lavish, chauffeured lifestyles it allowed its top editors — providing clothing budgets and securing mortgages. Even the imperious Vogue has seen its budgets cut and its fortunes shift.
Ms. Wintour, the editor of Vogue and the artistic director of Condé Nast, has sat atop her masthead for 30 years this June. Sub-editors have come and gone. But the handful of top editors who work on the magazine’s fashion features — who put starlets in gowns and on surfboards for the all-important covers, who decide which trends get spreads and which are deemed “not Vogue,” who minister to the temperamental greats of fashion photography — have been in place for years. Ms. Coddington joined the magazine in 1988, one of Ms. Wintour’s first hires. Ms. Posnick predated Ms. Wintour by a year. The most recent arrival of this group is Ms. Goodman, who came in 2000.
Ms. Goodman made clear that she expected very little to change: Like Ms. Posnick, she will continue shooting for the magazine and attend fashion shows with Vogue.
In an era of personal brands, Ms. Goodman and Ms. Posnick have not pursued individual fame.
A look at the magazine’s September issues, its largest of the year, paints the picture: The issue has been slowly, but steadily, decreasing in size, dropping from its record-breaking 2012 issues, with 916 pages, to 856 pages in 2014 to 774 last year. The September 2018 issue is due on newsstands Aug. 14.
Of particularly keen interest is the ongoing murmuring that Ms. Wintour may step down from Vogue or from Condé Nast entirely.
Those hoping to read today’s moves as tea leaves will likely find themselves stymied: It is as possible that Ms. Wintour is giving her longtime staffers graceful exits before her own as it is that she has perceived the need for change and evolution. The company remains steadfast in its denials that she is leaving.
“I am happy to tell you there is no truth to the rumors of Anna’s departure,” Robert A. Sauerberg Jr., the chief executive of Condé Nast, told The Times in April. A company spokeswoman reaffirmed Mr. Sauerberg’s comment today.
So for now, Vogue is evolving, but observers cautioned against expecting immediate changes.
Ms. Goodman and Ms. Posnick “contributed hugely,” said William Norwich, an editor at Phaidon Press and a former editor at the magazine. “As long as these people are contributing, going to the collections and going to the fashion meetings, I don’t expect to see that huge a change,” he said.
Vanessa Friedman contributed reporting.