McKinsey & Company, the prominent management consultancy, has stopped working for Immigration and Customs Enforcement after the disclosure last month that the firm had done more than $20 million in consulting work for the agency. The revelation prompted questions from employees at the firm.
Complaints about the contract come at a time when McKinsey is under fire in South Africa for its role in a vast government corruption scandal that led to the resignation of the country’s former president, Jacob Zuma. The resulting crisis at McKinsey, the most serious in its 92-year history, was the focus of The Times’s article. On Monday, in a speech to a business school in Johannesburg, Mr. Sneader apologized to the nation for McKinsey’s handling of the episode.
McKinsey’s decision to end work with ICE comes amid widespread anger, across the political spectrum, over the Trump administration’s “zero tolerance” policy on illegal immigration that led to the separation of children from their parents — a practice that was ended in June. While Mr. Sneader acknowledged the concerns about McKinsey’s contract, a spokesman said the firm had already finished the job.
However, when asked about the contract before the story was published, McKinsey did not say that the work was ending. What’s more, federal records show that the contract was modified three days after The Times’s story.
While several government agencies are involved in carrying out Mr. Trump’s immigration policies, ICE, which oversees detention centers across the country, has come under the most criticism. At least three other consulting companies — Deloitte Consulting, PricewaterhouseCoopers and Booz Allen Hamilton — have also advised ICE, according to federal contracting records.
“Our support, which has ended, has never been focused on developing, advising or implementing immigration policies, including the child-separation policy,” Mr. Sneader said in the note to former employees, whom McKinsey, adopting the practice of universities, calls “alumni.” The note was sent to The Times by a former employee.
McKinsey’s current contract with ICE began during the Obama administration. Most of the work was done after Mr. Trump took office, records show.
McKinsey’s involvement in the South African corruption scandal stemmed from its consulting contract with Eskom, the state-owned electricity provider. McKinsey came under fire because of the size of the payout and because its partner was linked to a business associate of three Indian immigrant brothers who have been accused of using their relationship with Mr. Zuma’s family to siphon money from the state.
McKinsey has paid back the 1 billion rand (about $74.7 million) in fees it took for its work with Eskom. In his speech in Johannesburg on Monday, Mr. Sneader said the contract went against McKinsey’s policy of putting the client’s interests ahead of its own.
