WASHINGTON — The Trump administration announced on Tuesday that it would provide up to $12 billion in emergency relief for farmers hurt by the president’s trade war, moving to blunt the financial damage to American agriculture and the political fallout for Republicans as the consequences of President Trump’s protectionist policies roll through the economy.
Unveiled two days before the president is scheduled to visit Iowa, a politically important state that is the nation’s top soybean producer, the farm aid appeared calculated to show that Mr. Trump cares about farmers and is working to protect them from the worst consequences of his trade war.
But the relief money, announced by the Department of Agriculture, was also an indication that Mr. Trump — ignoring the concerns of farmers, their representatives in Congress and even some of his own aides — plans to extend his tit-for-tat tariff wars.
“The actions today are a firm statement that other nations cannot bully our agricultural producers to force the United States to cave in,” Sonny Perdue, the secretary of agriculture, said during a call with reporters to unveil the program.
The move drew swift condemnation from many farm groups and lawmakers, including several in his own party, who worry about a cascade of unintended consequences that may be just beginning. One farm-group study estimates that corn, wheat and soybean farmers in the United States have already lost more — $13 billion — than the administration is proposing to provide as a result of the trade war. The prospect of retaliation has upended global markets for soybeans, meat and other American farm exports, and farmers are warning that tariffs are costing them valuable foreign contracts that took years to win.
President Trump’s $12 billion aid package for American farmers is a sign that he plans to continue the trade conflict that is hurting them.
Senator Lisa Murkowski, Republican of Alaska, asked how the president could single out farmers for help when the manufacturing and energy industries also stand to lose in the trade war.
“Where do you draw the line?” Ms. Murkowski asked reporters.
Mr. Trump could be forced to prop up other domestic industries as retaliatory taxes imposed by trading partners begin to sting automobile manufacturers, distillers and other impacted sectors. Republicans who cherish their party’s reputation as the bastion of free markets and fiscal responsibility wondered aloud on Tuesday about the president picking winners and losers in a trade war he is bent on waging.
Farmers have borne the brunt of Mr. Trump’s decision to impose tariffs, which is already costing American producers billions of dollars and threatens to inflict political pain on Republicans in farm states in the midterm elections in November.
The European Union, Canada, Mexico, China and other countries have responded to Mr. Trump’s tariffs on steel, aluminum and $34 billion worth of Chinese products by imposing taxes of their own. They have often targeted farm country, the source of some of America’s biggest exports and an important political base for the president. American soybeans, pork, sugar, orange juice, cherries and other products now face tariffs in foreign markets that make their products less desirable.
At a speech in Kansas City, Mo., on Tuesday, Mr. Trump said Americans should “just be a little patient” with the pain they may be feeling from the trade war, arguing that his actions were forcing other countries to the negotiating table to cut deals that would be better for them in the long run.
Some farm groups praised the move, albeit as a short-term solution.
The battle began when the United States imposed tariffs on solar panels and washing machines. It has led to a global tit-for-tat targeting billions of dollars of goods.
But lawmakers in both parties and many agricultural trade groups criticized the assistance program as a taxpayer-funded bailout for farmers imperiled by the president’s own policies, and even Mr. Trump’s Republican allies made clear that they did not regard it as a genuine solution to the problems his tariffs had created.
Agriculture Department officials said farmers could begin signing up to receive the federal money in September, just weeks before voters go to the polls.
The package includes direct payments to the producers of soybeans, sorghum, corn, wheat, cotton, dairy and hogs, who would be compensated according to the size of their harvests this year. It will also include government purchases of surplus products — including fruit, nuts, rice, legumes, beef, pork and dairy — that would be sent to food banks or other nutrition programs. Some of the funding would go to a program in which the Agriculture Department works with private companies to develop new export markets for American farm products.
Mr. Trump and his advisers have argued that while American producers may feel short-term pain, ultimately they will benefit as other countries are forced to lower their barriers to American products.
Meantime, the administration has sought ways to help farmers survive the pain of retaliation. The program announced on Tuesday will be funded by the Commodity Credit Corporation, which helps shore up American farmers by buying their crops.
It marked the first time that funding from the program — created after the Great Depression — has been used to compensate farmers for losses sustained because of trade, according to an Agriculture Department spokesman.
The initiative, which does not authorize any new money and thus does not need approval from Congress, was an unmistakable signal that the president has no plans to lift his tariffs anytime soon, as Farm Belt senators have pleaded with him to do.
“I support President Trump’s call for reciprocal trade and his effort to stop China’s theft of American intellectual property, but we should stop self-inflicting permanent damage to America’s economy through tariffs and a trade war,” Mr. Johnson said.
One trade group leader said farmers need contracts, not government assistance, for stability.
Administration officials argued on Tuesday that the assistance for farmers would help them absorb the pain while persuading other countries that they must offer concessions to forge trade agreements with the United States.
But many farmers criticized the decision and said it would only compound the maze of federal subsidies and regulations they already must wade through to make a living.
And some lawmakers argued that if he wanted to help American farmers, Mr. Trump must simply call off his trade war.
