New York|Don’t Hate Her. She’s Just the (Subway) Messenger.
Don’t Hate Her. She’s Just the (Subway) Messenger.
At the job she has now, she mostly keeps her opinions to herself. And while she keeps things light, she probably won’t make people laugh.
Ms. Dragoo writes alerts that appear on the Metropolitan Transportation Authority’s websites and on its Twitter feeds, so she often delivers news that ruins people’s days or nights — when antiquated signals fail; when overcrowded trains spend too much time in stations, holding up trains behind them; when someone pulls an emergency brake cord; when delays cascade across different lines. Starting Monday, her words will appear on a new platform, MYmta, an app that the agency has been testing.
It is probably no surprise that passengers accustomed to impersonal and often unintelligible communications on the subway sometimes have trouble believing that anyone at the transit agency is actually reading their tweets. Ms. Dragoo says she sends out 100 to 150 tweets a day in response to individual tweets from passengers — more when, as she put it, “we have a lot going on.” Ms. Dragoo’s tweets are posted on the transit agency’s Twitter account for the subways, @NYCTSubway, and she signs the messages that go to individual Twitter users “HKD,” with her middle initial, for Kimberly.
The latest platform to carry her messages, MYmta, was designed to provide real-time arrival information for subways, even when its problems cause the headaches riders are all too accustomed to. MYmta also covers buses and trains, not just the Long Island Rail Road and Metro-North Railroad, both of which the agency runs, but also PATH and New Jersey Transit trains. MYmta will do what Google Maps and some transit apps already do, but in the Balkanized New York region, it promises a surprisingly unified approach to getting around.
MYmta is part of an effort to remake what Ms. Hakim called the agency’s “digital rails,” its digital infrastructure. Officials say this was one of the big lessons of last summer, when Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo coined the phrase “summer of hell” to describe the consequences of service changes necessitated by major track repairs at Pennsylvania Station in Manhattan.
Transit officials believed it was important to run their own information pipeline, addressing passengers directly. But they realized there was no one place for doing so. The agency has multiple websites, mobile apps and Twitter accounts. And, apart from having the channels to report on daily delays and breakdowns, they were thinking ahead to another huge disruption: next year’s shutdown of the L line to repair damage from Hurricane Sandy in 2012.
She said that developing MYmta meant changing the culture in an agency with long experience in issuing pronouncements but much less in reacting to feedback.
“Having people rate us, that’s new territory for us,” she said.
The agency says its social media volume has skyrocketed in the last year, more than doubling every month. But for all the technology behind MYmta, it depends on people — Ms. Dragoo and 16 others who work in the Rail Control Center in Midtown Manhattan, the high-level hub for the subway system. There are metal detectors at the main entrance and, down an airy corridor, double sets of doors that unlock after an employee holds an identification card up to an electronic reader.
Beyond those doors is a room that looks like an election-night television studio — large, with lots of people who look very busy at lots of desks.
The far wall is a big monitor that looks like a giant schematic, with lights showing where the trains are. Ms. Dragoo, who has worked for the transit agency since November, remembered her reaction the first time she walked in. “I thought, it looks like NASA out here,” she said — like mission control at the Johnson Space Center in Houston.
At the rail center, there are moments when people talk over chatter on the radios on each desk — the “six wire,” as the subway radio system is known. Train crews and dispatchers use it, but some high-ranking managers at the command center can jump in.
The agency is releasing MYmta after inviting more than 2,000 people to try it out over the past few months. One was Nick Sifuentes, the executive director of the Tri-State Transportation Campaign, a transit advocacy group. He said that for once, the agency had been responsive to suggestions.
“And lo and behold, in subsequent iterations, there it was,” he said, adding that some of his group’s suggestions had involved accessibility for disabled people and that the agency had subsequently created an accessibility app-within-an-app. “We thought, that’s brilliant,” he said.
Still, she said, “the information can be somewhat masked” — meaning, she explained, that it sometimes took too many clicks to find what she was looking for. She said it was too intricate for people who needed basic information about the subway, like how or where to buy a MetroCard, or what a ride would cost.
At the control center, Ms. Dragoo said the transit agency hired her when she decided to move to New York from California, where she had been a social media specialist. “I interviewed with eight companies, and it was all social media,” she said. “I had applied on the M.T.A. website months before. I had kind of forgotten.
“They said they were making a jump into social media,” Ms. Dragoo recalled.
She read her message about the Myrtle Avenue delay. She read it again, saying under her breath that she did not want to send out a message with a mistake in it, and then she read it aloud. “O.K., good to go,” she said as she unchecked a box on her computer screen and sent it out. It appeared on the beta version of the new app before it showed up on the website.
Ms. Dragoo, who grew up in Connecticut, said she had mastered the subway system on the job.
