WASHINGTON — President Trump, who gleefully defies the norms of presidential behavior, went somewhere in Helsinki, Finland, on Monday where none of his predecessors have ever gone: He accepted the explanation of a hostile foreign leader over the findings of his own intelligence agencies.
During a news conference with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, President Trump would not say whether he believed Russia meddled with the 2016 presidential election.
When asked whether he would use his news conference with Mr. Putin to denounce Russia for its behavior, Mr. Trump acknowledged that his own director of national intelligence, Dan Coats, and other senior officials had told him that Russia was culpable.
The heads of the national security agencies on Thursday said that Russia was still trying to influence United States elections, contradicting statements made by President Trump.
Then he unleashed a fusillade of accusations about Hillary Clinton and her missing emails, the F.B.I., the D.N.C.’s unexamined computer server and the testimony of the F.B.I. agent, Peter Strzok. He also offered a defiant defense of his “brilliant” presidential campaign, reminding reporters of the Electoral College tally, 306 to 232.
To a domestic audience, these assertions were familiar — the grist for countless early-morning Twitter posts or stream-of-consciousness outbursts during “Make America Great Again” rallies. But to hear Mr. Trump utter them while standing next to the leader of the very country accused of carrying out those attacks was a spectacle of an entirely different order.
On Sunday, Mr. Trump’s national security adviser, John R. Bolton, had defended the president’s decision to meet with Mr. Putin by noting that President Franklin D. Roosevelt met Stalin, the Soviet tyrant, at the end of World War II — presumably a reference to the Yalta conference in February 1945. “Let’s try and have historical perspective here,” Mr. Bolton said.
Historians, however, said Yalta only dramatized the depth of Mr. Trump’s failure in Helsinki. Robert Dallek, who wrote a recent biography of Roosevelt, noted that Republicans faulted the 32nd president for appeasing Stalin in 1945. But Roosevelt, he said, had a far weaker hand — with the Red Army already occupying Eastern Europe — than Mr. Trump had.
As he did after white supremacists beat their opponents in Charlottesville, Mr. Trump reached in Helsinki for a kind of moral equivalence.
While the president lashed out at all manner of domestic enemies, he said nothing about Russia’s annexation of Crimea, its predatory behavior toward Ukraine, its bloody intervention in Syria or the alleged poisoning of a former Russian spy on British soil.
So disorienting was Mr. Trump’s performance that at times, it fell to Mr. Putin to try to cushion the blow — as if he recognized the damage that the president’s remarks would cause in the United States.
When a reporter asked whether Mr. Trump had objected to Russia’s annexation of Crimea in 2014, Mr. Putin answered that of course the American president had objected. Mr. Trump stood by in silence.
Yet on perhaps the most unsettling question of all — whether Russia possessed compromising material on the president — Mr. Putin offered Mr. Trump no comfort. Instead of simply saying it did not, Mr. Putin said he was well aware of the rumors, but that he had not been told that Mr. Trump had visited Moscow as a private businessman. And anyway, he added, hundreds of American business people visit Russia every year.
“Do you think we try to collect compromising material on each and every single one of them?” Mr. Putin asked.