Can the A.C.L.U. Become the N.R.A. for the Left?
The suit filed on behalf of families separated at the border was just the latest action against the administration by the civil liberties group.
On the morning of Friday, June 22, the American Civil Liberties Union won a major Supreme Court decision in Carpenter v. United States, which was possibly, at least in terms of pure jurisprudence, the most important case argued before the court this past session. It was a landmark ruling that changed the future of digital privacy in America, but news of the win was only the second most important thing happening at the A.C.L.U. offices that day. At 3 p.m., a conference call was scheduled to discuss the more than 2,000 children whose fates were tied to another A.C.L.U. suit against the government.
That case — Ms. L. v. ICE — was filed in late February, long before most of the rest of the world was aware that thousands of children were being separated from their families at the border. (As a point of comparison, a coalition of 18 state attorneys general filed a suit to stop family separation on June 26, four months to the day after the A.C.L.U. filed its suit.) It began with a single client, a 39-year-old Congolese woman, Ms. L., whose daughter was taken from her in November 2017, but it quickly grew into a national class action on behalf of every family whose children had been taken from them.
On June 6, Judge Dana M. Sabraw, a George W. Bush nominee in the Southern District of California, rejected the government’s motion to dismiss the case and ruled that in detaining the immigrants, it was violating the due-process clause of the Fifth Amendment. The A.C.L.U. asked that Sabraw issue a nationwide injunction, which the judge was still considering when the White House, with no legal room to maneuver and public outcry intensifying by the day, issued an executive order on June 20 saying the practice would be stopped. Now, on that Friday afternoon, Sabraw asked the lawyers to call in to discuss how the executive order affected their cases. Did the White House’s decision — in theory, anyway — negate the need for a nationwide injunction to stop family separation? And how did it affect the children who had already been separated?
Sabraw asked if there was any interdepartment communication that would allow the government to even begin putting together a plan for reunification. “I can’t say today that there is a formalized process,” Fabian responded.
Fabian declared that it was already too late on a Friday for that; the government needed time to prepare its response during normal work hours. So, it was decided, Wednesday.
I was in the crowd in Downtown Brooklyn when Gelernt stepped out onto the courthouse steps after the hearing. The atmosphere was electric. The new president had taken decisive action, and the courts and citizens rising up in protest had beaten him back. There had been, as with the crowd at the Women’s March a week earlier, a feeling of power and possibility.
“That’s the model,” Romero said when I met him that next week. “That’s the way we’re going to survive this. Pressure in the courts, pressure from the public. We have to keep him in the pincers. It’s the only way.” But he also warned that they were only a week in. They were going to have to file suit after suit after suit. And he worried about how to keep morale up among his lawyers and the A.C.L.U.’s members as time went on.
On Nov. 9, 2016, millions of voters woke desperate for something that might quell their anxiety that this was the beginning of the end of democracy in America. Overwhelmingly, the place they turned to was the A.C.L.U. Before the election, the A.C.L.U. was largely associated with either free-speech purism (the defense of Nazis to march in Skokie, Ill., in 1977) or leftist subversion of the American government (George Bush famously calling Michael Dukakis a “card-carrying member,” not so subtly equating support of the A.C.L.U. with communist sympathy, during the 1988 presidential campaign). Slightly less cartoonishly, the group has long been seen by those who are vaguely aware of its work as a collective of well-intentioned defenders of the Constitution, running their cases year after year and sending out newsletters to a membership made up largely of aging former hippies.
Since Trump took office, the A.C.L.U. has taken 170 “Trump-related legal actions.” There have been formal calls for investigation, administrative and ethics complaints and requests for documents under the Freedom of Information Act. There have also been 83 lawsuits, more than at any other equivalent time in its history — in defense of immigrants and transgender people and abortion rights and free speech and voting rights and access to birth control.
After that Friday afternoon family-separation call, I walked around the hallways for a little while and looked in on various rooms. The place had visibly changed from when I first started showing up there 18 months earlier. They were doubling lawyers up in offices now, and there was a communications and social-media team piled into what used to be a communal space. There were lawyers preparing for a hearing in North Carolina, challenging a state law barring transgender people from using the restrooms that match their gender identity. Another attorney, Louise Melling, one of the A.C.L.U.’s deputy legal directors, stepped out of her office to commiserate briefly about the Supreme Court’s decision in favor of a Christian baker (and against the A.C.L.U., which argued the case) who refused to make a wedding cake for a gay couple in Colorado. “That one hurt,” she said. “I can’t stop thinking about it.” There were plenty of other cases wending through the system, Melling said, and the issue would most likely rise up to the Supreme Court again. She sighed and then smiled broadly. She had come up fighting abortion rights cases for years, she said, so she was prepared for the long haul.
In the fall of 2016, as if in anticipation of the moment in which we’re now living, Cole published his seventh book, “Engines of Liberty: How Citizen Movements Succeed.” In it, he lays out three radically different examples of citizen groups banding together to change public perception and reshape political and judicial will: in 2015, when gay rights groups won the fight for same-sex marriage; the National Rifle Association’s inexorable gathering of local and state-level influence that leads, in 2008, to the federal constitutional right of individuals to bear arms; and the international pressure brought to bear by human rights groups during the Bush administration’s “war on terror,” which led to a 2004 Supreme Court ruling that effectively ended the blanket legal deference historically afforded an American president during a time of war.
It wasn’t just losing their guns, though. In an analysis of the N.R.A.’s success commissioned by Romero in 2013, one of the primary takeaways is that the N.R.A. invests significant resources in nurturing the N.R.A. “lifestyle” among its members. It sponsors a huge range of events, teaches gun education and has a large marketing arm to “get people into the ‘club’ and keep them there,” which is vital when the bat signal goes on. Gun ownership is the issue in most N.R.A. members’ lives; it’s central to their perception of who they are. They see gun control as a threat to their very way of life. To gun-control advocates, that’s a terrible thing, but Cole believes that it is possible to similarly galvanize people who care about civil rights. Citizens who might not have cared all that intensely about immigration or voting rights might, post-Trump, start getting invested in fights over them, and that in turn might lead to their caring more deeply about the underlying issues. That was his hope, that out of this trying moment for civil liberties might come a more profound awareness of and willingness to devote energy to protecting them.
The one thing he felt certain of was that “it will be easier for Trump to hurt the people he promised to hurt than to help the people he promised to help.” For Shakir, that meant there was a chance to reach people and activate them. After taking the job, he set about creating a system, with proper infrastructure and resources and personnel, from which you could call people to action and which other groups could tap into. “I hired people who know how to do this,” Shakir said, referring to several digital organizers who worked for Bernie Sanders’s presidential campaign. Whatever you think of Sanders as a candidate, he said, “out of the chaos that was the Bernie campaign was born a structure and a movement of people” — volunteers who then became supervolunteers, who weren’t on the campaign’s payroll but were passionate and trusted and could be depended upon to turn out thousands of people for an event.
In March 2017, the A.C.L.U. launched the new platform, called PeoplePower.org. The first call to action was around the creation of what Shakir called “freedom cities.” “We sat down and thought about what are the power levers that will most hinder Trump’s ability to get things done,” he said. “And we came to the conclusion that cities and towns across America are our greatest political strength. Effectuating power through city officials is the way we can push back.” They created a list of “asks” to present to local sheriffs, police commissioners or precinct commanders, and then prepared members with a script of questions to ask: “Do they participate in transporting people on behalf of Immigration and Customs Enforcement? Do they give home addresses to ICE? Do they detain people without judicial warrant?” The idea was to take the town-hall concept and apply it not to a member of Congress but to local law-enforcement officials, fostering a sense that constituents were invested in these issues and wanted their views represented.
The second major initiative, which the A.C.L.U. started last October in Lawrence, Kan., was a voting rights campaign called Let People Vote. Ronald Newman, the director of strategic initiatives and a former member of the Obama administration on the National Security Council, worked with Shakir to create geographically targeted campaigns. “Ronnie and I went to our affiliates and said: ‘You know your state’s issues better than we do. What’s the one thing you desperately want to accomplish when it comes to voting rights?’ ” Shakir said. The responses fell into four categories: election reform (things like automatic voter registration, same-day voter registration, expanded early voting); rights restoration for citizens who have committed felonies; gerrymandering; and pushing back on voter-suppression efforts like identification cards.
And yet the group has long had a lobbying effort in Washington and has always been involved in ballot referendums and deployed volunteers to get out the word on their core issues. Now, the leaders felt, those core issues were at the center of the storm in the United States, and the A.C.L.U. could operate on a scale that had never been possible. “None of that stuff is new,” Romero told me. “We’ve just never had this much money. In the old days, if we cobbled together $50,000 for a ballot referendum in California, and that was being in the game. Now we’re dropping $5 million in Florida, $3 million in Michigan. We’ll spend close to $10 million on ballot referenda this year.
The earliest test case took place in May 2017 during a Democratic primary for district attorney in Philadelphia. The race represented a rare open seat in one of America’s most heavily incarcerated cities. Udi Ofer, the A.C.L.U.’s deputy national political director, analyzed voting patterns and estimated that A.C.L.U. members in the Philadelphia area — 11,438 voters — made up roughly a quarter of all the people who vote in primaries there. They then hired formerly incarcerated individuals to go door to door, talking about their experience in prison and mass incarceration. It was a simple message, Romero said: “If you were to cast a meaningful vote in this D.A. race, here are the issues we think you should consider.” The winner of that primary and ultimately the election was Larry Krasner, whose reform-focused approach to racial discrimination in policing is more or less unheard-of among big-city district attorneys in the United States.
Next up was a State Supreme Court race in Wisconsin, in which they sent out hundreds of thousands of scorecards outlining the candidates’ positions on a host of threats to civil liberties — immigration policy, the restriction of access to abortion services, L.G.B.T discrimination. Rebecca Dallet, the best candidate on civil liberties issues, won by 11½ points.
“We stepped up our involvement in Mecklenburg County after that,” Shakir told me, referring to the Democratic primary for county sheriff in Mecklenburg County, N.C., in which the incumbent, Irwin Carmichael, had signed an agreement to help ICE locate undocumented immigrants. The A.C.L.U. paid for a radio ad that aired in the weeks leading up to the primary. “Sheriff Carmichael works for Trump’s deportation force,” it said, “detaining people for deportation, tearing families apart.” Carmichael’s challengers, it went on to say, “pledge to stop working with Trump’s deportation force.” Carmichael, a strong favorite who had raised significantly more money than his opponents, finished third in the primary.
This level of political involvement, no matter the affiliation, hasn’t settled well with all A.C.L.U. backers. In a recent article for The New Yorker by Benjamin Wallace-Wells, Ira Glasser, who preceded Romero as the A.C.L.U.’s executive director for two decades, said of the involvement in candidates’ races: “I regard this as a departure which has the capacity to destroy the organization as it has always existed.” What the A.C.L.U. does, Glasser and others have pointed out, is unique among advocacy groups in America. It is the only one purely committed to defending the Constitution. Once you wade into politics, the sanctity of that commitment risks getting stained.
I got a text from Lee Gelernt just after midnight on June 27, four days after his call with Judge Sabraw: “We won just now. Reunification ordered for all kids within 30 days. Kids under 5 within 14 days!!” It seemed impossible. Impossible because hours earlier the Supreme Court affirmed Trump’s travel ban, a piece of news that had hung over everything like a haze. And impossible because the unfolding nightmare of these families seemed to exist beyond the reach of rules, a kind of chaos unleashed that couldn’t be contained. But this ruling meant that there was now a pathway to these parents and their children finding one another, and that path led back to a single case, one mother and her child.
It seemed impossible, too, that it was only four months ago when Gelernt first told me about Ms. L. Her story is still shocking in its particulars, and it’s worth knowing, I think, because her fate, like the fate of thousands of others seeking asylum here, is still undecided.
This was on Nov. 1, 2017 — months before the government denied it was separating children from their families, then said it was only families who were caught crossing the border illegally, then announced it was all part of a zero-tolerance policy. Ms. L. entered legally at the port of entry at San Diego. In broken Spanish she had picked up along the way, she told the border agents she was seeking asylum in the United States. The Border Patrol referred her to ICE, and after four days in temporary housing, ICE agents met with her and S. and asked the girl to go with a guard into another room. Once she was gone, they handcuffed Ms. L., who hadn’t committed a crime. She listened to her daughter beyond the door, screaming and pleading with the guards not to take her away. S. was transported immediately to a facility for unaccompanied minors in Chicago. Ms. L. was detained in California with roughly 1,500 other detainees.
Ms. L. was paroled from detention the following week, a few days before the government’s response was due in her lawsuit. When I asked Gelernt why she had been released, he guessed it was an attempt to act as if her case had nothing to do with a policy of family separation. At the time, the government’s justification for separating Ms. L. and S. was that it needed to verify that Ms. L. was neither a child trafficker nor an abusive parent, though both of those things could have been ascertained quickly and without separating them.
A few days after she was released, Ms. L. traveled with an A.C.L.U. staff member from San Diego to Chicago. She was terrified to make the trip, certain that she would be arrested in the airport and sent back to Congo without ever seeing S. again. I met her briefly the next day, in a shelter on the outskirts of the city. Gelernt had gotten assurances from the government that Ms. L. and S. would be reunited, but he didn’t know when. She sat on a worn sofa in the shelter’s common room, wearing sweatpants and a thin sweater and plastic flip-flops, her face gaunt beneath tight braids. She kneaded her hands and looked into her lap as Gelernt asked her what S.’s favorite foods were, what color clothes she would like, what toys she might want to play with when they were finally together again. “Frozen,” Ms. L. whispered.
There were some creased, printed-out photos of her and S., taken before they fled Congo, spread out on a pool table at the end of the room. In one, Ms. L. smiles at the camera while S. sits behind her braiding her hair. You can recognize her in the pictures, the same softness in her eyes, the long, strong hands. But the woman in the room was, I would guess, 50 or 60 pounds thinner than the woman in the photographs. Before we said goodbye, we stood next to the pool table looking at the pictures. I remarked on how beautiful S. was, and she slowly ran a finger over her daughter in the photo, then gathered the papers up and slid them into a manila folder that she held against her chest.
The next night, after I left, they were reunited in the shelter. I’ve spoken with Gelernt several times about the moment of their reunion, what he called the most emotional thing he’d experienced in 25 years of doing immigration work. Ms. L. stood near him waiting for her daughter on a worn marble staircase just inside the shelter’s front door. When the door swung open, she crouched and stretched her arms wide. S. stepped through the doorway and saw her, and the most beautiful smile spread over the girls face, Gelernt said. She toppled forward, and Ms. L. gathered her in her arms and fell back onto the marble stairs. The look on her face as she held her daughter was almost too emotional to witness. For the next minute they lay there, clinging to each other and rocking from side to side. The only sound in the hall was a low, rhythmic moan, punctuated by S.’s higher-pitched cry.
Eventually they sat up and walked up the steps and settled on a bench in the shelter’s hallway. After a few minutes, Ms. L leaned toward S. and spoke to her in Lingala, then pointed to Gelernt, and S. stood up and walked over to him and wrapped her arms around his waist. “There are times when this work is so tiring,” Gelernt said. “But something like this, if people could only see this, I think it could change the way some of them think about these issues. This isn’t abstract policy, this is a mother and a daughter who have been through more than we can imagine. It was the rawest possible emotion,” Gelernt said.
Three days later, the immigration judge who ruled that Ms. L. would be deported denied the motion to reopen her case. “It’s horrific,” Gelernt told me. “It’s obviously going to be appealed.” As of now, they’re awaiting a decision on that appeal. Gelernt told me that S. is doing a little better, going to school in the day with some other kids in the shelter. Ms. L. remains terrified that ICE agents will show up there to take her away, or take S. away, and that she’ll be sent back to Congo and what she says and the government has agreed is certain death.
