MOSCOW — A car ran down a group of touring cyclists in the Central Asian state of Tajikistan over the weekend, killing four people from the United States, the Netherlands and Switzerland. On Monday, the Islamic State claimed responsibility for the attack.
In a video obtained by Radio Free Europe on Monday that purports to show the attack, a car can be seen making a U-turn on a rural road and then speeding back through a group of fallen and injured cyclists. Tajik authorities said the occupants of the car then got out and stabbed and shot some of the survivors, leaving little doubt that the assault was intentional.
That wording is a reference to a 2014 speech by the terrorist group’s former spokesman, in which he called on the group’s followers to carry out attacks in their countries in any way they could, including by using cars to crush pedestrians. The choice of language indicates that the militants view the attackers in Tajikistan as having been inspired by propaganda, and that they were not directly deployed by the terrorist organization.
The Tajik Interior Ministry confirmed the four deaths and said that members of the security services had killed four people suspected of being involved in the attack, all natives of Tajikistan, and had detained a fifth person. The Tajik police said they had found a Daewoo car with damage consistent with a collision with the cyclists.
The United States Embassy in Tajikistan confirmed in a statement posted on its website that two of the four people killed in the attack were American citizens. They were part of a group of cyclists who were biking in the Danghara district, about 60 miles south of the country’s capital, Dushanbe, on a picturesque mountain road that has been popular with Western bicyclists for its dramatic and remote scenery in a region close to the border with Afghanistan.
Officials identified the other two who were killed as citizens of Switzerland and of the Netherlands. Three other cyclists were injured. Ferghana, a Central Asia news site, said one cyclist, a Frenchman, escaped harm because he had fallen behind the group before the attack began.
Though Islamist movements have been active in Central Asia for decades, they have not been known for targeting Western tourists, who visit the historical cities of the Silk Road in Uzbekistan and hike and cycle in the mountains of Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan. The Ferghana news site suggested that the attack could frighten off tourists.
The Islamic State’s claim of responsibility appears to be its first for an attack inside Tajikistan, analysts said. That is surprising, given the large number of Tajiks are believed to have joined the militants.
According to a recent report by the Soufan Group, at least 1,300 citizens of Tajikistan traveled to join the jihad in Iraq and Syria. That is among the largest numbers for a single country. By contrast, no more than a few dozen Americans are believed to have made it into ISIS-controlled territory in Iraq and Syria.
Central Asia has been better known as a source of militants who strike at Europeans and Americans elsewhere. Tajiks and Uzbeks carried out or tried to carry out attacks in St. Petersburg, Russia, and Stockholm, and an Uzbek man who emigrated to the United States in 2010 drove a rented truck down a path along the Hudson River in Manhattan in October, killing eight people.
Tajikistan is a poor former Soviet state that fought a civil war against Islamist insurgents in the 1990s and has been plagued since then by local unrest and spillover violence from the opium-smuggling trade in Afghanistan.
A car-bomb attack in 2016 in Bishkek, the capital of Kyrgyzstan, struck the Chinese Embassy and was attributed to a militant group linked to Al Qaeda and composed of Uighurs, an ethnic group from western China.
