The government insisted that the criminal charges remained active, even though they date from November 2016 and have resulted in no arrests. General Dostum and nine of his bodyguards are accused of abducting a political opponent, Ahmad Ishchi, and of beating and raping him repeatedly.
General Dostum’s return from exile is the latest episode in the tumultuous career of the Uzbek leader, an illiterate former Communist enforcer turned warlord who at one time or another was allied with every side in Afghanistan’s long war — including the Taliban — and turned on most of them.
He is accused of war crimes, including allowing his men to suffocate thousands of Taliban prisoners in locked truck containers.
The new political respectability of First Vice President Dostum — the country has three vice presidents — did little to curb his behavior, however. After the election, he would still at times be seen leading his private militia into battle, riding in his personal Humvee with two dwarf bodyguards on the hood, and engaging in drinking bouts in a country where alcohol is outlawed. And he is widely accused of continuing to use rape to subjugate his enemies, and occasionally his allies.
His exile to Turkey was negotiated with the help of diplomats to avoid the unrest that would most likely have erupted if he were to face trial on rape charges. But unrest in northern Afghanistan, where General Dostum has many supporters and allies, is happening anyway: Many Uzbeks have been angered by the government’s arrest of a powerful northern warlord and Dostum ally, Nizamuddin Qaisari, and his bodyguards. Video of government forces violently abusing his bodyguards became public, fueling protests and more outrage.
Government officials insist that Mr. Qaisari will remain in custody, but General Dostum’s return is expected to calm his supporters.
The deal allowing him to return is seen as a bid by Mr. Ghani’s government to seek his cooperation in parliamentary elections this year, as well as in next year’s presidential race. Many other northern political factions are aligning against Mr. Ghani’s largely Pashtun ethnic base, and General Dostum could broaden that support to Uzbeks.
Several people have come forward to give accounts of General Dostum’s violence and sexual abuse, and diplomats and American Embassy cables released by WikiLeaks have detailed even more.
A former personal chauffeur to General Dostum, Saleh Mohammad Faizi, was interviewed by The New York Times in refugee housing in Austria, where the authorities have granted him asylum because he was under threat from the general, whom he served for 23 years. He gave explicit permission to be identified and photographed as he came forward with his accusations.
He said he fell out with General Dostum when he refused to marry the general’s girlfriend, whom he described as a 15-year-old girl, in order to provide a discreet means for Mr. Dostum to see her. General Dostum already had two wives, who would not consent to his taking a third one, Mr. Faizi said.
Infuriated at Mr. Faizi’s refusal, General Dostum, with the help of his bodyguards, repeatedly raped and tortured Mr. Faizi over a period of several days, he said, eventually chaining him by his lip — the scar is still evident — to the inside wall of a truck container. Mr. Faizi said he was able to escape after a C.I.A. team won his release in 2013; he later fled the country.
Mr. Faizi also accused General Dostum of killing his first wife, Khadija, and of numerous rapes of political opponents as well as underage boys and girls. “I know whom he killed, and when and where he put the bodies,” he said.
While several diplomats and government officials have confirmed Mr. Faizi’s account of how he was treated by General Dostum, there is no independent corroboration of his charges of numerous other rapes and murders.
The episode involving Mr. Ishchi took place much more recently, in November 2016, and Mr. Ishchi has publicly avowed that he was raped by Dostum’s bodyguards on the general’s orders. In the interview, Mr. Ishchi claimed that General Dostum tried to rape him but was unable to physically perform the act, so instead had photographs taken to simulate the rape in order to humiliate Mr. Ishchi.
“Later he called him on the walkie-talkie and said, ‘It’s done, the mission was carried out as instructed,’ ” Mr. Faizi said. When they returned to the family home, Khadija was found shot to death with an AK-47, purportedly by her own hand, and accidentally. She was the mother of the four oldest of General Dostum’s nine children.
Mr. Faizi claimed that General Dostum’s personal secretary, Jalil Sarbaz, had called him in Austria and threatened his family if he talked to the news media about the Uzbek leader.
Brian Glyn Williams, a University of Massachusetts professor who wrote a generally admiring biography of General Dostum, “The Last Warlord,” raised the question of how Khadija had died during an interview with his subject. “It was almost dangerous. He got angry and stormed away from the table, and didn’t come back for a week,” Mr. Williams said.
General Dostum denied being behind her death, and eventually related his version of events, the author said: The general told him that Khadija had been cleaning their house, which had several AK-47s hidden in it. She accidentally tripped one that was behind a refrigerator, with a broom, the general told Mr. Williams.
Mr. Williams wrote of the general’s account: “As the gun caught on her broom and fell sideways toward her, a coil behind the refrigerator set off the trigger on the deadly automatic weapon, he said, and it went off. The gun fell from behind the refrigerator with a bang, shooting off several shots that caused Khadija and her servants to scream in panic. As Khadija jumped away, she was shot in the chest.” Twice.
General Dostum’s spokesmen have dismissed all of the accusations against him as concoctions by his political opponents.
“In this old age, the general — a respected person, the first vice president — and Ishchi, also a 60-something year old, what wisdom and logic accepts that he would rape him?” Mr. Tahyanj said.