More than $2.5 trillion in mergers were announced during the first half of the year, as fears of Silicon Valley’s growing ambitions helped drive a record run of deal-making.
Four of the 10 biggest deals were struck in part to fend off competition from the largest technology companies as the value of acquisitions announced during the first six months of the year increased 61 percent from the same period in 2017, according to data compiled by Thomson Reuters. That has put mergers in 2018 on pace to surpass $5 trillion, which would top 2015 as the largest yearly total on record.
Even rising global trade tensions did not manage to stifle acquisitions: Deals involving companies based in different countries nearly doubled compared with the first half of last year, and accounted for more than 40 percent of all announced transactions.
The increase in deal-making has played out against the backdrop of a healthier economic outlook in many parts of the world nearly a decade after the recession. In the United States, interest rates remain low, corporate earnings are ballooning thanks in part to tax cuts and stock prices remain near historic highs. In this environment, companies have turned to mergers and acquisitions for growth, trying to grab market share and reinvent their business models, especially as Amazon, Netflix and other tech companies increasingly push into new industries.
Big deals, a number of them in media and health care, have driven much of the activity. So far this year, companies have announced 36 transactions valued at $10 billion or more, according to Thomson Reuters. They combined for $950 billion in deals, or nearly 38 percent of all activity.
Competition from the tech sector has pushed the largest media firms to own both the content and the platforms on which it appears. So far this year, the value of the announced media deals has jumped to $323 billion, up nearly 440 percent from a year ago.
Last month, Comcast offered $65 billion for much of Fox’s entertainment assets after earlier bidding $30.7 billion for the British broadcaster Sky, of which Fox owns a significant portion. Disney responded by increasing its offer for the Fox assets to $71.3 billion.
A federal judge’s recent approval of AT&T’s $85.4 billion acquisition of Time Warner removed some of the regulatory uncertainty around blockbuster mergers, and could touch off more deals. Comcast waited just a day after the judge’s ruling before challenging Disney’s existing bid with its own offer.
Other industries have not been immune to tech’s encroachment. Amazon’s much-discussed entrance into health care has helped pushed heavyweights in traditionally separate spheres to combine. The pharmacy chain CVS Health announced a $69 billion merger with the health insurer Aetna late last year, and in March another health insurer, Cigna, announced a $52 billion deal for Express Scripts.
Competition with Amazon also drove one of the biggest overseas acquisitions by an American company so far this year: Walmart’s $16 billion deal for a majority stake in Flipkart, India’s leading e-commerce platform.
The White House has tried to redefine the global trade balance, imposing billions of dollars in tariffs in hopes of bolstering domestic manufacturers. The levies have sparked retaliatory tariffs from trading partners, raising the specter of a trade war.
The Trump administration has also rejected a number of acquisitions by Chinese companies on national security grounds, and even blocked then Singapore-based Broadcom’s $117 billion bid for Qualcomm out of fear that it would put the United States behind China in developing next-generation mobile technology. The decision underscored how far the administration will go to shelter American companies from foreign competition.
Even so, the value of so-called cross-border deals jumped to more than $1 trillion in the first half of the year, its second-highest level on record. Acquisitions of American companies by foreign buyers jumped 48 percent to $206 billion.
But it may simply be too early for the rancor over trade to stymie deal-making. Negotiations can take months, and the tariffs have only just begun to take effect. While confidence among business leaders has remained high, some companies have now begun to project job cuts and other losses as the trade conflict continues.
A pickup in deal-making since 2015, if history is any indicator, is not necessarily a positive sign for the economy. Other recent peaks in merger and acquisition activity have been followed in short order by a recession.
In 1989, deal-making topped out at $558 billion. By July of 1990, though, a recession had set in. Companies announced acquisitions worth a then-record $3.4 trillion in 2000, and within three months the dot-com bubble had burst and the United States economy had fallen into recession. Seven years later, merger activity hit another record, topping $4.1 trillion, but the economy had already slipped into recession as the year came to a close.
Stephen F. Arcano, a partner specializing in mergers at the law firm Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom, said that while the market for mergers is strong now, there could be reasons to be concerned about a slowdown.
“The fundamentals for a strong M. & A. market are still in place, but there are risks that could become headwinds, such as the concerns regarding potential trade wars, regulatory uncertainty and, in the longer term, rising interest rates,” he said.