World Cup|Why Does Every Soccer Player Do This?
Why Does Every Soccer Player Do This?
We’ve seen it a hundred times in the World Cup: A player misses a shot and his hands immediately go to the top of his head. Why? Psychology has the answer.
If you’ve followed the World Cup this summer, you’ve most likely seen it dozens of times, by players from every position and every country.
Lionel Messi has done it, and so has Cristiano Ronaldo. France, Belgium, England and Croatia have all advanced to the semifinals, but their players, too, have struck the disappointed pose. It has nothing to do with soccer and everything to do with the human psyche, according to zoologists, psychologists and others who study such things.
It’s not limited to the shooter, either. In one of the most replayed soccer blunders of all time, from the 2010 World Cup, Yakubu Aiyegbeni of Nigeria missed an empty net from about 10 feet away. Though Aiyegbeni hardly moved afterward, nearly every one of his teammates and coaches made the gesture in immediate and unrehearsed synchronization.
In his seminal 1981 study of the sport, “The Soccer Tribe,” the zoologist Desmond Morris included the gesture in his catalog of 12 player reactions to defeat. He noted its function of self-comfort, which he described as “a form of auto-contact, a widespread device used when the individual feels in need of a reassuring embrace, but has no one immediately available to offer one.” It’s seen among nonhuman primates as well.
In 2008, Tracy published an influential study with her colleague David Matsumoto, in which they studied the gestures of both victory and defeat made by sighted and congenitally blind Olympic athletes. They found evidence to suggest that the display behaviors of pride and shame were innate and universal.
The gesture is also commonly made after a goalkeeper makes a spectacular save to prevent what otherwise would be a sure goal. One of the most famous examples came in the 2006 World Cup final. Late in extra time of a tie game, the French star Zinedine Zidane snapped a header that he thought was destined to win the tournament, only to see the Italian goalkeeper, Gianluigi Buffon, nudge the ball over the crossbar with his fingertips. Zidane’s hands went straight to the top of his balding head.
The hands-to-the-head gesture is also performed by fans at the same moments as the players. Since they are observers rather than participants, their motivations could differ. Philip Furley, a lecturer in sports psychology at the German Sports University, in Cologne, has studied players’ behavior during penalty kicks, when the gesture is common.
In this case, soccer players and fans don’t need to work on the gesture. It seems to come naturally.