Though the U.S. Open Cup soccer tournament dates to 1914, it is usually seen as a less important sideshow to Major League Soccer’s season and M.L.S. Cup. Fans and organizers of the tournament are always looking to increase its profile and get a bigger place on the national sports map.
Well, now the U.S. Open Cup is making news, but maybe not of the most favorable kind.
On Wednesday night, Los Angeles F.C. defeated the visiting Portland Timbers, 3-2, in a quarterfinal match. Or did they?
On Thursday morning, Portland officially protested, saying L.A.F.C. had broken rules by using too many foreign players. Now L.A.F.C. could even face disqualification from the tournament.
M.L.S. has always had ever-changing, sometimes complicated rules about the number of foreign players permitted, in part to help boost American soccer. Teams are currently allowed eight international players on their roster, and can trade for more.
The U.S. Open Cup has its own quotas, but they are slightly different. “Professional teams may have no more than five foreign players listed,” the rules say.
L.A.F.C. used five players who would certainly be considered foreign under most criteria: Laurent Ciman of Belgium, Adama Diomande of Norway, Diego Rossi of Uruguay, Marco Urena of Costa Rica and Carlos Vela of Mexico.
The players who seem to have tipped L.A.F.C. over the five-player limit are Mark-Anthony Kaye and Dejan Jakovic, both Canadians. Both players are fully eligible as domestic players under M.L.S. rules.
But the Open Cup, being an all-American event (M.L.S. teams like Toronto F.C. do not participate) counts Canadian players differently, often considering them foreigners.
In particular, Kaye is considered a domestic player in M.L.S. because he came up through the Toronto FC system and thus is a “homegrown international.” But this would not apply in the Open Cup.
The draw for the semifinal, scheduled for Thursday, has now been postponed as a result of the protest. U.S. Soccer plans to “meet as soon as possible,” on the matter, said Neil Buethe, the chief communications officer.
Punishment could include the disqualification of L.A.F.C. or replaying the game.
The crux of the matter may turn on whether L.A.F.C. made an error, or U.S. Soccer. L.A.F.C. partisans might point to a roster sheet, produced by U.S. Soccer, which indicated the team’s foreign players, but did not mark the Canadians. Timbers backers might argue that an incorrect team sheet does not mitigate the violation by L.A.F.C.
Even before the dispute, a dark cloud had passed over the quarterfinal match, when Diomande said he was subjected to racial abuse during the game. The Timbers have said they would investigate.
Some team will face the Houston Dynamo in the U.S. Open Cup semifinals on Aug. 7 or 8. It’s just not at all clear who that will be.