Black American Jews say they are seeking ways to bring their full identity to the symbolic food of the Passover meal.
For Passover, the author and food historian Michael W. Twitty will prepare his recipe for West African-inspired brisket, made with vibrant ingredients found in the cuisines of the region. Credit...David Malosh for The New York Times. Food Stylist: Simon Andrews.
At a table in Fredericksburg, Va., surrounded by loved ones, Michael W. Twitty will celebrate Passover this year with a Seder plate that speaks directly to his identity.
Mr. Twitty, an African American food historian and author, will make his haroseth, a dish that symbolizes the mortar Israelites used while they were enslaved by Egyptians, with pecans and molasses. The molasses represents the sugar cane that was central to the American slave trade, and the pecans represent African American resilience and celebration in the South.
Sweet potato, an important vegetable in the African diaspora, will serve as the karpas, signifying hope and renewal; it is usually dipped in salt water, a symbol of the tears Israelites shed during oppression. Collard greens will represent the maror, the bitter herbs that serve as a poignant reminder of the bitterness of slavery.
Passover, which begins this year on the evening of April 15, is one of the most important holidays for Jews around the world, a day in which liberation and freedom are not just remembered, but venerated in the Seder, the holiday’s ceremonial meal. The Seder plate, which bears an array of symbolic foods, is a source of reflection and celebration. Other common holiday dishes in the dinner that follows — like braised meats, fish and soups — also allow for cultural symbolism, and let Jews make the experience their own.
“Food is a very pliable, necessary, constant and interesting way of being able to define who you are and what you are not,” Mr. Twitty said.
For Black American Jews like Mr. Twitty — the author of the book “Koshersoul,” about the intersection of Jewish and African diasporic cuisine, which will be published in August — the table can be a place to claim and create their own culinary traditions, ones that reflect both their faith and ethnic background. It’s also a space to reaffirm their identity and place in American Judaism, where questions of authenticity often plague Black Jews.
According to a 2021 report from the Pew Research Center, there are about 5.8 million Jewish adults in the United States; the overwhelming majority identify as white and non-Hispanic. In a 2021 study commissioned by the Jews of Color Initiative, an organization devoted to supporting and empowering that community, 80 percent of roughly 1,100 self-identified Jews of color from across the country said they had experienced discrimination in a Jewish setting.
One percent of adult Jewish Americans identify as Black, but in younger generations, that percentage may be increasing, as young American Jews overall are a far more diverse group than their older counterparts.
“Jewish civilization has, can and will look like us as much as anyone else,” Mr. Twitty said.
There are clear parallels between the Black American experience and the story of Passover.
God then frees the Israelites from slavery in Egypt after four centuries of bondage, parting the Red Sea so they can escape; then they wander in the desert for 40 years. It is a tale of struggle and liberation — the same kind of liberation that Black Americans experienced after the Emancipation Proclamation, and still seek today.
Robin Washington, 65, a journalist and editor at large of the Forward, and a longtime prominent voice among Jews of color, tells a story about reaching for a book to prop up his laptop during a virtual Seder in 2021 at his home in Duluth, Minn. Halfway through dinner, he realized he had grabbed Taylor Branch’s “Parting the Waters: America in the King Years 1954-63,” about the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.’s early work and accomplishments during the civil rights movement — a divine coincidence.
In many ways, the Passover meal is a lot more flexible than it may seem. While certain foods are prohibited by Jewish law, cooks can still customize the details of the menu to reflect their identities and priorities.
Mr. Quartey uses the Passover table to reflect his family’s rich background, using spices like suya and hwentia (also known as selim pepper) to season his chicken; simmering flavorful pepper or groundnut soup instead of the more common chicken soup; and preparing kontomire stew, which he makes with spinach, palm oil, dried fish, tomatoes, pepper and eggs.
For his matzo-meal fried chicken recipe, Mr. Twitty flavors the meat with poultry seasoning, paprika, ginger, cinnamon, allspice and cloves. Credit...David Malosh for The New York Times. Food Stylist: Simon Andrews.
Mr. Twitty follows the tradition of holding two Seders at the beginning of Passover, both of which feature his African American Seder plate and the traditional Seder plate. The meals that follow include Afro-Judaic dishes like his Senegalese-inspired chicken soup, made with tomatoes, minced herbs and nutty suya spice; matzo meal-fried chicken; a West African-inspired brisket bathed in a fragrant sauce to be served with rice or fufu; and kachumbari, a tomato and onion salad with roots in Kenya.
Mr. Twitty, who won a James Beard Foundation award in 2018 for his book “The Cooking Gene,” is a leading scholar on the connections between Black and Jewish foodways. An active social media user with a large following, he has also been recognized as a prominent voice among Jews of color.
Mr. Twitty also serves kachumbari, which means “pickle” in Swahili, as part of his celebration. The tomato and onion mix is eaten as a salad or relish. Credit...David Malosh for The New York Times. Food Stylist: Simon Andrews.
Tema Smith, 38, a multiracial Black Jewish woman in Toronto who works as an educator and diversity advocate, said she felt inspired by the work of Mr. Twitty, a friend and colleague.
“As Jews become more diverse in the U.S, and are in more racially diverse leadership roles, modeling that it’s OK to bring all of your culture into Judaism is really beautiful and important, because food is such an important part of who we are,” she said.
The holiday, he said, can be a reminder of the work that needs to be done in the United States and around the world.
