I remember before the internet, and the minute the internet was available, I had private tutors come over to my house and teach me. From day one, the awe of it. The whole world is at your fingertips with a few clicks of your mouse. The power of it takes my breath away.
— I don’t want to use my name.
OK. Can you just introduce yourself maybe just with your first name?
Well no, because that’s my name on Twitter.
My nickname is Sam. So you can just call me Sam.
Had you ever been attracted to a conspiracy theory before?
No. No, not at all. The 9/11, the moon, the flat Earth — no. But I know the financial system is rigged against us. I’ve watched it. I’ve lived it.
Let’s talk about the speed with which we are watching this market deteriorate.
Traders saying this is the craziest day they have ever seen in these markets.
I lost everything in the housing collapse.
Houses are in foreclosure in a slump triggered by subprime mortgages.
Many say they’ve been left in shock and are simply waiting to see what will happen next.
$700 billion to rescue the country’s failing banks.
— the government bailed out all the banks. The banks got all the money, got all the houses, got all the bailout money. And you can’t help but reflect upon all that you’ve managed to lose because of the unfair banking system. And I was, you know, kind of in mourning. So I would had different stages.  I pretty much got stuck in anger.
They’re calling this the “big one,” perhaps the worst in a generation.
More than 6 million Floridians have been told to evacuate.
— I was just devastated, again.
Tonight. the images now emerging of the utter destruction Hurricane Irma left behind.
Buildings and trees ripped apart. Hundreds now homeless.
Got out with maybe 10 percent of my belongings and my car. And my friend’s like, “Well, just come live with me.” I’d known him 10 years, and so I didn’t mind coming in and moving in as a roommate.
I was here in a new town, living in a friend’s living room, like the kid that just got out of college and was trying to figure out what to do with their life. So I was very emotionally fragile at that time. And I wasn’t working. I had a lot of time on my hands. And I spent a lot of time online.
I had the whole house to myself all day. And I would put YouTube onto the giant TV.
And then YouTube recommended the QAnon to me. That’s how I found them.
Before you found Q, like right before that, what YouTube videos were you watching?
A lot of music.
I ain’t got a dime in my pocket.
I just stepped on my last cigarette.
By Trampled by Turtles.
I watched Elizabeth Warren.
America has always been some poor, some rich, and big, big, solid middle class.
It’s part of what gives us our political stability. It’s what affects our economy and drives our economy. It affects our self-identity. It affects who we are in this world.
I fear that what’s happening and what these data are about is that we actually are going to see a larger upper class. And then the rest is just one long trail of underclass.
It’s about an hour-and-a-half-long video. I’ve probably watched it four times.
It gave me an explanation as why it’s so difficult to thrive.
It helped me to not personalize it, that I did something wrong. [LAUGHING] You know?
And then I was watching Lynette Zang.
If you had a $20 bill 20 years ago, and you have a $20 bill today, nominally, they’re identical. They’re both $20 bills. But what that would buy you 20 years ago and what that buys you today is vastly different.
She’s a financial analyst.
The original J.P. Morgan said it best. Gold is money. Everything else is credit.
She’s definitely all about holding gold.
Hey, friends. Sean from SGTReport.com here with an important silver, gold, and cryptocurrency update.
I would watch the SGT report, too.
Another pundit on the global banking system and what’s going on with the market.
(SINGING) Bye bye, banker. Bye bye, banker. Bye bye, banker. No bailouts come this time.
I really enjoyed his channel a lot.
The dollar is in the process of dying.
And I would watch Jim Willie, who is the author of “The Golden Jackass.” It’s all about asset-backed currency.
The member banks of the Federal Reserve, the regional bank, they all report to the main headquarters. And they serve the Wall Street banks and the big banks of the United States.
That’s what I was watching.
For governments, the key in this is — it’s inflation.
 That’s what we get to watch.
So many are still asleep at the wheel. They’re locked in their iPhone.
This is sickening stuff, undermining democracy that’s been undermined now for the last 30 years. It’s not a new trend.
And I wonder at the time, was that your main source of information? Were you also looking at more mainstream news outlets?
Definitely watched mainstream news. Absolutely. Because then you can cross compare what they say to what’s really going on.
That’s when YouTube recommended this video to me about QAnon.
Hello, it’s Katie G. How’s everybody doing tonight? I’m going to play a video while we’re waiting for people to come in and get myself set up here. So let’s see. Turn the camera off. Ready? Here we go, down the rabbit hole.
Katie G. was her name.
Ooh, there we go.
She was adorable.
And funny, and giggly.
What happens when 90 percent of the media is controlled — owned— by six corporations?
What happens when those same corporations are operated and controlled by political ideology? How does the average person who is under constant financial stress — by design — find time to research and discern fact versus fiction? They don’t. We are the news now.
She was a deep diver. She was what I consider to be a research-based analyst.
Would POTUS make a serious accusation if truth wasn’t about to come to light? Let’s go back to POTUS’s post again. Look at the picture here. It’s our George Washington crossing the Delaware.
Now, DoD uses the same picture, crossing the Delaware.
In my mind, OK, they’re going to go after the banks.
This is from Dec. 7, 2017. He says, “Rothschilds, cult leaders, church, banks, the financial.” So they control the banks and the financial institutions. Worldwide government control.
And the politicians that are on the payola and doing deals behind closed doors that are unaudited. That’s what sucked me in.
This to me is a confirmation of what I had said before.
I felt like a part of something that was really meaningful.
Oh, this is so big, you guys. It’s so big. We can’t even believe how big it is.
That we’re fixing everything. The world’s going to change. The good guys are winning.
And I couldn’t wait to see the next Katie G. video.
We have a new Q post. Knew it was coming. I knew it.
Or DeceptionBytes video.
All right, I got it up. Let me read this out. Here we go. OK, here we go.
And I would wait, anticipate every drop. I couldn’t wait to see what was going to be next.
When a new Q drop would come, I would have a visceral reaction.
There is a purpose for every tweet.
Like a physical joy.
The Great Awakening. No deals. Trust the plan. Happy Sunday. Q.
We have allowed ourselves to be controlled by the puppet masters. And we will continue to let them control us until we are put in a situation where we will either surrender all personal freedoms, or we will throw off the chains of oppression.
— that it was fake.
I was like, OK, let me get this straight. We’re a military intelligence. We’ve got a secret channel that we can communicate, and we’re going to proselytize about the Bible and risk a military channel that’s leaking? No.
It makes no sense at all to me. It’s because my father was military. I grew up in — he was military ops. I knew that that was just a marketing ploy. I mean, they were hitting their market base. Their market base are conservative church ladies. The middle America. The Joe Sixpack. That’s who they’re marketing. And they wanted to bring the religious aspect in so they could broaden their base so they can make more money on the T-shirts, and the mugs, and the donations, and the app memberships.
You’re either military intelligence, or you’re a preacher. And if you’re a military preacher, you’re in a chapel. You’re not next to the president. It was just logic. It was just an instant, to me, an instant pulling back of the curtain of what they were doing. And the minute I saw that, I was just crestfallen. Because I knew that it was all fake. And it was the instant. It was like a death. And then I was angry again. And I said, well, you know, there is no hope. This is just ridiculous. There’s no way. This is not real. I’ve wasted three months of my life researching fakeness. I really felt like I’d been had.
How much time are you spending online now?
Well, now that the coronavirus lockdown has started, now I’m not working, I’m spending quite a bit of time. I probably spend watching what’s going on now probably about four hours a day.
And do you ever worry that you could fall into something like QAnon again?
Well, say more about that.
I mean, I lost my job because of the Covid. I was vested for retirement this year. And I haven’t worked. My kids haven’t worked, because we are all in hospitality. And I have tried to reach unemployment for three weeks. I got them on the phone today. She spent an hour trying to register me for unemployment, and the computer wouldn’t let her. And she can’t mail me a letter. She can’t call me back. So I have to spend another three weeks trying to get them on the phone. In the meantime, my landlord gave me a three-day notice in the middle of a rent moratorium.
No, I’m so done. It’s not there. There is no awakening.
Yeah, I mean, I guess I’m remembering you saying that when you found Q, you were pretty cynical and thought the government was screwing you and things were unfair, and you had a lot of time on your hands. 
Yeah.  Fool me twice, shame on me. No way. Q is a lie. [LAUGHS] Our system is all set up towards the people in control.
But isn’t that what Q is saying?
He is saying that, and that’s why I got sucked in. But remember, he’s also saying that he talks to the president and that the intel he’s getting is direct from the government. My thing is the source. Q’s source is a lie. Therefore, anything he says or Q drops say are suspect and questionable.
Even though you don’t think Q is real, you’re still allowing that some of what Q has said might be true?
Those things were true before I found Q, and those things are marketing tools for Q to grow his client base.
Do you still believe in some sort of global cabal?
It’s not whether I believe it or not. It’s true.
— who has used his Twitter account to retweet or respond to QAnon messages or QAnon-related accounts dozens of times.
We’re — I guess we’re in the opening acts of the Trump rally in Sunrise, Fla. Arena is filling up. There’s still about two hours left to go before President Trump is slated to speak. And we are looking for QAnon people. Oh, I see one. There’s one behind — do you see a guy in a QAnon — is that a Q shirt? Excuse me, do you have a second to chat?
I noticed your shirt has Q on it. We’re talking to people who are interested in Q here.
I actually got this outside.
Oh, you bought this outside?
What’s your hat say up there?
Yeah. It’s the Great Awakening.
Can you explain what’s on your shirt?
Well, it stands for QAnon.
Yeah, Q! Awesome. Love it.
Yeah. It’s kind of an alternative that’s building up an audience. What it means is taking back what belongs to you from the government.
Hi, ma’am. We’re talking to people about QAnon. Have you heard of QAnon?
Yes, I have. I believe in it. I don’t think it’s a conspiracy.
I think that in 10, 20 years, it’ll be probably part of history classes. I mean, it’ll probably be something kids are learning in middle school because of how it’s changing history.
Please welcome Trump Pence 2020 campaign manager Brad Parscale.
Well, hello, the whole state of Florida.
So, Silicon Valley, they want to control what you see, and they are giving you a myth right now. They’re acting like we are the ones showing an untruthful message. But they’re actually doing the most untruthful thing you could do in America, which is shut off free speech.
And the media’s not doing their job. They think it’s great because it fits their agenda.
Haven’t we seen what Google, Twitter, these companies try to do? They want to suppress your vote for 2020.
And what we need to do is we need to continue to fight back. And the way we fight back is get online ourselves. We get connected, sign up for emails. We have to ask our friends and neighbors to sign up and volunteer. Because their agenda is the president not to win in 2020.
They want to ensure they get control back. The establishment, they want the deep state back in control. Because when President Trump won in 2016, it wasn’t the end of the battle. It was the beginning of the battle.
The C.E.O. of YouTube. Her majesty.
Susan Wojcicki has decided that she is the arbiter of truth.
Twitter C.E.O. Jack Dorsey stands by decision to fact check Trump.
You can’t just take what you like, Mark Zuckerberg, and get rid of the stuff you don’t like.
So these are the people controlling what you’re now allowed to think and say in America.
Monopolistic power over the public square. Taking content down off of Twitter, off of YouTube. That is the modern equivalent of book burning.
All right, so Kevin, as you and I are talking today in June 2020, a year into all this — kind of a big question, but like, where is it things stand with the internet?
They’ve had unchecked power to censor, restrict, edit, shape, hide, alter virtually any form of communication between private citizens.
— with some of the loudest voices saying that they’re exerting too much control over what appears on their platforms.
It’s likely we’ll see this moment as a turning point in the way we live in this country. A sharp break with 250 years of law and custom.
Obviously, they have a political motivation for removing information.
— if anything, that actually makes me want to watch them even more. Because if there’s something in there that the media doesn’t want me to say, hell, I want to see it.
— that there is this secret, forbidden knowledge out there.
I want to know what it is that’s so damning to the official narrative that they want to hide it from me.
The world wide web is now more connected than ever before. Tens of millions of people suddenly forced to stay in and log in.
— they have never been more popular.
Social media usage has ramped up significantly during the lockdown.
This is unprecedented, that we’re seeing this kind of demand.
Twitter just reported that its usage has grown 23 percent since last year. Facebook has said that, in some of the countries that were hit hardest by the coronavirus, the time that people are spending on its apps has increased by as much as 70 percent.
The massive migration online is putting our internet infrastructure to the test.
People are asking, will all of this break the internet?
— that the company actually had to lower the quality of its videos to keep the internet from overloading.
YouTube wouldn’t tell me exactly how much watch time has jumped up. But one data firm estimated that 15 percent of all traffic on the internet right now is coming from people watching YouTube videos. That’s almost double what it was last year.
How are you? I’m Kevin.
Can I ask you a question, and you tell me honestly? How much like YouTube would you say you guys watch a day?

Too much. It’s like, oh, I got so much to do. And then at 3 a.m., I’m like, huh, look at that. And then I don’t stop.
I’m like, basically always doing it. Like, if I’m out on a walk, I’m using my data to watch YouTube.
What do you like about your favorite YouTubers?
Well, they just really inspire me. Like, they give me more ideas of what I should do, because when I get older, I want to at least have a YouTube channel.
Honestly, my main goal was, I would love to be a YouTuber. Like, that was the, the goal.
— they respond that they want to be online influencers.
I was stuck in a world where I felt so creative all the time in school, but I didn’t know how I could use that. Everybody was telling me, oh, you have to be a doctor. Oh, you have to do this.
There was this one survey where they gave kids a bunch of options, like do you want to be a scientist, or a lawyer, or an astronaut? And the kids basically said, overwhelmingly, no. I want to be famous on social media.
At first, I did it for fun. But starting to grow older, you can think, actually, you can turn it into a career, and you meet awesome people from it.
Last year, I actually went to go talk to some of those aspiring online influencers at this event called VidCon.
So why do you guys come to VidCon?
Mostly to collab with my friends and meet everyone.
Yeah. I just want to meet all my friends that are on the internet that I haven’t been able to before.
Which is the biggest convention of social media influencers in the world.
Why are you guys here?
My goal is to like, boost my watch time. So I would just kind of like to learn some of the trends and kind of how to navigate the algorithm a little bit better.
I’m here to collab. I’m also here to talk to companies. Next year, I don’t want to pay to go to VidCon. I want to get invited.
Oh, we got screaming fans over here.
— in Southern California.
People are lining up to take selfies.
With their entourages. And they do these meet and greets with their fans. And they get courted by agents and all these huge brands.
I’m here at the YouTube party. A bunch of people hanging out.
And then they go off to these like lavish private parties.
There must be a thousand people in here.
YouTube is slowly but surely dying. The creators are getting worse, I guess. I feel like they’re just trying too hard to be like everyone else and not being themselves.
— wasn’t YouTube.
Are there more TikTokers or YouTubers here?
TikTok has literally taken over VidCon.
It was TikTok.
(SINGING) Why you so obsessed with me? I don’t even know how they did — boy, I want to know.
Lying that you’re sexing me.

(LIL NAS X SINGING) Got the horses in the back.
People dancing to pop songs. Lots of animals.
Lots of cats.
[CATLIKE BILLIE EILISH SINGING CONTINUES] Meow.
Which is exactly how it was designed to feel.
And what do you mean that?
So unlike a lot of American social media companies, which started off as basically open platforms and have only recently started to implement more rules and restrictions, TikTok is owned by this Chinese company, ByteDance, which has been way more heavy-handed in curating and controlling what appears on its app. Whether that’s meant hiding controversial political speech, or more subtle things, like making sure that the people whose posts show up on the main feed look happy and beautiful. And it seems like what they’re really trying to do is to create the most entertaining, light, glossy version of reality that they can.
Does anyone want to be in my TikTok?
TikTok is definitely the place to build an audience right now. It’s so open and creative.
As of right now, TikTok is the app to be on.
And it’s working. People love TikTok. They’ve downloaded it something like 1.5 billion times.
It’s the fastest growing app in the world.
I got thousands of views.
Just as a point of context, the number one star on TikTok is a 16-year-old girl who went from 0 to 60 million followers in a year.
And we were able to get a viral hit just because people liked the video, and it was seen.
Which took PewDiePie on YouTube eight years.
Like, how many hours a day do you think you spend on TikTok?
Too much, honestly.
If I checked your phone, would it be like, six hours?
Maybe more. Like, 10 hours.
10 hours a day on TikTok?
And, of course, a lot of what’s fueling TikTok’s success is an incredibly sophisticated algorithm. Just like the ones that run YouTube and Facebook and all the other big social media platforms, TikTok’s algorithm is constantly learning from people what they want to see, and what will capture and keep their attention. And actually, ByteDance, this Chinese tech company, it doesn’t even really see TikTok or any of the other apps it owns as its primary product because ByteDance has this huge, advanced artificial intelligence lab — one of the biggest in the world. And its goal, way beyond just making a fun social media app, is to become the world leader in the development of superpowered A.I.
OK, Kevin. So in our attempts to better understand what the internet is doing to us, here’s where it sounds like we’re landing.
First, we know that the internet is largely being run by these sophisticated artificial intelligences that have tapped into our base impulses, our deepest desires, whether we would admit that or not. And they’ve used that information to show us a picture of reality that is hyperbolic and polarizing and entertaining and, essentially, distorted.
And now there are even more of these algorithms than ever before, and they are getting even smarter.
And they’re doing that in part because the technology is just getting better. But it’s also because we are giving them exactly what they are programmed to want, which is more of our attention.
Right. And so, in the end, what we have is a situation where the A.I.s keep showing us this distorted reality. And then we keep paying attention to that. And in doing so, we are telling them that we would like to see more of this distorted reality. And, essentially, we’re living inside of this loop that’s getting faster and faster and showing us a world that is getting more and more and more distorted.
And the more and more time we spend online, the more this distorted vision of the world actually becomes our reality.
It spans the globe like a superhighway. It is called internet.
The internet gave us a whole world of exciting new possibilities. So I guess this is a story of how it changed our lives.
“Rabbit Hole” was made by Julia Longoria, Sindhu Gnanasambandan, Larissa Anderson, Wendy Dorr, Brad Fisher, Dan Powell, Kevin Roose, and me, Andy Mills. Music by Peter Lalish, Dan Powell, and Nate Henricks. Special thanks to Charlie Warzel, Mike Benoist, Julia Simon, Mahima Chablani, Nora Keller, Ali Watkins, Nina Pathak, Jazmin Aguilera, Topher Routh, and Trey Shilts at Berkeley Advanced Media Studios, and Lisa Tobin and Sam Dolnick.
In the finale of the series, we hear from a woman who stumbled upon the “Q” community and found herself drawn in. We trace echoes of her story across the internet, and look at what our exploding culture of influencers, TikTok stars and information disseminators holds for the future.
“Rabbit Hole,” a narrative audio series with the tech columnist Kevin Roose, explores what happens when our lives move online. Follow Kevin on Twitter: @kevinroose. Email us at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| “Sam,” a woman who formerly identified as a member of the QAnon community.
Kevin Roose, who covers the intersection of technology, business and culture for The New York Times.
Andy Mills, a producer and reporter for The Times.
What is QAnon? Here’s a look into the origin of the conspiracy theories.
“The question of what kinds of online speech a world leader should be allowed to post on social media is mind-bendingly complex,” Kevin Roose writes in his column The Shift. Read more about evolving policies for distributing and moderating information on social media.
