In-person showings are back with coronavirus protocols, but potential buyers or renters may continue to prefer virtual tours.
As New York City entered Phase 2 of reopening this week, thousands of real estate agents across the city returned to work, but the business of listing and showing properties has taken on a series of pandemic protocols designed to keep brokers and their clients safe.
Many agents had already adopted some of these practices in mid-March, when the coronavirus arrived in New York and much of the real estate industry went on pause. There will be no open houses where potential buyers or renters can just drop in unannounced, and in scheduled showings, brokers will clean before and after each visitor, as well as discourage clients from touching any surfaces and provide access to hand sanitizers. Virtual tours have become the norm and will likely continue.
As of Monday, real estate brokerages have been deemed essential businesses and like the other industries reopening during Phase 2, the state has recommended a series of best practices.
The Real Estate Board of New York (REBNY) has issued its own set of guidelines to its members to ensure the safety of employees and clients in the field. In addition to the usual forms that a broker might ask a potential buyer or seller to sign, many agents may also ask a client to sign a coronavirus liability form and fill out a health screening questionnaire. The real estate board also urges members to conduct in-person showings only in vacant or unoccupied properties — in other words, only when the seller isn’t home.
Before Monday, Jason Haber, an associate broker at Warburg Realty, hadn’t been in an apartment other than his own since March 10. For three months, he declined new showing opportunities — even virtual ones — and instead focused on checking in with his existing clientele, going so far as to help some of them organize various Covid-19 relief projects. He did, however, close contracts for spaces that had already been seen by clients pre-pandemic.
Like many agents, Mr. Haber isn’t worried about returning to work. He’s itching to begin showing properties again and is currently sitting on 12 residential listings, a mix of rentals and sales, all of which are coming online in the next few weeks. He said that he had never had so many on the market at once.
Brokers agreed that the focus on client comfort and safety is more important than ever, but during Phase 2 and possibly beyond it, the consideration of everyone involved in a single listing may be a little tricky to handle. For in-person showings, agents will not only have to communicate with the buyer and seller, but also building managers or co-op and condo boards, as many buildings will have their own rules and coronavirus protocols.
Even developers realize the benefit of boosting their online presence. Before leasing began, Sam Charney, of Charney Companies, and Nicholas Silvers, of Tavros Holdings, had already begun working with Listing 3-D, a start-up used by Corcoran, Douglas Elliman and Compass, among other agencies, to develop an online marketing tool for The Dime, a rental building in Williamsburg, Brooklyn. Plans to welcome potential clients on April 1 were pushed back to May 18 because of the coronavirus, but both men now see the timing as fortuitous.
The Dime this week opened its on-site leasing office, allowing prospective renters to schedule socially distanced tours. Those who first previewed the building online can now walk through to feel out what Mr. Silvers described as an easy-to-use and touchless experience: doors are outfitted with keyless entry technology; tenants have access to a smart package room and a hands-free storage option, as well as a video intercom viewed through their smartphones.
Practicing safety during in-person showings is crucial for engaging with clientele, but the same goes for returning to work in real estate offices across the city.
Corcoran, for example, bought a robot — and trained a receptionist — to test the temperature of employees in its Bridgehampton office when Long Island entered Phase 2 on June 9. Pamela Liebman, chief executive of the company, said they may use the robot in Corcoran’s Manhattan and Brooklyn offices in the future. For now, the company is providing PPE and also tracking how many people enter the office. To limit the number of people in the office, staff key cards were deactivated and agents must sign into an app before heading into work.
Bess Freedman, the chief executive of Brown Harris Stevens, said the key to reopening was “harm minimization.” Ms. Freedman, a survivor of the coronavirus, said her agency was mourning the recent passing of one of its top agents due to Covid-19, Sal Capozucca, but she also spoke of the near future of real estate with optimism. Like many agency heads, she believes all the pent-up demand from the weekslong pause will make for a strong market in the late summer and fall.
