Our “hidden enemy,” in plain sight.
President Trump has characterized the response to the pandemic as a “medical war,” and described the virus behind it as, by turns, “genius,” a “hidden enemy” and “a monster.” It would be more accurate to say that we find ourselves at odds with a microscopic photocopy machine. Not even that: an assembly manual for a photocopier, model SARS-CoV-2.
For at least six months now, the virus has replicated among us. The toll has been devastating. Officially, more than six million people worldwide have been infected so far, and 370,000 have died. (The actual numbers are certainly higher.) The United States, which has seen the largest share of cases and casualties, recently surpassed 100,000 deaths, one-fourth the number of all Americans who died in World War II. Businesses are shuttered — in 10 weeks, some 40 million Americans have lost their jobs — and food banks are overrun. The virus has fueled widespread frustration and exposed our deepest faults: of color, class and privilege, between the deliverers and the delivered to.
Still, summer — summer! — has all but arrived. We step out to look, breathe, vent. The pause is illusory. Cases are falling in New York, the epicenter in the United States, but firmly rising in Wisconsin, Virginia, Alabama, Arkansas, North and South Carolina, and other states. China, where the pandemic originated, and South Korea saw recent resurgences. Health officials fear another major wave of infections in the fall, and a possible wave train beyond.
In our information age, we have grown familiar with computer viruses and with memes going viral; now here is the real thing to remind us what the metaphor means. A mere wisp of data has grounded more than half of the world’s commercial airplanes, sharply reduced global carbon emissions and doubled the stock price of Zoom. It has infiltrated our language — “social distancing,” “immunocompromised shoppers” — and our dreams. It has postponed sports, political conventions, and the premieres of the next Spider-Man, Black Widow, Wonder Woman and James Bond films. Because of the virus, the U.S. Supreme Court renders rulings by telephone, and wild boars roam the empty streets of Barcelona.
It also has prompted a collaborative response unlike any our species has seen. Teams of scientists, working across national boundaries, are racing to understand the virus’s weaknesses, develop treatments and vaccine candidates, and to accurately forecast its next moves. Medical workers are risking their lives to tend to the sick. Those of us at home do what we can: share instructions for how to make a surgical mask from a pillowcase; sing and cheer from windows and doorsteps; send condolences; offer hope.
“We’re mounting a reaction against the virus that is truly unprecedented,” said Dr. Melanie Ott, director of the Gladstone Institute of Virology in San Francisco.
So far the match is deadlocked. We gather, analyze, disseminate, probe: What is this thing? What must be done? When can life return to normal? And we hide, while the latest iteration of an ancient biochemical cipher ticks on, advancing itself at our expense.
As viruses go, SARS-CoV-2 is big — its genome is more than twice the size of that of the average flu virus and about one-half larger than Ebola’s. But it is still tiny: 10,000 times smaller than a millimeter, barely one-thousandth the width of a human hair, smaller even than the wavelength of light from a germicidal lamp. If a person were the size of Earth, the virus would be the size of a person. Picture a human lung cell as a cramped office just big enough for a desk, a chair and a copy machine. SARS-CoV-2 is an oily envelope stuck to the door.
It was formally identified on Jan. 7 by scientists in China. For weeks beforehand, a mysterious respiratory ailment had been circulating in the city of Wuhan. Health officials were worried that it might be a reappearance of severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, an alarming viral illness that emerged abruptly in 2002, infected more than 8,000 people and killed nearly 800 in the next several months, then was quarantined into oblivion.
The scientists had gathered fluid samples from three patients and, with nucleic-acid extractors and other tools, compared the genome of the pathogen with that of known ones. A transmission electron microscope revealed the culprit: spherical, with “quite distinctive spikes” reminiscent of a crown or the corona of the sun. It was a coronavirus, and a novel one.
In later colorized images, the virus resembles small garish orbs of lint or the papery eggs of certain spiders, adhering by the dozens to much larger cells. Recently a visual team, working closely with researchers, created “the most accurate model of the SARS-CoV-2 viral particle currently available”: a barbed, multicolored globe with the texture of fine moss, like something out of Dr. Seuss, or a sunken naval mine draped in algae and sponges.
Once upon a time, our pathogens were crudely named: Spanish flu, Asian flu, yellow fever, Black Death. Now we have H1N1, MERS (Middle East Respiratory Syndrome), H.I.V. — strings of letters as streamlined as the viruses themselves, codes for codes. The new coronavirus was temporarily named 2019-nCoV. On Feb. 11, the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses officially renamed it SARS-CoV-2, to indicate that it was very closely related to the SARS virus, another coronavirus.
There are hundreds of kinds of coronaviruses. Two of them, SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, can be deadly; four cause one-third of common colds. Many infect animals with which humans associate, including camels, cats, chickens, and bats. All are RNA viruses. Our coronavirus, like the others, is a string of roughly 30,000 biochemical building blocks called nucleotides enclosed in a membrane of both protein and lipid.
The core code of SARS-CoV-2 contains genes for as many as 29 proteins: the instructions to replicate the code. One protein, S, provides the spikes on the surface of the virus and unlocks the door to the target cell. The others, on entry, separate and attend to their tasks: turning off the cell’s alarm system; commandeering the copier to make new viral proteins; folding viral envelopes, and helping new viruses bubble out of the cell by the thousands.
For medical researchers, these proteins are key to understanding why the virus is so successful, and how it might be neutralized. For instance, to break into a cell, the S protein binds to a receptor called angiotensin converting enzyme 2, or ACE2, like a hand on a doorknob. The S protein on this coronavirus is nearly identical in structure to the one in the first SARS — “SARS Classic” — but some data suggests that it binds to the target enzyme far more strongly. Some researchers think this may partly explain why the new virus infects humans so efficiently.
Every pathogen evolves along a path between impact and stealth. Too mild and the illness does not spread from person to person; too visible and the carrier, unwell and aware, stays home or is avoided — and the illness does not spread. “SARS infected 8,000 people, and was contained quickly, in part because it didn’t spread before symptoms appeared,” Dr. Weiss noted.
SARS Classic settled quickly into human lung cells, causing a person to cough but also announcing its presence. In contrast, its successor tends to colonize first the nose and throat, sometimes causing few initial symptoms. Some cells there are thought to be rich in the surface enzyme ACE2 — the doorknob that SARS-CoV-2 turns so readily. The virus replicates quietly, and quietly spreads: One study found that a person carrying SARS-CoV-2 is most contagious two to three days before they are aware that they might be ill.
The virus can settle in still further: damaging the muscular walls of the heart; attacking the lining of the blood vessels and generating clots; inducing strokes, seizures and inflammation of the brain; and damaging the kidneys. Often the greatest damage is inflicted not by the virus but by the body’s attempt to fight it off with a dangerous “cytokine storm” of immune system molecules.
Often it feels like nothing at all; according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 35 percent of people who contract the virus experience few to no symptoms, although they can continue to spread it. “The virus acts like no pathogen humanity has ever seen,” the journal Science recently noted.
On Jan. 10, the Wuhan health commission in China reported that in the previous weeks, 41 people had contracted the illness caused by the coronavirus, and that one had died — the first known casualty at the time.
That same day, Chinese scientists publicly released the complete genome of the virus. The blueprint, which could be simulated and synthesized in the lab, was almost as good as a physical sample, and easier for researchers worldwide to obtain. Analyses appeared in journals and on preprint servers like bioRxiv, on sites like nextstrain.org and virological.org: clues to the virus’s origin, its errors and its weaknesses. From then on, the new coronavirus began to replicate not only physically in human cells but also figuratively, and likely to its own detriment, in the human mind.
Three hours after the virus’s code was published, Inovio Pharmaceuticals, based in San Diego, began work on a vaccine against it — one of more than 100 such efforts now underway around the world. Dr. Sabeti’s lab quickly got to work developing diagnostic tests. Dr. Ott and Dr. Weiss soon managed to obtain samples of live virus, which allowed them to “actually look at what’s going on” when it infects cells in the lab, Dr. Ott said.
With so many proteins in its tool kit, the virus has many ways to counter our immune system; these also offer targets for potential vaccines and drugs. Researchers are working every angle. Most vaccine efforts are focused on disrupting the spike proteins, which allow entry into the cell. The drug remdesivir targets the virus’s replication machinery. Dr. Fehr studies how the virus disables our immune system.
These battles, fought on the field of biochemistry, strain the alphabet to describe. The Jedi in this analogy are particular enzymes (poly-ADP-ribose polymerases, or PARPS, if you must know) that are produced in infected cells and wield a molecule that attaches to certain invading proteins — “we don’t know what these are yet,” Dr. Fehr said — and disrupts them. In response, the virus has an enzyme of its own that sweeps away our Jedi like dust from a sandcrawler.
On entering the cell, components of the virus set up shop in a subregion, or organelle, called the Golgi complex, which resembles a stack of pancakes and serves as the cell’s mail-sorting center. Dr. Machamer has been working to understand how the virus commandeers the unit to route all the newly replicated viral bits, scattered throughout the cell, for final assembly.
For all the attention the virus has received, it is still new to science and rich in unknowns. “I’m still very focused on the question, How does the virus get into the body?” Dr. Ott said. “Which cells does it infect in the upper airway? How does it get into the lower airway, and from there to other organs? It’s absolutely not clear what the path is, or what the vulnerable path types are.
Even a photocopier is imperfect, and SARS-CoV-2 is no exception. When the virus commandeers a host cell to copy itself, invariably mistakes are made, an incorrect nucleotide swapped for the right one, for instance. In theory, such mutations, or an accumulation of them, could make a virus more infectious or deadly, or less so, but in the vast majority of cases, they do not affect a virus’s performance.
What’s important to note is that the process is random and incessant. Humans describe the contest between host and virus as a war, but the virus is not at war. Our enemy has no agency; it does not develop “strategies” for escaping our medicines or the activity of our immune systems.
The roots can be traced back still further. The first known patient was hospitalized in Wuhan on Dec. 16, 2019, and first felt ill on Dec. 1; the first infection would have occurred still earlier. Sometime before that the virus, or its progenitor, was in a bat — the genome is 96 percent similar to a bat virus. How long ago it made that jump, and acquired the mutations necessary to do so, is unclear. In any case, and contrary to certain conspiracy theories, SARS-CoV-2 was not engineered in a laboratory.
And there we have it: an organism, or whatever the right word is, ideally adapted to human conversation, the louder the better. Our communication is its transmission. Consider where so many outbreaks have begun: funerals, parties, call centers, sports arenas, meatpacking plants, dorm rooms, cruise ships, prisons. In February, a medical conference in Boston led to more than 70 cases in two weeks. In Arkansas, several cases were linked to “a high school swim party that I’m sure everybody thought was harmless,” Gov. Asa Hutchinson said. After a choir rehearsal in Mount Vernon, Wash., 28 members of the choir fell ill. Not even song is safe anymore.
The virus has no trouble finding us. But we are still struggling to find it; a recent model by epidemiologists at Columbia University estimated that for every documented infection in the United States, 12 more go undetected. Who has it, or had it, and who does not? A firm grasp of the virus’s whereabouts — using diagnostic tests, antibody tests and contact tracing — is essential to our bid to return normal life. But humanity’s immune response has been uneven.
In late May, in an open letter, a group of former White House science advisers warned that, to prepare for an anticipated resurgence of the pandemic later this year, the federal government needed to begin preparing immediately to avoid the “extraordinary shortage of supplies” that occurred this spring.
To know SARS-CoV-2 is to know ourselves in reflection. It is mechanical, unreflecting, consistently on-message — the purest near-living expression of data management to be found on Earth. It is, and does, and is more. There is no “I” in a virus.
Dr. Sabeti agreed, up to a point. She expressed a deep curiosity about viruses — they are “formidable opponents to understand” — but said that, this time around, she found herself less interested in the purely intellectual pursuit.
“For me right now, the place that I’m in, I really just most want to stop this virus,” she said. “It’s so frustrating and disappointing, to say the least, to be in this position in which we have stopped the world, in which we’ve created social distancing, in which we have created mass amounts of human devastation and collateral damage because we just weren’t prepared.
