After complaints from rivals including Spotify, European authorities will investigate Apple’s App Store.
LONDON — Apple’s App Store helped usher in the smartphone economy, leading to the birth of now-ubiquitous services such as Instagram, Uber and Candy Crush, and providing a transformative new way for people to shop from their phones.
But for companies that wanted to offer their products through Apple’s digital store, there has always been a catch: To reach customers, they had to agree to Apple’s terms and conditions, including sharing certain data with the company and giving it a percentage of any future sales made through the iPhone or iPad app.
Now European regulators are questioning whether Apple’s terms go too far.
On Tuesday, the European Commission, the executive body of the European Union, said it had opened a formal antitrust investigation to determine if the terms that Apple imposes on app developers violate competition rules. The commission said it had also started a separate investigation to see whether Apple was boxing out rivals to its mobile payments system, Apple Pay.
In both Brussels and Washington, officials have been scrutinizing the power of the world’s largest technology platforms. Apple, Amazon, Facebook and Google are being investigated by antitrust authorities over their growing power, particularly their position as gatekeepers upon which other companies depend on to reach customers.
The case against Apple arises from a complaint made last year by Spotify, whose music-streaming service competes with Apple Music. Spotify and others have criticized Apple for imposing rules and charging a fee of up to 30 percent on digital services sold through its App Store. Spotify argued that the fee constituted a tax that violated competition laws and merited an investigation. In March, the European Commission said an e-book and audiobook distributor, which it didn’t identify, had filed a similar complaint.
On Tuesday, European authorities said a preliminary investigation showed the complaints had merit.
Josh Rosenstock, a spokesman for Apple, said the company disagreed with the European Commission’s decision to start the investigations, describing the complaints that it is breaking antitrust laws as “baseless.” The company has defended its tight control of the App Store as a means to preserve quality, privacy and security.
“It is important that Apple’s measures do not deny consumers the benefits of new payment technologies, including better choice, quality, innovation and competitive prices,” Ms. Vestager said.
The Apple investigations are part of a multifront challenge that the biggest tech companies are grappling with around the world.
In Germany and Britain, lawmakers are debating changes to antitrust laws that would make it easier for the authorities to bring tech cases. European Union officials are exploring a digital services law with wide-ranging implications, including potential liability rules for harmful content spread on social media, as well as expanded powers for regulators to quickly step in against what they conclude are unfair business practices. Australia, India and Brazil are also cracking down.
Spotify said that federal and state regulators in the United States had approached the company about Apple and that it had provided information, but that it expects real action to come in Europe.
Gene Kimmelman, a former chief counsel of the Justice Department’s antitrust division, said Europe continued to lead on enforcement.
Adam Satariano reported from London, and Jack Nicas from Centerville, Mass.