Former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. assailed President Trump’s response to the nationwide protests against police brutality following George Floyd’s death.
I can’t breathe. I can’t breathe. George Floyd’s last words, but they didn’t die with him. They’re still being heard, echoing all across this nation. They speak to a nation where too often just the color of your skin puts your life at risk. They speak to a nation where more than 100,000 people have lost their lives to virus, and 40 million have filed for unemployment, with a disproportionate number of those deaths and job losses concentrated in black and brown communities. And they speak to a nation where every day, millions of people, millions, not at the moment of losing their life, but in the course of living their life are saying to themselves, “I can’t breathe.” We’re not going to allow any president to quiet our voice. We won’t let those who see this as an opportunity to sow chaos, throw up a smokescreen to distract us from the very real, legitimate grievances at the heart of these protests. We can’t, we can’t leave this moment, can’t leave this moment thinking that we can once again turn away and do nothing.
Mr. Biden’s remarks, which were by turns optimistic about America’s potential and somber about the depth of its challenges, came as his team moved urgently to press a more aggressive case against Mr. Trump at an extraordinarily high-stakes moment for the country, marked by a pandemic, devastating unemployment numbers, racial strife and violent clashes between police and protesters during the demonstrations, which in many cities have also led to looting.
Heightening the tensions, in the last several days alone, Mr. Trump has called protesters “terrorists,” spent time in an underground bunker and visited a church for photographs with a Bible, while peaceful demonstrators were dispersed with tear gas to clear his path. His campaign is increasingly seeking to paint Mr. Biden as sympathetic to those “causing mayhem,” as Mr. Trump’s team put it on Tuesday.
To chart his own vision for the country, Mr. Biden left his home in Wilmington, Del., to travel to Philadelphia. It is the city where the nation’s founding documents were crafted, where President Barack Obama gave his famous speech on race in 2008, and where Mr. Biden held his first large-scale rally of the 2020 campaign, promising to heal the soul of the country. It is now also a city rocked by protests and growing racial tensions.
In his remarks, which lasted around 20 minutes, Mr. Biden urged his opponent to consult the Constitution and the Bible instead of eviscerating the “guardrails" of democracy, one of many times in the speech in which Mr. Biden reached for language that has traditionally had bipartisan appeal.
Yet Mr. Biden, who spent much of the presidential primary campaign casting Mr. Trump as an “aberration,” also said that defeating him would not be enough to heal the nation’s centuries-old divisions, which are growing deeper seemingly by the day. Seeking to acknowledge both the pain and the chaos of the moment, he warned, “we must not let our pain destroy us."
Julián Castro, a former presidential candidate who made police reform a focal point of his platform, endorsed Mr. Biden on Tuesday, citing the plans Mr. Biden sketched out on the issue.
As Mr. Trump cracks down on protesters, how Mr. Biden handles the coming weeks could define his candidacy for the final five months of the presidential contest. There is an increasing sense of urgency among his allies to see him leading from the ground, and his speech Tuesday marked the third straight day he appeared in public.
The killing of George Floyd, a black man who died last week after a white police officer knelt on his neck for nearly nine minutes, has sparked an outpouring of grief and anger across the country. Peaceful demonstrations during the day have turned chaotic at night as images of American cities, under curfew and on fire, blanket the airwaves.
Mr. Biden also decried clashes between police, protesters and looters.
Meanwhile, the coronavirus rages on, with more than 100,000 Americans dead, and more than 40 million people who have filed for unemployment.
Mr. Trump’s campaign defended the president’s approach to the crisis.
“President Trump has addressed the nation twice, expressed horror and sorrow for the death of George Floyd, stood with the peaceful protesters, and made it clear that he would not abide our cities being overtaken by violent, uncontrollable rioters,” the campaign said in a statement.
While Mr. Trump, with the bully pulpit of the presidency, never left public view as the virus closed much of the country, Mr. Biden spent recent months campaigning virtually, struggling to break through with his message.
But he made a public Memorial Day appearance to pay his respects to Delaware’s war dead and emerged for a Sunday walk around Wilmington, visiting the site of demonstrations and meeting with store owners, said Representative Lisa Blunt Rochester, Democrat of Delaware, who accompanied him.
That was followed on Monday by an in-person meeting with faith and community leaders at a historic black church.
Just 21 percent said the country was headed in the right direction, a drop by nearly half since March. The biggest drop in confidence came among Republicans: Only 45 percent now say the country is going the right way, down from 75 percent in March.
Mr. Biden’s campaign advisers have engaged in fluid and evolving deliberations about how best to wade back into public activity as Delaware eases restrictions.
Campaign officials are weighing the need for sensitivity to the fraught subject matter at hand, as well as ongoing health considerations amid the pandemic, people close to the team said.
Mr. Biden also called mayors on the front lines of the crisis. “He asked me how I thought he could be supportive of the work we’re trying to lead nationally, and how he could be helpful in that space,” said Mayor Melvin Carter of St. Paul, Minn.
