While the contact-tracing challenges faced by Las Vegas are extreme, they highlight larger systemic problems in monitoring the coronavirus across the country.
That seemed a reasonable bet, given that Las Vegas had yet to record a single coronavirus case. What no one realized was that one of the conference speakers, a New Yorker, had already contracted the virus by the time she landed at McCarran International Airport on March 6. Two days later, she was in a hospital.
As Nevada embarks on one of the most epidemiologically complex reopening experiments in the nation, Gov. Steve Sisolak says he is confident that “every precaution possible” has been taken to ensure that the famed resorts can both serve guests and protect public health. Dealers and players are separated by Plexiglas, dice are doused in sanitizer after every throw, and guests, encouraged though not required to wear masks, are subject to mandatory temperature checks.
Michael T. Osterholm, the director of the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy at the University of Minnesota, said the system, which assigns the lead investigatory role to officials in a person’s state of residence, worked fine for past outbreaks of diseases such as Legionnaires’ disease. But Covid-19, he said, is different.
A handful of states keep a separate, public log of cases involving visitors who test positive for the virus within their borders. Florida, home to snowbirds and Disney World, is one. Nevada is not.
Much depends on Las Vegas’s ability to lure those visitors back: Nevada casinos generated nearly $8.8 billion in revenue last year, and the state’s unemployment climbed to 28 percent during the shutdown, the highest in the nation.
In the case of the Women of Power Summit at MGM’s Mirage, casino executives said the woman who became sick initially felt unwell on the plane but did not immediately realize what was wrong. She gave her speech and interacted with guests and staff before telling hotel security she needed to go to a hospital.
“That information might be available within the history of a case, but we’d have to go over each case to find it,” Dr. Leguen said.
That is what Dr. Leguen’s staff did when asked by The New York Times to provide case totals involving casino employees from the beginning of the outbreak through April 2, to include the two-week incubation period after the governor’s March 18 shutdown order. The answer, he said, was at least 27.
But Dr. Leguen seemed unaware of the three MGM cases linked to the conference presenter’s case, incorrectly stating that “none of the hotel employees” in contact with the woman had developed the coronavirus. He declined to explain that discrepancy, saying he could not comment on individual cases.
He did, however, note that the district uses the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Covid-19 Case Report Form to collect case information, a form that does not require health departments to list a person’s employer. Understanding a casino’s role in virus spread is made more difficult by the fact that what happens in Vegas does not necessarily stay there; guests, who on average spend three to four nights in Las Vegas, might contract the virus at a casino but become symptomatic only after returning home.
Reopening regulations require casinos to notify health authorities if they learn of a coronavirus case at their property. But they are under no obligation to follow up with guests after they leave, and different resorts have adopted different policies.
Dr. Leguen said that ultimately he relies upon health officials in other states or countries to notify him if a person who visited Las Vegas during the incubation period tests positive after they leave.
But understaffed health departments can barely keep up with what is happening within their own states. Dr. Leguen received only 17 such out-of-state notifications through April 2, according to a spokeswoman, even though by that point the virus was raging.
Danielle Ivory contributed reporting.