Remembered for his adaptations of “I Never Promised You a Rose Garden” and “The Great Santini,” he prided himself on knowing his characters inside and out.
Lewis John Carlino, a screenwriter and playwright who earned an Oscar nomination for “I Never Promised You a Rose Garden” and who both adapted and directed “The Great Santini,” died on June 17 at his home on Whidbey Island, Wash. He was 88.
His daughter, Alessa Carlino, said the cause was complications of myelodysplastic syndrome, a blood disease.
In a long career of writing and directing for the stage, the screen and television, however, Mr. Carlino was best known for the films “I Never Promised You a Rose Garden” (1977), based on Joanne Greenberg’s novel about a teenage girl’s struggle with schizophrenia, for which he and Gavin Lambert received an Oscar nomination for best adapted screenplay; and “The Great Santini” (1979), based on the autobiographical novel by Pat Conroy, which he adapted and directed. That movie’s stars, Robert Duvall and Michael O’Keefe, were nominated for Academy Awards, and Mr. O’Keefe was nominated for a Golden Globe.
Lewis John Carlino was born on Jan. 1, 1932, in Queens to Sicilian immigrants. His father, Joseph Carlino, was a tailor, and his mother, Ida (Orcel) Carlino, was a homemaker.
Mr. Carlino’s father died when he was 14, and his mother moved the family to Los Angeles, where he graduated from Manual Arts High School. He enlisted in the Air Force as a medic in 1951 and served during the Korean War.
Upon returning to civilian life, Mr. Carlino attended El Camino College in Torrance, Calif., and then studied playwriting at the University of Southern California. After graduating in 1959, he earned a master’s degree in theater from the university in 1960.
His first plays were produced by the university’s Workshop Theater while he was an undergraduate there. His work later found its way onto professional stages in Los Angeles and New York, where he earned the Drama Desk‐Vernon Rice Award for excellence in Off Broadway theater.
After a successful run at a summer theater festival in 1967, his play “The Exercise” opened on Broadway in April 1968, starring Anne Jackson and Stephen Joyce. But the reviews were negative, and it closed after only five performances.
When Mr. Carlino returned to El Camino College to direct his play “The Brick and the Rose” in the early 1960s, he met and married Natelle Lamkin, who later acted in local productions in Ojai, Calif. They had three children: Voné Natelle Carlino, who died in 1988; Lewis John Carlino II, who died in 2018; and Alessa, who survives him, along with one grandson and one great-granddaughter.
Mr. Carlino’s first marriage ended in divorce in 1970. In 1976 he married Jilly Chadwick, whom he met while she was working as a script supervisor on “The Brotherhood.” She died in 2015.
