Mr. Verret, a 54-year-old mechanic, could not remember when he had last seen Mr. Poche, with whom he had a passing acquaintance. And so, for the next three years, as he awaited trial, Mr. Verret considered the ways Mr. Poche’s DNA might have found its way to his washing machine lid. Most of his theories involved the police or the killers planting it.
This month prosecutors dismissed the first-degree murder and armed robbery charges against Mr. Verret. This followed an evidence admissibility hearing in which his lawyer offered an explanation: A crime lab analyst had mixed up two DNA samples, one from the lid of Mr. Verret’s washing machine and the other from the knife that was used to kill Mr. Poche. This theory was supported by an expert, hired by the defense to retest the material swabbed off the machine. She testified not only that the sample did not match the victim, but also that she could not confirm the presence of human blood.
This may sound like an easy catch. But proving what had happened took much longer than it should have because the crime lab was slow to turn over the documentation to the defense, said Steve Singer, a longtime public defender who took on Mr. Verret’s case. Such a wait is not unusual, he said.
Amid a national reckoning over racism and police brutality, Mr. Singer and other public defenders said they hoped Mr. Verret’s case would draw attention to the way the criminal justice system permits people to be held in jail for months — or even years — ahead of trial because prosecutors and crime labs fail to turn over the documentation that defense lawyers require to understand what put them there.
Mr. Verret is white. But people of color who rely on public defenders are disproportionately affected, said Jonathan Rapping, the founder of Gideon’s Promise, an organization that seeks to improve the quality of free legal defense for marginalized communities. That’s because state-appointed lawyers rarely have the time or resources to be as persistent as Mr. Singer, Mr. Rapping said.
Howard Poche was known around Jeanerette, a town of 5,200 people about 120 miles west of New Orleans, as the man who arrived early to church to open the doors. When he failed to show up for Christmas morning Mass in 2016, people got worried. At his house, detectives encountered a woman, who identified herself as his house cleaner, mopping up blood, according to police reports.
The woman, Michele King, who acknowledged she sometimes also had sex with Mr. Poche for drug money, initially said he had cut himself while getting out of the shower. She later confessed to witnessing his murder and said that the killers had threatened to kill her, too, if she didn’t clean up. She denied that her longtime boyfriend, Mr. Verret, was involved.
Mr. Singer, a former professor at Loyola University New Orleans College of Law, became Mr. Verret’s lead counsel about five months after he was arrested, when prosecutors upgraded the charges to first-degree murder from manslaughter and committed to seeking the death penalty. At the time, Mr. Singer was working for the Louisiana Capital Assistance Center, an organization that provides free representation to defendants in Louisiana death penalty cases.
The only physical evidence tying Mr. Verret to the crime was the victim’s blood on the washing machine. In early 2018, while reviewing the DNA documentation from the Acadiana Criminalistics Laboratory in New Iberia, La., Mr. Singer spotted some peculiarities. One, the tests to confirm that the stain on the washing machine was blood were marked as both negative and inconclusive. Stranger yet, though an analyst tested the knife supposedly used to kill Mr. Poche at the same time as the washing machine swab, Mr. Singer could not find results for the knife.
Erin Murphy, a law professor at New York University, said the delays in Mr. Verret’s case were a symptom of a widespread issue. “The government should share all the information with the defense immediately, but that’s not the norm across the country,” she said.
In many jurisdictions, the prosecution is not even required to tell the defense that DNA evidence exists, Ms. Murphy said. This means that innocent people regularly take plea deals for rape and other violent offenses without ever learning that the police collected DNA evidence that points to a different suspect, she said.
Mr. Singer was unwilling to give up on solving the forensic puzzle. Partly because this is his personality; he is notoriously persistent, a trait that has won him both praise and criticism in his career. He also happened to have an unusually light caseload for a public defender.
In October 2019, Mr. Singer caught a lucky break when he spoke to Winnie Kurowski, a forensic chemist at the Acadiana Criminalistics lab, on the phone. Prosecutors had said the knife marked as item 16 was used to slit Mr. Poche’s throat and stab him multiple times. And yet, according to Ms. Kurowski, it did not contain even a drop of the victim’s blood.
Why would item 19, the washing machine lid, contain the victim’s DNA but not item 16, the murder weapon? A theory was forming. “A 6 and a 9 look the same when they are next to each other,” Mr. Singer observed.
Mr. Singer shared the paperwork with Suzanna Ryan, an independent DNA analyst. Based on her review, she too suspected a switch and asked to retest the samples. At Pure Gold Forensics, a private lab in Redlands, Calif., she found that the only identifiable source of the DNA on the washing machine swab was not the victim, as the paperwork suggested, but Ms. King, Mr. Verret’s girlfriend. This made sense because they lived together. The only identifiable source of DNA on the knife was the victim, a detail missing from the paperwork. This reinforced that the two had been switched; the washing machine had been processed as the knife.
At a hearing on June 5, Mr. Singer and Ms. Ryan presented what they had found. Then, citing the Acadiana Criminalistics report that said, with 99.9 percent certainty, that the DNA from the swab taken from Mr. Verret’s washing machine was from Mr. Poche, Mr. Singer confronted Ms. Kurowski. 
“Yes,” Ms. Kurowski said, according to a transcript.
Ms. Kurowski directed a request for comment to her lab supervisor, who said he could not discuss the case.
