“I’ve really never seen anything like this”: Reporters and news photographers describe being roughed up, arrested and shot with projectiles while covering demonstrations across the country.
Barbara Davidson, a Pulitzer Prize-winning photojournalist, was covering a protest near the Grove shopping mall in Los Angeles on Saturday when a police officer ordered her to move.
Ed Ou, a video and photojournalist for NBC News who was next to Ms. Cole, was pepper-sprayed and hit with what he believes was a baton and a projectile fired by the police, he said in an interview.
Ali Velshi, an MSNBC reporter, said he was on his way back from a rally in Minneapolis that had become violent — during which he was hit in the left leg by a rubber bullet — when the police stopped him and his camera crew at an intersection. With hands raised, the reporter and his colleagues identified themselves as members of the news media, Mr. Velshi said. One police officer responded, “We don’t care,” Mr. Velshi said. A police officer fired a projectile at them, he said, but they were not injured.
Maggie Koerth, a senior science reporter for the website FiveThirtyEight, said she was covering a protest from a Minneapolis sidewalk on Saturday when a police officer drew a weapon on her and another working journalist.
Michael Anthony Adams, a correspondent at Vice News, said he identified himself as a member of the press when police arrived on Saturday night at the Minneapolis gas station where he was conducting interviews. In a video that Mr. Adams recorded of the incident, he can be heard repeatedly identifying himself as a reporter.
Mr. Adams continued to take video as he lay on the ground, holding up his press badge with one hand. Then he was sprayed with what he believes was pepper spray.
Journalists have also been on the receiving end of harsh treatment from protesters. Near the White House on Saturday, demonstrators chased and threw objects at the Fox News reporter Leland Vittert and members of his crew. On Friday, protesters vandalized CNN headquarters in Atlanta.
Then there were the arrests. Andrea May Sahouri, a reporter at The Des Moines Register, was pepper-sprayed and handcuffed in zip ties after identifying herself as a journalist while covering a protest at a Des Moines mall on Sunday evening. She took livestream video from the back of a police vehicle Sunday evening. She was later released.
Christopher Mathias, a HuffPost reporter, was covering a protest on Saturday night in Brooklyn when an officer ran into him, saying, “Get out of my way!” Mr. Mathias said in an interview that he then insulted the officer, who turned around and hit Mr. Mathias in the abdomen with his baton.
Mr. Mathias was restrained and handcuffed. He said he was wearing a press pass issued by HuffPost and had repeatedly told the police he was a journalist. His case was processed at a precinct at around 1 a.m. Sunday, and he was issued a summons.
Mr. Mathias said he does not believe journalists deserve special treatment. But he added that it was unusual in his experience — he has covered protests in Baltimore, New York and Charlottesville, Va. — for the police to tangle with reporters and arrest them.
The U.S. Press Freedom Tracker counted five reporters arrested at protests on Sunday. Police departments in New York, Minneapolis, Los Angeles and Denver did not reply to requests for comment.
Sarah Matthews, a staff attorney for the Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press, said that while the First Amendment does not exempt journalists from crowd-control orders, its emphasis on freedom of the press should offer some protection to those covering demonstrations.
