How the protests come to be viewed may determine who the next president is. The way that will play out could surprise us.
The nationwide protests over the killing of George Floyd will test two competing notions of how voters respond to crises that provoke both anger and grief.
Could the demonstrations that have devolved into mayhem, looting and assault lead to victory for President Trump? Will they empower Republicans in the way that Richard Nixon used his “silent majority” and Ronald Reagan invoked the idea that “the jungle is always there, waiting to take us over” to propel themselves politically in the wake of the riots and rebellion in Watts, Newark and Detroit in the 1960s?
Or could Trump’s authoritarian reaction, both rhetorically (“You have to dominate,” “I am your president of law and order”) and actual (ordering military units and equipment to the nation’s capital) enrage and energize the knowledge class, white liberals and the young to more tightly ally with African-Americans, Hispanics and other minorities to produce a Democratic surge?
In Minnesota, where the protests first began, there are Democrats who worry that voters will turn to the right.
Both of those districts will be decided in large part by suburban women voters, and it would be hard for me to imagine those people aren’t watching this scared, like everybody else, for their family and for their children.
What Democrats fear most is a repetition of the voter reaction to urban rioting in the 1960s that brought an end to decades of Democratic hegemony at every level of government as Republicans were able to set much of the federal, state and local agenda for the next 52 years.
The transformation of voting patterns that manifested in the 1968 election is documented by Omar Wasow, a political scientist at Princeton. In his May 2020 paper, “Agenda Seeding: How 1960s Black Protests Moved Elites, Public Opinion and Voting,” Wasow compared voting in predominately white counties close to violent protests in 1968 to those that were not.
Violent protests likely caused a 1.6 percent to 7.9 percent shift among whites toward Republicans and tipped the election.
In contrast, the Democratic vote in white counties that directly experienced, or were in proximity to, nonviolent protests rose by 1.6 percent.
a majority of the votes in five additional states: Delaware, Illinois, Missouri, New Jersey, and Ohio. These swing states would collectively have provided Humphrey with an additional 84 electoral votes and allowed him to win the 1968 election with a total of 275 electoral votes.
The current situation not only raises Democratic concerns over a repetition of 1968, but also a repetition of 2016.
In a paper published two years ago, “Racial Attitudes and Political Correctness in the 2016 Presidential Election,” Matt Grossmann, a political scientist at Michigan State, wrote about the centrality of racially freighted issues in Trump’s victory.
Far more often than his explicit racial statements, Trump incorporated rhetoric combining conservative sentiments with symbols that invoke racial attitudes. He mentioned “illegal” and ‘criminal’ more than prior campaigns and exceeded Richard Nixon levels of “law and order” rhetoric, which had been effective in the past at marrying racial attitudes with broader ideas about liberalism.
Meanwhile, seeing an advantage over Sanders with black voters in the Democratic primary, Clinton toured the country with the “mothers of the movement” who had lost children to police violence. Opinions of police use of force were related to Trump and Clinton support early in the campaign and law enforcement became an important Trump constituency, boosting Republicans.
Trump took advantage of a moment of rising racial conflict. As he began to campaign in 2015, there had been a large upsurge in attention to the Black Lives Matter movement, protests of police violence, and campus protests of discrimination. The Baltimore Freddie Gray protests and riots before his announcement, and the Ferguson anniversary protests after it, stimulated widespread media attention and public interest. A San Francisco shooting death that summer was used to (erroneously) blame ‘illegal immigrants’ for rising crime in some cities.
Trump voters thus perceived rising crime alongside demands to limit police actions that hurt minorities, rising terrorism alongside norms against singling out Muslims, and declining opportunities for men alongside expectations to avoid mistreating women.
saw rising diversity and increasing openness to people of all types being threatened by a backward-looking and shame-worthy candidate. Both perceptions were responses to the central messages of the candidates and the context of the campaign.
There is, however, another set of forces at work that is likely to mute any rightward shift and to push voters to the left instead.
While fear of disorder and crime tend to play into the hands of the Republican Party, at least traditionally, the opposite is true of health care and economic crises, which play to Democratic strengths as the party more sympathetic to the concerns of those who are suffering.
Democratic politicians are perceived as more compassionate and empathetic, while Republican politicians are seen as stronger leaders and as having greater personal morality.
In the context of three simultaneous crises — the pandemic, the economy and nationwide protests over police brutality toward African-Americans — Trump’s attempts to assert his role as the hard-nosed embodiment of law-and-order have been undermined by the public’s harsh assessment of his leadership role during the pandemic.
The June 1 Morning Consult poll found, for example, that 41 percent of voters approved of Trump’s handling of the pandemic compared with 53 percent who disapproved, his worst ratings since the firm began asking the question in late February.
Trump’s approval ratings on handling the economy are better — averaging 50.8 favorable, 44.3 percent unfavorable across six surveys in May, according to RealClearPolitics — but those numbers are substantially worse than they were in polls conducted earlier this year.
In addition, white voters — the segment of the electorate most likely to become more Republican in reaction to heightened racial tension — are far fewer than they were 52 years ago. The census estimated that in 1968, 89.7 percent of all voters were white, so that even a small percentage shift could have major consequences. In 2020, the Pew Research Center estimates that the white share of the electorate has shrunk by 23 points to 66.7 percent.
There are additional indications that violent protest may produce stronger support for some liberal initiatives.
the riot caused a marked liberal shift in policy support at the polls. Investigating the sources of this shift, we find that it was likely the result of increased mobilization of both African-American and white voters. Remarkably, this mobilization endures over a decade later.
political violence is associated with a “backlash” effect; voters behave unsympathetically toward the perceived rioting group. In the United States, this means increased support for socially and politically conservative candidates and policies.
Interestingly, the profound levels of partisan polarization that obtain in 2020 are likely to lock voters into support for the candidates of their chosen political party. The freezing of millions of votes before the contest even begins means that a much smaller share of the electorate can be swayed by new developments, making the impact of urban disorder much less than it was in 1968, when voters’ attachment to political parties was less intense.
In a January 2020 paper, “Cross-Country Trends in Affective Polarization,” three economists, Levi Boxell and Matthew Gentzkow, both of Stanford, and Jesse M. Shapiro, of Brown, measured voter polarization from 1978 to 2018. They found that the level of polarization in the United States nearly doubled over those four decades, increasing at a much faster pace than in eight other developed nations, Canada, Switzerland, New Zealand Australia, Britain, Norway, Sweden, and German.
While Democrats struggle to capitalize on their strengths and compensate for their vulnerabilities, the most challenging political terrain involves questions of race.
November is a long way off, and it is very possible that these protests will be a distant memory by then and that a new coronavirus outbreak or continued economic crisis will be the main talking points as the election nears.
That said, it’s possible that the protests will help Trump. In 2018, Democrats won back some of the Obama-Trump voters, and those Obama-Trump voters that they won back looked like the Democratic base on many issues, but were much farther away from the party’s base when it came to issues of race.
in general like the Democratic Party’s positions on bread and butter economic and social welfare politics, but seem to be less comfortable with the racial justice platform. So elevating the salience of the latter may drive some swing voters back to Trump.
Schaffner provided data showing that voters who backed Obama in 2012 and Trump in 2016 are close to mainstream Democrats on such issues as banning assault weapons and Medicare for All. They are, however, substantially more conservative that the Democratic base electorate on issues of white privilege and the border wall.
will look at all of the chaos happening in the United States right now — protests, violence, coronavirus, economic crisis — and simply decide that Trump is just not up to the job. With the situation as it is, there may be a desire among many to put the country in the hands of an experienced professional politician like Biden.
What makes the moment unique is that the combination of widespread racial discontent, the pandemic and the economic implosion is taking place at a time when the scope of deprivation and need is extraordinary.
Families will increasingly begin to experience the incalculable depth of loss as the election approaches, and traditional political maneuvering will be subordinated to the less familiar and highly volatile politics of scarcity.
Scarcity can bring out the best and the worst in us, but with Trump in the White House for the next seven months the likelihood of a beneficial outcome is slim to none.
Trump’s behavior this week has prompted extreme fear among some of those on the left.
“Authoritarians, often mentally unstable people with deeply narcissistic needs, transform this kind of chaos into dictatorships,” David Leege, a professor emeritus of political science at Notre Dame, wrote in an email.
signaled his intent to seize power, sending troops to any state where the governor did not mobilize the forces of order to physically beat back and punish harshly any protesters who did not desist. To model for the nation his strength, he called out the troops to restore order to Washington, D.C.
The looting of drugstores and high-end retail — much of it videotaped and repeatedly broadcast — may undermine the strength of these emerging liberal convictions. But will that matter more than Floyd’s stark death, which also exists on tape for all to see?
Which narrative prevails in the aftermath — legitimate grievance or rapacious looting — will play a key role in determining who our next president is and how the nation will resolve the tension between grief and anger.
