The ruling came with assurance that the White House could remove any “rogue, mooning journalists” if such a disruption were to happen.
WASHINGTON — A federal appeals court on Friday blocked the Trump administration from imposing a 30-day suspension on the White House press pass of a reporter for trading caustic and blustering comments with Sebastian Gorka, a right-wing commentator who worked briefly in the White House, after an event in the Rose Garden last year.
In a 19-page ruling, a three-judge panel of the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit said the suspension of the credential for Brian Karem, a reporter for Playboy Magazine, violated his constitutional rights because the White House had no written rules or advance notice about what would constitute unprofessional behavior that could temporarily cost him his press pass.
The ruling upheld an earlier injunction blocking the move that had been issued by a Federal District Court judge. The Justice Department had appealed.
“Karem’s due process claim is likely to succeed because, on this record, nothing put him on notice of ‘the magnitude of the sanction’ — a monthlong loss of his White House access, an eon in today’s news business — that the White House ‘might impose’ for his purportedly unprofessional conduct at the non-press-conference event,” Judge David S. Tatel wrote.
The ruling was unanimous. Judges Sri Srinivasan and Cornelia Pillard, both Obama appointees, joined in the opinion by Judge Tatel, a Clinton appointee.
A spokeswoman for the Justice Department declined to comment. Mr. Karem celebrated the ruling by pointing toward broader press freedom issues in an era when the president has frequently deemed journalists “the enemy of the people” and reporters have been injured while covering the nationwide demonstrations against police brutality after the killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis on May 25.
“You cannot beat us down on police lines. You can’t intimidate us by pulling our press passes. You cannot deny us due process. We were here before you. We will be here after you,” Mr. Karem wrote on Twitter, tagging the account of President Trump along with that of his own lawyer, Theodore J. Boutrous Jr., and the press freedoms group Reporters Without Borders.
The legal dispute stemmed from an altercation at the White House in July. Mr. Trump invited a number of far-right commentators for what he called a social media summit, even though it did not include major companies like Twitter and Facebook.
Three weeks later, Mr. Trump’s press secretary at the time, Stephanie Grisham, informed Mr. Karem that the White House was suspending his press credential — which lets reporters who regularly cover the White House to quickly get on the grounds of the compound — because he had caused a disruption and violated basic standards of professional behavior.
Mr. Karem sued, defending his comments as jocular and within normal parameters of a freewheeling press environment and also making several legal claims, including that he had no notice of the severity of the penalty that might be imposed for such conduct. That argument alone was sufficient for him to win, the appeals court said.
In 2018, the Trump administration had tried to revoke the press credentials of Jim Acosta, a CNN reporter who covers the White House, because he refused to relinquish a microphone during a news conference when Mr. Trump tried to move on to another reporter.
CNN sued, and a judge blocked the move because there were no rules providing notice that reporters could lose their passes for such an act. After the ruling, the White House promulgated formal standards for how journalists must comport themselves in news conferences.
But those rules did not extend to other types of events, like the summit. The White House has yet to release any standards for what would constitute sanctionable behavior outside the context of news conferences, said Jonathan Karl of ABC News, the president of the White House Correspondents’ Association.
