Wednesday: Although the parallels with the Rodney King riots are clear, a lot has changed.
On Tuesday night in Los Angeles, the sound of police helicopters once again thudded overhead and sirens screamed as the sun set. Residents who didn’t abide by a curfew were arrested.
Thousands took to the streets in outrage over police brutality captured on video. They were met by the National Guard.
As my colleague Tim Arango reported, the parallels have been easy to see between the protests that have roiled the nation’s second biggest city again this week and the riots that erupted in 1992 after four police officers were acquitted of assault in the beating of Rodney King.
Some have been driven by conscious actions by organizers who remember 1992.
This week, for instance, the most chaotic scenes in L.A. have played out in largely white, wealthy communities like Beverly Hills, as Tim wrote.
“That’s an important distinction, that these current situations are not happening in black communities,” said Patrisse Cullors, a prominent activist and co-founder of Black Lives Matter who organized a protest on Saturday in the Fairfax District.
Others reflect broader shifts.
Many of the protesters that have poured into L.A.’s streets this week have come from different backgrounds, Dr. Guerra said, which stands in significant contrast with 1992.
Dr. Guerra said that separation was certainly enforced by the police, who he said were “much more willing to be brutal” in order to contain the destruction to poorer, predominantly black neighborhoods.
But public perception has also changed.
Dr. Guerra has helped run a survey of Angelenos about race and policing since 1997, five years after the riots, and continuing every five years.
In 2017, a quarter century after the riots, the survey found that 58 percent of Angelenos believed that similar riots and disturbances were likely to occur in the next five years — a share that increased for the first time since the study’s inception.
In 2012, just 47 percent of respondents said they thought riots were likely in the next five years.
And according to a different survey by the center, trust in the police over the last several years has remained stable and relatively high in L.A.’s overall population, although that trust is, as you would expect, much lower among African-Americans and Latinos.
While Dr. Guerra said that on the surface, all those trends might seem contradictory, he doesn’t see it that way.
“It makes perfect sense,” he said.
Taken together, Dr. Guerra said what they suggest is much broader understanding of how black and brown Angelenos are too often the targets of police violence — understanding that has translated into greater accountability.
And while the response by the police today has been far from perfect, Dr. Guerra echoed the observation that, unlike in 1992, police and elected leaders have said they support protesters’ rights to speak out and have acknowledged their pain.
Amid what has felt like an endless scroll of videos showing the chaos and tension of protests over the weekend, one image in particular struck me as, well, the opposite of all that.
In a tableau that can really only be described as majestic, a black woman rides an enormous brown horse down the urban canyon that is Broadway in Oakland.
A “Black Lives Matter” sign hangs down the horse’s flank.
Unsurprisingly, I was not the only one moved by photos of the woman, Brianna Noble, 25, astride her horse, Dapper Dan.
She said that she used to be bothered by the fact that she was one of the few black women she knew to be horseback riding. Now the owner of Mulatto Meadows, a horseback riding center in Martinez, Ms. Noble hopes her visibility helps inspire other young Bay Area residents to get involved in the riding community.
