A hacking group calling itself Evil Corp., indicted in December, has shown up in corporate networks with sophisticated ransomware. American officials worry election infrastructure could be next.
While ransomware has long been a concern for American officials, after devastating attacks on the cities of Atlanta and Baltimore and towns across Texas and Florida, it has taken on new dimensions in an election year. The Department of Homeland Security has been racing to harden the voter registration systems run by cities and states, fearing that they, too, could be frozen, and voter rolls made inaccessible, in an effort to throw the Nov. 3 election into chaos.
A leaked May 1 F.B.I. warning said ransomware attacks on American corporations were threatening to take out election infrastructure. “The F.B.I. assesses that ransomware infections delivered through M.S.P.s,” the abbreviation for internet service providers, “to U.S. county and state government networks will likely threaten the availability of data on interconnected election servers, even if that is not the actors’ intention,” it said.
A cyberattack attack late last year on a Louisiana internet services company allowed hackers to target the Louisiana secretary of state and nine court clerk offices the week before an election. And in Tillamook County, Ore., in January, ransomware attackers prevented voter registration personnel from accessing voter registration data as they readied the data for the May primaries.
The indictment is one of many in the past few years against Russian groups, including intelligence agents and the Internet Research Agency, accused of interfering in the 2016 election. Those indictments were intended as a deterrent. But Moscow has protected Evil Corp.’s hackers from extradition, and they are unlikely to stand trial in the United States. In the Treasury Department sanctions announcement, the United States contended that some of the group’s leaders have done work for the F.S.B., the successor to the Soviet K.G.B.
Symantec said it had briefed federal officials on the findings, which are echoed by at least one other company monitoring corporate networks. The Department of Homeland Security’s Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency did not immediately respond to questions about whether it had seen the same activity, or planned to issue a parallel warning.
The indictment was intended to put Evil Corp. out of business. It failed. In the month after the indictment, Evil Corp.’s hackers dropped off the map, but they picked up again in May, according to security researchers at Symantec and Fox-IT, another security company that is a division of the NCC Group. 
