Until this week, Mr. Parscale, the president’s campaign manager, was one of only three people whose Facebook and Instagram pages had been used by the campaign to display ads. The others were Donald Trump and Mike Pence.
President Trump’s re-election campaign has begun spending heavily on Facebook ads that also promote the social media pages of his campaign manager, Brad Parscale, running more than $325,000 in such ads, mostly in recent weeks.
Until this week, Mr. Parscale was one of only three people whose Facebook and Instagram pages the campaign had used to display ads. The other two were Donald J. Trump and Mike Pence.
Digital strategists said it was highly unusual to use a campaign staff member’s page to run ads. But the Trump campaign said that it was testing the use of Mr. Parscale’s page to run ads from different accounts, with more to follow, including Donald Trump Jr., and that Mr. Parscale had received no financial gain.
Here is how it works: The Trump campaign buys ads and uses Mr. Parscale’s Facebook and Instagram accounts as the vehicles to display those messages to social media users scrolling through their timelines, showing Mr. Parscale’s accounts, even to those who do not follow his pages. The Parscale ads have shown campaign videos, asked supporters to take online surveys and urged people to donate before this week’s end-of-quarter deadline.
“I’m relying on grass-roots donations from hard-working Patriots, like YOU, to lead us to victory,” says one ad that has run this week using Mr. Parscale’s page. On Monday, the Trump campaign began running ads using the Facebook page of a second strategist, Katrina Pierson; those ads are so new that her page does not yet appear in Facebook’s archive of advertisers.
Mr. Parscale’s follower counts have risen as the advertisements have been running. His number of Instagram followers has risen by 10 percent in the past two weeks, to nearly 50,000; his Facebook followers now top 90,000.
Digital strategists said that one reason to use something other than a candidate’s main Facebook page to run ads is that the platform does throttle how repetitive an ad can become. Using different pages can help get around that limit. Mr. Parscale, who served as digital director on the 2016 campaign and is an outspoken personality on the 2020 race, has also become something of a celebrity in Trump political circles.
Mr. Parscale’s follower counts have risen as the advertisements have been running.
The spending represents a small fraction of the millions that Mr. Trump has been spending on Facebook, but it is still a significant sum of money in politics. The total the Trump campaign has spent on ads via Mr. Parscale’s Facebook and Instagram pages in the past month, for instance, is more than many of the Senate Republicans facing re-election fights this fall have spent on the platform in the same time period, including Senators Joni Ernst, Susan Collins, Cory Gardner, Martha McSally and more.
Facebook data does not make immediately clear what date the Trump campaign began spending to run ads via Mr. Parscale’s Facebook page, but only about $37,000 of the more than $326,000 in ads ran before May 30, records show. The ads are paid for both by the Trump re-election committee itself and a shared account with the Republican National Committee, called the Trump Make America Great Again Committee.
Mr. Parscale’s Facebook page had linked to his private consulting firm, Parscale Strategy, until recently; that link appears to have been removed after Mother Jones first pointed it out last week.
It is not uncommon for a campaign to use multiple Facebook accounts to run ads. For instance, Senator Mitch McConnell, the majority leader, spent about $61,000 on ads in recent months through an account called “Wrong Path McGrath,” attacking the Democrat who on Tuesday became his general election opponent, Amy McGrath.
In the past 30 days, the Trump campaign has run more ads using Mr. Parscale’s page than the Black Voices for Trump and Latinos for Trump pages combined.
So far, former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.’s campaign has not run any Facebook ads beyond those promoting Mr. Biden’s main page.
Mr. Parscale, who has been Mr. Trump’s campaign manager since 2018, has come under some criticism recently, particularly for hyping the president’s recent rally in Tulsa that failed to fill an arena during the coronavirus pandemic.
Mr. Trump has recently added some political reinforcements to the campaign, promoting Bill Stepien to deputy campaign manager, and making Stephanie Alexander the campaign chief of staff in March. Jason Miller, a veteran of the 2016 campaign, has returned in a senior role.
Whatever Mr. Parscale’s future, an expanded social media footprint may be beneficial.
