Business|The Video Call Is Starting. Time to Put on Your Zoom Shirt.
It’s time to log in to his first Zoom meeting of his workday, so Joe Farrell puts on a short-sleeve button-down from Brooks Brothers, in black, red and white plaid.
He has worn it for video calls on 70 consecutive days. This was not his plan. “My ego thought someone would notice,” said Mr. Farrell, the executive vice president of the comedy empire Funny or Die.
No one did. Not one of the half-dozen co-workers he sees every day via screen said anything. Neither did the 50-odd entertainment industry executives he Zooms with week after week. This is a man who once owned 210 shirts because, as the host of a design show on TLC, he couldn’t have viewers see him repeat.
Finally, the terrible secret of this single garment became too much for Mr. Farrell to bear. He began confiding in colleagues about his Zoom Shirt.
“Every time I’ve outed myself, they say, ‘Oh, yeah,’ and they pull up two shirts hanging on the back of their chair,” he said.
Maria Rugolo, an apparel industry analyst for the NPD Group, said her company had run a poll showing that only 10 percent of people get dressed for working at home at the start of the day and change into “comfortable clothes” later. Some vast portion of the rest of us, I have come to understand, just slip into and then out of our Zoom Shirts.
There are several ways to Zoom Shirt. Some people, like Mr. Farrell, go to a one-garment extreme. Others rotate at least a couple shirts, or stratify them by degree of formality, depending on the Zoom situation. Some take their Zoom Shirt on and off for every meeting, while others wear theirs all day.
Choosing a Zoom Shirt isn’t simple. Ironically, a garment that rarely leaves a single room needs the same qualities as a travel shirt: durable, easy to store, able to front in a variety of social settings. It also must come on and off in a flash. The Platonic ideal of the Zoom Shirt stays mostly buttoned all the time, with just enough of them undone to get the thing over your head.
When my J. Crew button-downs started to look wrinkled after a few uses, I settled on a cheap, casual, basic H&M number that was made to maintain its cheap, casual, basic look. But I’m considering upgrading to one recommended by Daniel Zisman, the public relations manager at the men’s wear start-up Proper Cloth. It’s a $175 merino wool dress shirt that he promised would “hold its shape” even after being thrown on the sofa near my laptop.
“You can wash it maybe every week or two, honestly,” he said.
“When people overly dress up, I find it a little pretentious,” said Kevin Murray, a member of the Federal Home Loan Bank of San Francisco’s board and chief executive of the Weingart Center Association, which serves the homeless. Mr. Murray has been dressing less formally for Zoom calls, partly because they’re Zoom calls and partly because he has bigger things to worry about right now.
But while it can’t be too formal, a Zoom Shirt can be accessorized. “Wear statement earrings,” suggested Sarah LaFleur, the chief executive and founder of MM.LaFleur, a maker of stylish office wear for women. As for the shirt itself, she advises pastels to brighten your face.
Walmart sold more tops than bottoms in the first quarter of the year. Google Trends shows that “shirts” is at a 12-month high as a search term. While Google Trends records erratic data for the term “Zoom Shirts,” that’s most likely because I only just made it up for this article.
Sterling McDavid, a former Goldman Sachs analyst who co-founded the fashion line Burnett New York, suggests for a Zoom Shirt a flowy top with a pattern that shows some movement. Her $1,500 floral ruffle blouse is her biggest seller. In fact, it’s basically her only seller, besides masks.
Based in Amsterdam, where a lockdown is over, Mr. de Jong is done with Zoom calls. Despite all the predictions, he said, little has changed in post-Covid Europe.
While Zoom dressing might be an acceleration of our performative internet culture, what is fashion if not performance? Iris Apfel, the 98-year-old fashion icon, likes that people are dressing up for Zoom calls — though she didn’t care for the only one she has ever done.
This is what David Foster Wallace predicted we’d come to. In the 1996 novel “Infinite Jest,” he spends seven pages imagining a Zoom-like future in which the invention of videophones brings enthusiasm, then vanity, then fatigue. People keep a resin mask of their own face, slightly improved, on a hook near their devices, so that they can look good during calls. Within five sales quarters, the fad collapses and everyone goes back to aural-only communication.
That’s what I want, too. And I hope it happens before I buy that $175 Zoom Shirt.