After World War II, I spent three years in a displaced persons camp, trading everything I could until I saved enough money to start over in the United States.
This account is from “Beyond the World War II We Know,” a series from The Times that documents lesser-known stories from the war. Beginning in 1945, the Allied forces established displaced persons camps across Europe, where hundreds of thousands of concentration camp survivors and Jewish refugees reacclimated to life after the Holocaust. Some were former concentration camps with poor conditions, while others were requisitioned European villages, like Lampertheim, Germany, where Yankel Oltuski, who is now 102 and goes by Jack, lived between 1946 and 1949.
After the war, in the Jewish displaced persons camp in Lampertheim, I became known as an entrepreneur.
A fellow displaced person (known as D.P.s) sold me a five-carat diamond, which I traded to an American officer for maybe 100 packs of cigarettes, a rarity. A German doctor passing through sold me an American thousand-dollar bill. A local Greek man brought me a rough diamond. I’d never seen that, but I had it cut and sold it.
Everything I earned, I saved. After losing my home and being on the run, I knew that was the way to survive. A few months after arriving in Lampertheim, I married my late wife, Dora. I began courting her before the war and, having heard she was alive and in Germany, tracked her down in the camps. We were assigned to live in a requisitioned three-bedroom apartment with my father and two other young men. I hid the money in our oven because the boys never went into the kitchen — they ate in the camp cafeteria. Seldom did I spend, and there wasn’t a lot to spend on. For our wedding, I had a cobbler make a pair of shoes for Dora. This was something special.
When I fled home in 1941, I went east, not knowing where I would end up, and in Kyiv I was conscripted to the Soviet Army. In the army, resourcefulness was survival. As one of the only Jews in my unit, I had to be careful. Anti-Semitic officers would select me for the most dangerous missions. Knowing how to negotiate, how to talk to people, who to trust, when to follow and break rules saved me.
By the end of the war, I knew it was probable that my family and Dora had been killed. I’d watch other soldiers open letters from home but never received any myself. One officer, taking pity, ordered me to send 10 letters to my hometown. To my disbelief I received a response. My father had fought with the partisan resistance and, just months after the war’s end, opened a grocery store in the Polish city of Szczecin. When I found out he was alive, one kind officer gave me leave to visit. I never went back to the army; most of the time, it was a dangerous place to be Jewish.
This account has been edited and condensed for length and clarity. Jack Oltuski told his story to Romy Oltuski, his granddaughter and a New York-based writer and editor.
Sign up for the weekly At War newsletter to follow The Times’s “Beyond the World War II We Know” series.