Police violence and President Trump’s threats to use the military against protesters have undercut American criticism of autocrats and called into question the country’s moral authority.
Diplomats say that the violence has undercut their criticisms of foreign autocrats and called into question the moral authority the United States tries to project as it promotes democracy and demands civil liberties and freedoms across the world. It has also handed adversarial governments — including those of China, Russia, Iran and North Korea — a powerful propaganda tool to paint a dark portrait of the United States.
Hundreds of people have protested at the U.S. Embassy in London and the office of the British prime minister, Boris Johnson, to demand racial equality in the United States. Similar demonstrations unfolded outside the American embassies in Paris, Berlin and Copenhagen. More than 160 British lawmakers have called for ending exports of riot gear, tear gas and rubber bullets to the United States — similar to a ban that Mr. Trump and Congress placed last year on products to Hong Kong.
In this moment, top State Department officials and sitting ambassadors have yet to publicly address institutional discrimination in their corps, as some military commanders have done this week. After this article was posted online Saturday, the department’s South and Central Asia bureau announced on Twitter that it was committed to “promoting inclusivity” — but no official’s name was attached to the statement.
Chinese officials are using the crises in the United States as ammunition in their rhetorical battles against American diplomats, which Mr. Pompeo denounced as “laughable propaganda” on Saturday.
“If Abu Ghraib and Guantánamo were deeply damaging, this situation is downright devastating for American diplomacy,” said Brett Bruen, a former career diplomat and director of global engagement on President Barack Obama’s National Security Council.
Alex L. Wang, a law professor at the University of California at Los Angeles who advocates rule of law in China, said the crises in the United States meant American officials had less credibility to single out abusive behavior elsewhere. “It looks hypocritical when they criticize acts of violence against Hong Kong protesters, even as they call for violence against peaceful protesters at home,” he said.
