Analysts have used other evidence to conclude that the transfers were most likely part of an effort to offer payments to Taliban-linked militants to kill American and coalition troops in Afghanistan.
American officials intercepted electronic data showing large financial transfers from a bank account controlled by Russia’s military intelligence agency to a Taliban-linked account, evidence that supported their conclusion that Russia covertly offered bounties for killing U.S. and coalition troops in Afghanistan, according to three officials familiar with the intelligence.
Though the United States has accused Russia of providing general support to the Taliban before, analysts concluded from other intelligence that the transfers were most likely part of a bounty program that detainees described during interrogations.
Investigators also identified by name numerous Afghans in a network linked to the suspected Russian operation, the officials said — including, two of them added, a man believed to have served as an intermediary for distributing some of the funds and who is now thought to be in Russia.
Why intelligence officials suspect Russia of paying militants to kill American troops in Afghanistan.
Today: A Times investigation has revealed evidence of a secret Russian operation to kill American soldiers in Afghanistan — and the failure of the Trump administration to act on that evidence. I spoke with my colleague Eric Schmitt, one of the reporters who broke the original story, about what we know now.
It’s Wednesday, July 1.
Eric, how is it that the U.S. first learned that Russia was up to something in Afghanistan?
So, Michael, about six months ago or so, U.S. commandos, working with Afghan allies, carry out a raid on a Taliban safehouse. And they made a remarkable discovery. They found some $500,000 in American money inside this safehouse. Now, to be sure, from time to time when they do these kind of raids, you find weapons and you find other kinds of things. Even some money. But the military sources that we’ve talked to said they’d never seen such a large haul. I mean, what would these guys be doing with $500,000? How did they get it, and what was it going to be used for? So this set off a lot of questions.
And as they conduct other raids, the commandos, C.I.A., other authorities in Afghanistan, they seize the cell phones of different fighters — Taliban fighters — and they start exploiting that to see if there’s any clues in the cell phones that might lead them back to the source of this money. But perhaps one of most important things that happens is when they seize a couple of very important senior Taliban and Taliban-related figures. And of course, that’s one of the first things they want to ask these operatives is do you know anything about this money?
And what do the militants say?
They had a remarkable story to tell. That this was money that they had been paid. That they’d been paid by a secretive Russian military intelligence unit for the express purpose of killing American, British and other coalition forces in Afghanistan.
But these investigators, they were searching around for other proof — how to link all this together because, of course, how do you assess that these Taliban guys weren’t telling lies or some kind of disinformation?
And then investigators learned of something else that sealed the deal, that seemed to kind of be the glue that pieced all these disparate parts together. And that was intercepts. Basically electronic intercepts of the financial transactions themselves from this Russian military intelligence unit, down to the Afghans on the ground who are the intermediaries, who are basically managing this program for them there. And then onto the killers themselves before they were dispatched to target the American forces there.
Essentially, it was an electronic paper trail, receipts if you will, for services asked and services rendered. This became a very compelling argument that the military C.I.A. and other authorities in Afghanistan started putting together.
And a very serious conclusion, because from what you’re describing, U.S. intelligence officials are not just putting together a theory that this money was offered to Taliban fighters to go after Americans — to basically kill them for hire — but that money had actually been paid out to them, suggesting that such killings had occurred.
That’s right. This wasn’t just in theory, but there was the idea that they’d actually recovered some of the proceeds that the Russians had paid the Afghans to carry out this mission. So obviously the next task was to figure out what deaths may have been actually the result of this campaign.
And do we have an answer?
So the military and the intelligence officers working with Afghan officials started looking back over different attacks to see which looked suspicious. And their attentions focused on one in particular: three Marines who were killed on a patrol just outside of Bagram Air Base.  And this is something that the military is still determining, just what the links were, if any, to this program, this attack. But it was suspicious, and it may have had the hallmarks of this program and some of the receipts tying back to it.
And, Eric, in the minds of these intelligence officials who are starting to piece this Russian bounty system together, why would Russia do this? I mean, why would they pay the Taliban to kill U.S. soldiers?
Well, Michael, I think you have to go back in the history of the U.S. and Russia and Afghanistan, essentially to the very end of the Cold War, where in the late 1980s, the C.I.A. secretly armed the Mujahideen resistance against the Soviet Union, which had invaded and occupied Afghanistan for nearly a decade. And the United States helped accelerate the departure of Soviet soldiers from Afghanistan.
Fast forward to after 9/11 when it’s the U.S. that invades Afghanistan. Russians want a stable government there. They don’t like Al Qaeda any more than the United States does. And so for some years, there’s actually some cooperation between Moscow and Washington.
Until a few years ago, when President Putin of Russia starts to become disillusioned with the U.S. plan in Afghanistan, doesn’t believe it’s going to work, and begins — behind the backs of the U.S. — to support the Taliban. To provide weapons, arms the Taliban, who are still fighting the United States. And so we start to see this break where Russia is basically looking for ways to inflict pain on the United States, and maybe even accelerate the U.S. departure from Afghanistan, just as decades before the U.S. had done to the Soviet Union.
So if you put that framework, where Russia is now looking for a way to replace the United States as the power inside of Afghanistan, and humiliate the United States at the same time, this bounty program starts to make a little bit of sense. If this secretive military intelligence unit can put bounties on the heads of American soldiers, increase the number of casualties, presumably that would also stir unrest back in the United States — already war weary after two decades of conflict in Afghanistan. So the Russian theory is, why not just speed that departure along? We take the U.S.‘s place and we humiliate Washington and President Trump in the process.
And I guess the reason why Russia would turn to a middleman, the Taliban, on this is because it would never want to attack U.S. soldiers on its own in Afghanistan, just the way the U.S. didn’t want to ever attack Russian soldiers directly in the 1980s.
That’s right. You hire basically cutouts to do your dirty work, and it’s very hard for the other side to prove that you’re responsible. When it’s murky like this and you have Afghan intermediaries, criminals on the ground, and money’s passing back and forth, Russians would have plausible deniability to say, oh, perhaps we were just supporting them for other aims. There’s no evidence that we were behind this.
But Eric, even so, even with a middleman cutout, as you just called it, I have to imagine that this kind of an operation by Russia is very risky and represents a pretty significant escalation by Russia.
Absolutely, Michael. Any time you have a foreign power, much less one like Russia, targeting American service members — American troops on the ground — that is a very serious thing.
Right because this is, in its own way, almost a kind of act of war.
Absolutely. That’s the way many people would see it. Just because Russia might be using intermediaries or henchmen to do this, they’re the ones responsible. They’re the ones setting these killings in motion if they’ve happened. They’re the ones that are essentially bribing the killers to carry out the attacks, and that’s something that’s very, very serious. And the Pentagon and the White House would have to address it.
So Eric, in your reporting on this Russian bounty operation, what do you learn about how the White House, how the Pentagon decides to respond to the conclusion of the intelligence agencies that this operation exists?
So this assessment that’s been put together by the C.I.A. and the military special-operations forces in Afghanistan starts to make its way up the chain of command into Washington, sometime in late January, early February perhaps. And it’s very closely held. This is some of the most sensitive intelligence in the American government, both because of the ramifications if it’s true that Russia has put a bounty on American soldiers heads, and the political sensitivity that anything to do with Russia has with this administration and specifically this White House. And that assessment is serious enough that it makes its way into what’s called the presidential daily briefing. This is the compendium of top intelligence and news items. It’s put together every day for the president to read. President Trump is not known to read it very often, very much. He relies more on verbal briefings, oral briefings.
But by February 27, our sources tell us, it was in that document. About a month later, at the end of March, the National Security Council, the national security arm of the White House, holds its first meeting to discuss the intelligence assessment. It’s representatives from the State Department, from the Pentagon, from the C.I.A., from around the government who can weigh in about the impact this might have, and most important, the options. How should the United States government respond to this? And the options that are discussed at this meeting in late March include everything from sending Moscow a stern letter — basically cease and desist or else — all the way up to sanctions, economic sanctions on top of those already imposed on Moscow that have been proven effective in damaging their economy.
We don’t know if President Trump was briefed on any of these options. But we do know that his administration did not authorize any kind of action in response. Nothing has happened so far as a result of this assessment.
This is sort of stunning. Here’s the lead.
— when the Times published a major investigation that basically spelled out everything we’ve just been discussing.
A New York Times report alleges Russia offered bounties to the Taliban in exchange for killing U.S. forces in Afghanistan.
And what was the immediate reaction to all that information?
Well, look, I’m sick to my stomach over this.
This is as bad as it gets.
— both by Democrats and Republicans in Congress.
And yet the president will not confront the Russians on this score.
Where is President Trump? His number-one job is to protect American soldiers.
There was outrage that if indeed this bounty program had existed, what was the United States government doing about it? How were they protecting their soldiers, first of all, in Afghanistan? And what steps were being taken to punish the Russians?
He should have a plan. What are we doing? And above all, go after Putin.
The problem is many of the things that we talk about are about Putin.
Then I say have him in the room. Have him in the room.
— much to the disbelief of European allies and even some of his own Republican supporters here in the United States.
So we have a G7. He’s not there. Half of the meeting is devoted to Russia. And if he was there, it would be much easier to solve.
So as this information breaks, it breaks against a backdrop of the president continuing to enjoy, in his view, very warm relations with Vladimir Putin in Moscow.
And how does the White House explain this? I mean not only not responding to this Russian bounty program, but actually growing closer to Russia and to Vladimir Putin after our government had reached this conclusion.
— The C.I.A. director, N.S.A., National Security Adviser, and the chief of staff can all confirm that neither the president nor the vice president were briefed on the alleged Russian bounty intelligence.
— that President Trump was never briefed on this. He never had a briefing from the C.I.A. director, from his national security adviser, from his director of national intelligence, and thus how could he have made any decision on it?
There is no consensus within the intelligence community on these allegations. And, in effect, there are dissenting opinions from some in the intelligence community with regards to the veracity of what’s being reported.
The White House press secretary is saying that the reason he wasn’t briefed was because there was no consensus among the intelligence agencies on what to brief him about.
Democrats and Republicans both demand briefings from the president’s top advisers on what the intelligence report says.
And what the president knew and when he knew it.
— or his people are too scared to tell him because it contradicts this narrative of Vladimir Putin being his buddy?
What his aides knew and when they knew it. And if the president really wasn’t briefed, why wasn’t he briefed?
Right, because the thinking is that the president knowing and not acting is extremely problematic. But the president not knowing is problematic as well, because what would it say about an administration if the president was somehow not told this information or did not digest it?
That’s right. There’s no good answer for the White House in this. Either the president was told and he doesn’t remember, he wasn’t told because his aides feared what his reaction might be, or he was told and just dismissed it, because he didn’t believe the intelligence because it involved negative reporting on Russia. You have to remember this has happened before. You think back to the allegations that Russia meddled in the 2016 elections.
Just now, President Putin denied having anything to do with the election interference in 2016.
Would you now, with the whole world watching, tell President Putin, would you denounce what happened in 2016, and would you warn him to never do it again?
President Trump turned to President Putin.
He said, I believe him over my intelligence agencies. This has a different feel to it though. So often we’ve seen the past about some of the president’s utterances and judgments and tweets which have kind of fallen into partisan camps, and people can say what he really meant or not. This is something different. This is about soldiers’ lives in Afghanistan. This is about somebody’s brother, somebody’s husband, somebody’s daughter who are on the front lines in Afghanistan. And Trump, as the commander in chief, doesn’t care enough to take the brief? Doesn’t care enough to read the intelligence about this? Or his aides don’t think he will? Something as sacrosanct as the American soldier in harm’s way in the battlefields of Afghanistan, the White House doesn’t have its back? The president doesn’t have their backs? That’s something very, very troubling indeed, if true.
During his latest appearance before Congress on Tuesday, Dr. Anthony Fauci warned lawmakers that the number of new infections in the U.S. could more than double if current conditions persist.
We can’t just focus on those areas that are having the surge. It puts the entire country at risk. We are now having 40-plus thousand new cases a day. I would not be surprised if we go up to 100,000 a day if this does not turn around, and so I am very concerned.
His warning comes as a surge of infections in the South and West now extend to the Midwest, where six states are recording higher infection rates. Overall, U.S. infections have increased 80 percent over the past two weeks.
And in a closely watched Senate primary in Kentucky, Amy McGrath, the moderate choice of the Democratic Party establishment, has narrowly defeated Charles Booker, a liberal challenger who harnessed growing public anger over police brutality. McGrath will now face Republican Senator Mitch McConnell in the fall. In its final weeks, the Kentucky primary had become a referendum on the future of the Democratic Party, and whether the outcry over race and policing could influence the outcome of an election. Despite losing, Booker won nearly 43 percent of the vote.
Both people said the intent of the briefing seemed to be to make the point that the intelligence on the suspected Russian bounty plot was not clear cut. For example, one of the people said, the White House also cited some interrogations by Afghan intelligence officials of other detainees, playing down their credibility by describing them as low-level.
Representative Adam Schiff, the chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, criticized the White House’s claim that President Trump was never briefed about possible Russian bounties to Taliban-linked militants to kill U.S. and coalition troops.
As we look at these allegations, number one, the president of the United States should not be inviting Russia into the G7 or G8. We should be considering what sanctions are appropriate to further deter Russia’s malign activities, not further ingratiating Russia into the community of civilized nations. And I find it inexplicable, in light of these very public allegations, that the president hasn’t come before the country and assured the American people that he will get to the bottom of whether Russians are putting a bounty on the heads of American troops, and that he will do everything in his power to make sure that we protect American troops. I do not understand for a moment why the president isn’t saying this to the American people right now, and is relying on. “I don’t know.” “I haven’t heard,” “I haven’t been briefed.” That’s just not excusable. His responsibility as commander in chief is to protect our troops, and I shared the concern at the White House today that I think many of us have, which is there may be a reluctance to brief the president on things he doesn’t want to hear, and that may be more true with respect to Putin and Putin’s Russia than with respect to any other subject matter. Many of us do not understand his affinity for that autocratic ruler who means our nation ill. And so if there is a problem with being willing to brief the president on intelligence he doesn’t want to hear, that’s a problem for our entire nation’s security.
In a raid in Kunduz City in the north about six months ago, 13 people were arrested in a joint operation by American forces and the Afghan intelligence agency, the National Directorate of Security, according to Safiullah Amiry, the deputy provincial council chief there. Two of the main targets of the raid had already fled — one to Tajikistan and one to Russia, Mr. Amiry said — but it was in the Kabul home of one of them where security forces found a half-million dollars. He said the Afghan intelligence agency had told him the raids were related to Russian money being disbursed to militants.
