Religious schools should have the same access to scholarships and funds as other private schools, the justices ruled, in a victory for conservatives.
WASHINGTON — The Supreme Court ruled on Tuesday that states must allow religious schools to participate in programs that provide scholarships to students attending private schools, a decision that opened the door to more public funding of religious education.
The court’s 5-to-4 decision, with the more conservative members in the majority, did not directly affect public schools, but their supporters said they feared it would help divert resources from public to private education. Dissenting justices said the decision damaged the separation of church and state.
The Supreme Court has long held that states may choose to provide aid to religious schools along with other private schools. The question in the case brought by three mothers with children at Stillwater Christian School, in Kalispell, Mont., was the opposite one: May states refuse to provide such aid if it is made available to other private schools?
Montana’s Constitution, like those of many other states, restricts government aid to religious groups. Those provisions, often called Blaine amendments, were initially adopted in the 19th century and often had the goal of restricting funding for Catholic schools.
The three mothers in Kalispell wanted to participate in a state program enacted in 2015 “to provide parental and student choice in education.” It was financed by private contributions eligible for tax credits, and it provided scholarships to students in private schools. In 2018, 94 percent of the scholarships went to students attending religious schools.
Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr., writing for the majority in the case, Espinoza v. Montana Department of Revenue, No. 18-1195, said that provision of Montana’s Constitution ran afoul of the federal Constitution’s protection of the free exercise of religion by discriminating against religious people and schools.
The court’s ruling will have an immediate effect, said Tim Keller, a lawyer with the Institute for Justice, which represented parents who challenged their exclusion from the Montana program. “Policymakers nationwide now have the freedom to enact school choice programs that will empower parents to make important educational decisions for their children,” he said.
Of the 37 states with Blaine amendments, he said, 14 have strict prohibitions on the participation of religious schools in state programs.
Mr. Keller said that as a result of the court’s decision, he expected prompt action from officials in Missouri, Idaho, South Dakota and Texas. His group is also working on legal challenges to what he said were discriminatory policies in Maine and Vermont.
In his majority opinion, Chief Justice Roberts said the no-aid provision in Montana’s Constitution imposed a heavy burden on people of faith and their ability to educate their children in that faith.
“The prohibition before us today burdens not only religious schools but also the families whose children attend or hope to attend them,” he wrote, adding that the court had long protected parents’ ability to direct their children’s religious upbringing.
Justices Clarence Thomas, Samuel A. Alito Jr., Neil M. Gorsuch and Brett M. Kavanaugh joined Chief Justice Roberts’s majority opinion.
In his majority opinion, Chief Justice Roberts briefly discussed the dark history of the amendments but said the roots of Montana’s current amendment, which was readopted in 1972, were complex.
In a dissent, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, joined by Justice Elena Kagan, focused on one aspect of the Montana Supreme Court’s decision, which shut down the scholarship program for all schools and not just religious ones. Because no one was eligible for scholarships under the state court’s ruling, Justice Ginsburg wrote, there had been no discrimination.
In Espinoza v. Montana Department of Revenue, the court ruled, 5 to 4, that states may not exclude religious schools from programs that provide scholarships to students attending private schools.
Question wording: The state of Montana has banned students from using taxpayer-subsidized scholarships to attend religious schools. Some people think this rule is an acceptable restriction. Other people think this rule violates people’s constitutional rights. What do you think? | Source: SCOTUSPoll, based on an online YouGov survey of 2,000 U.S. adults conducted April 29 to May 12.
Chief Justice Roberts’s opinion built on earlier rulings on the First Amendment’s protection of the free exercise of religion. In 2017, for instance, in Trinity Lutheran Church v. Comer, the Supreme Court ruled that Missouri had violated the First Amendment by barring religious institutions from a state program to make playgrounds safer, even though Missouri’s Constitution called for strict separation of church and state.
On the other hand, a 2004 Supreme Court decision, Locke v. Davey, allowed Washington State to offer college scholarships to all students except those pursuing degrees in devotional theology. That case involved direct support for religion, Chief Justice Roberts wrote in the Montana ruling, while the new case did not.
In another dissent, Justice Stephen G. Breyer expressed concern about the implications of the majority opinion for public and charter schools.
Erica Green contributed reporting.