New York|Inside Barr’s Effort to Undermine Prosecutors in N.Y.
The prosecutors in New York resisted the effort, the people said, and a Justice Department official said Mr. Barr did not instruct them to withdraw the case. The department official, who was not authorized to speak publicly about the matter, noted that Mr. Cohen was convicted and sentenced in December 2018, before Mr. Barr was sworn in, so there was little he could do to change the outcome of the case.
Still, Mr. Barr’s unexpected involvement in such a politically sensitive case suggested that he planned to exert influence over prosecutors in the United States attorney’s office for the Southern District of New York, long known for operating independently of Washington. Mr. Barr and other officials have told aides and other United States attorneys that the Southern District needs to be reined in.
In an interview with NPR on Thursday, Mr. Barr said Mr. Berman was “living on borrowed time from the beginning” because the president had not appointed him.
“I certainly was aware that given the current environment, anytime you make a personnel move, conspiracy theorists will suggest that there’s some ulterior motive involved,” Mr. Barr said.
More than any other federal prosecutor’s office, the Manhattan office had pursued investigations that angered Mr. Trump. During the case against Mr. Cohen, for instance, prosecutors had indicated that Mr. Trump directed the hush money payments, although the office was not seeking charges against the president.
In addition to prosecuting Mr. Cohen, the president’s former personal lawyer, the office has also been investigating his current one, Rudolph W. Giuliani, over his actions in Ukraine.
Other points of contention included how to proceed against a state-owned Turkish bank that was eventually indicted in an alleged scheme to avoid U.S. sanctions on Iran, and the Justice Department’s decision to assign the United States attorney in Brooklyn to oversee all investigations into matters related to Ukraine. Mr. Berman’s office successfully fended off that oversight.
The conflict erupted publicly last Friday, when Mr. Barr announced that Mr. Berman was stepping down and would be replaced temporarily by an ally of the administration. Mr. Berman then issued his own statement saying he had no intention of resigning. By Saturday afternoon, amid the unusual standoff, Mr. Barr informed Mr. Berman that Mr. Trump had fired him and that he would be replaced temporarily with Mr. Berman’s own deputy.
Mr. Berman had been recused from the case against Mr. Cohen for undisclosed reasons, leaving it in the hands of other senior prosecutors in his office. In August 2018, facing the threat of an indictment, Mr. Cohen pleaded guilty to personal financial crimes and campaign finance violations, one of which stemmed from a $130,000 payment to the adult film star, Stormy Daniels.
In pleading guilty, Mr. Cohen pointed the finger at the president, saying he had acted at Mr. Trump’s direction.
Although the Southern District referred to the president as “Individual-1” in court papers and said he directed Mr. Cohen to pay the hush money, longstanding Justice Department policy prevents federal prosecutors from pursuing criminal charges against a sitting president.
In July 2019, the Southern District disclosed in court papers that it had “effectively concluded” the hush money inquiry and had ended an investigation into whether “certain individuals” lied to investigators or tried to obstruct the inquiry. At least one of those individuals included a senior executive at Mr. Trump’s company, according to people with knowledge of that investigation.
A spokesman for the Southern District declined to comment on Mr. Barr’s involvement in the case involving Mr. Cohen, as did a spokeswoman for the Justice Department.
Mr. Barr’s maneuvering in the Cohen case was not his only attempt to insert himself in Southern District cases. After Mr. Barr was sworn in, one of his first actions was to seek briefings on politically sensitive investigations in the office and elsewhere, people briefed on the discussions said.
The arrival of the coronavirus in New York forced Southern District prosecutors to cancel interviews with witnesses in the investigation into Mr. Giuliani and his former associates, people briefed on the matter said.
The pandemic also forced a delay in the trial of Mr. Parnas and Mr. Fruman from this October until next February, putting off what could have been an embarrassing spectacle for the president until after the election.
