“If it does come out as true, obviously the heartache would be terrible,” said Erik Hendriks, whose son was killed while on patrol in Afghanistan.
But the news that several American officials believe that a Russian military intelligence unit paid bounties to Taliban-linked militants to kill American and coalition troops in Afghanistan has been impossible to ignore, especially as he has learned that the attack in which his son and two other Marines died may have been related to that effort.
“If it does come out as true, obviously the heartache would be terrible,” Mr. Hendriks said.
He is not a political person, Mr. Hendriks insists. While he does not usually vote, he described himself as a supporter of President Trump.
Despite the heartbreak of losing a son in combat, Mr. Hendriks said he never had doubts about the mission in Afghanistan.
“I agreed with Mattis on this,” he said, referring to Jim Mattis, the retired Marine general who served as Mr. Trump’s first defense secretary and repeatedly defended the United States’ role in Afghanistan.
“If I find out this information was given to this administration or a previous administration, because let’s face it, who knows how long this could have gone on, the little faith I have in government would go down the drain,” he said.
But, he said, he believed liberal groups were needlessly leveraging tragedy for political reasons.
Lawmakers from both parties in the House and Senate have called for Congress to be briefed on the matter. On Monday, the White House brought in eight House Republicans to be briefed, while some high-ranking Democrats went separately to the White House on Tuesday morning.
Corporal Hendriks, 25, and two other Marines — Staff Sgt. Christopher K.A. Slutman, 43, a New York City firefighter, and Sgt. Benjamin S. Hines, 31, of York, Pa. — were killed when their armored vehicle was hit by a vehicle laden with explosives near Bagram Air Base, about 20 miles north of Kabul.
Corporal Hendriks had signed with the Second Battalion, 25th Marines, a reserve infantry battalion based in Garden City, N.Y., right after high school.
It was his first deployment to Afghanistan, where he was serving with his brother, Joseph Hendriks, who escorted his body back to the United States.
During his 2016 campaign, Mr. Trump repeatedly promised to end the foreign entanglements that had engulfed previous administrations over nearly two decades.
Indeed, his criticism of the war in Iraq during the campaign and his desire to greatly reduce the United States’ role abroad attracted many veterans. Mr. Trump has moved to reduce the number of troops in Afghanistan. While still popular with veterans and members of the military, he has lost some support in recent months over his threat to use active-duty troops against largely peaceful protesters around the nation.
“Regardless of whether or not these reports are corroborated, the loss of any American service member is tragic,” said Nate Anderson, the executive director of Concerned Veterans for America, who deployed twice to Afghanistan as an Army Green Beret.
“The larger issue here is keeping our troops deployed in places like Iraq and Afghanistan to fight wars that no longer serve our national interest,” he added.
The accusations against Russia and questions around what the president knew about them drew immediate fury from some groups that represent military families.
This week, VoteVets created a video for social media targeting Mr. Trump on the Russia issue, which was watched over three million times on Twitter.
Mr. Bibby said that during his time in Afghanistan, Marines were often told that other countries — notably Iran — were backing activities by insurgents.
But for Mr. Hendriks, a retired New York City police detective, the issue is not a political debate but a deep emotional scar, something he said only others who had lost a family member to war could comprehend.
“I can talk to 1,000 people a day and they have no idea what it is like to lay down at night and to lose a son like they do,” he said.
Mr. Hendriks notes that he had no proof of what Mr. Trump knew. “Because who knows the truth anymore?” he said.
Helene Cooper contributed reporting. Kitty Bennett contributed research.