The order to inform Texans that “all slaves are free” was found in a Union Army records book in the National Archives in Washington on Thursday.
Archivists in Washington, D.C., made a timely discovery this week: the original handwritten Union Army record of an order that brought emancipation to enslaved people in Texas at the end of the Civil War.
General Order No. 3 was read aloud by a Union officer, Maj. Gen. Gordon Granger, in Galveston on June 19, 1865, to inform Texans that all enslaved people in the state were free. That date, which became known as Juneteenth, has been celebrated ever since.
But the handwritten record had been buried in a leather-bound book at the National Archives in Washington, with its location largely unknown — even though, for decades, the book has been available to researchers to leaf through upon request.
The discovery was spurred by Michael Davis, a public affairs specialist for the National Archives who was writing a piece about the history of the holiday.
Trevor K. Plante, the director of archival operations at the National Archives building in Washington, zeroed in on the Union Army records from Texas. And on Thursday, in the stacks on the 10th tier of the building’s west side, he found a leather-bound book with a June 19 entry in neat cursive.
General Granger marched into Texas with about 2,000 troops in June 1865, two months after Gen. Robert E. Lee of the Confederacy surrendered to Union forces at Appomattox, Va., marking what some historians have called the beginning of the end of the deadliest war in American history.
The announcement would not have been a total surprise. People in Texas knew that the Emancipation Proclamation had been signed two years earlier — in fact, some slave owners had moved to Texas, the westernmost Confederate state, to escape the reach of Union enforcers.
Some plantation owners in Texas resisted or delayed emancipation despite the order, and the 13th Amendment, which abolished slavery across the United States, was not ratified until December 1865. After that, black people still faced lynchings, discriminatory laws and voter suppression, as well as white supremacist violence that continues to this day.
Still, Juneteenth became a day of celebration for generations of African-American families across the United States who have gathered annually for parades, barbecues, music and storytelling. And this year, after weeks of nationwide protests over racism, police brutality and the deaths of George Floyd, Breonna Taylor, Ahmaud Arbery, Rayshard Brooks and many others, there is a renewed interest in the history of the holiday.
Major companies like Nike, Target and Twitter have added Juneteenth as a paid holiday. And senators including John Cornyn of Texas, Kamala Harris of California, Cory Booker of New Jersey, Tina Smith of Minnesota and Ed Markey of Massachusetts have proposed bills to make the day a federal holiday.
Mr. Davis said he was glad to see more people interested in the history and the celebration of Juneteenth. “I think it is really significant that we are able to showcase this historical document because it raises awareness about African-American history,” he said.