African-Americans and Latinos are especially vulnerable to job losses in the pandemic and at a disadvantage in getting government support.
When Illinois shut down businesses to slow the spread of the coronavirus in March and the state’s unemployment system jammed from the overload, Bridget Altenburg, chief executive of a Chicago-based nonprofit group, visited one of the organization’s work force centers. Two things stood out: the sheer number of people lined up to apply for unemployment benefits, and how few faces were white.
Black Americans have always had a more difficult time in the job market. The latest evidence arrived Friday when the government reported that 21 million Americans were unemployed in May. Though the jobless rate for whites dipped, to 12.4 percent, the rate for African-Americans inched up to 16.8 percent, meaning that nearly 1.4 million black men and nearly 1.7 million black women were part of the labor force but without work. The Hispanic jobless rate improved from April but was 17.6 percent.
White men were among the groups with lower unemployment than the national rate, while Hispanic women and others had notably higher unemployment.
Hiring prospects for African-American and Latino workers have long been hobbled by factors that stretch from poorer educational options and lopsided incarceration rates to outright discrimination by employers.
Even last year, as the national jobless rate fell below 4 percent to its lowest level in half a century, the rate for black men in Illinois was nearly 10 percent. African-Americans also earn less, are quicker to be laid off, are slower to be rehired and are less likely to be promoted. Historically, the black unemployment rate is twice that of whites.
As Jerome H. Powell, chair of the Federal Reserve, explained at a news conference in April, “Unemployment has tended to go up much faster for minorities, and for others who tend to be at the low end of the income spectrum.” The coronavirus pandemic has only amplified the problem.
The current economic crisis has struck black and Latino families particularly hard in several ways. They are more likely to work in the service industries that were the first to be hit by layoffs, and less likely to work in white-collar jobs that can be done safely from home. They have, on average, significantly less in savings to help them weather a period of unemployment, and are less likely to have families with the resources to help out.
House Democrats seek better rates on loans to cities and states.
Since the pandemic, fewer than half the blacks who are 16 and older have a job. Latino unemployment rates are higher than any other racial or ethnic group.
Minorities also had a harder time taking advantage of government support efforts — less likely to have computers to file for unemployment benefits and less likely to have bank accounts, slowing the time it took to receive government stimulus checks or making it harder for small-business owners to apply for emergency loans.
Different challenges face those who have hung on to their jobs as part of the nation’s essential work force or in frontline occupations in health care and social services, at grocery and drugstores, in public transit and trucking, and in warehouses and cleaning services.
Minority women are more likely than any other group to be part of the large underpaid work force that has been deemed necessary to keep the country cared for and fed.
Still, the lives of these workers are insufficiently valued and appreciated, said Rhonda Vonshay Sharpe, an economist and the president of the Women’s Institute for Science, Equity and Race in Mechanicsville, Va. “It’s not the workers who are essential — it’s the jobs that are essential,” she said, pointing to the long delays in getting proper protective equipment and taking other lifesaving measures.
That partly explains why black Americans have suffered a disproportionate share of coronavirus deaths.
Ms. James, who lives in a suburb of Washington, is now out of a job. So are two of her three siblings and many of her neighbors. She has underlying health issues, and nearly all of the available jobs seem too risky.
Ms. James knows that a spate of joblessness, especially during an economic downturn, can have a lifelong impact. She spent 13 years working for a government contractor, rising up the ranks, before losing her job in 2010. Ms. James was unemployed for six months before she took a job at a grocery store to get by. She eventually got back into her field, but has not found the kind of steady work she enjoyed before the last recession.
The pattern is familiar — blacks tend to be out of a job longer than whites.
Owning a business or being self-employed has not insulated African-Americans from the pandemic’s economic fallout, because they are often concentrated in personal service activities, running barbershops and beauty shops that have had to close so as not to become sources of infection.
The next wave of the crisis could hit one of the underpinnings of the black middle class: state and local government jobs. Even as other sectors recorded some gains last month, an additional 571,000 state and local government employees, many of them teachers, lost their jobs.
In April, there were nearly a million job losses, and economists say many more are expected as the collapse in tax revenue ripples through statehouses and city halls.
African-Americans — particularly women — are disproportionately employed in those positions, said Christian E. Weller, an economist at the University of Massachusetts, Boston, who wrote a report on the systemic obstacles facing black job seekers for the Center for American Progress.
The loss of a job is particularly devastating for black and Hispanic workers because a paycheck is often the sole lifeline. Even those with a comfortable income may have little to fall back on. For every $1 of wealth that a white household has, a black one has 10 cents.
At this point, most employers and employees are assuming that jobs will return. But there are signs that many layoffs will be permanent.
Freddy Wiggins was laid off from his job as a customer service representative at Neiman Marcus in Washington during the first week in April. “The assumption was that once this is over, we’ll go back to business as usual,” he said, adding that he was paid his final weeks of salary and any owed vacation time and sick leave.
