On a private call with governors, the vice president played down new outbreaks, stressing that some states were seeing what he called “intermittent” spikes. Experts have warned it’s not that simple.
WASHINGTON — Vice President Mike Pence encouraged governors on Monday to adopt the administration’s explanation that a rise in testing was a reason behind new coronavirus outbreaks, even though testing data has shown that such a claim is misleading.
It was a misleading message publicly emphasized by President Trump at a meeting earlier in the day.
In fact, seven-day averages in several states with coronavirus outbreaks have increased since May 31, and in at least 14 states, positive cases have outstripped the average number of tests that have been administered, according to an analysis of data collected by The New York Times. Data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention show that coronavirus hospitalizations have decreased nationally, though positive cases have increased and the number of deaths attributed to the disease caused by the coronavirus, Covid-19, could increase as more data becomes available.
As the head of the administration’s virus task force, Mr. Pence has frequently used his public appearances to play down the seriousness of the pandemic, even though several members of his staff have tested positive. Last week, he was criticized for taking a picture with dozens of Trump campaign staff members who were standing close together without wearing masks.
This Saturday, Mr. Pence is scheduled to join the president at a rally in Tulsa, Okla., despite concerns that the enclosed venue could promote the virus’s spread. The Trump campaign has asked attendees to assume the risk should they contract it.
And on the private call with governors, Mr. Pence again played down the overall size of the new outbreaks, stressing that some states were seeing what he called “intermittent” spikes. Rather than pointing to community spread as a culprit, as officials in several areas — including Washington, D.C. — have, the vice president focused on specific outbreak locations, like nursing homes.
Gov. Larry Hogan of Maryland, a Republican who has publicly criticized the Trump administration’s early response to the virus, told the vice president that there was an “urgent need” to have the administration and members of Congress working together on another coronavirus relief bill.
“States are going to be faced with laying off tens of thousands of state workers,” Mr. Hogan said, adding that many governors were finalizing state budgets at the end of June. Mr. Pence said that any further legislation would most likely happen in the middle of July and that the door would be open for negotiations between the administration and Congress.
Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, has indicated that negotiations would not take place before a two-week recess scheduled for early July.
Other governors, including J.B. Pritzker of Illinois, who has been critical of the administration’s handling of the virus, did not speak on Monday’s call.
