Many details remain to be ironed out, but the plan calls for players who participate to receive 100 percent of their 2020 salaries.
W.N.B.A. players have ratified a plan between the league and the players’ union to play a 22-game season, beginning in late July, along with a full playoff schedule, all at IMG Academy in Bradenton, Fla., the league announced Monday.
Players who opt into the 2020 season — they have until June 25 to notify their teams if they will participate — will receive 100 percent of their 2020 salaries, assuming the league is able to complete both the regular season and playoffs. This was critical to getting the players to agree, according to Terri Jackson, the executive director of the Women’s National Basketball Players Association.
Many details remain to be sorted out: A start date has not been finalized, and the league has identified several other potential destinations as fallback positions if the plan to play at IMG Academy becomes untenable — either because of a change in local government policy or a spike in coronavirus infections in the area.
Jackson said that another round of approval from the players’ union would be required before the season actually begins.
Both sides also expect to address living accommodations for players with varying family situations, as well as how the league’s return would affect activism related to police brutality and systemic racism — an issue that the N.B.A. is also working to address as it moves forward to complete the 2019-20 season.
Nneka Ogwumike, the Los Angeles Sparks forward and the president of the W.N.B.P.A., said the union’s executive committee had already connected with groups that could help the players use the season as a platform for activism.
In 2016, W.N.B.A. players were among the first professional athletes to protest in solidarity with the Black Lives Matter movement, drawing fines from the league that were later rescinded. Ogwumike said that Engelbert, who was not with the W.N.B.A. at the time, had acknowledged the league had initially handled those protests poorly, helping to ease players’ current concerns on that front.
Rafael Nadal said he would not defend his U.S. Open tennis title because he preferred not to travel to New York during the coronavirus pandemic.
This season will be the W.N.B.A.’s first since the league and union signed a new collective bargaining agreement in January, which drastically increased pay for players and guaranteed individual hotel rooms, instead of shared rooms, for players on the road. Jackson said players would have the same rights at the academy in Florida, with the option of larger villas for players with families and caregivers.
The W.N.B.A.’s statement on Monday said that the league was “working with medical specialists, public health experts, and government officials” on medical protocols and protections to keep players and staff safe amid the continuing coronavirus pandemic. Because of the “fluid situation” caused by the virus, the statement said, the league was still reviewing and tweaking its plans.
Ogwumike said that as negotiations began, she was anxious about the health risks of playing a season during the pandemic, but that she had become more comfortable with the idea.
She added that she felt the level of risk of living at the academy would be comparable to what she had experienced living at home.
Engelbert offered her own personal endorsement, saying that safety concerns wouldn’t be the thing that kept her from playing, if she were able.
