Mr. Wallace and his team also revealed a new black paint scheme for his No. 43 Chevrolet, with the slogan ‘#blacklivesmatter’ over the rear wheels, that will make its debut on Wednesday.
Update: On Wednesday, NASCAR said it would ban the flag.
NASCAR began asking fans to stop bringing Confederate battle flags to races in 2015, after photos circulated online of the white man who killed nine black churchgoers in Charleston, S.C., posing with the flag.
But many in NASCAR’s predominately white Southern fan base have ignored the request and brought the flag anyway, hoisting it atop campers and R.V.s on fields around racetracks.
On Monday, following days of nationwide protests calling for an end to racism and police brutality, Darrell Wallace Jr., the first black driver in 50 years to win one of NASCAR’s top three national touring series, called on NASCAR to ban the flags outright.
On Tuesday, Mr. Wallace and his team, Richard Petty Motorsports, revealed a new black paint scheme for his No. 43 Chevrolet, with the slogan “#blacklivesmatter” over the rear wheels. On the hood, a black fist and a white fist clasp in a grip above the slogan “Compassion, Love, Understanding.” The paint scheme will make its debut on Wednesday at the NASCAR Cup Series race at the Martinsville Speedway in Virginia.
Mr. Wallace’s call for the Confederate battle flag to be banned at NASCAR events was among the latest pushes to have the flag removed from prominent display. State officials have faced growing pressure to take down Confederate statues and other monuments that many consider symbols of racism.
On Friday, the Marine Corps issued a statement that gave detailed instructions for how to remove and ban public displays of the Confederate battle flag at Marine installations.
In a more modest move, the Army has said it would consider renaming bases named for military leaders of the Confederacy.
NASCAR and the Confederate battle flag were once seen as entwined. The flag has been ubiquitous at places like Darlington Raceway in Florence, S.C., where the annual Southern 500 is held and where fans often showcased the emblem on baseball caps, coolers and T-shirts. But as NASCAR has tried to broaden its fan base and expand to other parts of the country, leaders and drivers have pushed for more diversity in the sport and tried to show solidarity with people of color.
Mr. Wallace, who competed in Sunday’s race and wore a shirt that read “I Can’t Breathe/Black Lives Matter,” praised NASCAR leaders for those actions. His comments about the flag on Monday followed a question from Mr. Lemon about what drivers and the organization should do now.
“My next step would be to get rid of all Confederate flags,” Mr. Wallace said.
He said that in the past he had not been bothered by the flag.
“I chase checkered flags,” he said. But Mr. Wallace said that he had dived into the discussion around the emblem and that he understood why many were disturbed by the Confederate battle flag.
He said he would talk to NASCAR officials and encourage them to get rid of the flags at races and other events.