Opinion|Aunt Jemima Is Gone. Can We Finally End All Racist Branding?
Aunt Jemima Is Gone. Can We Finally End All Racist Branding?
Companies and sports teams are trying to correct America’s painful history of overtly hurtful advertising. But not all.
Ms. Riley is a law professor at University of California, Los Angeles. Ms. Katyal is a law professor at University of California, Berkeley.
We now know that Ms. Blackhorse was right. In the wake of the Black Lives Matter protests sweeping the nation and the world, brands are swiftly taking account of the harmful stereotypes they once inflicted. In the last few days, Quaker Oats, the owner of the 131-year-old brand of Aunt Jemima, announced it would change the product name in an effort “to make progress toward racial equality.” The brand had long capitalized on a romantic view of antebellum American slavery, even going so far as to hire an actual former slave to impersonate the character of Aunt Jemima at the 1893 Chicago World’s Fair (marking the first time a living person was hired to impersonate a trademark).
Companies are clearly trying to correct America’s painful history of advertising, which for generations has trafficked in racial stereotypes to sell products. Momentum away from racial branding has been growing for decades. In 2005, the National Collegiate Athletic Association announced that it would prohibit its members from displaying hostile and abusive racial-ethnic-national origin mascots, nicknames or imagery at its championships, producing a wave of logo retirements at schools across the country. In 2018, Major League Baseball announced that the Cleveland Indians would finally stop using its Native American Chief Wahoo caricature on items for display on the field. (Although it continues to retain its logo for use on items for sale in its souvenir shop.) And in April, the Land O’Lakes company finally phased out the use of an illustration of a Native American woman, adorned in a feather headband, from their products.
What do these changes suggest about America, and more specifically, American marketing? To both of us, one an expert in Native American law and the other a trademark law professor, they suggest the onslaught of a dramatically shifting landscape for racialized brands in the future. Brands can no longer stand apart from social movements and activism. In order to succeed, they have to personify change — to be the change — through rebranding themselves, or risk serious criticism.
It’s no wonder, then, why Mr. Snyder and the Washington team received scathing responses to their tone-deaf participation in “Blackout Tuesday” in support of racial equality while continuing to amplify the Redskins name. Even the mayor of Washington, Muriel Bowser, has joined in a chorus of politicians, athletes and activists to demand a name change, pointing out that, among other things, it presents an obstacle to building a new stadium in the team’s home city.
We may dismiss these examples as thoughtless advertising mishaps. But, in aggregate, they are more than that. As Simon Tam pointed out three years ago, a victory is incomplete if some marginalized groups win and others lose. But perhaps Black Lives Matter can accomplish what the Tam opinion failed to do. The country and, indeed, the world is demanding a rejection of overt symbols of racism and expecting something better from our leaders, our educators and yes, even our sports teams.
There is no ambiguity here, Mr. Snyder. It is time to change the name.
Angela R. Riley is a professor of law and director of the Native Nations Law and Policy Center at UCLA. Sonia K. Katyal is a Haas distinguished chair at the University of California Berkeley School of Law and a co-director of the Berkeley Center for Law and Technology.