The announcement came two days after Darrell Wallace Jr., the first black driver in 50 years to win one of NASCAR’s top three national touring series, called on NASCAR to ban the flags outright.
NASCAR said on Wednesday that it would ban the Confederate battle flag from its events and properties, becoming the latest organization to reconsider the emblem’s place amid a national reckoning over racism and white supremacy after the death of George Floyd.
NASCAR made the announcement two days after Darrell Wallace Jr., the first black driver in 50 years to win one of its top three national touring series, called on NASCAR to ban the flags outright.
On Wednesday evening, Mr. Wallace praised the ban just before he debuted a new black paint scheme for his No. 43 Chevrolet, with the slogan “#blacklivesmatter” over the rear wheels, at the NASCAR Cup Series race at Martinsville Speedway in Virginia.
“That was a huge pivotal moment for the sport — a lot of backlash — but it creates doors that allow the community to come together as one, and that’s what the real mission is here,” he said.
The N.A.A.C.P. also welcomed NASCAR’s decision.
“In this moment it’s good to see entities like @nascar taking the necessary steps to remove symbols of hate, racism, and discrimination from their events,” the organization wrote on Twitter.
But many in NASCAR’s predominantly white Southern fan base have ignored the request and brought the flag anyway, hoisting it atop campers and R.V.s on fields around racetracks.
It was not immediately clear if NASCAR’s ban would apply to parking lots outside racetracks or to Confederate imagery on objects other than flags, such as bumper stickers and T-shirts. NASCAR said it was working with the industry to establish protocols for the ban, so it can enforce them at its tracks.
Across the country, public officials and private institutions have been rethinking symbols of the Confederacy as demonstrations against police brutality and racism have erupted in the weeks since Mr. Floyd, a black man, was killed after a white Minneapolis police officer pressed his knee onto his neck for nearly nine minutes.
Last Friday, the Marine Corps issued detailed directives about removing and banning public displays of the Confederate battle flag at its installations — an order that extended to such items as mugs, posters and bumper stickers.
Also last week, the mayor of Birmingham, Ala., ordered the removal of a Confederate statue from a public park.
On Monday, a Pentagon official said that Secretary of Defense Mark T. Esper and Secretary of the Army Ryan McCarthy were “open to a bipartisan discussion on the topic” of removing Confederate names from military bases.
