Neither man anticipated the leftward tilt of the electorate in 2020.
America has swung wildly from electing, and re-electing, its first African-American president, to installing the most belligerently white chief executive in the nation’s history.
Now, as a multiracial cohort of demonstrators has massed in more than 2000 cities and towns, as Covid-19 has shifted to red states and as the economy has continued to crater, we head toward November 2020.
Will the current crises push the nation to the left or to the right, and where will the country land on Election Day?
The protests are bringing awareness and it is possible that real change will happen. The daily microaggressions — those sting. Books that explore racism, white privilege, and anti-racism are selling at a record pace. These are all good things. Still, I am waiting for the actions. It’s good to change minds, but black people are still dying at disproportionate rates due to Covid-19, we are less likely to own homes in most places, we have accumulated less wealth, we are more likely to go to prison. Let me be clear, we need real change and real reform to try to start chipping away at these outcomes and I am less optimistic that we are really ready to make those changes.
Looking at the roughly 31 percent of voters who identify as liberal, the percentage who say they are very liberal has doubled from 5 to 10 percent from 2010 to 2018, while those who say they are somewhat liberal fell modestly and those who say they are simply liberal remained constant, according to Schaffner.
Using another measure, Schaffner calculated the shift in political thinking by combining answers to questions about health care, immigration, gay marriage, gun control, environment and government spending from 2010 to 2018. He found a strong leftward shift in public opinion on these issues after 2014, as shown in the accompanying graphic.
The L.A.P.D. was out of control and needed reform. The verdicts and rioting happened in May 1992 when the economy was weak, as we were coming out of a recession. There were two Senate seats up in CA. Democrats won both. The upshot is that the 1992 example is the closest I know of to the present situation. Rioting and anti-police sentiment seemed to give the Republicans an issue, but they could not get traction.
In 2016, the denial of white privilege was strongly associated with voting for Trump and was even a strong predictor of switching from voting for Obama in 2012 to backing Trump in 2016. The acknowledgment or denial of racism continued to be a strong predictor of vote choices in House races in 2018.
In 2016, a minority (43 percent) of white American adults “somewhat or strongly agreed that white people have advantages in the United States,” Schaffner wrote.
However, when we asked this question again on June 9, 2020, 57 percent of whites acknowledged the existence of white privilege — an increase of 14 percentage points over 2016 and even a 12 point increase over views registered in November 2019.
The increased acknowledgment of white privilege appears to have come exclusively from white Republicans and independents. The vast majority of white Democrats already acknowledged their privilege — about three-fourths of white Democrats consistently agree that whites have advantages.
From 2016 to 2019, acknowledgment of white privilege among white Republicans had hovered closely around 20 percent, with a slight downward trend. But in the June 9 survey this year, that percentage more than doubled, to 44 percent. Among white Independents, acknowledgment had been in the 33-35 percent range from 2016 to 2019, but in the most recent survey, it shot up to 55 percent.
The African-American political scientists I contacted argued that changing attitudes, especially among young white people, are likely to be lasting and to have significant consequence for both elections and policymaking.
These protests will contribute to a durable shift in how most Americans understand policing and the limits of the criminal punishment system. In addition, these protests will likely have an impact on policy as even after the demonstrations are over, activists will move inside of formal political institutions and demand and work to change policies.
Young people are also much more progressive than older generations. This shift includes all racial groups. There is even substantial movement among Republicans on some questions.
additional reasons to expect these current protests over the Floyd murder to have positive effects. There are more cameras than ever, and police brutality, whether killings or violence against protesters, is impossible to ignore. The protests have been widespread and largely peaceful.
We are seeing movement toward blacks and away from conservative constituencies. The evidence for this broad move are seen in the actions of traditionally conservative elected officials and leaders; from the kneeling of police chiefs and rank and file members of police during the protests, the embrace of this movement by the NFL commissioner Roger Goodell, to calls for widespread reform by police unions, Republican mayors, governors, and members of Congress, to an executive order signed by President Trump — we are witnessing how social movement activity and public opinion are now driving elite conservative behavior.
Over the last four years, America has experienced some of the largest liberal protests in our history — the Women’s Right Movement, March for Our Lives, and Black Lives Matter. This liberal movement has been underway for some time now.
When one adds to that a president who seemingly does anything and everything to inflame the situation, it’s hard to imagine that consequences won’t follow. With the election of Trump, Latinos and Asian-Americans have moved ever more closely to the black community in their respective preferences. College-educated whites have also become more progressive since Trump assumed the Oval Office.
Measuring trends on three different dimensions —— economic, racial and cultural issues — Stanley Feldman, a political scientist at Stony Brook University, and three Australian colleagues, tracked responses to 40 questions in American National Election Study surveys from 1972 to 2016 covering 34,345 respondents.
In an email, Feldman pointed to some of the key findings in an unpublished working paper, “Sorting Apart: Partisan Polarization in the American Electorate, 1972-2016,” especially on racial attitudes.
It’s not the case that conservative racial issue preferences are concentrated among low-income whites. High-income Republicans are more conservative on racial issues than low-income Republicans.
among Democratic identifiers from 1972 to 2012, but virtually all of this is a function of the growing size of minorities among Democratic partisans. There is no real change in racial issue preferences among white Democratic identifiers up to 2012.
it could be a swift reaction to Trump’s rhetoric in the 2016 campaign. It’s also very possible that this was in response to the first wave of Black Lives Matter protests — Ferguson, Eric Garner, etc. It would take much more fine-grained data to sort this out.
The swing among white Democrats toward increased racial liberalism will have significant political consequences, Andrew Engelhardt, a postdoctoral research associate in political science at Brown, wrote in an email.
this increased homogeneity makes Democrats less susceptible to wedge issues. The number of them who are cross-pressured by, say, holding more conservative social issue views when deciding whether to support a more liberal candidate, is decreasing. There’s less reason for people to decide to not turn out or to vote for the other party.
All whites were 12 points more supportive of increasing the number of police than blacks, 58 to 46. But this difference paled in comparison to the 35-point difference between those over 65 of all races and those under 30, 73-38. And even those numbers in fact understate the difference between the role of age and the role of race in shaping attitudes toward spending on police.
Conditional on age group and the same set of background characteristics, African-American respondents were only 5.7 percent less likely than white respondents to report supporting additional policing, Hispanic respondents were 3.3 percent more likely than whites to report supporting additional policing, and Asian respondents were 2.1 percent more likely than whites to report supporting additional policing.
Goldstein found that the sharp differences between the attitudes of the young and old toward police spending is specific to this generation, and not just an artifact of all people becoming more conservative as they age.
Having been born from 1946 to 1958 is associated with an 8.2 percent increased likelihood of believing there is too little spending on halting the rising crime rate, having been born from 1958 to 1970 is associated with a 9.8 percent increased likelihood of believing there is too little spending on halting the rising crime rate, and having been born from 1970 to 1982 is associated with an 7.9 percent increased likelihood of believing there is too little spending on halting the rising crime rate.
Older Americans lived through and remember the most recent crime wave in the U.S., from the 1960s through the early 1990s, while younger Americans were born either at the tail end of the crime wave or once the crime drop had already begun. The F.B.I.’s UCR data indicate that violent crime rates rose from 161 per 100,000 persons in 1960 to 758 per 100,000 persons in 1991.
Millennials, who oppose additional policing, are “too young to remember this period well,” Goldstein said. In my email exchange with Ansolabehere, he looked at the generational differences from a different vantage point.
That line is my summary of the silent majority view. It’s that they want law and order. They actually support more spending on police and they are afraid of backsliding to the crime rates of early 1990s and earlier. In terms of the protests the ones who are staying home are older.
aren’t likely to rally behind various proposals to defund the police. They do want the police to behave though, and the bits of survey data I’ve seen suggest high support for body cams, bans on choke holds, and other police reforms.
Goldstein’s finding that age is more important than race in shaping attitudes toward the police provides a partial explanation for the substantial participation of whites in the protests over the killing of Floyd.
Two of my Times colleagues, Amy Harmon and Sabrina Tavernise, reported last week on surveys of protesters in Los Angeles, New York and Washington, D.C. conducted by Dana R. Fisher, a sociologist at the University of Maryland, and Michael T. Heaney, a political scientist at the University of Michigan.
Fisher and Heaney found that whites made up 61 percent of the protesters in New York, 65 percent in Washington D.C., and 53 percent in Los Angeles. The presence of such large numbers of whites in protests over police brutality “is utterly different from anything we’ve seen,” Douglas McAdam, a sociologist at Stanford, told the Times.
Data revealing the trends toward racial liberalization described above coincide with poll data revealing declining support for Trump and the Republican Party.
Joe Biden’s lead over Trump has grown from 5.6 points to 8.1 points since Floyd was killed on May 25; Trump’s disapproval rating has risen and his approval level has fallen over the same period; and the Democratic advantage in the generic congressional vote has inched upward.
While a leftward movement among voters, particularly on racial matters, is, at the moment, indisputable, these and other social and cultural issues remain volatile, and Republicans remain undeterred.
From the Eastern Seaboard to the West Coast and the battlegrounds in between, there is an overriding belief that, just as Trump defied political gravity four years ago, there’s no reason he won’t do it again.
The more wound up we get on coronavirus and unemployment and race, the more chaos we see. If Trump is chaos and Biden is community, what will the country choose? I think a whole bunch of suburban G.O.P. women, younger G.O.P., business G.O.P. and college educated G.O.P. choose Biden and community. G.O.P. women are exhausted by the chaos.
