The pope was the latest leader to speak out about social unrest in the United States after the death of George Floyd. Former Presidents Jimmy Carter, George W. Bush and Barack Obama have also commented.
ROME — Pope Francis said on Wednesday that he was watching the “disturbing social unrest” in the United States with “great concern,” adding his voice to those of other world leaders who have spoken up about the days of unrest across the United States after the death of a black man in Minneapolis.
“We cannot tolerate or turn a blind eye to racism and exclusion in any form and yet claim to defend the sacredness of every human life,” the pope said in his weekly general audience.
The pope was the latest religious or government leader to react to the turmoil in the United States, where, for more than a week, tens of thousands of people have staged daily peaceful protests and impassioned marches across the country. The looting that has followed demonstrations in recent days has somewhat tapered off.
The protests erupted after Mr. Floyd, a 46-year-old black security guard, died after his neck was pinned under a white police officer’s knee for nearly nine minutes in Minneapolis last week. The officer has been fired and charged with second-degree murder, and three other officers were charged with aiding and abetting murder. The killing, captured on video, was the spark for the outpouring of anger and anguish expressed in demonstrations in more than 140 cities.
The pope’s comments came a day after Christian leaders criticized President Trump for using two religious sites in Washington for what they said were acts of political theater. On Monday, Mr. Trump posed holding a Bible outside the historic St. John’s Episcopal Church, and on Tuesday he and the first lady spent about 10 minutes inside the St. John Paul II National Shrine.
The pope called for “national reconciliation and peace” and said the recent violence on U.S. streets was “self-destructive and self-defeating.” Like his predecessors, Pope Francis has often used his weekly addresses to the faithful — a general audience each Wednesday and a prayer on Sundays — to weigh in on global matters and issues of social justice. He has tackled subjects like human trafficking and migration, climate change and its impact on the poor, and access to universal health care, which have been among the cornerstones of his papacy.
The pope’s condemnation of racism and calls for justice in the aftermath of Mr. Floyd’s death echoed comments from other current and former leaders.
Mr. Carter on Wednesday issued a statement in support of the protests but condemning the violence.
“Rosalynn and I are pained by the tragic racial injustices and consequent backlash across our nation in recent weeks,” he said. “Our hearts are with the victims’ families and all who feel hopeless in the face of pervasive racial discrimination and outright cruelty. We all must shine a spotlight on the immorality of racial discrimination. But violence, whether spontaneous or consciously incited, is not a solution.
On Tuesday, Mr. Bush praised peaceful protesters and called for empathy for people seeking justice.
Mr. Obama has released two statements about the death of Mr. Floyd and in an online town hall on Wednesday praised the protesters and called for police reform.
Mr. Obama commented again on Monday, in an essay published on Medium, after the weekend’s protests expanded and turned violent in some cases.
When asked on Tuesday what he thought of Mr. Trump’s call for military action against American protesters and the tear-gassing of peaceful demonstrators to make way for a photo-op, Mr. Trudeau paused at his lectern for 21 uncomfortable, televised seconds.
After a reporter asked Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada about President Trump’s handling of the protests, he paused for several seconds and avoided directly answering the question.
Finally, he said: “We all watch in horror and consternation what’s going on in the United States.” He then spoke out about racism against black Canadians and other people of color.
“No one deserves to die the way George Floyd did. And the truth is, if you’re white in America, the chances are you won’t,” Mr. Clinton said.
Catherine Porter contributed reporting from Toronto.