A school counselor and a children’s book author offer advice for talking to children about racism and George Floyd.
Credit...Christian Robinson, an author and illustrator, as a child.
The protests in response to the killings of George Floyd, Ahmaud Arbery and Breonna Taylor have elicited questions from children of all ages, and many parents are left wondering how to respond.
Children are like sponges. They soak up news headlines and images of unrest on TV and social media. They may also be keenly attuned to conversations about current events happening at home. Parents and educators alike (and those of us now wearing both hats) should address questions about racism that arise and maintain an open dialogue with children.
To help navigate the best way to do this, I asked Christiana Cobb-Dozier, a school counselor in Los Angeles, and Christian Robinson, a Sacramento-based author and illustrator of children’s books, about how to talk to children about racism.
1) All parents should talk to their children about racism. “We don’t talk about race and disparities and inequity enough,” said Ms. Cobb-Dozier. Too often, the burden of talking about race falls to the parents of black children.
Mr. Robinson, who grew up in Los Angeles, said that as a black child, race was always talked about in his family. “I wouldn’t even call it a topic of discussion, it was just discussion,” he said.
“We should all be having conversations with our children that the color of your skin in this country, specifically, will dictate your experiences in the world,” Ms. Cobb-Dozier said.
There are ways to broach the topic of race with children at every developmental level, even with kids as young as 2. It’s important to follow their lead. If children approach their parents ready to talk about race, it’s a good sign that they are ready to talk about it. “If they’re asking about it, they’re ready to know about it,” Ms. Cobb-Dozier said.
2) Be honest with yourself and with your children. When talking about racism, it’s important for parents to also check their own thoughts for biases, unconscious or not.
One way of rooting out unconscious biases, Mr. Robinson said, is to use the power of imagination, an idea he heard while giving a talk with the founders of Abundant Beginnings, a school in Oakland.
4) Allow for questions even when you don’t know the answers. You may not have the answers to questions like, “Why is this happening?,” but it’s important to hold space for them and explain how you feel, nonetheless.
5) If speaking with black children, let them know their lives matter and encourage their whole identity.
The message of Mr. Robinson’s latest book, “You Matter,” is one his grandmother, who raised Mr. Robinson, his older brother and two cousins in a one-bedroom home, instilled in him from an early age. Drawing became a way for him to make space for himself and to create the kind of world he wanted to see.
The message he wants to send to young people, he said, is simple.
