Good morning. Mississippi is getting rid of its state flag. Big companies are boycotting Facebook. And the new virus outbreak in the U.S. is worse than in any other rich country.
Another country that highlights the lessons is Britain. Its prime minister, Boris Johnson, has taken the virus less seriously than most other European leaders but more seriously than Trump. Sure enough, Britain is suffering an outbreak that’s worse than in most of Europe but not as bad as in the U.S.
A final point: Trump and Vice President Mike Pence have claimed that the rise in confirmed U.S. cases is largely the result of more tests. That’s not true, as The Times explains. The U.S., which once trailed Europe in per capita overall deaths, has now endured many more.
Worldwide deaths from the virus have exceeded 500,000 and confirmed cases have exceeded 10 million.
In Florida, the daily case count has increased fivefold in two weeks. “Much of Florida’s new surge in cases appears to follow from the reopening of beaches, bars, restaurants and other social activities,” Frances Robles writes from Miami.
Coronavirus patients in intensive care have experienced paranoid and often terrifying hallucinations that can slow recovery and increase the risk of depression.
On Sunday, the Mississippi legislature passed a bill to abolish the state’s current flag, the last in the country to feature the Confederate battle emblem. The decision was partly economic: Business leaders in the state feared they could lose investments from outsiders, including the N.C.A.A.
At least 70 people have died in law enforcement custody over the last decade after saying, “I can’t breathe,” The Times has found. Here are some of the cases you probably haven’t heard about.
Trump retweeted a video yesterday of one of his supporters yelling “White power!” He later deleted the tweet.
A high-profile U.S. purchase of Russian medical supplies, which Vladimir Putin used to call for an end of sanctions on Russia.
A joint Putin-Trump statement in April about “trust” between the two countries.
A friendly phone call between the leaders.
Trump’s efforts to invite Russia to the next Group of 7 meeting.
And the latest development: U.S. spies and commandos alerted their superiors about the bounties as early as January, after finding large amounts of cash at a Taliban outpost.
President Barack Obama wanted to keep a low political profile after he left office. In recent months, though, he has taken an increasingly active role. He speaks with Joe Biden frequently, offering suggestions on staffing and strategy.
Coca-Cola, Starbucks and several other major companies have temporarily stopped advertising on Facebook. The boycott, spurred by civil rights organizations, is an effort to pressure the social media giant to crack down on hate speech and misinformation.
At least three people were killed today after gunmen stormed Pakistan’s stock exchange in the city of Karachi. A separatist group, the Baluchistan Liberation Army, claimed responsibility.
The federal government gave Boeing approval to start test flights of its 737 Max jet, which was grounded in March 2019 after a pair of fatal crashes.
Marty Baron made The Washington Post great again. Now Baron — its top editor — is dealing with fierce cultural crosscurrents there, Ben Smith, The Times’s media columnist, writes.
The New England Patriots signed the quarterback Cam Newton. Separately, the N.F.L. stripped the Patriots of a third-round draft pick for videotaping another team’s practice.
Lives Lived: The movie “The Graduate” helped define the 1960s. The story of the man who wrote the novel, Charles Webb, is even more fascinating. He has died at 81.
Starting today, we’re often going to use this middle section to highlight fascinating ideas and arguments we’ve come across, in The Times and elsewhere.
Of all the major sports leagues, the National Basketball Association has the healthiest relationship with its players. It doesn’t suffer repeated labor conflicts, as baseball does. And it doesn’t subject its players to short, body-damaging careers, as pro football does. The relative peace between players and owners is one reason the N.B.A. has thrived in recent seasons.
What explains that peace?
The N.B.A. has figured out how to balance competitive capitalism with regulatory oversight. Or, as a short and charming new video from a Times Opinion team argues, the N.B.A. has injected just enough socialism.
Every few years, players and owners negotiate over what share of total revenue the players will receive. (It’s now 50 percent.) With that number set, the two sides then have the same incentive: maximize league revenue. In baseball, by contrast, players and owners are in a constant struggle over how much each side will get, as the messy negotiations about a virus-shortened season showed.
The N.B.A. also requires big-market teams to subsidize poorer teams and then sets both a salary floor and ceiling for each team. That ensures players get their share of money while also keeping the teams in Los Angeles and New York from dominating. Cleveland and San Antonio have won recent titles, and Milwaukee has the best record this season.
The N.B.A. isn’t perfect, as the video makes clear. But the league does seem to grasp a basic economic idea: Regulated capitalism, with careful attention to incentives, has a better track record than any other system.
This one-pan recipe by Yewande Komolafe for crispy tofu with toasted cashews and snap peas comes together in just 30 minutes. You can also swap the tofu for another protein, like chicken thighs or pork shoulder. But the tofu is really the star here: It’s the perfect vehicle for the ginger and coconut milk-rich sauce. Asparagus, broccoli or pretty much anything fresh and green can replace the snap peas, too.
“When people talk about the relationship between people of color and their barbers, they tend to forget that it’s not just that they raise your self-esteem and help you look good — they are people you can also share your life with, and who can share their life with you,” writes Claudio E. Cabrera, in a photo essay of barbershop before-and-afters.
“Your barber is your part-time therapist, and sometimes you are his,” he continued.
As salons and barbershops opened up in New York City last week, residents talked about getting their cut.
Listen to some new music, including a previously unreleased Prince track.
“Hamnet,” Maggie O’Farrell’s novel about Shakespeare, and a memoir by the longtime “Jeopardy!” host Alex Trebek are among 16 books to watch for next month.
Here’s today’s Mini Crossword, and a clue: Operating system with a penguin logo (five letters).
P.S. Dean Baquet, the executive editor of The Times, joined the Longform Podcast and spoke about the recent protests, the Tom Cotton Op-Ed and his own experiences as a black journalist.
Today’s episode of “The Daily” includes a police union official’s perspective on the push to overhaul policing in the U.S. On the latest Book Review podcast: A short guide to “The World,” with Richard Haass, the president of the Council on Foreign Relations.
