Good morning. Facebook and Twitter take actions against Trump. Climate change is making babies sick. And the Supreme Court issues its second left-leaning decision in a week.
When this country started hearing a decade ago about Dreamers — people who came to the United States as small children without legal permission — many of them were in their teens or early 20s. These Dreamers are now full adults, with careers and families, and many have spent years anxiously wondering whether they would be thrown out of the only country they’ve really known.
Yesterday’s Supreme Court ruling, which barred President Trump from deporting the Dreamers anytime soon, came as a tremendous relief to them.
The decision was the second this week in which at least one conservative justice — Chief Justice John Roberts, in this case — joined the court’s four liberal members to issue a left-leaning ruling. Immigration is proving to be one of the issues (along with L.G.B.T.Q. rights) on which the court is not reliably conservative. Last year, a majority effectively blocked the Trump administration from adding a question about citizenship status to the 2020 census.
Yesterday’s decision was a narrow one, holding that the administration did not follow the proper procedures for terminating President Barack Obama’s policy, Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, or DACA, of allowing Dreamers to stay. Trump quickly suggested that he still planned to end the policy.
Facebook and Twitter both pushed back against Trump’s use of inflammatory material yesterday. Facebook removed advertisements by the Trump campaign that prominently featured a red triangle that the Nazis used to classify Communist political prisoners during World War II. The ad used it in connection with antifa, a loose collective of anti-fascist protesters.
Twitter added a warning — an exclamation point with the label “Manipulated Media” — to a Trump tweet that featured a video of two toddlers running down a sidewalk. The video, which included a headline about a “racist baby,” had been made to look like a CNN segment.
The next source of debate: Tomorrow, Trump will hold his first rally since the coronavirus shut down public gatherings. Critics have condemned his choice of a host city: Tulsa, Okla., the site of a racist massacre 99 years ago this month.
Today is Juneteenth, and a growing number of companies have begun recognizing it as a holiday, in the wake of the police killing of George Floyd, The Wall Street Journal reports. The Times has put together a collection of historical photos, poetry and articles about the holiday, which commemorates the end of slavery in the U.S.
“As someone who has celebrated Juneteenth for a long time, I think we need it now — not in lieu of the freedom, justice and equality we are still fighting for — but in addition, because we have been fighting for so very long,” Veronica Chambers, an editor who spearheaded the project, writes.
More Confederate pushback: Nancy Pelosi ordered portraits of four House speakers who served the Confederacy to be removed from the Capitol. And the Southeastern Conference threatened not to hold future college sports championships in Mississippi unless the state removed the Confederate battle emblem from its flag.
Another 1.5 million Americans applied for state unemployment benefits last week, a sign that the coronavirus pandemic was reaching deeper into the economy even as the pace of jobs cuts slowed.
Higher temperatures caused by climate change and increased air pollution have raised women’s risk of giving birth to premature, underweight or stillborn children — and hurt African-American babies most. That’s the finding of a newly published paper, which reviewed data from 57 studies collectively analyzing nearly 33 million births in the United States.
Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota withdrew from consideration to be Joe Biden’s running mate and said she told him he should pick a woman of color.
Chinese officials said today that they had indicted two Canadians on espionage charges. The move escalated a conflict that began after Canada arrested an executive of the Chinese technology giant Huawei in 2018.
Lives Lived: “We’ll meet again, don’t know where, don’t know when.” Vera Lynn, the “Sweetheart” of the British forces in World War II, sang those lyrics and many more to the troops and to embattled Londoners in the Blitz. In the darkest days, her voice was as familiar to Britons as Churchill’s. She died at age 103.
Cycling has become more popular, as the coronavirus has left many people looking both for alternatives to mass transit and for outdoor activities. John Herrman, who covers tech for The Times and has been riding bikes “since before I have coherent memories,” wrote a helpful guide for biking pros and first-timers alike that answers many questions.
“Lots of people just want to climb back on a bike to commute, but they’re confronted with options and hurdles that are awfully discouraging for such a supposedly universal and routine activity,” he told us.
If you’re looking to buy a bike, he suggests reaching out to a local bike shop or REI, or browsing through used bikes on sites like Craigslist. You don’t need to get too fancy; bikes from big box stores like Walmart will work fine for a short work commute.
“A lot of cycling enthusiasts are on what amounts to a very long detour, returning, eventually, to what they knew the first time they kept their balance on two wheels: A bike is a bike, and every ride is a victory,” he said.
These crispy mushrooms, which use a dry rub adapted from the chef Greg Collier, make a great main course or side. The seasoning works well on a variety of mushrooms. Just be sure to buy the biggest ones you can find. Black oyster mushrooms, white lion’s mane or even portobellos all work.
Many injuries occur when multiple children, especially a mix of older and younger ones, are jumping on a trampoline at the same time. That’s what happened to the daughter of our colleague Adam Pasick, who broke her tibia on a trampoline on Wednesday. 
Here’s a guide, from Well, with tips on how to do so.
I’ve been watching my share of serious fare these days, but I would be lost without something silly to rely on. “What We Do in the Shadows,” a two-season FX comedy that you can watch on Hulu, is ribald, vulgar and exactly what I’ve needed.
In the latest Modern Love column, an author writes about growing up without a father — and finding him again years later in a brochure.
The late-night hosts weighed in on the Supreme Court’s big rulings.
Here’s today’s Mini Crossword, and a clue: Night sky streaker (five letters).
P.S. The word “dadliness” appeared for the first time in The Times yesterday, as noted by the Twitter bot @NYT_first_said.
Today’s episode of “The Daily” is about the history of Juneteenth. The latest Book Review podcast features an all-star lineup: André Leon Talley, Claudia Rankine, Jericho Brown and Megha Majumdar.
