How Adam Schlesinger and his writing partner created what may be the most outrageous opening number the broadcast has ever seen.
Hearing that lyric on the Tony Awards broadcast in 2011, the year of “The Book of Mormon,” might not have been as jarring as it would be most other years. But the line didn’t come from that famously irreverent show.
And they all came in the first six minutes of the broadcast, courtesy of an impish Neil Patrick Harris’s showstopping show opener, “It’s Not Just for Gays Anymore” (“it” being Broadway).
Subsequent Tonys numbers have been more deep-cuttish (James Corden riffing off “Be More Chill” in a bathroom stall) or more spontaneous (Lin-Manuel Miranda and Thomas Kail’s end-of-show recap) or just plain bigger (Harris again in, well, “Bigger”).
But “Not Just for Gays,” written by Adam Schlesinger (who died of the coronavirus in April) and David Javerbaum, set a new template for what the Broadway community would accept in terms of self-mockery.
“Mormon” was expected to run the table that night, and it did, winning nine of 13 possible awards. The real drama came over how exactly those first six minutes would go over.
But only up to a point. And so a bit of lyrical legerdemain was called for.
Each year the Tonys has an invited dress rehearsal a few hours before the actual show, at which point it was time to ditch the Potemkin lyric and sing the real one. Everything went over well — except for that sodomy couplet.
And so one of those alternate lyrics came into play: Javerbaum remembers the compromise choice as “man-man love,” while Harris thinks it was “same-sex love.” Whatever it was, that’s what the teleprompter said on Tony night. But it’s not what Harris sang.
“It would never have made it to the air if Neil hadn’t behaved heroically sneakily,” Javerbaum said.
Harris also kept a game face as a bit of mid-song audience participation dragged on over the allotted time, in part because of a botched verse from Brooke Shields.
The two went on to write tailored material — Javerbaum calls them “bespoke” songs — for the likes of Stephen Colbert and Jane Lynch. When Schlesinger appeared on the comedian Marc Maron’s “WTF” podcast in 2012, he credited this surge in work to the success of “Not Just for Gays,” which won an Emmy Award that year.
And not just any people but people who know their way around a musical theater number.
Javerbaum, who said he is still in the disbelief stage over losing his collaborator of more than a decade, found Schlesinger to have an ideal sense of perspective when it came to foregrounding the words or the music.
Or, in this case, the multiple lyrics.