The America We Need is a Times Opinion series on emerging from this crisis with a fair, resilient society.
Fetishizing coding and robots misses the real engines of our economy.
Ms. Poo is the director of the National Domestic Workers Alliance, and Ms. Shah is the director of the innovation arm of the organization.
The stories we used to tell about work went something like this: The protagonist, a white man wearing a hard hat, has a stable job in manufacturing or construction that allows him to buy a home and work toward a comfortable retirement.
But when we look to the future of work, we’re fixated on robots replacing humans — in either a dystopian serfdom or a utopia where we have so much leisure time, we can finally learn the violin.
But neither story is rooted in reality.
The work force that powers our economy today — in times of stability and in crisis — is a low-wage service work force that is disproportionately made up of black women and other women of color, and largely unprotected by our safety net. These workers take care of us in different ways, and it took a pandemic for the nation to recognize they are the critical engine of our economy.
But we don’t take care of them. At all.
Home care workers took their children to work when they couldn’t afford child care after schools shut down. Janitors lacked the protective equipment they needed to sanitize spaces without putting themselves at risk. These workers didn’t have the option to work from home, and they also lacked paid leave to allow them to isolate themselves if they were exposed to an infected person.
These workers are essential not only in the present. They are essential in the future. The Bureau of Labor Statistics reports the job projected to have the largest percentage increase in employment from 2018 to 2028 is the home health aide followed by the personal care aide, a reflection of the growing older population in America.
The workers we need the most aren’t wearing boots and hard hats; they are wearing sneakers or scrubs.
We are at a critical juncture. The future of work will be decided by how we respond to this moment.
This is our moment to choose a future where we invest in the work that we now know is essential. Where care jobs become living-wage jobs with benefits, protected by a strong federal safety net. Where essential workers can support their own families through their work, even as they support ours.
Or we can continue down the path we are on. As companies consider how they will use the economic recession as a moment to reset, they will be making choices that determine the future of millions of jobs. More jobs could be outsourced, subcontracted and offshored, deconstructed into tasks or automated. Many jobs that were lost may never return. Increasing numbers of the jobs that do return could become gigs that are farmed out to disaggregated workforces managed by algorithms. Too many of us could end up working along a Walmart or Amazon supply chain, while not earning enough to shop there. And more jobs might become inputs into an equation, without recognition, value or access to a safety net. Most economic choices we’ve made in recent decades make that possibility likely.
We must let go of the old paradigm of work and build the future we deserve, one that invests in these workers — especially in jobs we know are here to stay. It isn’t rocket science. In fact Senator Elizabeth Warren and Representative Ro Khanna developed the blueprint — the Essential Workers Bill of Rights — which includes provisions like health and safety protections, a livable wage, paid sick and family leave, support for family care and access to health care.
It took an epic public health crisis and economic recession to wake us up, but as the economy reopens, we must not forget what we have seen. We must shore up every last job, especially those that have been invisible, and every worker who has taken care of us, until every job is a good job, and dignity is restored to work in America.
Ai-jen Poo (@aijenpoo) is the director of the National Domestic Workers Alliance and Palak Shah is the director of the innovation arm of the organization.