The books we read, the movies we watch, the friends we make, the doctors we visit and the conversations we have at home all shape our children’s views of race.
When kids on the gaming site Roblox were darkening the skin color of their avatars to support Black Lives Matter, 12-year-old Garvey Mortley decided to speak up. She created a video explaining the offensive history of blackface, and offered viewers more appropriate ways they could show support.
“Changing your skin tone to a darker skin color in Roblox or any game is essentially painting your face with shoe polish,” she explained in the video. “It’s like you’re putting on blackface.” A better way to show virtual support, she suggested, would be to dress the character in a Black Lives Matter T-shirt.
It was one child’s small step against racism, based on lessons she had learned at home. Her mother, Amber Coleman-Mortley, is the director of social engagement at iCivics, a nonprofit founded by Justice Sandra Day O’Connor to improve civics education using games and digital resources. Ms. Coleman-Mortley has marched with her daughters and mother in the 2017 Women’s March in Washington and created podcasts with her children during quarantine. Even a conversation about a favorite singer (“Cardi B is the greatest ever!”) was an opportunity to talk about other greats, like the poet and civil rights activist Audre Lorde or Oprah.
We’re all in the midst of a global civics lesson right now, and we don’t have to be marching in the streets to take small steps toward changing ourselves and raising socially conscious, anti-racist children, she said. Join your P.T.A., go to school board meetings, learn more about the curriculum. Demand accurate history lessons about race. Supplement your child’s education with books and documentaries, and don’t shy away from conversations about race.
Dr. Kendi recently published a children’s book, “Antiracist Baby.” The book, written in rhyme, offers nine steps, including seeing skin color, celebrating differences and growing up to be an antiracist. “Parents use books to teach about love or kindness or to potty train. Why not do the same for teaching our kids to be anti-racist,” Dr. Kendi said. He notes that people who are uncomfortable talking about race often come from homes where it wasn’t a topic of conversation.
The first time they recall a conversation about race at their high school, in New Jersey, was in 10th grade history class, when a teacher initiated a talk about the death of Eric Garner in 2014. The conversation inspired them to take a gap year traveling to all 50 states to talk to people about race, which became a book, “Tell Me Who You Are: Sharing Our Stories of Race, Culture & Identity.” The duo also started a nonprofit called Choose, and the book, education guide and a workbook have been used by hundreds of educators around the country.
“Schools are important because they enable us to reach every child, including white students mistakenly taught that race is irrelevant to their lives,” said Ms. Guo.
Parents can start conversations about race with books, documentaries or even movies like “Black Panther” or “Crazy Rich Asians,” two box office hits that proved the power of diversity in movie making.
Parents who live in homogeneous communities can find ways to make their children’s lives more diverse. “Who are your kids’ doctors and dentists and pharmacists and music teachers and tutors?” said Traci Baxley, a coach and educator who offers courses through Instagram and her website, SocialJusticeParenting.com.
Join me Wednesday, June 24, at 8 p.m. Eastern time for a conversation with Amber Coleman-Mortley about how to raise a socially conscious, anti-racist child. R.S.V.P. here.