Sunday morning, I’m telling you, I was sitting in my house, I was contemplating, and I got up, I got in my car, and I just drove.
I drove to north Minneapolis, then I drove to south Minneapolis, and I landed at the area where Mr. Floyd got killed. And when I got out, I walked up, and I felt comfortable. Like, I was surrounded of my old people that we’re gonna be out here, and we’re gonna — we’re gonna try to make the best of a bad situation.  And I feel good, and this is one of those things it’s like, it was so beautiful to see people come together and try to have their voices heard.
From The New York Times, I’m Michael Barbaro. This is “The Daily.” Today. They came to protest the death of George Floyd and because his experience spoke to their own. Five protesters on the moments that brought them into the streets. It’s Friday, June 5.
No justice — No peace! No justice — No peace!
My name is down for Donfard Hubbard. I am 44 years old. I grew up in Minneapolis. I’ve been Minneapolis since 1978. So when I was 10 years old, I was up at the park, it’s, like, eight, nine blocks away. Like, nine of my friends, we was having a snowball fight. It snows in Minnesota. It was early evening so it wasn’t really dark outside yet. And the cops rolled up.
So when the cars roll up, we scattered.
Nobody would have interaction with the police. It’s just one of those things — nobody ever wanted to have interaction with the police. As everybody scattered and took off, I ran about two blocks. I remember I ran around two blocks and I cut the alleys, because in Minnesota, we got alleys. And as I was cutting through alleys, the cops zoomed by, backed up, and sped down the alley, and got me as I was trying to cut through a yard. So I stopped, and I came back. And he confronted me and asked me what I was doing out there. And I told him, we was having a snowball fight. And he was like, y’all was having a snowball fight? I’m like, yeah. He’s like, well, it’s getting late.  I’m like, what? 
Once he said what he said, and he took off, I just figured that confrontation was over with. And so I just kept going. And then I didn’t see no more cars. I went home. I didn’t tell nobody about it. I just went about my evening. And it was what it was. It’s one of those things that it sticks with you because you be, like, why did he talk to me like that? Well, he figured he could, you know what I’m saying? It was nothing to him to talk to me like that. At the time, it didn’t bother me. I was just a kid, so I didn’t know the magnitude of the word when he said it. It was more so of relief that I didn’t even get brought home by the police.
And then — — I work for Hennepin County now, but I used to work for the city of Minneapolis. At the time, I was on his concrete crew, and it was early in the morning, so we was taking our morning break. And we was going to a store on our way to the next job site. And so he was driving, so I told him, you know, I want to run up in his store and grab me something to drink, and probably some chips or something, I don’t remember. And I went in the store, and grabbed my items, and I came back out, and it was a cop out here, you know? So I’m not thinking of it. So I’m walking back towards the truck I was riding in with my co-worker. And he stopped me. Yeah, he stopped me and he was, like, what are you doing over here? I’m like, what do you what I’m doing? I just came out the store. He’s, like, I need to ask you some questions. You look like somebody that was — got into a domestic dispute. I said I didn’t get into no domestic dispute. I’ve been at work. And I pointed out the truck.  So me and the cop are going back and forth, and he finally says, well, I need to see your ID. So I hand him my ID. And we’re going back and forth, and finally, he gets a call on the radio or whatever. He proceeds to say, yeah, you’re not it, and throws my ID on the ground.  So I get back in the truck and dude asks me what happened. That is the most ignorant thing a person could ask you. You sat there and watched so you know what happened. So basically, I said, well, he assumed I was somebody else. But why didn’t you get out and confirm it? He was, like, I don’t know, I just thought you guys were talking. Why would I be talking to the police just randomly coming out of a store? I just think — I just think he was a coward for just sitting there and not interceding when he could have been. He didn’t want to do that, but he looked, though.
White people don’t want to get involved. He looked — he looked dead at me and this cop sitting there for at least a five minute conversation. He looked and then turned away. He didn’t want to get involved. I’m not — like I said, I’m not actually asking you to go over there and we’re gonna fight the cop. You could’ve just simply, walked out — got out the truck, walked over, said, what’s going on? But then as soon as I get in the back of the truck, you want to ask me what’s going on. I mean, if you want to know what’s going on, you should have got out and asked.
My name is Rashaad Dinkins. I am from Minneapolis, Minnesota, and I am 18 years old and I am a actor-director and a college student. So I work at Mall of America in the amusement park inside at a ride called Flyover America. Flyover America is a virtual flight experience, where your feet dangle over, you experience wind, mist, and scent to make you feel like you’re flying.
OK, so this was about 2018, and I had been working in the mall for about a year-ish. I start every morning to same — I like, listen to music as I go to work. It’s kind of like, my upbeat kind of going into it. So I take the bus there, because I don’t drive. And I’m happy, I’m, like, bumping, I’m ready to go to work. I think I remember the song I was listening to at the time. I think it was Demi Lovato, “Confident,” because I think her album had just came out, so I was like, yeah, (SINGING) what’s wrong with being, what’s wrong with being, what’s wrong being confident, uh.
I was wearing a red shirt that day that says Flyover America, and I have a badge that says my name, and it says the date that I started. So that’s how you scan in, how you do all that. So they have these back hallways that you can enter through kind of like a secret tunnel, if you will. And a lot of mall cops stand either guard or stand inside of it. But at this moment, a guard was standing in front of the door to me getting into the entrance to the tunnel.
OK, all right, why is he standing here? It’s 8:00 AM. No one ever really is here. And he has a white — mall cops usually white button up shirts with their badge and their holster. And he was about, I want to say, six feet. He had blue eyes, white skin, and he was very kind of muscular, very built. And he stopped me, and I said, hi, how are you? And he said, where are you going? I said, I’m going to work. I have to clock in. And he says, where do you work? And I said Flyover America. I showed him my badge. He said, well, I think you have to call your manager out to escort you to your job. I said, I know where my job is, I know where I’m going. He said, well, I just think for your safety, for who you are, I think it will be best for your manager to come out for you. And so I called my manager and she said she was unable to come out, because she had to open the store. I said, OK, well, she’s currently busy, so she can’t come out here. And he said, well, I really would like your manager to be here. And I said, I just told you that she can’t come. I can call her again and put on speaker so you can hear her say it yourself, but I have to get to work. Like, my shift starts in about 10, 15 minutes, so I have to — I have to go. And he said, OK, well, I just don’t believe you. And so I had to go around the other entrance, the main entrance that’s actually locked. So I had to wait for my manager to see me through the glass to kind of just come and enter an escort me in. And that was what happened.
I started to think — I started to just every thought about like things that I hate about myself. Was it me? What was I wearing? What was I acting? How was I acting like that to make him think that I was this or am I wrong? Was I not smiling? Did I need to do something else? Should I try to be nice to him or comfort him or offer him a free ticket on the ride? Like, what do I need to do to make him OK with me? And I think that’s when I realized that there is nothing that I really could have done to make him OK with me. He just kind of has to be OK.
My name’s Joe Morris. I am 32 years old. I live in Tallahassee, Florida. People tell me every day, those who know him, that boy, you’re just like your daddy. And it’s kind of weird talking about it, because I don’t even know how he would look today.
He was a minister in the church. He did the best he could, you know, to be a great dad. You know, he loved everybody. He’s, you know — he just loved smiling and grinning and chewing gum was his favorite thing to do. And he was in charge with us on Sundays.
As I grew up, at the age of 12, it was the saddest day of my life when I was at church, and I remember I believe I was on the front row. I was pretty hyper growing up, so they wanted to keep me from being in trouble, so I was on the front row of church and.
is when we saw that he was gone. And — ah — it was — oh man.
So he was laying there and the way that he died and the way that the police handled the situation — you know, a bullet to the head is pretty — pretty steep. And so I don’t know what happened. I know that I guess the cops, there was a call. I guess someone called in. He was going through a time where he was wrestling, I don’t know if it was drug abuse or alcohol abuse.
And yeah, that’s all the information I have ever gotten even till this day with that whole situation. So I mean, that was his last time at home.
My name is Azalea Hernandez and I’m 12 years old. I live in Minneapolis, Minnesota. I was in sixth grade. And I think I was either 10 or 11. And by the way, like, when I say 10 or 11, it kind of sounds like it was just, like, last year. I am about to be 13, so it kind of seems like a long time ago for me. I think it was the Women’s March. We were marching with our signs, and we had pins on. And we weren’t with any adults or like our parents, but I was with people. And there was a couple older white men, and they were kind of just walking next to us. They’re like, creeping up next to us. I remember it’s like trying to speed up with our walking, but they came up to me and the people that I was with, and started calling us the n-word. They were like, you n-words don’t belong here and this and that.
I think I was kind of scared that they would like — that they would hurt me or my friends or something if I tried to say something back. I didn’t say anything, but — I don’t exactly remember what one of my friends said, but they did say something. I think they just told the guys to go away. They didn’t. They kept saying, like, you whatever, don’t belong here. And we kept walking, because we can’t really defend ourselves against like, old — there were like, tall, kind of bigger people. We don’t really have the strength, like, the body strength to do that.
But that’s just one thing that I remember well. I think that’s because I had a long conversation with my mom after. Just that things are going to happen and to not let people like that get into my head. And that there’s going to be so many things that happen in my life until I die. And I just have to move forward, I guess. I understood what she was trying to say. I understood that — that there’s going to be people who don’t like me for the wrong reasons. And that as long as I’m not dead, things are going to keep happening.
I am Dr. Joyce Ladner. I am 76 years old and I live in Washington DC. I grew up in segregated Mississippi. I don’t remember the precise time that I knew about Emmett Till’s lynching. That you have to understand also that the media was very much censored. So I bought the Hattiesburg American each day. I think it cost a nickel or a dime. I read whatever I could find in about Emmett Till’s murder. I was going on 12 years old — I was 11, soon to be 12 when Emmett till was lynched. Everyone was discussing it. We were talking about it. And when I heard about it, I felt just a profound sense of fear just washed over me, because this was the first time we knew that a child had been murdered. And therefore, it could happen to us. Felt it could happen to me. I especially felt that it could happen to my brother.  But I don’t know, maybe it was because I thought this was a boy, and they did kill him. And there were witnesses to them dragging him from his home. And so much to my young sense of hope that people would be punished for what they did to him, they weren’t, no. And so what I did was take a lot of that anger about Emmett Till and later tried to put it into civil rights activism. A lot of my friends, it was one of the seminal moments that led them into the movement. And almost to a person, It was seeing the pictures Emmett Till, bloated body, on the cover of Jet magazine. So that’s why I call ours the Emmett Till generation. We were determined one day to exonerate his death on a larger scale.
I see a parallel between what the young kids are seeing and feeling about this, and I think they understand as much as I did that George Floyd is an adult film of Emmett Till. He was murdered. I believe the reason so many people are out protesting against this is that the Emmett Tills of the world — you know, their murders have gone unpunished. And this was the straw that broke the camel’s back.
I’ve made a sign that says Black Lives Matter. I’ve made another sign, it has the power fist in different shades of skin colors to show that everybody is equal. I like to outline everything in black, because I feel like it makes everything pop more. But I I’ve been doing skin color. 
I was looking at the new and looking at the news and looking at the news, and then on Saturday, it got even worse, and kept getting worse.
My eyes tell me what I seen. You can’t tell me nothing. I know what I’ve seen. I’d seen that man, he didn’t resist arrest, he didn’t do nothing, and then people out there told you to move. And you still didn’t move. And the other three sat there and let it happen. That’s why it’s different. I was conflicted to even go to the rally, but then I thought to myself, that could be me.
I jumped out of the house with my friend. DeRay sent a text to the group, the protest that was going on. And I’m, like, well, oh my goodness, I got to get back out there.
We want justice! We want justice! We want justice!
The first day, I think I just went to the corner and had my sign. Had my sign up. Like, I was with my mom and her friends.
Prosecute the police! No justice, no peace!
The first day that I went, actually, there was a march. But I didn’t go all the way down, I didn’t walk all the way down. It’s like, five miles, and I did not have the right shoes on, because I didn’t know that I was going to be marching. And I was wearing Vans with no socks on, which I would have rather to be wearing tennis shoes. I still did walk, like, four miles, though. I didn’t walk all the way there. I was close, but — I did get blisters. I have fat feet, so I got blisters, like, three of them on the side.
No justice, no peace. Prosecute the police!
Like I said, I’m shy, but we ended up leading a march of over 1,000 people through the city of Tallahassee.
Ain’t no protest ever went like this before. This is all new. This is, like, they had protests in Ferguson when Mike Brown got killed. They had protest in Baltimore when Freddie Gray got killed. They had protests in New York when Eric Garner got killed. None of them has been like this. All those other ones, you could add a little bit on to the story where it’s not clear cut. You can’t clear cut this one. You can’t clear cut this one.
Going through neighborhoods, it was such a unique demonstration of unity. We had people coming outside joining the march. People was leaving restaurants joining the march. And the other day, we did over 12 now. I said, we’re going. I am pumped up, I’m excited to march, and to play my role in history.
And until today, I didn’t even know. I thought rubber bullets were like little BB gun things. They’re huge. They’re ginormous. Like a BB gun, they’re just little balls. But these things, it’s like the shape of a bullet, but it’s a rubber on most of it, and then on the end, it’s plastic. I don’t know what to compare it to. It was like maybe half of a phone. I saw one in person, it was on the street. And I know someone who got hit in the lip, and their lip was ginormous. It was like half the face.
I can’t do anything but be black. I can’t wash it off, I can’t take it away. So me walking out of the house and walking into work, if you feel threatened by that existence, that is not my problem. That is not my place to try to change you and try to kind of morph you into the person that I want to be. You kind of have to do that for yourself. And if you’re willing to do that for yourself, then I applaud you. And if you’re not, well, I hope you get to a place where you can.
What’s giving me hope? These people keep protesting. I love it. I turn it on every day. Listen, I got other stuff I could be watching. I come home every day, I’ve been watching this stuff morning, noon, and night. On the weekend, I watch it. I come home from work — I’m watching it right now while I’m talking to you. My TV is on here. I could be watching something else. What’s important is I love seeing all these people come together in a protest.
Now am I proud of the people when they’re looting? No. Do I care? No, that’s part of — that’s part of the protest. You’re not going to get people’s attention if you do friendly protest. It’s, like, you know when you’re getting people’s attention when you start distorting stuff. OK, now they’re destroying stuff. Now you got our attention. Now how do we stop them from destroying stuff? OK, we got to hear what they’re talking about.
This feels different, because there are people out there demonstrating that we’ve never seen before. They haven’t been in marches, protests before. I do think this was a watershed moment that caused things to be different.
When I’m protesting, I am out also protesting, you know, for my father’s death at the hands of law enforcement to make sure that our future is much brighter. We don’t have to be fearful of traffic stops. You know, we don’t have to be fearful because we see a cop. That’s what I’m marching for. So that other young men in this world can see their father. And it is so unfortunate for the daughter of George Floyd. She’s sort of in my shoes, you know? You grow up through life and, you know, who’s going to take her to the father and daughter lunch and the father-daughter dance? And it was same with me, because my dad actually used to come to the parent luncheons. When I had lunch, I would pop up, and I would see him, and he would surprise me.
You wouldn’t think nothing of it. I don’t know if my parents is going to come, but it’s lunchtime, and he’s out at the table before you. I mean, it was such a great experience.  Hate killed him. That was it.
He’s 46. Well, I’m 44. I’ve been harassed by the police several times. I’m a black male in America and it’s one of these things that I can relate to what happened to this man’s family.
Got two boys. My youngest son, he’s 13. My oldest son, he’s 24. Now the conversation I have with my kids is about this — you always gotta be careful when you’re interacting with white folks. Why do I gotta keep having this conversation? Do I wish I didn’t have to had a conversation? Yeah, but that’s not the world we live in. So that’s why I keep having this conversation with my kids, because I don’t want nothing to happen to them.
I think that it is about to get justice for George Floyd. And to try to make one thing in the world fair.
Like, the people have been trying for years, and I don’t think it’s gotten any better. So I feel like right now, we’re trying to draw a line for all of it.
I’m going back out there tomorrow, because it’s not about me no more. That’s what I want people to know — it’s not about me no more.  Do we got to live like this his whole life? No, he shouldn’t have to. Will he have kids? Will his kids have to live like this their whole lives? No, they shouldn’t have to. So if we got to go ahead and march every day or go downtown and sit in front of City Hall until they change these laws on the books, hey, I’m with it. I got time. I got time.
No peace! No justice — No peace! No justice — No peace! No justice — No peace! No justice — No peace! No justice — No peace! No justice — No peace! No justice — No peace! No justice — No peace! No justice — No peace! No justice — No peace! No justice — No peace!
On Thursday, George Floyd was honored at a memorial service in Minneapolis that was attended by hundreds of grieving friends, family, lawmakers, and community members.

George Floyd should not be among the deceased. He did not die of common health conditions. He died of a common American criminal justice malfunction.
Speakers, including Reverend Al Sharpton, said that Floyd’s death at the hands of Minneapolis police officers would not be forgotten.
It was this amazing. Everywhere you go and see people, how they cling to him, they wanted to be around him. You know, George, he was like a general. Every day, he walks outside, it’d be a line of people wanted to greet him and wanted to have fun with him.
During the service, Floyd’s brother, Philonise, remembered sharing banana and mayonnaise sandwiches with him as a child, and described him as a cherished figure in the community.
(SINGING) From above — from above. Through it all — but through it all. I remember — I remember. That He loves me — that He loves me. Lord, that you care — that He cares. And you’ll — And you’ll never. Put more — put more on me — oh — than I can bear.
That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you on Monday. - (SINGING) Oh Lord.
Oh Lord. Oh.
They came together to protest the killing of George Floyd — and because what happened to him had echoes in their own experiences. Today, we speak with five protesters about the moments in their lives that brought them onto the streets.
Donfard Hubbard, 44, from Minneapolis.
Rashaad Dinkins, 18, from Minneapolis.
Joe Morris, 32, from Tallahassee, Fla.
Azalea Hernandez, 12, from Minneapolis.
Joyce Ladner, 76, from Washington.
Kimiko de Freytas-Tamura, John Eligon, Patricia Mazzei and Kim Barker contributed reporting.
