A match on the Adria Tour, an exhibition circuit organized by Novak Djokovic in the Balkans, was canceled on Sunday after a player tested positive for the coronavirus.
They have not only played tennis in front of big crowds on the Adria Tour. They have hugged, high-fived, and partied together: Some of the players even formed a line and did the limbo on a night out in Belgrade, Serbia.
But the consequences have quickly become much more serious than the mood with two of the tour’s main attractions, Grigor Dimitrov and Borna Coric, announcing they tested positive for the coronavirus and another, Viktor Troicki, doing so, according to a Serbian media report.
And on Tuesday, Novak Djokovic, the top men’s singles player who organized the exhibition series in the Balkans, said he and his wife, Jelena, both tested positive for the virus.
Nick Kyrgios, tweeting from his home nation, Australia, called it “a boneheaded decision” to play the event.
Dimitrov, the Bulgarian star and a 2019 United States Open semifinalist, announced his test result on Sunday after returning to his base in Monaco from the tour’s latest stop in Zadar, Croatia.
“I am so sorry for any harm I might have caused,” Dimitrov said on social media.
Coric, a promising Croat ranked 33rd in men’s singles, said on Monday that he also had tested positive. So have Troicki, a prominent Serbian player; Christian Groh, Dimitrov’s coach; and Marco Panichi, Djokovic’s fitness coach, according to media reports in Serbia.
Three other players on the Adria Tour — Alexander Zverev, Marin Cilic and Andrey Rublev — announced Monday that they had tested negative for the virus but would be self-isolating for 14 days.
“I deeply apologize to anyone that I have potentially put at risk by playing this tour,” Zverev, the seventh-ranked men’s singles player, said on Twitter.
Dimitrov’s announcement forced event officials to call off Sunday’s final between Djokovic and Rublev. Djokovic, who was in frequent physical contact with Dimitrov during the tour, returned to Belgrade to await his test result.
But the risks of taking a less cautious approach are now clear, particularly in a sport with an international group of players who have to travel.
Andrea Gaudenzi, the ATP chairman, said the tour had recommended that players competing on the Adria Tour and in other unsanctioned events take “proper precautions and respect social distancing.” But ultimately the ATP had no jurisdiction to impose safety regulations.
The positive tests on the Adria Tour could help make subsequent events safer, Gaudenzi said, by making players more willing to stay in the restricted environment imposed to reduce the risk of infection.
It is also a reminder to event organizers — like Bob Moran, the tournament director of the Credit One Bank Invitational, a six-day women’s team exhibition in Charleston, S.C. — of the importance of safety measures. The participants in the event, which is set to begin without spectators on Tuesday, include Sofia Kenin, this year’s Australian Open champion, and Sloane Stephens, a former U.S. Open champion. According to Moran, players have been practicing social distancing and wearing masks on site when not training or competing.
Nets and sitting areas are being sanitized after practice sessions.
