Fearing the country’s lax approach to combating the coronavirus, Sweden’s Scandinavian neighbors have all closed their borders to Swedes.
And Norway isn’t the only Scandinavian neighbor barring Swedes, with some exceptions, from visiting this summer. Denmark and Finland have also closed their borders to Swedes, fearing that they would bring new coronavirus infections with them.
Swedish officials, including the architect of the country’s measures to stop the spread of the coronavirus, Anders Tegnell, are not amused. They say Swedes have been stigmatized by an international campaign to prove Sweden was wrong and warn their neighbors that they are going to be much more vulnerable if a second wave of the virus hits in the fall.
Mr. Tegnell had emerged this spring as something of a cult figure, widely admired for his determinedly maverick approach. But perhaps because of such differing outcomes, his star has dimmed lately. Confidence in Mr. Tegnell went from 69 percent in April to 60 percent on Monday, according to a poll done by the leading Swedish newspaper Dagens Nyheter and Ipsos.
While the emergency laws and “strong travel advice” have upset many Swedes, nothing has been more painful than the behavior of their neighbors, said Ann Linde, Sweden’s foreign minister.
“It is sad and frustrating that regions on the borders were so easy to close,” said Ms. Linde. She pointed to southern Sweden, where coronavirus infections were much lower than in bordering Denmark. Nevertheless, she said, “suddenly there were border guards” on the bridge connecting the two countries.
The travel restrictions imposed by their immediate neighbors, Denmark, Finland and Norway, have exposed resentments and differences that usually are obscured by a Scandinavian sense of mutual identity and niceness.
At over 10 million, its population is almost double the size of any of its neighbors. Its economy, which is far more globally integrated than the others, includes successful brands like Volvo, Ikea and H&M, as well as the band Abba. Sweden also has far more relaxed policies toward immigration.
“The different views on foreigners and crime have created a divide between Denmark and Sweden that’s become the deepest since the Second World War,” said Jakob Nielsen, the editor in chief of Altinget.dk, a political website with offices in both Denmark and Sweden.
Sweden, by contrast, is “a very consensus-oriented culture. They reach a common standpoint before they saddle up and ride anywhere,” said Mr. Nielsen.
Historically, the Scandinavian nations have been bound together in a number of ways. With the exception of Finland, they share roughly common languages and cultures, and have currencies generally pegged to one another. They have long allowed travel among themselves without border checks and documents. In fact, the Nordic Passport Union, established in 1954, was a model for the European Union’s open border system.
Reporting was contributed by Henrik Libell in Oslo, Christina Anderson in Stockholm and Martin Selsoe Sorensen in Copenhagen.