At 50, the supermodel is busier than ever, and a lot more serene than expected, given both current events and her tumultuous past.
There are so many Naomi Campbells, you never know which you will get.
There is goddess Naomi, whose verified superpowers (ask any eyewitness) include an ability to part seas of people and alter the electrical charge in a room. There are cover girl Naomi and campaign Naomi and runway Naomi, whose catwalk strut is unlikely to ever be outclassed. There is vulnerable Naomi, the unexpectedly bashful human who first appeared on the modeling scene at the tender age of 15.
There is activist Naomi, who called Nelson Mandela granddad, and there is party girl Naomi, who wears a string of playboy and oligarch heads strung from her belt. There is golden-hearted Naomi who “would give you the Prada off her back,” as an old friend recently noted. And there is coldhearted Naomi who, when a close friend needed funds for heroin rehab, turned her back.
“Fighting on arrival, fighting for survival,” the modeling agent Bethann Hardison, Ms. Campbell’s lifelong guide and protector, once said of her. And despite struggles with the race-based inequalities too long unchecked in fashion, Ms. Campbell has not only remained in the public eye for three decades — light-years in the modeling business — but also has reinvented herself, after a half-century on earth, as a digital media phenomenon. Her show, “Being Naomi,” is both vacant and mesmerizing, almost Warholian level, and a canny master class for the aspiring brand-building narcissist.
Ms. Campbell, who was born in London and recently turned 50, has kept busy during and beyond lockdown at a friend’s house in Los Angeles. She shares her daily workouts with the Ocho System founder Joe Holder on Instagram, attends virtual recovery meetings, has become the first face of the Pat McGrath Labs makeup line, and tapes “No Filter” interviews with old friends and colleagues like Sharon Stone, Marc Jacobs and Cindy Crawford. Just this week she conducted a disarmingly frank beauty tutorial for Vogue’s YouTube channel.
Reached by phone on a Friday evening in early June, Ms. Campbell talked about what, in fact, it is like to be Naomi.
“Of course, it is race based,” Ms. Campbell said of the bias in fashion that kept the deck stacked against the black creators whom Anna Wintour recently conceded had not been given enough “space” in places like Vogue.
“I have a routine I kept during quarantine,” she said. “Get up, pray, shower, work out. In times like this, you need that sense of familiarity and routine to keep your mind and spirit in a safe space.” You also need, to judge by Ms. Campbell’s Vogue YouTube tutorial, a foolproof 10-minute method for beating your face with skills so refined that they may give Bianca Del Rio pause.
“I never made that to go viral,” Ms. Campbell said of the 2019 video of her flight sanitizing ritual, which has more than 2.9 million views on YouTube and which, though it may once have seemed extreme, ought to be required viewing for anyone planning to board a plane again.
Ms. Campbell began routinely wearing face masks to fly in the early years of the century. “In Japan I was seeing everyone in these masks, and I thought, ‘This makes sense,’” she said. Some 15 years on, her methodology stops just short of traveling with a decontaminating Aerosolizer (though she has been seen in a hazmat suit).
