A rural hospital in Texas braces for an outbreak while trying to stave off financial ruin.
With cases in Texas on the rise, a rural hospital braces for an outbreak while trying to stave off financial ruin.
One of the difficulties in a small rural hospital is we don’t have a lot of resources. We have two ventilators and four anesthesia machines. If we had six or more critically ill Covid patients, we would be overwhelmed. We don’t have the equipment to be able to support that many severely sick patients. That’s why it’s so scary for rural hospitals. Our county has about 15,000 people. But we have another 33,000 people that go through here everyday on the Interstate. And I’m going to have to go get one of them to bring me another test. And we’ll go ahead and do it while you’re here. OK? We deliver the tests to Snyder, which is 40 miles away. They drive them to Lubbock, which is another 100 miles. Or they could be flown to a lab in Austin. Sometimes, we have test results in seven days. Very spotty, very unpredictable. I just dropped two specimens off. I’ve got to go print labels for one. We’ve had four positive patients in our county. The most troubling piece to me is to know that it’s probably still coming. Nearly two-thirds of rural counties are reporting outbreaks of Covid-19.  In one week, they have no patients. In the next week, they have 300 positives. Rural hospitals are at a disadvantage. We are all barely hanging on by a thread. Rural hospitals are facing a different kind of crisis, which is how to financially survive during the pandemic, as they shut down elective surgeries out of an abundance of caution. Another month or two of that, that would be unsustainable. We have another rural hospital closing this week. How far do we let the economy suffer for protection? And how far do we let protection suffer for the economy? So today, I’m issuing an executive order that outlines how we go about opening the Texas economy. And I know that’s a difficult decision that we individually are having to make— People were ready to get out and grab a drink. and our hospitals’ are having to make, and that our country’s having to make. Twenty states reporting increases in new cases. Tonight, Texas reporting its largest single day in cases ever. Though the virus hadn’t yet reached us, it was already our enemy. It is concerning that, as we start opening back up, that people just quit self-distancing. And then it does get in our nursing home. Hi, Mom. How are you? Get your phone so we can talk. You’re doing OK? Yeah. I guess I’m doing OK. I love you. I love you. I’ll be there every day at her window until I can get my hands on her. I have a concern that she would die alone. I know that many people in the country have died alone. Back in March, we decided to forgo all elective procedures before we were required to do so, in order to save lives. Typically at 10 o’clock on a Monday, usually this E.R. would be full. It’s sort of a curse and a blessing. A large portion of our income is generated from surgery procedures. Restricting those cost us over $2 million. Everyone took a 10 percent pay cut. It’s very personal. Because these people are friends and colleagues. And you hate to ask them to sacrifice. That’s a very tough decision to make. For days, we waited for a significant number of Covid patients. But at the same time, we were moving very quickly towards financial disaster. I could never live with myself if I was the one that got my kids sick. So the kids, they went to stay with their grandparents. If this hospital couldn’t survive, where would we go? What would we do? Our family’s rooted here. We don’t want to go anywhere. Hi, buddy. Hi, buddy. The presence of a pandemic is just one more financial burden on struggling rural hospitals. High numbers of uninsured patients have forced 128 hospitals to close in the last decade, in Texas more than any other state. It’s staggering to think that there are 11 million people who, in their county, cannot go to a hospital. There are a handful of counties across Texas that don’t have a doctor in the county. To drive 150 miles or more to get to a hospital, that’s absolutely the difference between life and death. When Governor Abbott reopened Texas, there was kind of a mixed sense of relief and fear. My anxiety went through the roof. We reopened our hospital for elective surgeries on May the 11th. It was an absolute necessity to get the funds running again. There are certain pieces that I couldn’t have fixed without help. We had to have federal intervention. The Trump administration promised to rush $10 billion for rural health care providers. That’s money that’s going to support the hospitals that gave up elective procedures, which is how they make so much of their money. We knew then that we would have the money be able to keep the doors open. When the state had been opened up for three weeks, my husband and I wanted to bring the kids back home. Happy birthday, Mom! Happy birthday! Mommy! I actually got the best birthday present and went and got them for my 35th birthday. And they had a carrot cake made for me — or a bunny cake, as they call it. I knew you’d be here any minute! I don’t know what the future will bring. I don’t know if we’ll ever hit that storm of patients to come in. And if so, we might end up taking the kids back to their grandparents. We are a very vital part of these small communities. And most of us get paid less than what it costs us to provide care. We need to be paid fairly for what we do. I think you’re going to see rural medicine continue to kind of just dwindle. And that’s heart-wrenching. Because I think that everybody should have care that’s accessible to them. This is Dr. Liedtke with an update from Sweetwater. Covid has finally arrived. We have over 10 active cases in the county, one hospitalized with critical illness, requiring respiratory support.
As coronavirus cases surge in Texas and other Sun Belt states, rural hospitals are enduring a uniquely painful emergency of their own, in a world away from the I.C.U.s of New York City, or even Dallas.
With just two ventilators, Rolling Plains Memorial Hospital in Sweetwater, Texas, has been terrified of Covid-19 ever since March. Sweetwater, perhaps best known as the home of the “World’s Largest Rattlesnake Roundup,” has a population of about 10,000. Even the slightest outbreak would overwhelm Rolling Plains, which sits on a major highway that carries tens of thousands of travelers a day.
Rural hospitals in America have been fighting for survival for years, mostly because of their relatively high numbers of uninsured patients. Approximately 130 rural hospitals in America have closed over the past decade, leaving millions of Americans without health care nearby. Texas has had more hospital closures than any other state. And the pandemic, by forcing providers to cancel elective procedures with high insurance reimbursement rates, has pushed many of its remaining hospitals to the brink of bankruptcy.
We spent several months with the staff of Rolling Plains as it fought off Covid-induced financial ruin before treating a single Covid patient. Then, in late April, Gov. Greg Abbott reopened the state, giving the hospital a financial lifeline, but also causing cases to spike statewide. And now, the hospital’s worst fears seemed to be coming true.
By Friday, Sweetwater’s county had 10 confirmed cases of Covid-19, with one requiring intensive care. This video Op-Ed, featuring the staff at Rolling Plains, shows how even just a few coronavirus cases can threaten a hospital, its workers’ families, and an entire rural community.
Donna Boatright is the former chief executive officer of Rolling Plains Memorial Hospital. She retired on June 12.
Jennifer Liedtke is a family physician at Rolling Plains Memorial Hospital.