The powered scooter showed the stark contrast between our aspirations for technology and its banal, dysfunctional reality.
Mr. Leitch is a contributing editor at New York magazine.
This week, Segway announced that it will soon stop production of its famous two-wheeled Personal Transporters. It’s very possible that you had already forgotten about the Segway; the company, bought by a Chinese rival in 2015, certainly had, with less than 1.5 percent of its revenue coming from the model.
But it is important to remember just how much the Segway, when it was introduced in 2001, was supposed to change our planet and how we interacted with it.
The Segway was an artifact of its time: the end of the dot-com bubble (the story of its existence was first broken by the now-defunct website Inside.com) and the Bill Clinton global economic expansion and the start of the end of that moment when we actually believed that technology and innovation would change our lives for the better. The Segway came along and showed the stark contrast between our expectations for tech and their banal, dysfunctional reality. As a cultural artifact, it’s a relic — and a harbinger.
The Segway itself was a technological marvel; as Time put it, “not only does it have no brakes, it also has no engine, no throttle, no gearshift and no steering wheel. And it can carry the average rider for a full day, nonstop, on only five cents’ worth of electricity.” But it was impressive without being particularly useful. (Was the world looking for something that transported at a speed slower than a car’s but faster than walking? And isn’t that just a bike?) And perhaps more to the point, like much technology of the time, it was so complex that people couldn’t figure out how to use it.
The Segway did not inspire a rush of buyers, and that’s probably for the best, because riders often crashed them. One high-profile accident was in 2003 when President George W. Bush fell off one while visiting his family complex in Kennebunkport, Maine. That same year, the company had to recall thousands of the machines because when the battery ran out, the scooter would stop, sometimes throwing riders off. Perhaps the most tragic (and ironic) accident came in 2010, when James Heselden, a British entrepreneur who had bought the company just a year earlier, died by running his Segway off a cliff.
But mostly Segways didn’t work because people simply looked ridiculous riding them. It is telling that in most of the news stories about the Segway’s demise, the photo editors used an image not of Mr. Kamen or the glossy launch photos or even President Bush’s fall: They used Kevin James’s Paul Blart character from the “Paul Blart: Mall Cop” movies (there are two of them, somehow).
The Segway was mostly successful as a device for beat cops and security guards, and no one represented that more than Paul Blart: a portly, affably ineffectual mall security guard who, criminals quickly learned, couldn’t move on his Segway nearly as fast as they could run. The sequel steered so hard into the Segway joke that it featured the device on the poster. The Next Big Idea had become a sight gag in a low-budget comedy sequel (and a particularly bad one at that).
The promise of technology is always going to outpace reality, but the disparity of what we dream of and what we can actually achieve will perhaps never be laid more plain and bare than the poor Segway. The machine will now occupy that odd space in American culture reserved for artifacts of a specific place and time that include the Pet Rock, the Beanie Babies and the Cabbage Patch Kids — except people actually liked those.
Will Leitch (@williamfleitch) is a contributing editor at New York magazine, a columnist for MLB.com and the founder of Deadspin.