Two career officials accused the attorney general and other political appointees of interfering in law enforcement to advance his interests and the president’s.
The accounts by two Justice Department officials on Wednesday before the House Judiciary Committee painted a damning portrait of the department under Attorney General William P. Barr, one of political appointees intervening in law enforcement to advance the interests of both Mr. Barr and President Trump.
Two Justice Department officials recounted to Congress in stinging detail on Wednesday how political appointees had intervened in criminal and antitrust cases to advance the personal interests of President Trump and Attorney General William P. Barr.
“Personal dislike of the industry is not a valid basis upon which to ground an antitrust investigation,” Mr. Elias said of the cannabis cases.
The two accounts painted a damning portrait of the Justice Department under Mr. Barr, made all the more remarkable given that the witnesses were both still department employees. They could increase pressure on Mr. Barr to further explain decisions related to criminal cases involving Mr. Trump’s associates and the abrupt firing of the top federal prosecutor in Manhattan, who had overseen some of the investigations into Trump allies.
Not long after the hearing got underway, the Justice Department announced that Mr. Barr had agreed to appear himself before the panel on July 28. Democrats had been threatening to issue a subpoena for his appearance. Seeking to further increase pressure on the attorney general, Representative Jerrold Nadler, Democrat of New York and the panel’s chairman, told reporters after the hearing that the committee “may very well” pursue impeachment proceedings against Mr. Barr — a highly unlikely outcome given the political reality of a fast-approaching election.
During the hearing, lawmakers spent more time trying to argue divergent political points about Mr. Barr, Mr. Trump and the investigations that have hung over his presidency than they did eliciting facts about the Justice Department from either witness.
Republicans mounted an aggressive defense of Mr. Barr, relying on their witness, Michael B. Mukasey, who was attorney general under President George W. Bush, to try to deflate Democrats’ arguments.
Republicans worked with the Justice Department to undermine the credibility of Mr. Zelinsky and Mr. Elias, who they pointed out had previously sought an assignment working with Democrats on the committee.
Mr. Zelinsky was among four career prosecutors who withdrew in protest from the Stone case after political appointees overrode their recommendation that Mr. Stone receive seven to nine years in prison, in line with standard sentencing guidelines.
Mr. Stone had been convicted of committing seven felonies to impede a congressional inquiry that threatened Mr. Trump. Mr. Zelinsky described a fraught battle between the career prosecutors working the case and their superiors that spilled into public the day after prosecutors made their request, when Mr. Trump attacked it on Twitter as unjust.
Later that day, the department submitted a new, more lenient recommendation to the judge deciding what punishment to impose.
Mr. Zelinsky testified that supervisors had openly discussed the intervention to shorten the recommendation as motivated by “political reasons” even though one supervisor agreed that doing so “was unethical and wrong.” He said they also pressured him to mischaracterize trial testimony and play down Mr. Stone’s misconduct so the department could recommend a lighter sentence.
Days before the intervention, Mr. Barr had maneuvered the Senate-confirmed U.S. attorney for the District of Columbia, Jessie K. Liu, out of her role and temporarily installed in her place a close aide from his own office, Timothy Shea.
Mr. Zelinsky said that he was told that Mr. Shea “was receiving heavy pressure from the highest levels of the Department of Justice” and complied because he was “afraid of” Mr. Trump. At one point, he said, a supervisor instructed him and other line prosecutors that they could be fired if they did not comply.
Under questioning by Mr. Jordan, Mr. Zelinsky identified J.P. Cooney, the chief of the fraud and public corruption section in the U.S. attorney’s office for the District of Columbia, as one of the supervisors who told him what was happening, but said there were at least two others. Democrats must now decide whether to try to seek testimony from Mr. Cooney.
Mr. Stone was ultimately sentenced to 40 months in prison and ordered to begin serving is sentence by June 30. He has asked a judge to grant him a two-month reprieve because of the pandemic, and on Wednesday the judge ordered Justice Department officials to report to her on its policies for dealing with such requests.
Mr. Elias’s account of the antitrust division more directly tied what he viewed as improper actions by Mr. Barr.
“At the direction of Attorney General Barr, the antitrust division launched 10 full-scale reviews of merger activity taking place in the marijuana, or cannabis, industry” because the attorney general “did not like the nature of their underlying business,” Mr. Elias said in written testimony.
Mr. Elias also said that the department initiated a review of four major automakers the day after Mr. Trump said on Twitter that he was enraged by the news that the companies would adhere to higher fuel emissions standards than the federal government demands.
In Mr. Elias’s account, the marijuana industry reviews consumed the antitrust division, making up nearly a third of all of its cases in the fiscal year that ended in September. He said that staff members objected to the numerous requests for information that the department sent to the companies, in large part because they were seen as harassing and overly burdensome.
The department’s Office of Professional Responsibility investigated Mr. Elias’s concerns about the reviews of mergers in the cannabis industry and determined that the division “acted reasonably and appropriately,” according to an email sent to the division and obtained by The New York Times.
The office also found that given the “unique challenge” that the nascent cannabis industry posed for federal and state regulators, the department reasonably sought out additional information from the industry.
Republicans drew heavily on that report to undercut his account. In defending Mr. Barr, they also frequently cited a ruling on Wednesday by a divided appeals court panel that ordered the dismissal of the case against Michael T. Flynn, Mr. Trump’s former national security adviser. The ruling could be appealed.
Mr. Barr had ordered that case dropped last month even though Mr. Flynn had twice pleaded guilty to lying to the F.B.I. about phone calls with the Russian ambassador — another move that critics of Mr. Barr have portrayed as favoritism to a presidential ally.
