U.S.|A Minneapolis Neighborhood Vowed to Check Its Privilege. It’s Already Being Tested.
In the city where the movement began, residents are not surprised that it is being taken especially seriously in Powderhorn Park, just blocks from Mr. Floyd’s deadly encounter with the police. For decades, the community has been a refuge for scrappy working-class activists with far-left politics. The biggest day of the year, locals often boast, is the May Day parade celebrating laborers.
Though it is one of the most diverse neighborhoods in Minneapolis, with black residents making up about 17 percent of the population, white people make up the largest group. About a third of the population is Latino.
Since the camp appeared, the community has organized shifts for delivering warm meals, medical care and counseling to people living in the park. They persuaded officials to back off an eviction notice served shortly after the campers arrived.
But many in the neighborhood, who were already beleaguered from the financial stresses of the coronavirus, now say they are eager for the campers to move on to stable housing away from the park.
But some people in the neighborhood have already found their best-laid plans to avoid calling the police harder to execute than they had imagined.
Last Thursday night, Joseph Menkevich found a black man wearing a hospital bracelet passed out in the elevator of his apartment building two blocks away from the park. Mr. Menkevich, who is white, quickly phoned a community activist but she did not pick up. He felt he had no choice but to call 911, so he did, but requested an ambulance only, not the police.
Ultimately, a white police officer arrived at the scene. The officer checked the situation out briefly and then returned to his squad car.
The impulse many white Powderhorn Park residents have to seek help from community groups rather than from the police is being felt in neighborhoods across the country. But some are finding the commitment hard to stand by when faced with the complex realities of life. While friends, neighbors and even family members in Powderhorn Park agree to avoid calling the police at all costs, it has been harder to establish where to draw the line.
Some of the self-examination she and her mother have done recently has led them to the same place. Ms. Miller came to see her decision to buy a home in the neighborhood as potentially preventing a person of color from doing so. And while Ms. Albers used to feel only pride about the work she put in to revitalizing the community, now, she sees her work as gentrification that may have pushed out nonwhite residents. The neighborhood’s black population has dropped more than five percentage points since 2000.
Sheldon Stately Sr., 43, grew up in Powderhorn Park with his grandmother, one of the community’s few black homeowners at the time. He returned there recently in a tent. Mr. Stately said he had been homeless for three years after he could not make rent and lost his identification, which he could not afford to replace.
“I would like to get back working and feel better about my life,” he said.
On a recent afternoon, Sarah Kenney and Diane Cullumber, who are both white, were speedwalking behind their toddler sons through the park leading up to the camp. Ms. Kenney had been volunteering there a few times a week.
She said the experience had challenged her to consider not only the safety of her own family, which has a comfortable home and locked doors to retreat behind when they feel uncomfortable, but also that of people living outside without protection. Ms. Cullumber agreed.
Some people of color in the neighborhood, however, said they were skeptical that the community would allow the encampment to stay. “This thing is probably going to last two or three weeks,” said Aza Ochoa, a Mexican and Native American father who was walking through the park with his three children, 12, 11 and 6. Several Spanish-speaking members of the community said they had not been able to take part in collective discussions about the camp because they were in English.
Akhmiri Sekhr-Ra, a black woman who rented in Powderhorn Park for 10 years, said she was making plans to move back with her daughter. Though Ms. Sekhr-Ra said she had had a personal no-police policy for years, she questioned whether her white former neighbors would be able to stick to theirs. “If something really goes down that makes people uncomfortable, I think they’re going to call,” she said.
