His main target was voting by mail, suggesting that mail carriers would be robbed as they delivered ballots.
President Trump traveled to the southwestern border on Tuesday to lift his flagging re-election campaign with a renewed anti-immigrant appeal, bragging about the progress his administration has made in constructing a “big, beautiful wall” before predicting to a group of students at a Phoenix mega church that the election could be stolen in a huge fraud.
In a visit with handpicked border officials and Republican allies in Yuma, Ariz., Mr. Trump sought to revive the issue at the heart of his 2016 victory: his portrayal of immigrants as a threat to the economic and personal security of Americans, and his promise to close the United States off from much of the world.
Mr. Trump followed his border visit with a rambling 90-minute speech to a mostly maskless gathering of Students for Trump in Phoenix in which he vented about the removal of Confederate monuments, China’s handling of the coronavirus outbreak and one of his newer themes, voter fraud by mail.
He suggested at one point that mail carriers could be held up as they delivered ballots, which could then be counterfeited by enemies foreign and domestic.
“This will be, in my opinion, the most corrupt election in the history of our country,” the president said to the crowd, which booed at the mere mention of mailed ballots.
His speech also targeted demonstrators who have in recent weeks tried to tear down monuments of slaveholding Americans, many of them former leaders of the Confederacy.
“Lock ’em up. Lock ’em up,” he said of the demonstrators, repeating the signature phrase of his 2016 campaign when he threatened to jail his Democratic opponent, Hillary Clinton.
The president’s visit to Arizona, which included a brief stop at a section of the wall, followed by a day his decision to suspend most worker visas for the rest of the year, effectively denying entry into the United States for more than 500,000 foreigners, including those seeking green cards to join their family members.
Mr. Trump has used the threat of the coronavirus to accelerate his efforts to shut down legal and illegal immigration, citing rarely used public health laws to turn back asylum seekers and impose other travel restrictions. But the centerpiece of the president’s efforts to stop the flow of immigration has always been the wall.
And he hopes it resonates in Arizona, a state Mr. Trump carried in 2016, but which both parties now see in play in November.
He also used the event in Yuma to accuse Democrats in Congress and former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., his rival in the presidential election, of being weak on border security.
In September 2016, Mr. Trump delivered the most important immigration speech of his campaign at the Phoenix Convention Center, laying out in detail the hard-line approach he would take to shutting down the border, deporting undocumented immigrants and reducing the flow of foreigners trying to come to the United States legally.
But Arizona is roughly split in party registration among Democrats, Republicans and unaffiliated voters. And recent events — including a spike in coronavirus cases and unrest over police brutality — have shaken up the state’s politics.
In 2016, in a sign of the shifting politics in Arizona, voters in Maricopa County defeated Joe Arpaio, the Republican sheriff who had been an outspoken champion of some of the state’s most restrictive anti-immigrant policies. Democrats are betting that they can do the same for Mr. Trump in 2020.
The president is betting that his progress on the wall will help him win the state even as his administration has run into legal and practical hurdles.
The federal government has the power to seize land for the wall by negotiating with the landowners and filing eminent domain lawsuits, but many owners sought to delay the construction beyond the election. The administration had acquired just 10 of the 213 miles it needed as of last month, an increase of seven miles since December, even as the administration filed a flurry of lawsuits against the landowners this year.
Customs and Border Protection officials have contended that they can still meet Mr. Trump’s mandate by building on the projected border wall path already owned by the federal government in Arizona, California and El Paso, Texas. But to accomplish Mr. Trump’s goal, the administration would have to double the rate of construction to nearly 40 miles built per month.
Jeremy Peters contributed reporting.