A video showed the protester motionless on the ground and bleeding. Fifty-seven officers resigned from the department’s Emergency Response Team in solidarity with the two who were suspended.
Police officers knocked a man down on a sidewalk in Buffalo on Thursday as he tried to talk to them. The 75-year-old man appeared to hit his head and lie motionless on the ground.
Prosecutors are investigating the actions of two Buffalo police officers who were suspended without pay on Thursday night after a video showed them shoving a 75-year-old protester, who was hospitalized with a head injury.
The video taken by WBFO, a local radio station, shows the man, identified on Friday as Martin Gugino, approaching a group of officers during a protest stemming from the death of George Floyd. He was identified by the Western New York Peace Center, a nonprofit that named him in a Facebook post, saying he is a peace activist and a member.
After the video shows Mr. Gugino stopping in front of the officers to talk, an officer yells “push him back” three times; one officer pushes his arm into Mr. Gugino’s chest, while another extends his baton toward him with both hands. Mr. Gugino flails backward, landing just out of range of the camera, with blood immediately leaking from his right ear.
An officer leans down to examine him, the video shows, but another officer then pulls the first officer away. Several other officers are seen walking by the man, motionless on the ground, without checking on him.
The Erie County District Attorney’s Office said in a statement on Friday that prosecutors were investigating the incident. It said Mr. Gugino was unable to provide a statement to investigators on Thursday night at the Erie County Medical Center, where he was taken for treatment for the head injury. On Friday, Mr. Gugino was in serious but stable condition and was alert and oriented, according to a hospital spokesman.
The video, which rapidly spread across social media, added to a growing body of videos from across the nation that showed officers responding to protests against police violence with more police violence. Fury among online supporters of the protests was heightened by the Police Department’s initial claim that he “tripped and fell,” a description at direct odds with the video.
The officers’ union and the Buffalo Police Department did not immediately respond to messages seeking comment on Friday. Byron Brown, the mayor of Buffalo, said the city was aware of the development.
The Buffalo Police Department told local news media that five people were arrested during the protest.
Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York condemned the actions of the officers in the video late Thursday night.
“It sickens me,” the Erie County executive, Mark Poloncarz, said on Twitter of the video, which includes both vulgarity and disturbing images.
Mr. Brown, the mayor, said in a statement that he was disturbed by the episode and that the city’s police commissioner had ordered an immediate investigation.
Like other cities in New York, Buffalo has widely deployed law enforcement during the protests. On June 1, officers in armored vehicles fired tear gas after asking a crowd to disperse. Several stores were looted; a vehicle drove into a group of police officers, injuring two; and two people were struck by gunfire.
The Buffalo Police Department has been accused in lawsuits in recent years of discriminating against minority groups. In 2018, the department was sued in federal court, accused of discriminating against people of color through traffic enforcement practices that included checkpoints in neighborhoods where a majority of residents are black.
Chinyere Ezie, one of the lawyers litigating the case, said additional plaintiffs had been added to the suit, amended in April. Ms. Ezie said the video showing Mr. Gugino’s treatment highlighted “systemic problems and institutional failures” in the department’s enforcement, even when both the city’s mayor and police chief are black.
