A Brooklyn winemaker travels north to Bristol Bay each summer to net the red salmon that support his family. This year he’s faced with a tough ethical and economic choice.
ANCHORAGE — For Christopher Nicolson, each June brings happy anticipation of his family’s trip to the tiny Alaska fishing town of Naknek, 3,700 miles from his home in East Flatbush, Brooklyn.
Mr. Nicolson, 45, spends much of the year working at Red Hook Winery in Brooklyn, where he is the managing winemaker, but his main income is drawn from Iliamna Fish Company. The business, which he and two cousins own, sells Alaska red salmon directly to thousands of shareholders, most of them in New York and Portland, Ore., as well as to a few high-end restaurants and stores, including the Park Slope Food Co-op in Brooklyn.
The Nicolson family — from left, William, Emily, Christopher and Ezra — on their skiff in Naknek, Alaska, in 2017.
For close to a century, Mr. Nicolson’s big extended family has fished each summer in Bristol Bay, home to the largest red-salmon fishery on the planet. His grandmother, who is Athabascan, was born in the region. His brother used to joke that the family were like fish themselves, drawn by instinct to the mouth of the granite-colored Kvichak River, year after year.
But suddenly Mr. Nicolson feels like an outsider, one who may be looked on with suspicion even by his Alaskan relatives, because he could be carrying a deadly virus.
In the months leading up to the fishing season, Mr. Nicolson has been torn by the signature dilemma of the pandemic era: weighing what he is willing to risk against what he is willing to sacrifice, never knowing if he has the best information to make the call.
Last Tuesday, Mr. Nicolson arrived in Anchorage, having tested negative for Covid-19 just before he left New York. He was tested again on Friday, to be sure he wasn’t exposed during travel. (He will only be notified if there is a positive result.) As required by an Alaskan state mandate, he began taking his temperature twice a day.
On Wednesday, Mr. Nicolson arrived at the airport in King Salmon, a town next to Naknek. He was used to seeing people wearing masks in Brooklyn, but it felt jarring to see familiar faces in masks as he made his way through town, evidence of how the virus had crept into a place that had always felt so safely removed from the larger world.
Alaska has so far managed to keep its number of Covid-19 cases among the lowest in the nation, helped by its isolation, social-distancing measures and quarantine for arriving travelers. Cruise cancellations, while devastating to the state’s economy, have also shut out a million visitors, reducing a potential source of infection.
By mid-June, as the fishing season began, there were more than a dozen cases in the region, almost all of them among people who had come from out of state. As Mr. Nicolson packed his patched-up waders and rubber boots in Brooklyn, 900 or so Naknek residents braced for the weeks to come.
The work of fishing is sleepless and bone-tiring. Operators net the fish from boats, or, like Mr. Nicolson, they string nets into the current from the shore, which is called set-netting. The salmon hit hard for a few peak weeks. Fishermen work around the clock, following a state-managed schedule of openings and closings dictated by the tides.
For all the work and risk, the payoffs can be huge. Last year, one of the best on record, brought a catch of more than 235 million pounds, worth just under $700 million. In an average year, between selling fish to shareholders and a commercial processor, Mr. Nicolson estimates he makes $100,000 after taxes.
This year’s salmon markets are going to be weak, a significant departure from last year, said Garrett Evridge, a fisheries economist with McDowell Group in Anchorage. Sales to restaurants are expected to be down because of closings across the country, he said. Retail demand may be steady, though high unemployment could force consumers to seek out a less expensive protein, Mr. Evridge said.
She bought a new boat and had been hoping to captain it this summer, but bringing up a crew from outside of Bristol Bay felt too risky, she said. Her husband, Bronson Brito, also a nurse, decided he would fish. Mr. Brito has been a captain for 16 seasons, she said.
Norman Van Vactor, chief executive of the Bristol Bay Economic Development Corporation, a seafood company that owns and manages investments in the Bering Sea, has worked in fishing in the region for decades. He expects the number of fishermen will be down this year.
“If I was going to Vegas today, I’d put it at 15 percent, maybe as high as 20 percent,” he said.
One major concern for the industry is the processing plants, Mr. Van Vactor said. Thousands of workers will be living four or eight to a room, eating in cramped cafeterias, working double shifts, every day of the week.
There are a number of safeguards in place to identify and isolate fishermen and processors carrying the virus before they spread it, Mr. Van Vactor said. But the season is so short and intense, he added, that an outbreak that closes a processor even for a day or two could create a costly ripple for fishermen, who might then not have a place to sell their fish.
Mr. Nicolson’s family-business model gives him some security because he and his relatives will deliver some of the fish to a small processor, who will package and freeze it for direct sales. The rest of the catch will be sold to a large processor.
Mr. Nicolson planned to begin fishing within the next week or so.
