What Happened in Rochester, N.Y.
A tweet by Liberty University’s president, Jerry Falwell Jr., has sparked an angry protest in the evangelical college’s community and a rare apology from Mr. Falwell.
WASHINGTON — The racial strife roiling the country and its politics has reached an unlikely redoubt of social conservatism, Jerry Falwell Jr.’s Liberty University.
Blackface and Ku Klux Klan imagery tweeted by Mr. Falwell, who tolerates little dissent at the evangelical university he leads, has spurred staff resignations, demands for his firing by influential alumni, an incipient boycott and a raucous protest in the university’s home of Lynchburg, Va., over the past week.
So heated was the response that on Monday, Mr. Falwell, the university’s president and a vocal ally of President Trump, did something rare for him in the heat of a controversy: He apologized for a May 27 tweet in which he mocked the social-distancing orders of Virginia’s Democratic governor, Ralph Northam. In that tweet was the image of a mask on which was emblazoned the photo from Mr. Northam’s medical school yearbook of a man in black face and another in Ku Klux Klan robes, one of whom might be Mr. Northam.
It is not clear whether the overture — as much another jab at Mr. Northam as an olive branch to Mr. Falwell’s critics — will defuse the controversy.
The tweet in question came after months of criticism over Mr. Falwell’s decision to reopen Liberty University after spring break, despite the coronavirus pandemic, and of his mockery of social distancing orders.
At least four black faculty and staff members resigned in protest, including Mr. Scott and Quan McLaurin, who was Liberty’s director of diversity retention. Players on Liberty’s popular football and basketball teams have had fraught meetings with coaches and staff to discuss George Floyd, a black man whose death in police custody has roiled the nation, and the Falwell controversy.
A regional broadcaster owned by an African-American businessman and Liberty alumnus threatened to no longer run Liberty advertising or content. And the larger Liberty alumni world showed a dissident streak unheard-of in the school’s nearly 50-year history.
The letter was turned into a petition on change.org, signed by nearly 37,000 people as of Monday.
The tumult has spread into town. Josh Read, owner of Lynchburg restaurant Fifth and Federal, tweeted his appreciation of Mr. Falwell’s face mask idea, saying, “We would offer them to our staff as a mask option!” An ensuing protest May 31 turned violent, when demonstrators threw rocks and debris at the restaurant and neighboring businesses, injuring police officers.
The uproar is more remarkable in light of Mr. Falwell’s tight control over Liberty and his intolerance for dissent. Liberty’s administration controls the content of the school newspaper. Faculty do not have tenure, and renew their contracts from year to year. And Liberty without a Falwell in charge would be a sea change for a school almost synonymous with the name.
The university was founded by Mr. Falwell’s famous father as a bastion of social conservatism, one that was unabashedly combative as it trained what it called “Champions for Christ.” Under the family, the university has grown from a modest Baptist college to a giant with cash investments and endowments of nearly $2 billion, nearly 46,000 undergraduates and a campus that sprawls across Lynchburg and neighboring communities in Virginia. Total enrollment, including online students, exceeds 100,000.
But this time, dissent ran deep. Even Mr. Falwell’s wife, Becki, chastised him. “I’m not wearing that mask, and I don’t approve of Jerry’s tweet,” she said on the Eric Bolling broadcast as Mr. Falwell laughed.
“We’ve extended a lot of grace and looked past a lot of things, but when we saw that tweet with the blackface and the KKK on it, we said enough is enough,” said Eric Carroll, pastor of the Ascension Church RVA in Richmond and a 1991 Liberty graduate.
The anger over the blackface tweet cannot be unraveled from Mr. Falwell’s contentious decision to reopen the campus after spring break, which Mr. Northam responded to by placing further restrictions on in-person instruction. Mr. Falwell reacted to coverage of his decision by lodging trespassing charges against journalists who visited the campus and threatening news media outlets, including The New York Times, with lawsuits.
Liberty students, parents and alumni have posted hundreds of messages on Facebook and Twitter objecting to Mr. Falwell’s recent behavior, some under the hashtag #LUDeservesBetter. Calum Best, a recent Liberty graduate, posted a manifesto on Facebook encouraging the Liberty community to lobby its board of trustees to censure him, and it was shared more than 700 times. Past controversies involving Mr. Falwell have not moved the board, which is composed of Falwell supporters and Mr. Falwell himself.
After talking with players and staff, Hugh Freeze, Liberty’s football coach, issued a statement on Twitter calling for unity. Ritchie McKay, Liberty’s men’s basketball coach, tweeted a statement that said in part: “The Liberty Flames men’s basketball players and staff are united in opposing PREJUDICE, BIGOTRY and RACISM. We’re against all intents associated with those three affronts to human dignity.” Mr. Falwell retweeted the statement.
Black alumni who signed the open letter were less sanguine.
After the apology, Andre Whitehead, the chief executive of Whitehead Media Ventures, which runs a network of Virginia regional broadcasters, canceled a news conference in Lynchburg on Monday to announce that his company would no longer air Liberty advertisements and content.
In an interview before the apology, Mr. Whitehead, a 1988 Liberty graduate, said he had called Mr. Falwell personally last week asking him to apologize, delete the tweet and meet with the four organizers of the open letter.
What did Mr. Falwell say?
