Where can we find the leadership to save the U.S.?
Well, I am now 66, and my fears have all come true — and worse. I am not at all certain we will be able to conduct a free and fair election in November or have a peaceful transition of presidential power in January. We are edging toward a cultural civil war, only this time we are not lucky: Abraham Lincoln is not the president.
Instead, we have Donald Trump, a man whose first instinct, when the country is being ripped apart, was to have peaceful protesters tear-gassed and shoved aside so that he could walk to a nearby church just for a photo op outside holding a Bible. He did not open that Bible to read a healing passage. He did not enter the church to host a healing dialogue. He posed for a photo op to drive up his support among white evangelicals. Trump was holding the Bible upside down.
Three years ago, I might have hoped that Senate Republicans would step in and restrain Trump. But now we all know better. The Senate Republican caucus today is nothing but a political brothel. Mitch McConnell is the madame. And McConnell and his caucus rent themselves out by the night to whoever will energize the Republican base to keep them in power and secure the economic benefits for their wealthiest donors.
Those energizers have been Sarah Palin, the Tea Party, coal companies, industrial polluters and now Trump’s most rabid supporters. It doesn’t matter who. The red light is always on above the door of the Senate G.O.P. caucus room.
It is interesting to note that scientists tell us that people with the coronavirus who are loud and obnoxious in a closed room are the biggest super-spreaders of that pathogen. And internet experts tell us that people who are loud and obnoxious online are the biggest super-spreaders of political pathogens. That’s because Facebook’s whole business model is to encourage and reward enragement because it drives more engagement. Sorry, help is not on the way from Zuck.
So where to look? It is not hopeless. I hope America’s principled business leaders, and there are many, can find a way to come together to lead a healing discussion, maybe through the Business Roundtable, in the absence of a president willing and able to do so.
Stephenson added: “This is about doing justice and making sure that we’re putting in place procedures … to address what seem to be constant and recurring injustices … as it relates to interaction of law enforcement” with the black community.
How can business make an immediate difference? Obviously by empowering politicians who want to address police reforms, but, just as important, by amplifying local social entrepreneurs working in disadvantaged neighborhoods to help their residents realize their full potential.
I am from Minneapolis. I was born in the Northside, a few miles from the street where George Floyd was killed. No one there is doing more today to make sure that disadvantaged families in that neighborhood have the tools to succeed than my friend Sondra Samuels, the C.E.O. and president of the Northside Achievement Zone. NAZ is working with parents, students and local partners to drive a culture shift in predominantly black North Minneapolis to end multigenerational poverty through education and building family stability.
NAZ and its 30 nonprofit partners and schools will tell you that it is a struggle, often two steps forward and one step back, but they have been making a quantifiable difference in getting kids the tools to succeed and get to college, and at the same time providing parents the support they need to stabilize their homes, increase their parenting skills and ensure upward mobility.
NAZ has also significantly increased access to quality early-learning opportunities for the 1,000 families it works with and helped provide measurable improvements in reading proficiency and other learning metrics critical for life success.
If you are depressed and want to do something that will have a lasting impact for the common good — not just denounce looters and scream at Trump on your television screen — check out the NAZ website and hit the donate button!
Help is not on the way from this White House or this G.O.P., but the country is full of problem-solvers. We need to ignore Trump as much as possible; he’s made himself part of the problem. But we can connect, elevate, amplify and empower the business leaders, social entrepreneurs and local leaders who are rising and ready to be the solution.