Good morning. U.S. coronavirus cases set a daily record. Policing bills hit a wall in Congress. And Democrats lead in several Senate races. Let’s start with a look at the black-white wage gap.
A civil rights rally in Atlanta in 1973.
If you look at the government’s official wage statistics, you’ll see a somewhat different story. Those numbers show that the wage gap is smaller than in the mid-20th century.
Elsewhere: Writers for The Atlantic have previously made cases in favor of and against reparations.
The U.S. recorded 36,880 coronavirus cases on Wednesday, the highest single-day total so far. While some of that reflects an increase in testing, the virus really is spreading more rapidly than it was several weeks ago. Across much of Europe and Asia, by contrast, the situation is less dire.
The rise of U.S. cases is also leading to more serious illness. In Texas, about 4,000 people with the virus are hospitalized, more than double the number at the beginning of June. Houston’s intensive-care units are now filled to 97 percent of capacity, the mayor said.
New York, New Jersey and Connecticut will require visitors from several states with high positive test rates to quarantine for two weeks. The list includes Florida, which had imposed the same rule on visiting New Yorkers three months ago.
Investors alarmed by the surging cases sent the S&P 500 falling 2.6 percent on Wednesday. The drop was particularly tough on industries vulnerable to a prolonged pandemic, such as cruise lines and airlines.
Some countries in Asia and Europe are taking novel approaches to managing new waves of infections. In South Korea, the government has advised citizens to carry two types of masks — a surgical mask for normal use, and a heavy-duty mask for crowded situations.
Senate Democrats blocked a Republican police overhaul bill that they said was not an adequate response to systemic racism. The House, which Democrats control, is set to pass its own legislation today, but Senate Republican leaders have said they will not take up the bill.
The Times analyzed videos and interviewed witnesses to reconstruct how the police in Philadelphia used tear gas on a group of trapped protesters this month.
Amazon employees say a “systemic pattern of racial bias” affects the company, including racist graffiti and missed promotions.
Ibram X. Kendi’s books appear on four of The Times’s best-seller lists this week. “How to Be an Antiracist” is No. 1 on our hardcover nonfiction list, while “Stamped From the Beginning” is on our paperback nonfiction list.
The Republicans’ Senate majority appears to be in danger, according to New York Times/Siena College polls of battleground states. To retake Senate control, Democrats would need to win five of the 11 races that currently appear competitive (as well as the vice presidency, which breaks Senate ties). The Times polled three of those races — in Arizona, Michigan and North Carolina — and the Democratic candidate is leading all, although by only three percentage points in North Carolina.
It won’t be easy for Democrats, because nine of the 11 races are in states that President Trump won in 2016. But his unpopularity has made it imaginable, as Jonathan Martin and Matt Stevens explain. In a separate story, Nate Cohn looks at Trump’s deficit in six swing states, including Florida.
The three white men accused of killing Ahmaud Arbery, a black man who was chased while jogging in Georgia, were indicted on murder charges.
A federal appeals court panel ordered an end to the case against Michael Flynn, President Trump’s former national security adviser, delivering a major victory to the Justice Department.
Some people are turning to conspiracy theories to explain the flood of fireworks booming over American cities. But experts say the simplest answer is probably the right one: People are bored, and fireworks are fun.
Live cockroaches, a funeral wreath and pornographic videos: The Wall Street Journal goes behind the scenes on eBay’s harassment campaign against two critics.
Lives Lived: The Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev famously warned the West, “We will bury you!” But his son Sergei Khrushchev liked the West just fine. In fact, he moved to the United States and became a senior fellow at Brown University. “I like this country,” he once said. He has died at 84.
In Powderhorn Park, a diverse Minneapolis neighborhood just blocks from where George Floyd was killed last month, many white, liberal residents are rethinking their relationship with law enforcement.
When a multiracial group of homeless people displaced by the unrest over Floyd’s death set up a tent camp in the neighborhood park, residents pledged not to involve the police. They engaged community activists, delivered meals and persuaded officials to back off an eviction notice.
But as our colleague Caitlin Dickerson reports, the limited alternatives to traditional policing have created dilemmas about where to draw the line.
One Powderhorn resident debated calling 911 after he found an unconscious man wearing a hospital bracelet. Another regretted doing so after two teenagers held him up at gunpoint. And some residents of color doubt that their white neighbors’ vows to avoid involving the police will last.
Would you like to make a deep-dish pie, with crisp edges and without mushy dough? This recipe, developed by King Arthur Flour’s test-kitchen team, achieves that. The secret? Baking it in a cast-iron pan.
Some other tricks: The tomato sauce is “smudged on top of mozzarella like sunblock,” Tejal Rao writes, which turns the cheese into a barrier against sogginess. And sprinkling more cheese to the edge of the pan adds crunch.
Good news if you haven’t been able to see “Hamilton” (or just want to rewatch it, over and over): The film version begins streaming on Disney Plus on July 3.
The movie — which is not really a movie but a live-capture of the stage production — was shot over three days in June 2016. It stars much of the original cast of the award-winning Broadway show. This is how the film came together.
Here’s a list of 16 books to watch for in July. In “Afterland,” a mother must disguise her son in a world where most of the men have been wiped out. The novel “Blacktop Wasteland,” a fast-paced noir set in Virginia, follows a mechanic who agrees to one last heist. Nonfiction titles include a memoir by the longtime “Jeopardy!” host Alex Trebek.
Say goodbye to the Segway. Once hailed as the two-wheeled future of personal transportation, the device — popular with tourists and law enforcement — is being retired.
The late-night hosts addressed coronavirus-related travel bans.
Here’s today’s Mini Crossword, and a clue: Channel for political junkies (5 letters).
P.S. Ashley Southall has been named the new police bureau chief on The Times’s Metro desk. Ashley, an Alabama native, has covered the N.Y.P.D. for The Times since 2016.
Today’s episode of “The Daily” is about how voters in battleground states view the presidential candidates. On the “The Argument,” Opinion writers talk about Joe Biden’s veepstakes.
Please consider supporting Times journalism with a subscription.
