The herbalist Jade Marks shares three simple recipes for calming, restorative drinks.
For the last two years, Marks has been sharing their extensive knowledge through their virtual apothecary, 69herbs. Founded in 2018, the company sells plant-based remedies handmade in Marks’s Brooklyn studio — its products are now stocked in 25 stores throughout the United States and Canada — and specializes in glycerites. These alcohol-free tinctures, made from plant extracts and designed to be ingested neat or diluted with water, come in an array of different blends that Marks says may help with malaise both physical and mental. There is a formula made with extracts of echinacea, ginger and honey, for example, that they suggest might boost the immune system. To induce a deeper sleep, they recommend a blend that includes valerian, a perennial known for its sedative capabilities. But over the past few months, as the country has grappled with the Covid-19 pandemic and the ongoing violence against black Americans, Marks has focused on addressing grief and anxiety.
There is a longstanding connection between healing practices and social justice movements, they emphasized during a recent phone call, noting that the Black Panthers and the Young Lords integrated healing and wellness initiatives into their work. “The Black Panthers were basically responsible for introducing acupuncture into the American mainstream,” they said. To support the current protests in downtown Manhattan, Marks has been creating and distributing care kits, which include a selection of 69herbs’s healing tinctures. “Some of the city’s herbalists are trying to build a herbal mutual-aid network,” they said.
Because Marks believes that “herbalism is the people’s medicine,” they want to upend the idea that knowledge of plant usage is reserved for a few experts. “That’s what I worry about in the herbal world,” said Marks, who has hosted herbalism workshops at the Institute of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles and the Alchemist’s Kitchen apothecary in New York, and recently taught a virtual class series that addressed grief and healing. “I do see and am concerned about the consolidation of power when we get into so-called experts — we are all experts,” they continued. “The benefits should be more accessible, especially for people who are from marginalized communities.” When a company in Massachusetts trademarked the name “fire cider” (in reference to a tonic of apple-cider vinegar, citrus fruit extracts, hot peppers and spices — a staple brew in the herbalist community for decades) in 2012, it was met with strong opposition that ultimately led to a lawsuit; last fall, a court determined the term could not be trademarked. “Herbal formulas are not meant to be owned, they’re meant to be replicated,” Marks said. “That’s the beautiful spirit of herbalism.” With that, they share three herbal recipes that can be made by anyone at home.
