Ms. McGrath and John Hickenlooper, two moderate Democrats, prevailed in their Senate primaries on Tuesday. In Oklahoma, voters approved a Medicaid expansion.
In Colorado, John Hickenlooper, the state’s former governor, survived a rough campaign to win his Democratic Senate primary, propelling him to a general election challenge to Senator Cory Gardner, a Republican and top target for Democrats looking to capture control of the Senate.
And in Oklahoma, voters narrowly approved expanding Medicaid coverage to at least 200,000 lower-income adults, according to The Associated Press, an affirmation of Obamacare in an overwhelmingly Republican state. The results, coming as the state battles the coronavirus pandemic, was a repudiation of President Trump and Republican state leaders who had opposed the Medicaid expansion and who supported a court case seeking to overturn President Barack Obama’s signature health care plan.
One week after the Kentucky primary was conducted, The A.P. declared Ms. McGrath the winner after a campaign that was shaped by the coronavirus pandemic and protests against racial injustice. She narrowly defeated Charles Booker, an African-American state lawmaker who harnessed anger over a pair of fatal shootings by the authorities in Louisville to roar into contention in the final weeks of the campaign.
In Colorado’s Senate race, Andrew Romanoff, a former state House speaker, drew organizational and financial support from many liberal Democrats across the country as he challenged Mr. Hickenlooper. But Mr. Hickenlooper, who ran unsuccessfully for the Democratic presidential nomination, had the strong backing of national Democrats who thought he would be the strongest candidate to run against the vulnerable Mr. Gardner.
Mr. Hickenlooper’s campaign was marked by a series of missteps, which had given Republicans a glimmer of hope. The state ethics commission held him in contempt for defying a subpoena to appear at a hearing over a complaint against him, and found that he had violated the state’s gift ban while he was governor by accepting rides on a private jet and in a limousine.
But he now appears to be in a relatively strong position as he enters what is almost certain to be one of the marquee Senate battles of the fall.
Also in Colorado, Lauren Boebert, a political novice and gun-rights activist, claimed an upset primary victory on Tuesday against Representative Scott Tipton, a five-term incumbent endorsed by Mr. Trump.
Ms. Boebert, 33, owns a restaurant in Rifle, Colo., and has gained attention in recent days for keeping it open in defiance of state orders tied to the pandemic — at least until a sheriff obtained a cease-and-desist order against her.
And in Oklahoma, the Medicaid ballot measure that passed on Tuesday was the latest Democratic-led push on health care to succeed in a red state, following other efforts in states including Utah, Nebraska, Idaho and Maine, which at the time had a Republican governor and is now led by a Democrat. Thirteen other states, mostly in the South, have not yet expanded Medicaid.
Republicans have often fought such measures because of financial worries and their opposition to the Affordable Care Act, which stipulates that the federal government cover most of the cost of any Medicaid expansion. Oklahoma voters were the first to expand the program via a constitutional amendment, which proponents say will prevent interference by Gov. Kevin Stitt or his fellow Republicans in the State Legislature. Missouri will hold a similar vote on Aug. 4.
In Utah on Tuesday, the former Ambassador Jon Huntsman Jr. was facing off against the state’s lieutenant governor, Spencer Cox, in a primary election ahead of a Republican race for governor. That contest had not been called as of early Wednesday. It was not clear until Tuesday that Ms. McGrath had won in Kentucky because a number of counties waited to ensure they had counted their many mailed-in ballots before releasing results.