People have long complained about the use of African-American stereotypes in marketing. The Aunt Jemima decision has prompted more companies to take action.
Mars Food, the owner of the brand Uncle Ben’s rice, which features an older black man smiling on the box, said on Wednesday afternoon that it would “evolve” the brand as protests over racism and police brutality across the country continue.
And later on Wednesday, B&G Foods Inc., the parent company of Cream of Wheat, announced that it too was conducting a review of its packaging.
The porridge box, which depicts a beaming black man in a white chef’s uniform, has not been altered much since its debut in the late 19th century. The character was named “Rastus,” a pejorative term for black men, and he was once depicted as a barely literate cook who did not know what vitamins were.
Complaints about the images go back many years.
The recent widespread anti-racism protests have renewed the focus on companies that for decades have used racial images to sell rice, breakfast foods, dairy products and snacks, among other products and services.
They have fielded complaints about these depictions before, and they have sometimes made adjustments. In 2007, Uncle Ben, whose face has appeared on the box of rice since the 1940s, was promoted from a servant to chairman of the board.
But Kevin D. Thomas, a professor of multicultural branding in the Race, Ethnic and Indigenous Studies Program at Marquette University, said he hoped the current push for change would finally lead to a substantial overhaul in the marketing world.
“I’m hoping this is a reckoning and we’re going to start seeing something that becomes pervasive,” Professor Thomas said.
The images of placid, smiling African-Americans on commercial products were often created during times of racial upheaval, Professor Thomas said.
Characters like Aunt Jemima, who was first depicted as a mammy, followed Reconstruction when white people were scared of what it meant to live alongside newly freed slaves, he said.
“There was a lot of angst around that. There was terror and a sense of what does this mean for white supremacy?” he said.
Mexican-American advocacy groups denounced the character and demanded the company stop using it to sell chips. Frito responded by making the Frito Bandito less unkempt. His beard was shaved and his gold tooth was removed, but the character did not fully disappear until around 1971.
Sheelagh McNeill contributed research and Neil Vigdor contributed reporting.