Also this week, all that cardboard from ordering online.
“There has been a level of opening up of imagination in terms of what we can push for that won’t necessarily retract,” Ms. Patterson said.
So. Much. Cardboard.
For our family, one particularly visible side effect of the pandemic has been cardboard. Every week, the boxes that bring us food, baby supplies and other necessities pile up by the backdoor. Every weekend, we tackle the teetering tower and the cycle starts anew.
I can’t help but feel guilty about all that cardboard. But should I?
The answer is complicated. There’s no question that the pandemic has caused a surge in online shopping and its attendant impacts, including cardboard use, said Miguel Jaller, who studies transportation and logistics at the University of California, Davis. Producing a single box made from two pounds of cardboard releases 483 grams of carbon dioxide, about the same as driving a mile, according to the Corrugated Packaging Alliance.
At the same time, some cities temporarily halted recycling programs at the beginning of the outbreak to protect municipal workers. Even before that, many were still reeling from China’s 2018 decision to stop accepting recycled material from abroad.
But that’s not the whole story. The surge in e-commerce has also been offset by a drop in sales from brick-and-mortar stores, which normally dominate the cardboard market.
“It’s purely a distribution and supply-chain shift that’s happening,” said Rachel Kenyon, senior vice president at the Fibre Box Association, a trade group. Aside from a bump in March as grocers struggled to stock their shelves, she said, overall demand for cardboard has remained unchanged.
The same logic applies in our homes. While ordering more stuff online has environmental costs, staying home reduces our negative impacts in other ways.
The pandemic may even reduce certain impacts of e-commerce, Dr. Jaller said. Fewer cars on the road mean delivery trucks spend less time battling traffic and searching for parking. And suppliers like Amazon have reduced rush orders, allowing them to maximize delivery efficiency. Dr. Jaller said he suspected that per-package emissions have actually decreased even as the sector has grown.
It’s impossible to say whether this trend will persist after states reopen. Dr. Jaller said many customers may continue to opt for grocery delivery now that they’ve experienced the convenience. Shuttered retail chains and malls could also push consumers online. And that prospect has the cardboard industry worried.
On average, corrugated cardboard contains 50 percent recycled material, Ms. Kenyon said, and most of that material is collected from stores. If they close, manufacturers will have to rely on consumers to supply cardboard for recycling.
However, only half of residents in the United States have easy access to curbside recycling, said Dylan de Thomas, a vice president at the Recycling Partnership, a nonprofit group. And those that do often don’t take full advantage.
Last week’s newsletter misstated the position of Cassandra Thiel at NYU Langone Health. She is an assistant professor in the departments of population health and ophthalmology who focuses on hospital design and medical technologies, not an ophthalmologist.
We’d love your feedback on this newsletter. We read every message, and reply to many! Please email thoughts and suggestions to |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| 