Hertz is bankrupt, yet it moved to sell new stock anyway. For sheer audacity, our columnist says, this takes his breath away.
Typically, when a company offers stock to the public, it emphasizes the positive. Fundamentally, the pitch is this: Buy us and prosper. Maybe even get rich.
But Hertz Global Holdings put out a prospectus this week that projected a different outcome: Gamble on us and be prepared to end up with something worthless.
Hertz, you see, is bankrupt. But it said it hoped to sell $500 million in shares, maybe even $1 billion, anyway. For sheer audacity, what Hertz was trying just takes my breath away.
By Thursday, Hertz decided “that it was in the best interests of the company to terminate” the offering.
The S.E.C. declined to expand on Mr. Clayton’s statement, and Hertz did not respond to repeated requests for comment.
What is unusual in the Hertz stock venture is that the company is still in the early stages of what are formally known as Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings. Companies in bankruptcy do not, as a rule, sell stock, precisely because creditors have a higher claim on assets than shareholders do. By the time the creditors have been paid a fraction of what they are owed, there may be nothing left for shareholders.
Still, a federal bankruptcy judge in Delaware had given Hertz permission to sell up to $1 billion in stock, and on Monday, its prospectus said it intended to sell $500 million worth.
Issuing additional shares of stock while the bankruptcy process is still underway is a fabulous idea, if you hold the company’s bonds, said Michael Cazayoux, who has analyzed Hertz’s bonds for KDP Investment Advisors.
“The money that the new shareholders pay may go right to the bondholders,” he said. That’s one reason he had given Hertz bonds a “buy” rating. They were trading for around 40 cents on the dollar but may have been worth more than 50 cents .
On the face of it, though, if the new stock sale had been permitted, it would have been a very bad deal for shareholders. “That’s why, normally, this just doesn’t happen,” he said.
But there is always a first attempt, and this may well have been it.
I asked Lynn E. Turner, a former S.E.C. chief accountant, whether a stock offering like this, by a company in the early days of bankruptcy, had ever occurred before. “I can’t recall an incident where a company has made a stock filing this early after filing for bankruptcy,” he said.
Hertz, to its credit, disclosed the risks to prospective stock shareholders quite openly. If it had been permitted to proceed with the sale, buyers could not have said they weren’t warned.
In fact, it used the word “worthless” seven times, like a series of hazard lights set up along a long and dangerous road, so even unwary, inexperienced or perversely oblivious drivers will see at least one of them.
Hertz appears to have sought to comply with legal requirements while availing itself of what it described in a court filing as a “unique opportunity” to raise money cheaply by selling new shares, while day-traders on Robinhood and other platforms play with its existing stock as though it were a video game.
The company made a cultural mark — its television commercials, featuring a raucous sock puppet, were, for a time, ubiquitous — but the prospectus was wrong about one thing. It didn’t manage to lose money for four years. By November 2000, it folded, and its existing shareholders lost their money. Unlike Hertz, though, it went bankrupt quietly and didn’t try to sell additional stock while in bankruptcy.
The dot-com bubble didn’t end well for anyone but short-sellers, who were betting on the bubble’s demise. By October 2002, the Nasdaq, in which many of the dot-com stocks were concentrated, lost more than 75 percent of its value.
Of course, the current era is different. The stock market’s volatility — and many of Hertz’s problems — are, to a large extent, caused by the coronavirus pandemic, and may well be relieved if and when the pandemic recedes decisively.
And Hertz, which celebrated its 100th birthday in 2018, is no Pets.com. It has survived many market cycles and in many incarnations. It is even possible, Mr. Cazayoux said, that with some big “ifs,” the next chapter in Hertz’s story will be a happy one. If it had been able to sell the stock (and, perhaps, even without the sale), and if the economy recovers quickly, it is conceivable that Hertz can “cure” its bankruptcy quickly, and the existing stock will be worth something, after all. “It’s extremely risky, certainly,” he said.
For extreme risk takers, a new offering of stock from a bankrupt company could conceivably have some value, said Jay R. Ritter, a finance professor at the University of Florida. Mr. Ritter said he teaches that a stock is “an option on the future value of a firm.” If that future value is somewhere between zero and, say, $2 billion, the stock might be “worth something as long as there’s a possibility” that the company will end up being worth something.
But, like Pets.com, Hertz is creating a wonderful spectacle. While social distancing, enjoy bankruptcy from the sidelines.