Young collectors are still viewing and buying pieces, but they’re spending far less time and money than their older counterparts once did. That’s a problem for the industry.
The coronavirus pandemic caused a near total shutdown of the art world as we know it in April and May. Auctions and art fairs were either postponed or converted into online-only events. Sales plummeted. Commercial galleries tried to do some business through so-called virtual viewing rooms, but revenue has declined sharply: Many are cutting jobs and facing closure.
Unlike the music industry and other retail sectors, the centuries-old art market has been slow to adapt to the digital era. The uniqueness of original works has made collectors nervous of buying from websites sight unseen, especially at higher price levels. But now the industry is trying to persuade collectors to spend thousands — even millions — online.
Some galleries have reopened; live auctions have recommenced in cities including Berlin, Paris and Hong Kong; and fair organizers have been hoping that their live events can resume in the fall. But organizers of Art Basel, the industry’s flagship fair, announced on Saturday that they had canceled the 2020 edition, having already moved it to September from June. An online version will take place this month.
With so many virus-related restrictions still in place, digital approximations of the events that keep the industry moving are the only way to stay in business. But online-only transactions represented just 9 percent of the global market’s estimated $64.1 billion sales last year, according to Art Basel and UBS.
Ms. Doshi said that she had bought works online during the lockdown by South Asian contemporary artists in the $10,000 to $35,000 range.
The generation gap in collectors’ buying habits may take some time to close. The 2019 Hiscox Online Art Trade Report found that 29 percent of surveyed collectors younger than 35 said they preferred the online buying experience, just 1 percent less than buying in a physical space. By contrast, 10 percent of those older than 60 said they preferred buying art online.
“I will not go to a mass preview. I don’t want to run the risk of getting sick,” Mr. Rachofsky said.
Collectors’ reluctance to offer exceptional works online, much less buy them, has resulted in a dramatic reduction in high-value art sales during the pandemic. In April, Sotheby’s, Christie’s and Phillips’s sale calendars consisted solely of online auctions for the first time. The aggregate revenue of $44 million was 92 percent lower than the equivalent sales last April, according to data provided by Pi-Ex, an art analytics company based in London.
But with online channels currently the only way for collectors to buy, higher prices are being achieved, though the threshold is far below that of live auctions and fairs. On June 2, Sotheby’s sold a landscape by the 19th-century Russian artist Ivan Aivazovsky for $2.8 million, a record for a painting at an online-only auction. But that’s a long way from $48.8 million.
Mr. Breuer-Weil said he recently bought a 14th-century silver Jewish amulet from Spain for 2,750 pounds, or about $3,450, at an online-only auction.
But many older buyers have yet to be won over. Lockdown sales have exposed a generation gap in the culture of collecting. Until it is bridged, the art trade looks as though it is going to suffer a serious gap in its sales figures.