The world has been transfixed by the unrest in the United States over police brutality, racism and President Trump’s response. Here are snapshots of how people in other countries view what’s happening.
A 92-year-old Italian, fondly recalling the G.I.s who parachuted in to liberate his country from fascism, says he now sees the ghost of Mussolini in TV clips from the United States. In Iraq, people are sharing photos that compare President Trump holding up a Bible with Saddam Hussein clutching a Quran. In Mexico, no stranger to mayhem, a 36-year-old author worries about her relatives in New York.
With emotions that range from horror to hope, from schadenfreude to self-reflection, the world has been transfixed by the cascading crises in the United States — the coronavirus scourge, 40 million suddenly unemployed, the police killings of George Floyd and other African Americans, and President Trump’s threats of a military crackdown on protests that have convulsed dozens of cities.
In Italy, birthplace of fascism, a war survivor worries.
The scenes on mobile phones, on televisions and on the front pages have prompted some Italians to reconsider their admiration of America.
Angered by police violence at home, Kenyans are shocked.
In Kenya, one of the closest American allies in Africa and a country where police brutality has festered, some said the clips of tear-gassed demonstrators and journalists had diminished the moral right of the United States to criticize injustice elsewhere or lecture African nations on human rights.
French march in solidarity, while looking inward at the parallels.
Many interviewed on the streets of Paris said Mr. Floyd’s death reinforced their already diminished view of the United States, which has been eroding since the 2003 invasion of Iraq. But their message was tempered by France’s own problems with racism and police brutality.
“What happened was inhuman,” Frederic Kauffmann, a 48-year-old business owner, said of Mr. Floyd’s death.
“It shocked me,” said Alyssa Mievilly, a 17-year-old hair salon apprentice.
That much was clear on Tuesday evening when 20,000 people converged outside the main courthouse in northern Paris to denounce police violence and racism, defying orders against large assemblies because of the coronavirus.
In Mexico, new worries of dangers in the U.S., but admiration for protesters.
Bárbara Arredondo, 36, said she had been apprehensively watching the images of American protests on Instagram feeds from friends around the country and family members in New York.
“It’s personally devastating to see that no one is safe on the streets in the United States,” said Ms. Arredondo, a writer and entrepreneur based in Mexico City. The past few days she has been kept up at night.
“The language that Trump is using is key to the violence that we are seeing, and is the reason no one is safe,” she said.
Ms. Arredondo grew up about three hour’s drive from Texas and said she always admired the United States for its values and entrepreneurism. The unrest has only made her respect Americans more.
Many Britons of color feel a special affinity for victims of racism in America.
Melanie Bennett, 44, a restaurant manager who studied in Washington in 2013, said she barely recognized the America she had been watching on television. She blamed Mr. Trump.
Cheering U.S. protesters, some Iraqis call Trump America’s Saddam.
The American protests have struck a nerve in Iraq, where people are paying more attention to the events in Minneapolis and Washington than in their own troubled cities.
“Protests in America have a global impact because people consider that the U.S. is a democratic state applying all human rights conventions,” said Sheikh Abdul Jabbar al-Khuzai, who teaches in a Shiite educational institution.
Protesters in Basra, Iraq’s second-largest city, drew inspiration from the American streets. “These demonstrations have painted a positive and supportive picture for demonstrators and demonstrations around the world that want to fight racism and despotism,” said Karrar Muslim, who attended a sit-in on Wednesday in central Basra.
A favorite WhatsApp meme showed a photo of President Trump holding the Bible, paired with a photo of Saddam Hussein holding the Quran at his trial as a way to emphasize his loyalty to Islam.
Soran Tawfiq, 43, a father of four who is a shopkeeper in Sulaimaniyah, in northern Iraq’s Kurdistan region, said he sympathized with the American protesters and was shocked by the video of Mr. Floyd’s death.
“I wondered: ‘Is it true?’” he said. “I mean yes, there are killings in the world every day, but a policeman, who is supposed to be a protector of the law, kills a civilian, and for racial reasons? This is a difficult thing to accept.” ALISSA J. RUBIN AND FALIH HASSAN, BAGHDAD, AND KAMIL KAKOL, SULAIMANIYAH.
In Russia, a young follower of the American crisis.
Katya Gazetnikova, 19, a university student majoring in sports management, said she was “very closely” following the protests in America, a subject of fascination among Russia’s young.
In Germany, even a cynical student is surprised.
Ozge Siteiss, 22, a law student at Berlin’s Free University, said she had always considered the United States hypocritical.
Still, she said, she was not expecting the scenes of American police brutality.
For many Indians watching the protests in America, it’s a familiar sight. Just a few months ago, the police in New Delhi were seen thrashing students in videos taken at a predominantly Muslim university as India, the world’s largest democracy, convulsed in protest over a divisive citizenship law seen as favoring the Hindu majority.
Critics of Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his government’s Hindu-nationalist agenda see many parallels between him and Mr. Trump.
Ramachandra Guha, a pre-eminent biographer of Mohandas K. Gandhi, who was arrested last year during a peaceful demonstration, saw especially clear similarities in their penchant for polarizing photo-ops.
Just as Mr. Trump held up a Bible at a Washington church, Mr. Modi posed in a saffron robe last year at a Hindu shrine deep in the Himalayas.
