This article is part of a special report on Climate Solutions.
Much has been made about what the coronavirus “means” for climate change: measurable drops in carbon dioxide emissions and air pollution, behavioral changes that climate action might demand.
To Daniel C. Esty, a professor of environmental law and policy at the Yale School of Forestry and Environmental Studies and Yale Law School, taking only those lessons from the coronavirus would be a missed opportunity.
But there are morals to this story, and the response to the pandemic can also be shaped by lessons from the environmental movement over the last 50 years, some of which Mr. Esty employed as commissioner of the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection.
He has also edited and contributed to a recent book, “A Better Planet: Forty Big Ideas for a Sustainable Future,” which makes concrete many of the often abstract-seeming solutions to climate change. As we move toward a world where climate change will present more frequent disruptions to what we think of as “normal life” (which Covid-19 is preparing us for), both new applications of big data, systems design, and technology, and transformations in social justice, urban planning and policy will be essential.
Like climate change, Covid-19 recognizes no borders and requires a coordinated international response. What are the lessons we can draw from Covid-19 that might apply to the longer-term effort for action on climate change?
The frame of the choice can’t be, “What’s the cost of taking action?” as if the cost of inaction was zero. The cost of inaction is high, too. Covid-19 sharpens people’s understanding of what the proper choice is: significant action at some substantial cost, or inaction, which has a tremendous cost itself.
I hope that lesson carries over to the game plan being developed in the years ahead for action on climate change: getting people ready for serious work and a significant transformation of society, and to explain that the status quo is not really an option.
Do you think there are any dangers in the current media framing that Covid-19 is “helping” climate change because of reduced emissions from declines in air travel, commuting and other normal commercial activity?
Another lesson we’ve all learned is that data matters, and you’ve got to have your feet on the ground and your facts straight when you think about how to take up and respond to a major challenge of this kind. One of the things we need is a Dr. [Anthony] Fauci of climate change, laying it all out there, straight, and in a manner that the public can take on board. Someone who is not using complicated ideas that confuse people, but is also not sugarcoating things and not hiding the facts, and is doing so in a way that has broad trust across political divides and geographic separation. We need a trusted set of scientific perspectives that will help frame the challenge.
Looking at the American response to Covid-19 and climate change, it seems fair to say that we have not been prioritizing investment into long-term or relatively remote problems, putting off action until it’s too late. How do we motivate people to prepare?
Things that may seem remote can come up very quickly and be huge problems. One of the things that’s led to dramatic action on Covid-19 is that the threat is now very immediate and very personal, and I think that has given people a real appreciation for why dramatic action is required. Climate change is never going to be immediate and personal in the same way, and it remains a significant challenge for those who are trying to move that agenda to think about how to create the same sense of urgency without the immediacy and the personal threat that Covid-19 poses.
With Covid, everyone was given marching orders: wash your hands, social distancing, and we also engaged industry at the highest levels. We are neither leaving it to individuals alone or to corporations entirely; this engages individuals broadly but all segments of society, and I think something similar will be required on climate change.
What needs to happen for meaningful success in climate change and sustainability? How do we make sure those key elements happen?
The idea that it’s going to be necessary for us all to work together and that collective action will be required is a big deal. There is going to need to be some combination of top-down leadership at the political level and bottom up mobilization led by mayors and governors, community leaders, university presidents and C.E.O.s.
And it’s much easier to move the agenda forward on a bipartisan basis. A great deal can be done if you’re willing to sit down with the leaders in both parties and take seriously the concerns that they bring to this debate. My Yale students and people of the young generation have no sense of the possibility of broadly collaborative efforts, and I think that’s a tragedy. I don’t think there is a path forward on climate change in a timely fashion that doesn’t involve bipartisan efforts.
I hope that one of the lessons coming out of the Covid-19 crisis is that we can’t afford to have significant parts of the political leadership in denial of the facts. We have to have some effort to create a scientific foundation for policy debate.
The role of business and harnessing its capacity for technological innovation has been at the center of your work at Yale, and also in state government, particularly with the creation of Connecticut’s Green Bank. What is the role of business specifically, and what changes need to happen to make business a more productive partner on climate change?
One of the dramatic changes that I think has occurred in the past several decades is the change in business’s role in promoting and protecting the environment. In the 20th century, business was seen as the problem, and business really was inattentive to emissions, water pollution and waste of all kinds.
Almost all businesses now understand that they need to be good stewards of the environment, which isn’t to say that government can go away. Rather, government should understand its role a little differently and create incentives for environmental care, and to harness the innovation capacity of business.
We also need to move away from an outdated model based on shareholder primacy. If the business community is going to play a deciding role in decarbonization, we need to have the corporate world broadly adopt a stakeholder business model.
We need to be honest about the trade-offs. At the core of policy needs to be transparency to understand where environmental harms are coming from and some structure of pricing to make people pay for the harms they cause. If big polluters pay for their harms and everyone down to the household level pays for their emissions, there would be a huge incentive to change behavior.
We cannot afford to have the price for our choices hidden with the result that imposing harm and consequences on others goes unaccounted for. We need to ensure transparency so we can see where those harms are. We must make people stop their harmful behavior, or else pay fully for their environmental impacts more broadly and climate change impacts in particular.