The pandemic-cooking craze hasn’t swept up everybody. To those who feel lost in the kitchen, even toasting bread and warming pizza are a challenge.
When she began self-isolating in her apartment in College Station, Texas, in March, Melissa Hodges thought it would be her big opportunity to finally learn to cook. After all, so many of her classmates at Texas A&M University, where she is a senior, were posting Instagram photos of glossy strands of spaghetti carbonara and citrus scones drizzled with a sticky glaze.
Then she tried to heat up a frozen cheese pizza.
After that disaster — and another involving undercooked pasta that crunched when she bit in — she is resigned to dinners of breakfast cereal and other undemanding foods. “The kitchen just sits there and stares at me,” she said.
Yet for all the home cooks who are embracing the art as a therapeutic escape or mode of entertainment, there are as many others who are left cold, or confounded, by the sight of a stove.
It’s hardly news that plenty of people don’t cook, or don’t like to. But driven by necessity or inspired by the new popularity of cooking, Ms. Hodges and others like her have tried their hand at it, often with discouraging results: smoke-filled kitchens, blackened pots, whipped-coffee explosions.
Even when they succeed, satisfaction isn’t guaranteed. The pandemic has pitted the passive cooks against the passionate ones, with some feeling increasingly annoyed by the culinary renaissance unfolding around them.
Ms. Baldwin, 43, has a kitchen full of unused appliances that she and her husband, John, received as wedding gifts 12 years ago. Neither has ever found cooking relaxing.
Since her work has slowed, she has been flipping through her few cookbooks (also wedding gifts). She made curried lentils with the legumes in her pantry, but later realized they were about eight years old. “They were chewy and weird,” she said.
She tried making barbecue chicken by putting boneless breasts into a slow cooker and pouring an entire bottle of barbecue sauce over them. “It was terrible,” she said, “like chicken barbecue soup.” Her husband has made a lot of instant ramen.
Still, some fledgling cooks have found pleasure, and even pride, in their debacles.
Mr. Callahan cooked a chicken breast on his stovetop, but a thermometer kept indicating that the meat was undercooked. So he turned up the heat and promptly burned it.
Even toast posed a challenge. His toaster broke, so he turned to the stove. But because his stove top is pitched at an angle, the bread cooked on only one side, which burned. The center was cold. The butter didn’t melt evenly.
One appliance that hasn’t failed him is the rice cooker he bought a few years ago and has started using regularly over the past two months. “It has been a huge savior for me,” he said.
Ms. O’Connor, 32, a paleoclimatologist in Tucson, Ariz., is subsisting on defrosted batches of beans and rice, paired with toast topped with Vegemite, a food spread she grew up on in Australia.
She’s not the only one using the time at home to connect with her culinary roots. Richard David recently attempted to recreate his family’s Guyanese chicken curry in his apartment in South Ozone Park, Queens.
The dish was taking a while, so he drank a little wine and fell asleep on the couch with the pot still on the stove. He woke to a smoky apartment and a pitch-black curry.
There was a silver lining: “I also realized my smoke detectors don’t work,” Mr. David, 34, said.
Certain dishes have emerged as especially popular during quarantine — like the whipped dalgona coffee that has taken social media by storm.
The pasta came out chewy and not garlicky enough. “There wasn’t an ounce of joy that came from it,” she concluded.
Now, every night, she roasts vegetables and fries some eggs, and for the rest of the evening, her husband snacks on Little Debbie Nutty Buddy bars and Turtle Brownies to fill up. Sometimes the vegetables are raw or burned when they emerge from the oven. She eats them anyway; as an executive assistant and fitness instructor, she has little time to spend in the kitchen.
A lack of enthusiasm for cooking can become even harder to bear when there are children involved.
She pointed out that she is actually a good cook — she recently made a vanilla cake, since so many others are baking — but still dislikes it. “Being in that kitchen just does not make me happy,” she said.
In Bethesda, Md., Kathryn Spindel is living with her adult daughter, Pippa, 22, who moved back home in March. If it weren’t for her husband’s cooking, Ms. Spindel, 54, said there might be a repeat of the dinner of cut apples and cheese she once served her daughter when he was out of town.
Meaningful progress has come for some of the new cooks. Sudarshan Muralidhar, 25, a software engineer in Seattle, said he has learned that the pasta is supposed to go into the water only after it boils, and that you can’t use the same kind of oil for every dish.
Mr. Phillips, 39, who works for a crisis management firm, said he doesn’t resent the people who have found comfort in cooking. He just doesn’t always understand them.
Over the past two months, Ms. Najafi, 32, has learned to grill and make pasta carbonara, but she is “absolutely” sure that once she and her boyfriend move back to their apartment in Downtown Brooklyn, cooking will no longer be a habit.
But will she enjoy the process? Not likely.
