Book Review|Is Donald Trump a Danger to Democracy?
Is Donald Trump a Danger to Democracy?
It is now difficult to remember how outlandish it seemed, back in 2016, to suggest that the election of Donald Trump as president of the United States might endanger American democracy. Though many were shaken by Trump’s racism, his foul attacks on his political opponents and his disdain for longstanding political norms, the prevailing consensus suggested that the Republic’s institutions would easily withstand a challenge from a man who came to national prominence on reality television.
Trump, some said, would grow into the job. Others thought that Republicans like Paul Ryan would be able to mold him in their image. And if the newly elected president did try to do something truly outlandish — like, say, firing the head of the F.B.I. or protecting collaborators who had admitted to lying about their connections to foreign government officials — the other branches of government would stop him.
Now Gessen has drawn on nearly four years of writing about the president to produce a righteously furious account of the damage that Trump has inflicted on the country. Over the first years of his presidency, lies, conspiracy theories and attacks on the press that once seemed shocking have become just another day at the Oval Office. Institutions that long operated independently from the White House have been turned into partisan tools. Perhaps most worryingly of all, Gessen says, our view of who gets to count as an American may have started to shift as courts have upheld travel bans and as a partial wall on the southern border may slowly be taking shape.
Despite these important insights, the book suffers from a tendency to shoot in a very target-rich environment without bothering to take careful aim. Again and again, Gessen attacks Trump for such trivial crimes as hanging golden drapes in the Oval Office or ordering the wrong kind of cake. Trump’s Inaugural Address, Gessen implausibly asserts, was not just meanspirited or poorly written; it “rejected the idea that excellence is desirable” in a conscious effort to diminish the presidency.
A great virtue of Posner’s conceptual scheme is that it allows him to focus on those aspects of Trump’s presidency that are of lasting significance. Instead of condemning demagogues for any phrase or policy he happens to dislike, he zeros in on their dangerous habit of positing a conflict between the people and the very institutions that have historically enabled them to exert their power.
Still, a distinct drawback of the book is that it becomes a repetitive hunt for populists and demagogues. And while Posner’s sketches of major political figures from Thomas Jefferson to Franklin Roosevelt are often interesting, they do not add to the vast stock of knowledge we owe to their many biographers.
This could be more easily forgiven if Posner gave us a fresh perspective on our contemporary predicament. But when he finally reaches the present, his view of the Trump presidency turns out to be disappointingly conventional. Trump, he concludes, should not be seen “merely as a poor choice for the presidency, like Franklin Pierce, James Buchanan or Warren Harding.” Rather, he is “a political monstrosity who should be repudiated by the body politic, so that politicians who eye the presidency in the future will be deterred from using Trump’s ascendance as a model.” It is difficult to argue with Posner’s conclusion. But it’s one that has long been shared by a vast swath of the American public.
Taken together, these two books offer an instructive view on what, after four years of his dominating the national conversation, we do — and don’t — know about Donald J. Trump. The instinct to normalize Trump has, mostly, gone out the window; it is now amply evident that he is not just another Republican president, and that he was never destined to grow into his august office.
