They’re never gone: Star turns from Ralph Fiennes, Meryl Streep, Gregory Hines and Christopher Plummer still live in the mind’s eye of readers.
Live theater, it would seem, lives on. Granted, the traditional traffic of the stage — with flesh-and-blood actors sharing a space with flesh-and-blood audiences — has almost entirely ceased in this age of social isolation. But to devoted lovers of dramas, comedies and musicals, star turns from as long ago as the mid-20th century continue to thrill in radiant recollection.
Such was the overwhelming evidence offered by responses to my essay on great acting remembered, which ran last month. Hundreds of readers wrote in to testify about performances that still burn brightly in their memories. Their selections span more than half a century, from Claudia McNeil in “A Raisin in the Sun” in 1959 to Glenn Close in “Sunset Boulevard” more than 50 years later.
What follows is an edited sampling of excited, lovingly specific evocations of mythic performances — acting that still feels as fresh as last night.
Jessica Tandy in “Foxfire.” At one point she was remembering her youth and leapt onto a table. Although she was in her early 70s, the transition was totally believable. Sally Parry, Bloomington, Ill.
I made a beeline to Broadway when Ralph Fiennes was cast in “Hamlet” after falling head-over-heels for his work in the perennially underappreciated 1994 film “Quiz Show.” Early in the performance, clad in head-to-toe black, silent, and with his back turned to the audience, Fiennes was still the only thing you could look at. Presence personified. He rightly won the Tony for his work. Rebecca B, Tacoma, Wash.
Robert Sean Leonard as the younger A.E. Housman in “The Invention of Love.” Admitting to Mo that he loves him with merely a turn and a glance that tore a thousand hearts in two; every single person in the theater gasped aloud at that moment. Guy William Molnar, Traverse City, Mich.
I snagged a single ticket in the fourth row to see John Malkovich in “Burn This.” On entering the theater, I reflected on the fact that I knew women who found him attractive, which baffled me. Not long after his entrance, I found myself wanting to jump onto the stage and offer myself to him then and there. MKORAL, Pittsburgh, Pa.
The 1980s production of “Death of a Salesman,” with Dustin Hoffman as Willy Loman. The performance that haunts me to this day wasn’t Hoffman’s, but that of the young actor who played Willy’s son Biff: John Malkovich. Mindi, Sherman Oaks, Calif.
Kathy Bates was harrowing in “’Night Mother.” So matter-of-fact. And there was actually a clock on the wall, in real time, so that you’d see the minutes ticking by, before her planned suicide. John B. Archibald, St. Petersburg, Fla.
Oh, to see the perfect Len Cariou in “Sweeney Todd” again. Karen Lorentz, Jersey City, N.J.
I could. Not. Blink. Watching a mesmerizing Raúl Esparza in “Company.” JP Stephenson, Emeryville, Calif.
