The sale follows outcry over comments Mr. Glassman made about the death of George Floyd and reports of sexual harassment under his management.
Greg Glassman, the embattled owner of CrossFit who was the subject of a recent article in The New York Times detailing routine sexual harassment of female employees, intends to sell the fitness brand to Eric Roza, according to a message sent to affiliate gym owners by the company’s chief executive, Dave Castro.
Mr. Roza is the former senior vice president and general manager of Oracle Data Cloud and is an owner of a CrossFit gym in Boulder, Colo.
He was previously the chief executive of Datalogix, a data company that was acquired by Oracle in 2015, and is also chairman of TrueCoach, a software company for personal trainers.
Mr. Roza began training in the CrossFit method in 2008, after he was sidelined by a running injury and discovered he has high cholesterol.
Mr. Castro had taken over as chief executive earlier this month after Mr. Glassman was excoriated for tweets and comments made in early June on a Zoom call about the death of George Floyd. Mr. Glassman stepped down at that point, but remained the sole owner.
Several parties had been interested in purchasing the fitness company in turmoil, including Mr. Glassman’s ex-wife, Lauren Jenai, who founded CrossFit with him.
But CrossFit representatives had accused Ms. Jenai — and those who spoke about the company’s toxic culture — of attempting to lessen the value of the brand. “There is a collective effort to devalue the company and buy it for scraps,” a spokeswoman said this weekend.
The spokeswoman said that she believed Ms. Jenai was working in cahoots with Andy Stumpf, a former Navy Seal with five Bronze Star medals and a Purple Heart who previously oversaw CrossFit, Inc.’s partnership with Reebok. He also served as Mr. Glassman’s pilot.
Public scrutiny of the company’s culture intensified on June 12, when Mr. Stumpf, now a speaker on leadership, devoted an entire episode of his podcast, “Cleared Hot,” to what he saw while working for CrossFit, Inc. from 2010 to 2014.
Now headquartered in Scotts Valley, Calif., CrossFit was created in 2000. It is privately held and currently employs 72 people full-time, down from 137 two years ago. The company made its name with a rigorous exercise method, now taught in thousands of mom-and-pop gyms around the country that have licensed the CrossFit trademark. For some of its devotees, CrossFit is a near-religion.
But interviews with eight former employees, and four CrossFit athletes with strong ties to the company, revealed a management culture rife with overt and vulgar talk about women: their bodies, how much male employees, primarily Mr. Glassman, would like to have sex with them and how lucky the women should feel to have his rabid interest.
Through a company spokesman and spokeswoman, Mr. Glassman denied such conduct. The spokeswoman said Mr. Glassman has treated her only respectfully.
The former employees say reporting the harassment was not an option. Mr. Glassman was the sole owner of CrossFit, Inc. Perhaps the most powerful female executive there, Kathy Glassman, the affiliate director, is Mr. Glassman’s sister, and they were reluctant to complain to her. There was no human resources manager until 2013. That manager left the company in January and has not been replaced.
In recent months, a shift in the company’s focus from competitive games to health initiatives, and the pandemic, resulted in layoffs. Most departing workers received severance only if they signed nondisclosure agreements.
The company has also drawn revenue from the CrossFit Games and sponsorships, like one from Reebok, which was valued at about $100 million over the last 10 years.
