HOUSTON — For months, Republican leaders in Texas resisted calls by Democrats to allow widespread mail-in voting, more swayed by President Trump’s concerns about mail-ballot “fraud” than by the threat the coronavirus might pose at polling places.
The pandemic would have run its course by the time voting began, they believed. The election had been postponed, after all, and would not take place until long after Gov. Greg Abbott had embarked on an aggressive reopening of the state.
But the virus did not go away, and instead has surged in Texas, catching Mr. Abbott off guard. And as early voting began on Monday in statewide primary runoff contests, local election officials were scrambling to make polling sites as safe as possible.
In Houston, poll workers in masks and full plastic face shields pointed voters to large yellow sanitizer stations and offered tiny blue finger covers for manipulating the voting machines.
Similar scenes could be found around Texas. In the city of Waco, voters were given unsharpened pencils, rather than finger caps, and told to use the erasers to operate the machines without touching them. Election officials described low turnout, though not unusually so for a primary runoff.
Still, the initially rosy expectations for the vote, and the more tense reality in which it unfolded on Monday, reflected the on-again, off-again path Texas has taken in recent weeks, as a confident march to reopening last month wound up in a partial rollback when coronavirus cases surged.
Late last week, the governor closed bars and limited restaurant capacity, an attempt to stem the tide of new cases and hospitalizations. But they keep growing. And even some Democratic leaders worried whether another full shutdown — seen by some as the best way to prevent the spread of infection — would even be possible.
So many people have been trying to get tested for the virus in Texas that one testing firm, Clinical Pathology Laboratories, told its clients that it had temporarily suspended routine coronavirus testing to deal with a backlog, a development that disturbed health officials. A company spokeswoman declined to comment, but pointed to a surge in demand that was overwhelming testing companies nationally.
Hospitalizations have grown to a point in Houston that some top elected officials warn that medical centers could soon be overwhelmed.
On Monday, Texas Medical Center hospitals, a major provider in Houston, reported another sharp increase in the average number of people newly hospitalized for Covid-19 — the disease caused by the coronavirus — over the previous week, to 252 from 186.
Ms. Hidalgo, who quarantined herself on Sunday after learning that she had been exposed to a staff member who tested positive for the virus, said that nothing short of a new stay-at-home order — with legal enforcement — would halt the spread.
“The question is do we have it now or when our hospitals are turning away patients?” she said Monday in a telephone interview.
Customers at supermarkets and other businesses in Houston are required by local regulation to wear masks, but at polling places on Monday, election workers could not force voters to wear the free masks being offered.
“We have to do what the governor and the secretary of state say,” said Lee Parsley, an election judge at one Houston polling site, speaking through a white mask and behind a facial shield. By the early afternoon, no one in the largely Democratic area had arrived unmasked, he said.
Turnout was expected in any case to be low in the election, a primary runoff that included a heated race between Democrats to take on Senator John Cornyn. Voters have two weeks to cast their ballots early, a voting window that the governor, perhaps reflecting his confidence in the course of the pandemic, had stretched by a week, beginning it in June rather than in July. Early voting will continue for two weeks; Election Day is July 14.
The opening of the polls on Monday came after a lengthy legal effort by Texas Democrats to allow all voting-age residents to cast their ballots by mail as a safer alternative amid the pandemic. Those 65 or older are permitted to do so currently. The Democrats were unsuccessful in their attempts to broaden the law but were still planning to pursue other legal avenues in advance of the November general election.
Cal Jillson, a political science professor at Southern Methodist University in Dallas, said concerns about the virus would undoubtedly have an impact on turnout. “It can’t help but suppress the early in-person vote, at least marginally,” he said. By the afternoon, roughly 5,500 people had turned up to vote in Harris County, according to preliminary data from the county clerk’s office.
A spokesman for the governor did not respond to a request for comment about early voting and the pandemic.
State Representative Phil King, who represents two conservative North Texas counties just west of Fort Worth, said he believed Texans would be able to safely exercise their democratic rights without the option of mail-in ballots.
On Monday around noon, voters at one large polling place in Houston came in a light but steady stream. The machines had been moved to a large gymnasium from a small room in the same city building to ensure spacing and better airflow.
Andrea Camangon, 32, said she came to vote early on Monday because she was anxious about the kinds of lines that she found at the same polling place on the initial primary Election Day this year. “We waited three hours, back-to-back with people,” she said through her mask.
Inside, Jim Blair, 59, said that the voting had been smooth. “I brought my mask, I came and I voted,” he said, indicating the red Delta Air Lines-branded mask of his employer.
Mr. Blair, like many Houston voters, expressed confidence in his ability to protect himself at the polls; the virus, after all, has shown up at his own doorstep.
