Twitter is only bringing more attention to the president’s tweets, and Facebook’s strategy has been to do nothing.
While Twitter and Facebook dithered over whether to append warning labels on outrageous and dangerous posts from Donald Trump, the president continued to tweet and post.
Twitter took the plunge last week with a fact-checking link on two misleading and false tweets about mail-in voting and, later, an admonition that the president’s tweet warning protesters that they risked being shot had violated its rules. Rather than blunt the president’s message, the effect of Twitter’s knuckle-rapping has been to draw even more attention to it.
Twitter executives deserve credit for at least calling out President Trump, even if it took them two years to finally decide to do so. Despite Twitter’s measured approach, its solution only amplifies the problem. And Twitter’s boss, Jack Dorsey, has fallen victim to the Streisand Effect, the internet phenomenon where attempts to censor or excise information instead backfire, causing the information to be cast even more widely.
Mark Zuckerberg, under the guise of free speech rights, has in the meantime given the president carte blanche to say what he pleases. Though he wrote he had a “visceral negative reaction” to the president’s posts, Facebook ultimately left the posts up, warning-label free. “Although the post had a troubling historical reference, we decided to leave it up because the National Guard references meant we read it as a warning about state action, and we think people need to know if the government is planning to deploy force,” Mr. Zuckerberg posted on his personal Facebook page Friday.
It’s a wonder Mr. Zuckerberg didn’t trip over himself performing the verbal gymnastics it took to explain away what even his own employees seem to know is the wrong side of history. Some of Facebook’s employees have gone public to criticize their boss for his inaction, even threatening to leave their high-paying, equity-rich jobs.
But all Twitter and Facebook have done so far with their limp chiding is confirm the right’s contention that there’s an anti-conservative bias in Silicon Valley, while allowing the president’s falsehoods to gain a foothold. Removing the posts hits him where it hurts.
This job is too important for the bots. The online platforms should assign a special team to personally review the president’s daily posts and cut loose those that violate their rules or even just good taste. That’s the beauty of being the boss.
There’s precedent on social media’s side: Facebook, Google’s YouTube and Twitter have all given the heave-ho to posts by President Jair Bolsonaro of Brazil that promoted quack coronavirus treatments — though he has a comparatively anemic 6.6 million followers to Mr. Trump’s 81 million. CNN, MSNBC and others did something similar when they stopped showing portions of the president’s daily coronavirus briefings back in April after they veered into unhinged campaign propaganda.
Twitter and Facebook’s rules are applied so scattershot already, it’s hard to imagine the team could further muddle the situation. Why, for instance, have President Trump’s posts belittling ordinary people and peddling unproven coronavirus treatments remained with no warning labels? That’s not to mention his embrace of a myth that former Representative Joe Scarborough was behind the death of a former staffer.
Unfortunately, Facebook’s touted Oversight Board, its cherry-picked team of outsiders charged with determining the fate of high profile posts, has indicated it’s sticking this one out. Members have said recently that they would only be addressing whether content was properly removed, not whether it should be.
Stung by Twitter’s scolding, the president has fought back, threatening to revise the Communications Decency Act to apply more liability to social media for its content. But such a change faces a protracted and uphill legal battle, which should outlast the election.
President Trump even threatened to shut down social media sites and claimed, incorrectly, that they are stifling his rights to free speech. But he’s just fanning the flames of his loyal base — Twitter and Facebook have every right to police their sites as they see fit.
Taking on the president’s social media posts does carry some risk, but sitting back and doing nothing carries a far greater one — to our nation, the environment, civil rights, fair elections and diplomacy (to name a few).
Yes, Facebook and Twitter might continue to raise President Trump’s ire, but he’ll be sure to let the world know that opinion on — where else? — Facebook and Twitter.