Dwindling white support for the president leads to a deficit of at least six points in each state.
Joe Biden holds a strong lead among registered voters in six battleground states carried by Donald Trump in 2016.
Based on a New York Times/Siena College poll of 3,870 registered voters from June 8 to June 18.
Mr. Trump’s once-commanding advantage among white voters has nearly vanished, a development that would all but preclude the president’s re-election if it persisted. Mr. Biden now has a 21-point lead among white college graduates, and the president is losing among white voters in the three Northern battleground states — not by much, but he won them by nearly 10 points in 2016.
But for now, the findings confirm that the president’s political standing has deteriorated sharply since October, when Times/Siena polls found Mr. Biden ahead by just two percentage points across the same six states (the average gap is now nine points). Since then, the nation has faced a series of crises that would pose a grave political challenge to any president seeking re-election. The polls suggest that battleground-state voters believe the president has struggled to meet the moment.
President Trump has the most support among voters in dealing with the economy, the least on issues connected to race.
Battleground voters who approve of Trump’s handling of ...
Allan Larson, 83, a recently retired mechanical engineer in Apache Junction, Ariz., began to regret his vote for the president shortly after he took office — he said Mr. Trump tried to do away with too many things President Obama had done, and kept firing good people — but his handling of the pandemic solidified his views.
On these recent issues, voter disapproval reflects more than just general dissatisfaction with the state of the country. It seems to reflect deeper disagreement with the president’s prioritization of the economy over stopping the spread of coronavirus, and with his focus on law and order over criminal justice.
Voters in Michigan were much more likely to say that they thought President Trump treated their state unfairly in responding to the coronavirus.
Mr. Trump’s ratings are healthier on the kinds of issues that might have dominated the election season under more ordinary circumstances. His 56 percent approval rating on the economy, versus 40 percent who disapprove, is nearly the opposite of his overall job approval rating. Battleground voters say by a double-digit margin that he would do a better job on the issue than Mr. Biden, and they also prefer Mr. Trump to handle relations with China.
There is still time for memories to fade or for the national debate to return to more favorable turf for the president.
Joe Cook, a 35-year-old bakery manager in Orlando, Fla., voted for Mr. Trump in 2016 and disapproves of how he has handled the coronavirus outbreak. He said Mr. Trump shouldn’t have let the economy be shut down during the pandemic, and should have cracked down on rioters.
Nevertheless, he will stick with Mr. Trump because he has run on lower taxes and less regulation. “The less government in my life, the better,” Mr. Cook said.
For now, though, the president’s coalition has suffered serious defections, eroding the familiar demographic divides of recent elections.
Mr. Trump’s edge among white voters has dwindled despite national attention to the kind of racial issues that many analysts believed propelled his strength among white voters in the first place. If attitudes about race were vital to Mr. Trump’s appeal with white voters, then a foundation of his strength has been badly shaken.
Biden’s standing in battleground states represents a major shift in support from 2016 with nearly every group of voters.
Figures in 2020 are from a New York Times/Siena College poll of 3,870 registered voters from June 8 to June 18. Figures from 2019 are from a NYT Upshot/Siena College poll of 3,766 registered voters from Oct. 13 to Oct. 26. Figures from 2016 represent a combination of 7,802 battleground respondents in polls by The New York Times/Siena College, The New York Times/CBS News, Pew Research, The Washington Post/ABC News and CNN/ORC in fall 2016.
Over all in the battlegrounds, Mr. Biden leads among black voters by 83 percent to 7 percent, up only slightly from October. Hispanic voters back Mr. Biden by 62-26, also essentially unchanged. Neither lead exceeds Mrs. Clinton’s margin in the final polls from 2016.
Claire Cain Miller contributing reporting.