Readers condemn the administration’s renewed effort to get the Supreme Court to rule against the Affordable Care Act. Also: Too early for polling.
Please, No More Polls!
At a time of pandemic and economic disaster for so many Americans, especially and ironically in states where President Trump has many followers, what does he decide to do? Imperil health care for as many as 23 million of his countrymen. This deplorable timing further convinces me that Mr. Trump is, to use a term coined by James Cowles Prichard in the 1830s, morally insane.
Mary Trump’s new book aptly calls him “the world’s most dangerous man” in its title. Mr. Trump is a drowning man who won’t hesitate to pull his country down with him.
I’m a 31-year-old stage IV cancer survivor. By some measure of luck and picking the right doctor, I’m still here. My total treatment costs were around $3 million. Million. I haven’t made $3 million in my entire lifetime, nor have most people.
I’m in remission now, thankfully, but if my disease comes back, it cannot be while having my health insurance company tell me that my pre-existing condition precludes coverage. Nor should any of us with these long-term issues be denied coverage, or required to pay higher premiums.
Please, I hope the court does not take up this case. My life is at stake.
Please, please, please stop publicizing these pro-Biden polls, especially months out from the election. In 2016 virtually every New York Times poll until the election had Hillary Clinton easily winning. Only later did the “experts” realize that the Electoral College/swing state momentum had much earlier turned toward Donald Trump and that many people who voted for him would not admit their support in a pre-election poll.
Mr. Trump still commands huge support from his base of white blue-collar and rural people in swing states, and these votes have disproportionate power because of the flawed Electoral College.
Polls that show Joe Biden with a commanding lead also decrease the urgency of actually voting next November. Mr. Trump and his Republican enablers will use every means possible to diminish voter turnout, especially in the swing states and among minorities.
The polls may look favorable for Mr. Biden now, but there is a long road ahead, and we have not begun to see the tsunami of dirty tricks that Mr. Trump and the G.O.P. will attempt to use to steal the election.
Anyone who really wants to vote Mr. Trump out of office needs to work hard from now until November to register and motivate liberal and progressive voters in the swing states.
