Amanda Chung and Karl Ni offer us a part of themselves.
THURSDAY PUZZLE — Many solvers ask how they are supposed to know when there is “funny business” going on in the grid. The short answer is to practice, so you will be exposed to a variety of puzzle tricks and learn to recognize them. I’ve heard from a lot of solvers who don’t seem to have the patience for that. They would like there to be a visible warning near the grid to tip them off.
But where’s the fun in that? Figuring out what the constructors hath wrought is part of the pleasure of this brain exercise. Sure, I might not always get it right, but when I see how they fooled me, I’m left with a sense of admiration for their cleverness. I like being fooled.
Still, there are tangible ways to conquer tricky puzzles, like this fun one by Amanda Chung and Karl Ni, a wife-and-husband constructing team. Follow me down to the Theme section and I’ll show you how I did it.
1A. Hi, kids! In the 1950s-60s sitcom “Leave It to Beaver,” the title character’s nickname, Beaver, was sometimes shortened to BEAV.
13A. This “Scary story?” is not a campfire tale, it’s the ATTIC, which is a story in one’s house.
17A. Be honest. You wanted to write in TUSHY, didn’t you? “A chair might hold one” is just ripe for answers like that, but this chair is the head of a department or team, and might hold a GAVEL.
26A. SOY make the Impossible Burger possible, because it is a soy-based meat analog.
47A. I have never played the Xbox game HALO, but it was easy enough to get through the crossings.
40D. “Crawl space?” sounds like a place to store things in your home, but in this puzzle, it’s a PLAYMAT, a place where a baby like Ms. Chung and Mr. Ni’s crawls.
60D. The “Gift that much thought is put into?” is the gift of extrasensory perception, or ESP.
The first thing you might have noticed in this puzzle is that not all of the entries fit properly. For example, I knew that the 2001 Reese Witherspoon movie at 35A was “Legally Blonde.” I was also certain that the answer to 42A was WHISTLE-BLOWING. But look what happened when I tried to write them in.
Not enough room in either slot. Could it be a rebus? Which square gets the extra letters?
I’ve been doing this for a long time, so I recognized what was going on. This type of theme is what I call an “anti-rebus.” You are not being asked to pack multiple letters into a square. You are being asked, in a sense, to let it all hang out.
If you write in ALLY BLONDE — which would make a great name for a band — what is left over? The letters L, E and G have not been accounted for. Unless it’s meant to be an actual LEG and you … take the limb out? No, that’s not right. What is that phrase again?
 You are actually removing a limb from the inside of the puzzle.
On the WHISTLE-BLOWING side, the limb that is out is a WING. 
There is a lot to like in Ms. Chung and Mr. Ni’s puzzle, fill-wise. The theme entries are all snappy, and I also liked DONATION BIN, AZALEA, BAEZ, PLAYMAT and WHOOPED.
We’re very happy to have our puzzle published today. We’re also very grateful to the editorial team and everyone involved in getting these puzzles out. To stay positive and encouraging in this challenging time is truly an admirable feat. A big thank you to you all. We also hope you puzzlers out there are staying safe and healthy.
PLAYMAT is another bit of fun fill and very appropriate as our living room is dominated by a colorful one of these. The clue came to us in one of those lightning bolt moments and we're so glad they kept it and added the “?” for clarity.
SOY is a great clue that the editing team wrote. Impossible Burgers are amazing!
If you’re an aspiring constructor, do reach out to us via |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| to talk shop. Working with others is so refreshing and inspiring. Be well, everyone!
