A few days before they were supposed to have their first date, in February 2018, a sharp-eyed friend of Andrea Raines’s saw a man walking by the San Francisco bar that the women were waiting to enter. The man looked exactly like the picture Ms. Raines had just shared of her soon-to-be date from his profile on the League dating app.
Ms. Raines, who was decked out in ‘80s attire, including a tutu, leg warmers and a scrunchie, for a theme party, was mortified when she also recognized him.
“My initial reaction was to duck and run,” she said.
And so she did. She blasted past the bouncer into the bar without showing her identification, and when he came in after her and she explained, he took pity on her.
Her friends, however, persuaded her that this chance almost-encounter with Mr. Gehlken was a not-to-be-missed opportunity, so she sent him a text asking if he had just walked past Maggie McGarry’s, an Irish pub. By that point, he was already in a shared Uber and heading back to Oakland, Calif., where he lived.
Ms. Raines and Mr. Gehlken ended up closing the place down that evening, and, after sharing a hug, she asked if he still wanted to get together for the first date as they’d originally planned.
“And I said absolutely,” said Mr. Gehlken, 32, a staff writer for The Dallas Morning News, covering the Dallas Cowboys.
When they met two days later, Mr. Gehlken quickly found himself entranced by Ms. Raines, also 32 and now an executive communications leader in Plano, Texas, for the American division of Samsung Electronics.
Afterward, she had a birthday party to go to, and he walked her there. She impulsively kissed him.
“And he said, ‘I don’t normally kiss on the first date,’” she said. “I was so embarrassed.” Mr. Gehlken said that what he actually said had included a loophole.
On their second and a half date, they explored Oakland. For the third, she arrived at his apartment with bags and bags and bags of supplies: all the fixings for pizza — dough, sauce, cheese and every imaginable topping — as well as a DVD player, her five favorite movies, and an entire concession stand’s worth of movie candy.
They were soon in love.
On June 20, the couple were married in Washington, in the backyard of the bride’s mother’s house. They self united, as allowed by District of Columbia statute, with 13 people in attendance and as many as 175 watching on a livestream.
