The kids who most need social interaction this summer won’t be getting it.
My 12-year-old daughter, Jo Jo, blossoms over the summer. For her, it’s a time for camp, pool trips with friends, bonfires and dancing for hours on the beach at our town’s monthly “Sand Jams.” Last summer, she began going to the salon for monthly manicures, even getting her dirty-blonde hair highlighted with buttery chunks.
These events are a rite of passage for any preteen, but they’re particularly important for Jo Jo. She has Down syndrome, which means she has an extra 21st chromosome that has led to overall developmental delays. For her, these regular social interactions are crucial.
Studies suggest that death rates from pneumonia — a common Covid-19 complication — were up to 5.8 times higher in 2017 among those with intellectual disabilities. During the 2009 flu pandemic, more than 40 percent of the children who died had neurodevelopmental disorders. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has labeled intellectual disability as a high risk condition for flu.
An intellectual disability itself isn’t a risk factor for Covid-19 but kids with developmental disabilities often have other underlying medical conditions that could be. A recent study showed such kids are slightly more likely to die from Covid-19. Jo Jo also has Graves’ disease (a form of hyperthyroidism) and takes medicine that suppresses her immune system. A typical virus hits her hard: This winter she tested positive for the flu and ran a 104-degree fever for almost a week.
In addition, many kids with intellectual disabilities depend on in-person physical, occupational and speech therapy year round to prevent regression. For example, Lisa Kinderman, a psychologist in Seymour, Ill., is grappling with whether it’s safe to resume physical therapy for her daughter, Lija. A 6-year-old with cerebral palsy, Lija cannot walk or talk and has been hospitalized twice in the last year for respiratory ailments.
“What’s just a mild cold for a typical kid lands Lija in the I.C.U.,” Kinderman said. She’s pulled Lija from her usual summer program in Florida for children with movement disorders and plans to rely on virtual therapy and play dates to keep her stimulated. “We have to bring the world to her, rather than let her out to experience it herself,” Kinderman said.
Unfortunately, there’s no way to gauge a child’s risk of Covid-19, especially as we’re still learning so much about this disease in kids, stressed Brian Skotko, M.D., director of the Down Syndrome Program at Massachusetts General Hospital. But there are a few things parents can do to get a ballpark sense of risk.
He suggested using your child’s past experience with infections as a guide for how they might experience Covid-19. If a child like Jo Jo has come down with flu or pneumonia in the past but recovered without urgent medical care or hospitalization, then “you should feel more comfortable gradually re-entering the community,” he said. For each step, talk it over with your pediatrician.
Jo Jo asks every day if she can go with her best friend to get her hair cut, which, technically in Connecticut, she could. My answer is still a hard no.
That doesn’t mean you should neglect routine medical care, especially with underlying medical diseases that need to be monitored. In addition, “the usual childhood diseases are still around,” pointed out William Schaffner, M.D., a professor in the division of infectious diseases at Vanderbilt University Medical Center in Nashville.
While some visits can be done virtually, things like blood work must be done in person. Saunders recommended calling ahead to the physician’s office: many will accommodate more medically fragile kids with first-in-the-morning visits.
Social distancing can be equally tricky. “Wearing masks, staying at least six feet apart from others, being able to tolerate a Covid-19 test — these may all eventually be required for kids to resume school or other activities,” Skotko said. These are challenging for any child, let alone one with intellectual disabilities.
One way to teach these concepts is through “social stories,” individualized short stories that pair simple language with pictures often used for children with social-communication disorders such as autism.
Skotko also recommended teaching social distancing through color coded circles for older kids. For example, red for strangers, orange for people you would normally wave to, green and yellow for casual and close friends, and blue for people it’s OK to hug, like parents or siblings.
Masks can be particularly challenging, because many kids with intellectual disabilities have sensory processing issues that make it hard for them to tolerate a mask on their face, said Leah Booth, a speech-language pathologist at the Yale Child Study Center who works with kids with developmental disabilities.
It’s also important to remember sibling needs. Megan Lindberg, a 40-year-old compliance specialist from Lombard, Ill., has 2-year-old twin boys, Max and Major. Max has chronic airway and lung damage from cerebral palsy. He has been admitted to the hospital nine times over the last year. Lindberg is worried about how the family’s strict quarantine has impacted her oldest child, Malena, 7.
This can be a particularly tough time for siblings, said Robert McGregor, M.D., chief medical officer at Akron’s Children’s Hospital. “You don’t want to make this all about the child with the more complex medical needs, because you don’t want to ramp up anxiety, or even resentment,” he said. Instead, McGregor recommended explaining to your child that because there’s currently no good treatment or vaccine available, your family is erring on the side of caution.
This is something we’ve had to grapple with in our house. My son Teddy is fiercely protective of Jo Jo and grills me when I return from grocery shopping to make sure I wore a mask and washed my hands. But he’s also dealing with his own frustrations: no fifth grade graduation ceremony, no end of year parties, no overnight camp. His social media feed is filled with classmates attending barbecues and not-socially-distanced sleepovers.
We’re hopeful that if the number of Covid-19 cases continues to decline in Connecticut, we can let him interact with friends again, albeit at a safe six feet away. But in the meantime, he’s learning a painful, but ultimately valuable lesson: Doing what’s right isn’t always easy.
Hallie Levine is a health journalist who lives with her three children and two Labrador retrievers in Fairfield, Connecticut.