Evelyn Rodriguez and Feliberto Gonzalo, both 27, were high school sweethearts who started dating their senior year at Union City High School in New Jersey, and in 2010 went to their prom together.
Mr. Gonzalo, who wore a tuxedo to the prom, gave her a wrist corsage spray painted with gold glitter to match her white gown with gold flowers, and picked her up in his father’s yellow Hummer.
Ms. Rodriguez, now an associate at Werner Suarez, a law firm in Hackensack, N.J., was the first in her family to go to college. She graduated cum laude from Rutgers, and received a law degree from Seton Hall.
“She’s beautiful, and a great person who makes me better,” said Mr. Gonzalo, a New Jersey State trooper based in Hope Station, N.J. He graduated from New Jersey City University.
Ms. Rodriguez was born in Cuba, and came to the United States when she was 7; Mr. Gonzalo’s father is Cuban, and his mother is Ecuadorean.
They were just 17, when Mr. Gonzalo picked her up for their first date on Dec. 30, 2009.
Evelyn Rodriguez and Feliberto Gonzalo in 2010 at their high school prom.
During college they saw each other on weekends, usually at family gatherings.
“I feel like there was an event every week,” she said, and during the week and Saturdays, he worked at his family’s truck repair business.
He proposed in May 2018 at her law school graduation party, in front of 80 guests, after she was sworn into the New Jersey bar.
“My boss swore me in at the party,’” she said. “My parents were holding the Bible,’’ and then she recalled Mr. Gonzalo grabbed her hand, and said, “‘I’m very proud of you. You’re going to be an awesome attorney, but I know you’re going to be an even better wife,’” and then he got down on one knee.
By the end of the year they moved into their house in Little Falls, N.J., with their two Maltipoo dogs, Mason and Ava.
They originally planned to marry on May 24 at the Ss. Joseph and Michael Church in Union City, with 150 guests, and now plan to renew their vows there next April. They decided to get legally married June 27 in their backyard in Little Falls. The groom’s sister Jessica Kovach, affiliated with the American Marriage Ministries, officiated at a small ceremony with their immediate family.