It took two first dates for Nuala O’Connor and Peter Bass to fall in love.
In 2013, Peter Bass, 56, was chatting with a college friend from Princeton at an event in Washington.
The college friend had in mind Nuala O’Connor, 51, who is now a senior vice president and top data-privacy lawyer for Walmart. The two women had had a conversation a few weeks earlier, in which Ms. O’Connor, who had also divorced recently, asked if she knew of anybody who might be right for her.
“I have never been very intentional about going out and meeting people,” Ms. O’Connor said.
Mr. Bass, now the chief executive of Quberu, an online platform for businesses to manage international trade deals, agreed to be set up, and a few weeks later, he and Ms. O’Connor went on their first first date.
The two had dinner alone, and then met another couple for an evening of Shakespeare. At the end of the date, he kissed her on her cheek as she stood in front of her minivan, which was covered with stickers from her three children’s schools.
“I thought he seemed very sweet and very, very smart, and a little guarded,” she said.
The two did have much in common. They both had three children and had spent years in federal government service. She has a law degree from Georgetown as well as a master’s degree in education from Harvard; he has a law degree from Yale.
Three or four months later, the “hiatus,” as he calls it, began.
Ms. O’Connor put it a little differently. “He ghosted me,” she said.
Months went by. And then, she started thinking about him again.
So she emailed him.
For their second first date, in September 2014, they again went to Shakespeare.
Two years ago, the couple was engaged and then bought a house together in Chevy Chase, Md. But with six children between them and their own commitments, they just couldn’t find a date to marry. Then Covid-19 came. “It suddenly occurred to us in the middle of this pandemic that everyone’s here,” Mr. Bass said.
So on June 21, in the backyard of their house, the couple married. Rabbi Sarah Tasman officiated via Zoom, with as many as 500 others, from all across the globe, also on the video link.
