Cheesy games, taco nights and at-home spa moments are just a few ways that the reality stars are keeping busy, along with some serious discussions about race and current news events.
Reality TV sweethearts Lauren Speed and Cameron Hamilton of Netflix’s “Love is Blind” share how they are navigating life amid a pandemic and protests.
Most of us have come to expect reality television stars to be anything but real. Yet Lauren Speed, 34, and Cameron Hamilton, 29, Atlanta-based newlyweds who became breakout stars on the hit Netflix dating show, “Love Is Blind,” have proven to be the real deal. Since their TV debut earlier this year, where they got engaged sight unseen, the couple have become YouTubers, producing content for their show, Hanging with the Hamiltons, which has more than 600,000 subscribers. In recent weeks, Ms. Speed, a digital content creator and former model, and Mr. Hamilton, a fireman turned artificial intelligence professional, have had to tackle tough conversations about racism, while also navigating the obstacles that come with being an interracial couple.
The days following the death of George Floyd, who was killed in police custody in Minneapolis, and the preceding deaths of Breonna Taylor and Ahmaud Arbrey, led to protests around the world, including in their hometown Atlanta. None of this makes for a sexy conversation with a spouse, but the Hamiltons are figuring out how to discuss these important events.
While the Hamiltons are smitten with their dog, Sparx, they intend to expand their family in the near future. They know that doing so will come with challenges beyond late-night feedings and diaper changes. “Parents begin having conversations with their children about interaction with law enforcement in black households at 6 years old,” said Ms. Speed.  Mr. Hamilton added, “Unfortunately I will be treated differently by society than they will. That’s not right, but we have to work toward a better future. I will remind them that they are always loved and we will do our best to protect them."
The couple has found interesting ways to keep themselves entertained at home, including a game that involves their favorite snack, Cheez-Its. “Basically one person throws a Cheez-It and the other person opens their mouth and tries to catch it,” said Ms. Speed.
The Hamiltons have found fun ways to entertain each other while staying indoors. “It gets mundane if you have the same pattern, so it’s cool to do something new together like learn a new game,” Ms. Speed said.
“We’re obsessed with Cheez-Its.” The couple came up with a silly yet sort of sexy game to incorporate their favorite snack. “Basically one person throws a Cheez-It and the other person opens their mouth and tries to catch it.” They even found a way to incorporate this new pastime into their “Quarantine Diaries” series on their YouTube channel.
The couple and their “fur baby” Sparx.
