Our “hidden enemy,” in plain sight.
President Trump has characterized the response to the pandemic as a “medical war,” and described the virus behind it as, by turns, “genius,” a “hidden enemy” and “a monster.” It would be more accurate to say that we find ourselves at odds with a microscopic photocopy machine. Not even that: an assembly manual for a photocopier, model SARS-CoV-2.
For at least six months now, the virus has replicated among us. The toll has been devastating. Officially, more than six million people worldwide have been infected so far, and 370,000 have died. (The actual numbers are certainly higher.) The United States, which has seen the largest share of cases and casualties, recently surpassed 100,000 deaths, one-fourth the number of all Americans who died in World War II. Businesses are shuttered — in 10 weeks, some 40 million Americans have lost their jobs — and food banks are overrun. The virus has fueled widespread frustration and exposed our deepest faults: of color, class and privilege, between the deliverers and the delivered to.
In our information age, we have grown familiar with computer viruses and with memes going viral; now here is the real thing to remind us what the metaphor means. A mere wisp of data has grounded more than half of the world’s commercial airplanes, sharply reduced global carbon emissions and doubled the stock price of Zoom. It has infiltrated our language — “social distancing,” “immunocompromised shoppers” — and our dreams. It has postponed sports, political conventions, and the premieres of the next Spider-Man, Black Widow, Wonder Woman and James Bond films. Because of the virus, the U.S. Supreme Court renders rulings by telephone, and wild boars roam the empty streets of Barcelona.
So far the match is deadlocked. We gather, analyze, disseminate, probe: What is this thing? What must be done? When can life return to normal? And we hide, while the latest iteration of an ancient biochemical cipher ticks on, advancing itself at our expense.
Once upon a time, our pathogens were crudely named: Spanish flu, Asian flu, yellow fever, Black Death. Now we have H1N1, MERS (Middle East Respiratory Syndrome), H.I.V. — strings of letters as streamlined as the viruses themselves, codes for codes. The new coronavirus was temporarily named 2019-nCoV. On Feb. 11, the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses officially renamed it SARS-CoV-2, to indicate that it was very closely related to the SARS virus, another coronavirus.
There are hundreds of kinds of coronaviruses. Two of them, SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, can be deadly; four cause one-third of common colds. Many infect animals with which humans associate, including camels, cats, chickens, and bats. All are RNA viruses. Our coronavirus, like the others, is a string of roughly 30,000 biochemical building blocks called nucleotides enclosed in a membrane of both protein and lipid.
Every pathogen evolves along a path between impact and stealth. Too mild and the illness does not spread from person to person; too visible and the carrier, unwell and aware, stays home or is avoided — and the illness does not spread. “SARS infected 8,000 people, and was contained quickly, in part because it didn’t spread before symptoms appeared,” Dr. Weiss noted.
Often it feels like nothing at all; according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 35 percent of people who contract the virus experience few to no symptoms, although they can continue to spread it. “The virus acts like no pathogen humanity has ever seen,” the journal Science recently noted.
Three hours after the virus’s code was published, Inovio Pharmaceuticals, based in San Diego, began work on a vaccine against it — one of more than 100 such efforts now underway around the world. Dr. Sabeti’s lab quickly got to work developing diagnostic tests. Dr. Ott and Dr. Weiss soon managed to obtain samples of live virus, which allowed them to “actually look at what’s going on” when it infects cells in the lab, Dr. Ott said.
With so many proteins in its tool kit, the virus has many ways to counter our immune system; these also offer targets for potential vaccines and drugs. Researchers are working every angle. Most vaccine efforts are focused on disrupting the spike proteins, which allow entry into the cell. The drug remdesivir targets the virus’s replication machinery. Dr. Fehr studies how the virus disables our immune system.
These battles, fought on the field of biochemistry, strain the alphabet to describe. The Jedi in this analogy are particular enzymes (poly-ADP-ribose polymerases, or PARPS, if you must know) that are produced in infected cells and wield a molecule that attaches to certain invading proteins — “we don’t know what these are yet,” Dr. Fehr said — and disrupts them. In response, the virus has an enzyme of its own that sweeps away our Jedi like dust from a sandcrawler.
On entering the cell, components of the virus set up shop in a subregion, or organelle, called the Golgi complex, which resembles a stack of pancakes and serves as the cell’s mail-sorting center. Dr. Machamer has been working to understand how the virus commandeers the unit to route all the newly replicated viral bits, scattered throughout the cell, for final assembly.
For all the attention the virus has received, it is still new to science and rich in unknowns. “I’m still very focused on the question, How does the virus get into the body?” Dr. Ott said. “Which cells does it infect in the upper airway? How does it get into the lower airway, and from there to other organs? It’s absolutely not clear what the path is, or what the vulnerable path types are.
Even a photocopier is imperfect, and SARS-CoV-2 is no exception. When the virus commandeers a host cell to copy itself, invariably mistakes are made, an incorrect nucleotide swapped for the right one, for instance. In theory, such mutations, or an accumulation of them, could make a virus more infectious or deadly, or less so, but in the vast majority of cases, they do not affect a virus’s performance.
By March, at least 1,388 variants of the coronavirus had been detected around the world, all functionally identical as far as scientists could tell. Arrayed as an ancestral tree, these lineages reveal where and when the virus spread. For instance, the first confirmed case of Covid-19 in New York was announced on March 1, but an analysis of samples revealed that the virus had begun to circulate in the region weeks earlier. Unlike early cases on the West Coast, which were seeded by people arriving from China, these cases were seeded from Europe, and in turn seeded cases throughout much of the country.
The roots can be traced back still further. The first known patient was hospitalized in Wuhan on Dec. 16, 2019, and first felt ill on Dec. 1; the first infection would have occurred still earlier. Sometime before that the virus, or its progenitor, was in a bat — the genome is 96 percent similar to a bat virus. How long ago it made that jump, and acquired the mutations necessary to do so, is unclear. In any case, and contrary to certain conspiracy theories, SARS-CoV-2 was not engineered in a laboratory.
And there we have it: an organism, or whatever the right word is, ideally adapted to human conversation, the louder the better. Our communication is its transmission. Consider where so many outbreaks have begun: funerals, parties, call centers, sports arenas, meatpacking plants, dorm rooms, cruise ships, prisons. In February, a medical conference in Boston led to more than 70 cases in two weeks. In Arkansas, several cases were linked to “a high school swim party that I’m sure everybody thought was harmless,” Gov. Asa Hutchinson said. After a choir rehearsal in Mount Vernon, Wash., 28 members of the choir fell ill. Not even song is safe anymore.
The virus has no trouble finding us. But we are still struggling to find it; a recent model by epidemiologists at Columbia University estimated that for every documented infection in the United States, 12 more go undetected. Who has it, or had it, and who does not? A firm grasp of the virus’s whereabouts — using diagnostic tests, antibody tests and contact tracing — is essential to our bid to return normal life. But humanity’s immune response has been uneven.
Dr. Sabeti agreed, up to a point. She expressed a deep curiosity about viruses — they are “formidable opponents to understand” — but said that, this time around, she found herself less interested in the purely intellectual pursuit.
