Her baby was coming, and her complications were growing more dangerous. But nowhere would take her — an increasingly common story as India’s health care system buckles under pressure.
NEW DELHI — Neelam Kumari Gautam woke up at 5 a.m. with shooting labor pains. Her husband put her gently in the back of a rickshaw and motored with her to a hospital. Then another. Then another. Her pain was so intense she could barely breathe, but none would take her.
Mr. Singh began to panic. He knew what he was up against. As India’s coronavirus crisis has accelerated — India is now reporting more infections a day than any other nation except the United States or Brazil — the country’s already strained and underfunded health care system has begun to buckle.
Indian government rules explicitly call for emergency services to be rendered, but still people in desperate need of treatment keep getting turned away, especially in New Delhi, the capital. Infections are rising quickly, Delhi’s hospitals are overloaded and many health care workers are afraid of treating new patients in case they have coronavirus, which has killed more than 13,000 people in India.
“There is currently little or no chance of admission to hospitals for people with Covid-19, but also for people with other intensive care needs,” read a warning just issued by the German Embassy in New Delhi.
When things got better, Mr. Singh and his wife had hoped to buy an apartment in a gated community in Noida, a satellite city of New Delhi crammed with tall glass buildings, many malls and many hospitals. She worked on an assembly line producing electrical wire. He serviced machines at a printing press.
Together, Mr. Singh, 31, and Ms. Gautam, 30, earned a respectable $8,000 a year, putting them solidly in India’s rising middle class. “Two wheels of a well-oiled machine, making our family go around,” Mr. Singh said.
As Ms. Gautam entered her ninth month, she ran into some health problems and spent five days, in late May and early June, in the hospital for pregnancy-related high blood pressure, bleeding and possibly typhoid.
They were shocked, Mr. Singh said. But Ms. Gautam was having trouble breathing. They didn’t argue. She begged for oxygen, which the hospital had, along with ventilators. But instead of helping, the doctor told them to go to another government hospital, on the other side of town. There, too, she was turned away.
An administrator at the first hospital declined to comment, and a doctor at the second hospital said Ms. Gautam needed intensive care, which the hospital couldn’t provide.
Even before Covid-19 arrived, Indian hospitals were beleaguered. The Indian government spends less than 2,000 rupees (about $26) per person per year on health care. The hope during India’s lockdown, which began in late March but was mostly lifted by early June, was that the restrictions would slow the spread of the virus and give cities time to scale up hospital capacity before the worst hit.
That didn’t happen, or not nearly enough, and Delhi now finds itself thousands of beds short — the central government just repurposed hundreds of railway cars to be used as sick bays. And still there is great confusion about admitting patients who don’t have coronavirus.
The third hospital that Ms. Gautam went to, Shivalik Hospital, was the one that had treated her for her prenatal troubles. This time, doctors gave her a little oxygen, but Mr. Singh said they feared she might have coronavirus and abruptly ordered her to leave.
The couple hobbled back to the rickshaw. Ms. Gautam was fading. She stopped talking and began heavily sweating. She clung to her husband’s hand.
In a statement, the hospital said that it had no space for her, tried to stabilize her and then offered to take her by ambulance to another hospital. Mr. Singh said that the hospital’s efforts were cursory and that there was no offer of an ambulance.
They tried three other hospitals, hurrying from one to the other, losing precious time. When all refused, Mr. Singh called the police.
After that failed, they raced in an ambulance to Max Super Specialty Hospital in Ghaziabad, more than 25 miles away. It was now late afternoon, still bright, around 100 degrees outside. More than eight hours had passed since Ms. Gautam and her husband had set off from their home, eager to meet their new baby soon.
Mr. Singh told the ambulance to rush back to the Government Institute of Medical Sciences.
As they finally pulled into the hospital, she stopped breathing. Her neck slumped. Mr. Singh jumped out of the ambulance, grabbed a wheelchair and frantically wheeled her into the emergency room.
At 8:05 p.m., after 8 different hospitals and 15 hours, Neelam Kumari Gautam was pronounced dead. The baby also died.
She has not been the only pregnant woman to die in labor after being turned away. The same thing happened to a young mother in Hyderabad and another in Kashmir. In that case, the family said, the hospital staff were so uncaring that they didn’t even help with an ambulance to take the body home. The woman’s family had to wheel her body down the road, in a stretcher, for several miles.
As the authorities consider criminal charges in Ms. Gautam’s case, her husband spends his days at home looking after his son, Rudraksh. The boy asked him to throw away all of his mother’s clothes.
The spark has gone out of Rudraksh’s eye, Mr. Singh said.
