Opinion|Can Jamaal Bowman Be the Next A.O.C.?
Can Jamaal Bowman Be the Next A.O.C.?
The uprising over police violence fuels a progressive primary challenge.
At the time, I was only half-aware of Bowman’s primary campaign against the high-ranking Democrat Eliot Engel, and didn’t think he had much of a chance. In 2018, the Democratic insurgents Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and Ayanna Pressley won surprising victories over longtime Democratic incumbents. But since then, the only progressive primary challenger who’s ousted a sitting member of Congress has been Marie Newman in Illinois.
The election on June 23 will thus be a test of whether the energy on American streets translates into votes. Engel is a 16-term incumbent, the head of the House Foreign Affairs Committee. If he’s dethroned by a political newcomer calling for defunding the police, it could be as politically earthshaking as Ocasio-Cortez’s victory two years ago.
Recently, Bowman’s been getting important endorsements. Ocasio-Cortez threw her support behind him last week, as did the New York City comptroller, Scott Stringer. Alessandra Biaggi, a state senator who won a primary campaign against a conservative Democrat in 2018, withdrew her Engel endorsement to back Bowman instead.
“The world has changed, like, 180, practically overnight,” she told The Riverdale Press. “We would be remiss not to have leadership of the future to represent this district.” Bowman has raised over a million dollars. There’s no recent public polling on the race, but he appears to have a shot.
When Bowman talks about redirecting funds from the police to social services, he draws on his experiences in education. Before he helped found Cornerstone Academy of Social Action, a well-regarded Bronx middle school, in 2009, he was the dean of students at a high school where part of his job was to monitor the metal detectors as his black and Latino students arrived. “I felt like a corrections officer. I didn’t feel like an educator,” he said.
After starting his own school, he made it a point to visit private schools in wealthy communities, including a Montessori school in Greenwich, Conn. “You see a curriculum of empowerment and liberation and creativity and critical thinking,” he said. He tried to bring those values to the students at Cornerstone.
The school was open seven days a week, providing services to parents as well as children. But the community suffered in ways that no school could fix. He had students whose fathers were killed. A local teenager, Ramarley Graham, was shot to death by the police. Others died by suicide.
“When you look at the impact of concentrated poverty that’s been created by bad policy, and the trauma that results from that, and then add on top of it stop-and-frisk policing, zero-tolerance schools, you’re dealing with a population of black and Latino students that consistently feel occupied,” he said.
Around the country and the world, this rage and mourning is toppling statues. We’ll soon find out whether it can also topple politicians.