Inspired by the wave of athletes joining calls for racial justice, the new Hockey Diversity Alliance aims to address the challenges faced by players of color.
Players of color from the N.H.L. have formed a new group to tackle the league’s challenges with diversity and inclusion.
Members of the group, the Hockey Diversity Alliance, said they were inspired by Colin Kaepernick, the former N.F.L. quarterback who knelt during the playing of the national anthem to protest social injustice against African-Americans. They spoke to him and got advice, representatives of the alliance said.
Two of its leaders, Akim Aliu, a former N.H.L. player, and Evander Kane, a San Jose Sharks forward, said the group of seven players would operate independent of the league, try to make the game more socioeconomically inclusive and, as Kane put it, “eradicate racism and intolerance in hockey” through community outreach and youth engagement.
“It was incumbent on us seven to get together and try to put our heads together on how to try to create, promote and manufacture real change when it comes to racism in our sport and racism in society as well,” Kane, who is black, said in a telephone interview.
Other players of color joining Aliu and Kane in the alliance are Minnesota Wild defenseman Mathew Dumba; Detroit Red Wings defenseman Trevor Daley; Buffalo Sabres forward Wayne Simmonds; Chris Stewart, a forward in the American Hockey League; and Joel Ward, a retired N.H.L. winger.
The creation of the Hockey Diversity Alliance comes during a cultural reckoning within the sport.
Don Cherry, a popular Canadian television commentator, was fired in November for making xenophobic comments on “Hockey Night in Canada,” one of the sport’s premier broadcasts. After the head coach of the Toronto Maple Leafs, Mike Babcock, was dismissed in December, he was accused of hazing and bullying by several former players.
Days after Babcock’s firing, Aliu tweeted that Bill Peters, his coach in a minor league, directed racial slurs toward him. Peters, who by then was the head coach of the Calgary Flames, resigned after the allegations. Aliu further detailed, in an essay for The Players’ Tribune, having experienced hazing and racially driven bullying in the minors.
“We know that important and significant work remains to be done at the N.H.L. level and throughout hockey to ensure that our game lives up to the ideals that are truly essential to it,” the league said in a statement responding to Aliu’s article.
In January, a defenseman in a development league, Brandon Manning, was suspended for using a racial slur during a game. Three months later, a Rangers prospect, K’Andre Miller, was subjected to racist slurs during a Zoom call with fans. In early May, the N.H.L. publicly reprimanded two players, Washington Capitals forward Brendan Leipsic and the Florida Panthers prospect Jack Rodewald, for racist and misogynistic comments on their social media accounts.
Stung by these and other instances of racism, the N.H.L. has tried to promote diversity in recent years, but the number of black players remains relatively small. The first black player in the N.H.L., Willie O’Ree, didn’t take the ice until 1957, and since then, only about 100 black players have dressed for at least one game in the league. At least 30 black players have been on teams since the 2016-17 season, when a record four black players were named All-Stars. Still, only a handful of team captains has been black and there are no black head coaches in the N.H.L.
A major goal of the Hockey Diversity Alliance will be mentorship, giving younger players who are members of minority groups a chance to learn from the likes of Kane and Aliu.
Aliu and Kane said they felt emboldened after talking to Kaepernick.
Kaepernick declined to comment.
