Some came to the streets to dance. Others were moved to dance more spontaneously, and surprised to find themselves seen by millions online.
As protesters streamed through the streets of New York on Sunday afternoon, one group’s chants of “Black lives matter!” and “No justice, no peace!” gave way to a sound more often heard at weddings and block parties. On 125th Street in Harlem, hundreds of people, many of them professional dancers, had congregated for a peaceful march across town and a collective performance of the Electric Slide.
Scroll through social media, and you might also find twerking in New Orleans, Senegalese Sabar in Los Angeles and the Haka (an ancient Maori war dance) in New Zealand, all proclaiming through the body that black lives matter. The examples are so abundant that one hip-hop dancer and scholar, MiRi Park, has created a public Google document listing occurrences of dance as protest since May 26, together with further reading on the subject. It expands every day.
At the center of many of these videos are dancers expressing pain and joy — affirming that they are alive. Some came to the streets with the purpose of dancing. Others were moved to dance more spontaneously, and surprised to find themselves seen by millions online. Dancers from three cities, featured in three videos, spoke about what it has meant to them to dance in protest.
At a march in Lower Manhattan last week, three men who had never met were drawn to the same drumbeat. Fabricio Seraphin, Nathan Bunce and Areis Evans had gathered around a group of musicians, and during a pause in the procession, they broke into dance. A video of their exuberant, unplanned dance circle — recorded and shared on Instagram by another protester, Antoinette Henry — has now been viewed well over two million times.
Mr. Seraphin, 25, a contemporary dancer and circus artist living in Brooklyn, added ballet to the mix, with an ecstatic grand jeté that translated the words on his T-shirt — “black boy joy” — into movement. For him, joy is a form of resistance.
One night last week, Karma Munez, a dancer in Chicago’s vogueing ballroom scene, proposed an idea to two of her best friends: to dress up, find a protest and vogue in the streets. The next day, the three put on their thigh-high black boots, grabbed their speakers and joined a march in the city’s Bronzeville neighborhood.
The results have circulated in numerous videos online, in which the dancers fearlessly strut, spin, kick and dip, letting their bodies crash to the pavement, as other protesters cheer them on. In one moment, Ms. Munez (who also goes by Gorgeous Mother Karma Gucci, her ballroom name), dances in front of a row of police cars, flipping her hair in front of their flashing lights.
The group known as Kalpulli Yaocenoxtli, which practices Mexican Nahua dance, song and drumming, is a frequent presence at Black Lives Matter protests in Minneapolis and St. Paul. Its dancers first took to the streets in solidarity with the movement after the death of Jamar Clark, who was shot and killed by Minneapolis police in 2015.
A recent video posted on Instagram by a Kalpulli member, Samuel B. Torres, shows the dancers in bright regalia, kneeling outside the Fifth Precinct of the Minneapolis Police Department. After leading protesters in a chant of “George Floyd! Say his name!” they leap to their feet to an accelerating drum beat.
