Corporate boards are handing out millions to top executives before their companies seek bankruptcy protection, and courts can’t do much about it.
But critics counter that the money would be better spent on rank-and-file employees. “It makes me angry because they are not taking care of the people who are actually making the money,” said Liz Marin, who worked at Toys “R” Us when it filed for bankruptcy and is now an organizer in training at United for Respect, a nonprofit organization that seeks to help retail workers. Toys “R” Us paid bonuses to executives before its bankruptcy.
Hold on, why are these C.E.O.s still employed?
Chief executives who lead companies into bankruptcy are at risk of losing their jobs. Geisha Williams left Pacific Gas & Electric, the giant California utility, in January 2019, just before the company filed for bankruptcy protection, for example.
But other corporate boards, which hire the chief executive and set compensation for senior officers, seem to be showing more grace toward the boss. In many cases, the executives could do little to prevent the crushing falloff in business that occurred when the pandemic and lockdowns stopped people going into stores, eating out and taking trips. The drop in the oil price this year was unusually large, walloping many energy companies, though some, like Chesapeake, were already burdened with large debts.
Typically, a company in bankruptcy court has to get a judge’s approval before doing just about anything of importance, especially spending millions of dollars. If a chief executive got a new compensation package during bankruptcy, a judge would have to decide whether the compensation was justified after hearing from creditors, shareholders and other groups. But this can be a drawn-out and expensive process — a big reason companies pay bonuses before bankruptcy.
Why are the C.E.O.s getting cash?
As a result, boards have quickly changed how top officers are paid, giving them cash bonuses instead of stock-based awards. But paying cash up front can be a windfall for chief executives when the livelihood of employees is under threat.
“The companies are creating certainty for their C.E.O.s at a time of the greatest uncertainty for the employee base and the company in general,” said Brett Miller, head of data solutions for the responsible-investment arm of Institutional Shareholder Services, which advises investors on corporate governance issues.
How big are these bonuses compared with what executives earned before?
Some companies point out that their cash bonuses are smaller than the incentive-linked compensation previously awarded to executives. Chesapeake said in a filing that its chief executive, Robert D. Lawler, was eligible for a cash bonus 34 percent smaller than the $13.5 million at which his 2019 variable compensation was valued. Ms. Soltau of J.C. Penney got a $4.5 million cash bonus before the retailer declared bankruptcy, much lower than the $8.2 million at which her 2019 incentive-based awards were initially valued.
And of course the bonuses are far higher than what regular employees earn. Ms. Soltau’s was many times the $11,482 the retailer’s median employee, a part-time worker, earned during J.C. Penney’s 2019 fiscal year, according to a securities filing.
The cash bonuses have also led to the concealing, loosening and removal of the tools companies normally use to tie pay to performance, which many critics contend were already too weak. Companies still operate when seeking protection under Chapter 11 of the bankruptcy code. And in theory, boards could require chief executives to hit sales targets or achieve other goals.
And in some cases, a few strings remain. Ms. Soltau has to repay a fifth of her cash bonus if she fails to achieve certain performance goals, and Mr. Lawler has to repay half of his. But J.C. Penney and Chesapeake did not disclose the goals in their securities filings and declined to answer questions about them.
Of course, Congress could change bankruptcy law so that compensation payments made before the filing could be clawed back, Mr. Ellias said. In addition, lawmakers could make it easier for creditors to pursue claims against executives after the bankruptcy.
