“Vampir Cuadecuc” is a ghostly film as well as the ghost of a film and perhaps the ghost of cinema itself.
Made in 1970 by the Catalan filmmaker Pere Portabella, “Vampir Cuadecuc” is among the most highly regarded avant-garde films of the past half century and has also been among the hardest to find. It is now available on disc from the British company Second Run Features in a zone-free format compatible with most DVD players and computers.
Using a hand-held 16-millimeter camera and high-contrast black-and-white film stock, Mr. Portabella filmed central scenes from the Franco movie as though he were spying on its making. Amid the mysterious comings and goings, which include much kinetic rushing through the woods, the Portabella film emphasizes details like the crude bat puppets fluttering outside the window of a woman soon to receive Count Dracula’s attentions. Ambient sound is almost entirely suppressed in favor of a musique concrète score by the Catalan multimedia artist Carles Santos in which rolling thunder and tolling bells are interspersed with passages of incongruously languorous lounge music.
Atmosphere is at least as important as action here. Images dissolve into shadows. Light is generally diffused. Mr. Portabella’s focus is sharpest when he shows various on-set preparations, including the manufacture of fog, the creation of cobwebs, the fabrication of bloody bites and the arrangement of actors in coffins. Everything is equally fantastic. Mounted on a dolly, the official camera is shown stalking the “Count Dracula” set as relentlessly as Mr. Lee’s voracious count.
Mr. Portabella’s film had a short run at Film Forum in May 1973 under the title “Vampir.” Roger Greenspun, who reviewed the movie for The New York Times, found it “so distinctly worth seeing as to be almost mandatory.” Now, thanks to Second Run, that will be possible.
Another rarefied and elusive avant-garde film, “Anticipation of the Night” by Stan Brakhage, is newly available in a zone-free dual Blu-ray/DVD edition from the French company Re:Voir Video.
Made in 1958, “Anticipation of the Night” was conspicuous by its absence in the two excellent Brakhage compilations released several years ago by Criterion. Perhaps this was because it was difficult to transfer — or perhaps it was the obscure nature of the movie itself. Certainly, as the film that led Brakhage, then 25, to a new form of “first-person,” utterly subjective cinema, “Anticipation” can seem as puzzling today as it was nearly 60 years ago when his early supporters, like the critics Amos Vogel and Parker Tyler, deemed it unshowable.
For the first time, Brakhage’s protagonist was fully the entity behind the camera. Even more than “Vampir Cuadecuc,” “Anticipation of the Night” (which has a running time of 40 minutes) is a film that is most analogous to a musical composition. The movie is silent; the only rhythm is visual. Like Mr. Portabella, Brakhage uses the hand-held 16-millimeter camera to dynamic effect — smearing light or blurring the image to achieve special effects that more timid filmmakers might consider mistakes.
As with many Brakhage films, “Anticipation” is hard to describe although it is by no means abstract. The images are recognizable but enigmatic. The film’s montage is even more so. “Anticipation” begins by acknowledging the filmmaker whose shadow is shown in a shaft of light on the floor. Soon the early interiors give way to the outside world — landscapes shot from a moving car, a rainbow produced by a lawn sprinkler.
A bit less than halfway through, “Anticipation” becomes an intensely fragmented, at times frenzied, study of children in a nighttime amusement park. The movie’s final movement is also nocturnal. There are numerous car-shots of empty road and onrushing trees in the moonlight (an image often used by David Lynch in “Twin Peaks”). A close-up of a sleeping child suggests that the various mysterious shots of birds and bears, evidently filmed at a zoo, are the child’s dreams.
Brakhage is often described as a lyrical filmmaker but his can be a most disquieting, even violent, form of lyricism. Forms coalesce and vanish throughout. Narrative only becomes obvious in the final minutes when it abruptly appears that the consciousness behind the camera is contemplating suicide.
“Anticipation of the Night” is far from Brakhage’s greatest film, but it is the one in which he hurled himself into the unknown. It embodies a desire to make something completely new, which, even after six decades, remains fresh.
