Jonathan Lewis lives on his own in a big brick apartment building in Brooklyn.
He lives by himself, but he is not quite self-sufficient.
He is not allowed to use the stove alone. He gets help with laundry and food shopping. Every time he leaves the building, he must sign out with the support workers on the first floor.
Mr. Lewis, 26, has a mild intellectual disability, though you would not know that to speak to him. He presents as quiet and serious, but grows more animated when he talks about the things he likes.
For most of his life, Mr. Lewis lived with his adoptive mother, most recently in a basement apartment in another part of Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn. She is 77, and this year, Brooklyn Community Services says, she is moving to Florida and retiring from caring for her son.
So, Mr. Lewis needed a new place to live. Brooklyn Community Services, one of the eight organizations supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, found him one. He moved this summer into the building on Atlantic Avenue, where the organization manages several apartments as supportive housing. There are about 10,000 developmentally and intellectually disabled adults living in such situations in New York City, a number that keeps growing as the state shuts down public institutions.
To start paying rent, Mr. Lewis needed more money, but he was denied Supplemental Security Income the first few times he applied because the evaluators did not believe he was intellectually disabled, his case manager said. “They said there’s nothing wrong with him,” the case manager, Joanne De Curuew, said. “They couldn’t pick up on it.” But Mr. Lewis, she said, is unable to manage money or perform many of the other tasks of daily life.
In August, Brooklyn Community Services used $790 from the Neediest Cases Fund for Mr. Lewis’s first month of rent and security deposit.
Mr. Lewis is settling into his new life. He says he has made friends with his next-door neighbor, Andre.
“We have a lot in common,” Mr. Lewis said. Andre is also a Scorpio, also high-functioning. They both love music, though Andre prefers gospel.
Mr. Lewis’s apartment is sparse but spacious and clean. The main room has a bed, a dresser a little round table, a chair and a big TV his adoptive mother got for him. In the kitchen, boxes of Alpha-Bits, Cheerios and sugar-coated flakes are lined up on top of the refrigerator.
Mr. Lewis works out by using his dining table as a dumbbell. “I’m the guy in my job who’s known for lifting heavy objects,” he said.
“You go as a group, you come back safely,” Mr. Lewis said. “It was a good experience. Andre paid for my ticket. I was unprepared. I didn’t come with resources. And then he told me don’t worry about it.
Mr. Lewis likes his colleagues at Dave & Buster’s, too. “Good people, good vibe, charismatic people,” he said. He cleans bathrooms and clears tables. He has run into his share of celebrities.
Mr. Lewis eventually qualified for Supplemental Security Income, but is now receiving $505 a month in Social Security Disability Income instead.
One recent Friday afternoon, Mr. Lewis took the subway to Times Square. Dave & Busters is two escalator rides up in a building that houses a 25-plex movie theater. It is huge and noisy and jammed. The restaurant is on your left when you enter. On the right are the arcade games — flashing wheels of fortune, growling driving games, pounding music.
“This is where I work,” Mr. Lewis started to explain, “over here behind the arcade section they have bathrooms.” Then a supervisor came and took him by the arm. “Go, go, go,” she said, and led him back toward the dining room.