New York|Acting Studios Are Struggling. Does It Matter?
Acting Studios Are Struggling. Does It Matter?
Schools that trained actors like Robert De Niro and Jessica Lange are facing rising costs, competition from colleges, and shifting cultural attitudes.
In the late 1950s, Robert Duvall was studying acting at the Neighborhood Playhouse, sharing a Manhattan apartment with Dustin Hoffman and going to parties at Gene Hackman’s place.
The three friends would all go on to win Academy Awards, helping to establish the classic blueprint for pursuing an acting career in New York: Move here, hone your craft at a gritty acting studio, do a handful of plays, conquer Hollywood.
Things have changed since the heyday of theater-trained movie stars and the independent acting schools that shaped them. Many small studios, threatened by rising rents, decrepit buildings, well-funded university programs, and instant internet stardom, are now struggling.
Just ask Mary Boyer, who moved to the city from the Midwest in 1973 to pursue an acting career. She eventually became a teacher and a director, opening her own school in 2003. But by 2008, Boyer’s 150 students had dwindled to about 50.
“The economy changed,” Ms. Boyer said, “and what actors and audiences wanted sort of changed all at the same time.” She noticed more students expecting “instant gratification.” Her “craft of acting” courses, what she felt most passionate about, were not filling up. Auditioning classes became her new staple.
Last fall, after 43 years in New York, Ms. Boyer gave up her studio space, delegated most of her teaching responsibilities to her associate artistic director, and returned to her hometown of Toledo, Ohio, to open a theater there.
“I just could not keep doing it,” Ms. Boyer said. The lease for her school was up for renewal, and she had realized two things: her rent would continue to increase, and the only way to survive would be to teach more audition classes. “My creative soul was crumbling,” she said.
This year, two other schools with long track records, the Atlantic Acting School and the T. Schreiber Studio, have made significant compromises in order to keep a toehold in Chelsea, the Manhattan neighborhood they helped gentrify.
A symbolic example of the neighborhood’s changing priorities is the fact that the tech giant Google, now the Atlantic’s landlord, has plans to raise the school’s rent to market rate next year when the school’s 12-year lease expires.
“We’ve moved around Chelsea all this time, and it’s just heartbreaking for the school to have to leave the neighborhood,” said Mary McCann, the Atlantic’s executive director.
For much of the 20th century in New York, independent acting studios, many of them inspired by the Russian theater master Constantin Stanislavsky and the formation of the Group Theater, trained actors who revolutionized the craft and became marquee names, like Marlon Brando and Ellen Burstyn. But gradually, several of these studios joined forces with universities (Stella Adler was the first to go collegiate, in 1972), where their budgets and institutional power dwarfed the reach of the independent institutions. Meanwhile colleges outside of New York also started to offer theater degrees.
“The colleges became our bigger competition,” said Pamela Moller Kareman, executive director of the Neighborhood Playhouse. Applications for the Playhouse’s conservatory program, based on the techniques of its renowned teacher Sanford Meisner (a Stanislavsky protégé who died in 1997), started to decrease about 10 years ago, she said. The school has responded by investing in recruitment and relying on its star-studded alumni system for support (last April, Joanne Woodward established a scholarship there).
“It allowed us to expand,” said Tom Oppenheim, artistic director of the Stella Adler Studio of Acting, about its 45-year partnership with N.Y.U. The school, which counts Elaine Stritch, Warren Beatty and, more recently, Bryce Dallas Howard, among its former students, has four theaters, a professional-quality set design space, and eight rehearsal rooms. Mr. Oppenheim said that he wants to transform the school into more of a cultural institution, rebranding it as the Stella Adler Center for the Arts, and relocating to an even bigger space.
Since N.Y.U. is affiliated with several independent studios, its undergraduate students can travel “through the studio network” to learn different acting techniques after two years, said Rubén Polendo, chair of the drama department at Tisch. “They can stay within one methodology, or switch it up,” he continued. “You may be able to develop those tools in 15 years, but here you can compress that experience.” The compression comes at a steep price, however: one year of undergrad acting at N.Y.U. costs about $55,000.
For comparison, a full-time course load at most independent studios with no university affiliation costs a fraction of that. The T. Schreiber Studio, for example, charges $16,495 a year for its one-year conservatory program, while the fee for the one-year “Hagen Core Training” program at HB Studio, named for the performer and acting teacher Uta Hagen, is $13,500. The Neighborhood Playhouse charges about $16,500 annually for its two-year school.
A successful alumni network will no doubt help the Playhouse face the daunting task of maintaining the 1920s-era property it owns.
“It’s like driving a 1947 Chevy,” said Ms. Moller Kareman of the Playhouse, which has been on East 54th Street since Irene and Alice Lewisohn, its founders, bought the two adjacent buildings in Midtown in 1947. The Playhouse has five floors, including a light-filled dance studio designed by Martha Graham, as well as a 99-seat theater.
“We are all afraid of the roof caving in,” said Ms. Moller Kareman, who had to pay $20,000 to fix the building’s out-of-commission elevator when she was first hired. “The elevator guys said we don’t even have parts for this anymore,” she recalled.
HB Studio owns its three West Village properties, all bought in the 1950s and ’60s. It, too, has undergone some belt tightening. Founded by the actor Herbert Berghof, who was joined later by Ms. Hagen, the school and theater collective established a reputation for quality acting classes (its alumni list includes Robert De Niro and Jessica Lange) at famously low rates.
“When Herbert Berghof died in ’90, I think it was still $5 a class,” said Edith Meeks, HB’s current artistic and executive director. But even by 2004, when Ms. Hagen died, HB had only marginally increased tuition. Modest, incremental fee hikes were just not “enough to catch us up to the real expense of running a nonprofit and managing three buildings in the 21st century,” said Ms. Meeks.
The change was made with a heavy heart, said Ms. Meeks, who admitted that young actors are affected by New York’s real estate and job market just as much as the institutions training them. “They commute from farther and farther away to study with us at HB; many of them have crushing college debt and they struggle to stay employed and to have enough flexibility to continue their creative work,” she said.
For acting schools that pay rent, the situation is even more tenuous.
The Atlantic Acting School moved into the Chelsea neighborhood 26 years ago, when “no one wanted to be there” and “rent was cheap,” said Ms. McCann. With a pedigree that includes the playwright David Mamet and the actor/director William H. Macy — not to mention a thriving children’s program, a connection to a professional theater with 12 Tony Awards, and even a coveted affiliation with N.Y.U. — it would seem that the school would have a rosy outlook.
But next June the school’s lease will expire, along with the affordable rent that was negotiated for the nonprofit when it first moved into 111 8th Avenue in 2006. Google, which honored the Atlantic’s lease when it purchased the building in 2010, is simply “following the provision stipulated in our lease that allows for a short-term renewal at market rate,” said Jeff Lawson, the Atlantic’s managing director.
“We can’t afford market rate,” said Ms. McCann, the school’s executive director.
So, over the last two years, Mr. Lawson and his team have been looking for an affordable space, but the specifics for what the school needs — at least 20,000 square feet of office and open studio space at an affordable price — have proved to be a daunting challenge.
And yet the Atlantic hopes to have a deal in the Hell’s Kitchen area, according to Mr. Lawson, who reported that his team is currently considering two options. The rent, he said, will be difficult but doable, something between what the Atlantic is currently paying and “Chelsea market rate.” Google, meanwhile, has offered the Atlantic a new lease for its theater, housed in the basement of 111 8th Avenue, for reduced rent.
The T. Schreiber Studio, also in Chelsea, has survived by keeping its classrooms and administrative areas but letting go of its theater.
In the mid-90s, Schreiber was riding high on the success of at least two former students, Edward Norton and Peter Sarsgaard. Around the same time, the school was offered the opportunity to buy its East 4th Street building, which was located across the street from the experimental theater La MaMa, next door to New York Theater Workshop, and included a theater space, offices, dressing rooms and a downstairs class area, for $90,000. But the money simply wasn’t there, said Sally Dunn, its managing director.
Instead, the now-49-year-old acting school moved to Chelsea right when it was becoming hot, said Peter Jensen, its artistic director. “You could just see all the hotels going up,” he said.
Meanwhile, student interest in the traditional scene-study class — what Mr. Norton and Mr. Sarsgaard cut their teeth on at Schreiber — was leaning more toward on-camera, commercial and casting classes, said Mr. Jensen. The whole nature of pursuing acting in New York was evolving, while the costs of teaching the trade were rising.
By 2017, the school’s annual rent had mushroomed to more than $300,000. Over the summer, to streamline costs, Schreiber reduced its square footage by more than half, giving up its in-house theater, where a full season of plays were regularly produced. For future productions, said Mr. Jensen, the plan going forward will be to rent space from other theaters like the Cherry Lane and the Robert Moss Theater.
But that might not be as easy or as affordable as hoped. Over the last decade, the city has also lost approximately 50 small performance venues, and according to Ms. Dunch, the arts fundraising expert, this “space crunch” affects the entire nonprofit theater industry, including acting studios.
The Barrow Group, which leases space on West 36th Street, has been fortunate enough to hold on to both its theater space and its classrooms, but not without constant challenges. After the 2008 recession, the professional company and school stopped producing for its main stage. It moved its offices into a storage room. Instead of downsizing the school component, however, it expanded it, said Robert Serrell, its current executive director.
Seth Barrish and Lee Brock, the artistic directors of Barrow, had developed a reputation as actor whisperers, with successful alumni like Anne Hathaway, Tony Hale and the newcomer Noah Schnapp (“Stranger Things”). So they decided to capitalize on their signature teaching style by introducing it to more beginners. The school went from offering 70 classes a year in 2010 to 320 classes, 83 of which were for beginners, in 2016. It worked. The studio is also making inroads in higher education, having recently partnered with Quinnipiac University in Connecticut to produce a New Play Festival.
Perhaps the answer is to leave Manhattan. The Atlantic looked in Brooklyn, but “it’s not any less expensive,” said Ms. McCann. Even the actor and Renaissance man James Franco, who in 2014 opened a branch of his acting and film school, Studio4, in Fort Greene, couldn’t work his magic: the studio announced it was closing on Oct. 1.
But there’s still at least one relatively new pioneer in the borough: the Terry Knickerbocker Studio, in Sunset Park.
“I knew I wanted to be in Brooklyn — three-fourths of my students live here,” said Mr. Knickerbocker, who opened his school in 2015.
The warehouse-chic studio, part of Industry City, has neighbors like Brooklyn Kura, a new sake factory and tasting room, and pba, an Italian design company.
So far, they have come. After taking out a home equity line of credit and some money from his retirement account (“completely against the advice of my lawyers and accountants”), he has about 100 students. Mr. Knickerbocker “wanted to have a studio that would be an affordable alternative to an M.F.A. program,” he said. The two-year conservatory, with an optional third year, costs about $8,000 annually.
Meanwhile, in Toledo, Ms. Boyer is embracing, somewhat, the changing tides of the acting school business. While she is establishing her theater there, she is continuing to coach her most loyal New York students through Skype.