A few years ago, not long after Jeanine Pirro paid a visit to Donald J. Trump at his Trump Tower office, a box arrived at her home in Rye, N.Y.
Inside was a gift: a selection of shoes from the latest Ivanka Trump footwear collection.
Ms. Pirro, the prosecutor-turned-politician-turned-television personality who hosts a weekend show on Fox News, has been friends with Mr. Trump for decades, their careers forged in New York’s tabloid caldron. But these days their relationship is playing out on a bigger stage.
She is not the only media figure attacking the inquiry and the law enforcement officials in charge of it. Other Fox News commentators, like Sean Hannity, have labeled Mr. Mueller and his team hopelessly biased. On Jesse Watters’s Fox News show last weekend, an onscreen graphic asked, “A Coup in America?” The Wall Street Journal — like Fox News, a media property owned by Rupert Murdoch — called for Mr. Mueller to be fired on its editorial page.
Ms. Pirro, 66, who declined to be interviewed for this article, is undeterred by such criticisms — and her increasingly severe denunciations of Mr. Mueller have translated into big ratings.
Her show, “Justice With Judge Jeanine,” reaches more than two million viewers on Saturdays at 9 p.m., up 25 percent from a year ago. When she guest-hosted Mr. Hannity’s prime-time show on Monday, she pulled in more viewers than MSNBC’s Rachel Maddow, who was on at the same time.
One of those viewers is Mr. Trump, who rarely misses an episode and who has urged his Twitter followers to tune into her show along with him. In May, Ms. Pirro conducted one of the few one-on-one interviews with the president that he has granted since taking office.
Ms. Pirro’s ex-husband, the businessman and lobbyist Al Pirro, served as Mr. Trump’s Westchester County power broker in the 1990s, navigating deals for the Manhattan developer. That was before Mr. Pirro went to prison for conspiracy and tax evasion, a scandal that hindered Ms. Pirro’s tenure as district attorney in Westchester and, later, her brief candidacy for United States Senate.
Through it all, Ms. Pirro and Mr. Trump remained close. He told New York magazine in 1999 that she was “sexy as hell.” In 2006, he donated $20,000 to Ms. Pirro’s unsuccessful run for New York attorney general.
Ms. Pirro’s new proximity to power represents a rise in fortune and influence for someone who, until recently, was a minor Fox News player mired in its weekend backwater. A syndicated show, “Judge Jeanine Pirro,” was canceled in 2011. In May, another reality vehicle featuring Ms. Pirro (“You the Jury,” on the Fox broadcast network) was pulled after two episodes.
And while she was once viewed as a rising Republican star — a tough talker with centrist views who had the support of Geraldine Ferraro — Ms. Pirro’s political prospects have since dimmed. She flubbed the start of her campaign for a Senate seat, appearing flummoxed at the lectern after a page went missing from her prepared speech. Federal prosecutors later investigated her for reportedly wiretapping her then-husband with the help of Bernard B. Kerik, the disgraced former New York City police commissioner.
She might have remained a locally famous Manhattan character — in the ranks of semi-celebrities like Bo Dietl, Elaine Kaufman and Curtis Sliwa — had she not joined Mr. Trump in riding the tide of rising right-wing sentiment. Now her hard-line views earn plaudits from the Trump base.
Not surprisingly, critics of the president disagree. One of them is Lisa DePaulo, who briefly worked on a book project with Ms. Pirro about the wealthy murder suspect Robert Durst.
In her view, Ms. Pirro is merely doing Mr. Trump’s bidding.
Ms. Pirro eventually published the book, “He Killed Them All: Robert Durst and My Quest For Justice,” as the sole author; details of her account have been disputed by numerous parties in the Durst case.
