Nikki R. Haley, the American ambassador to the United Nations, presented what she said was evidence that Iran was violating one of its international agreements. John Ismay, a Times reporter, said the evidence fell short of proving her claims.
These are the recovered pieces of a missile fired by Houthi militants from Yemen into Saudi Arabia. The missile’s intended target was the civilian airport in Riyadh. At no time was I told that analysts from the Defense Intelligence Agency were able to actually inspect any of the locations. Nobody said that they went to Yemen, to the places where the anti-tank guided missile or the drone were recovered. They did not inspect the impact crater at the King Khalid International Airport. The answers I got like that, that just seemed to have no information behind them, the more skeptical I became and the more insistent I was in asking even more questions because one thing I noticed was that some information was conspicuous by its absence. And so I started asking questions. I started asking each of these analysts very directly, ‘Where were they found? Do you have a latitude and longitude?’ And the answer was always ‘no.’ I’d say, ‘O.K., well, do you know when it was used?’ And the answer was ‘no.’ And I’d say, ‘Well, where do you get your information from?’ They said, ‘From the Saudis.’ And so that was basically a constant refrain. The reason I’m asking those questions is that they go to the heart of the government’s claim that Iran was violating sanctions and violating United Nations resolutions. Absolutely nobody has any doubt that Iran has provided weapons to Houthis in Yemen. What the United States is arguing is did Iran violate certain sanctions and certain U.N. resolutions — and those have a time component to them. So what I want to figure out is were the arms transferred before those resolutions and sanctions went into place, or did they happen after? Because if it happened before then there’s really no violation. It’s simply just more evidence of what’s already known, and that being that Iran has supplied these weapons to Houthis. For instance, when I was looking at the U.A.V., and the analyst explained to me all the different ways it could be configured. And so then I just asked a simple question. I said, ‘O.K., well, what about this one you’re showing me, how is it configured?’ There’s kind of a pause. And they said, ‘Well, we don’t know.’ I said, ‘Well, O.K. Did it have a warhead? You know, an explosive warhead?’ They said, ‘We don’t know.’ They said, ‘This is just the way the Saudis handed it to us.’ I said, ‘So you don’t know anything else about this? You don’t know where they found it? When they found it?’ And they said, ‘No.’ At multiple places there were little placards that just said simply, on loan from Saudi Arabia. So I imagine at some point, they’re going to go back. I began to have less and less and less confidence that there is really anything here that was news.
WASHINGTON — The Trump administration tried to mount a case on Thursday that Iran violated an international agreement to limit its arms dealing, but American officials failed to show how an array of weaponry presented as evidence proved the charges.
Nikki R. Haley, the American ambassador to the United Nations, accused Iran of providing weapons to Houthi rebels in Yemen who toppled the government in Sana, throwing the country into chaos and setting off a proxy war between Iran and Saudi Arabia.
At a military base in Washington, Ms. Haley stood in front of pieces of what defense officials said were Iranian-made Qiam missiles, including one that was fired by Houthi militants at an airport in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Saudi officials have called that attack an “act of war” by Iran.
Her accusations were the latest step by the Trump administration’s effort to punish Iran for its ballistic missile program and destabilizing actions throughout the Middle East.
Asked what international agreements Iran was violating, Ms. Haley cited the United Nations Security Council resolution 2231. Passed in 2015, it bars Iran from supplying, selling or transferring certain weapons outside the country unless approved by the Security Council. It also prohibits Iran from transferring weapons capable of delivering nuclear warheads.
But the evidence she showcased at Joint Base Anacostia-Bolling — four weapons provided to the American government by Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates — fell short of proving her claims.
Defense officials said they could not say exactly when the weapons — the Qiam missiles and an anti-tank missile and a drone that were both recovered in Yemen — were given to the Houthis, which means that they could have been transferred before the Security Council resolution was enacted. And in some cases, the officials said that they could not say when the weapons were used.
Defense officials were also unable to say exactly where or when the drone, a broken Qasef-1, was found. It was evidently turned over without its warhead or guidance system.
Additionally, none of the weapons displayed were capable of delivering nuclear warheads, said Jeffrey Lewis, an analyst at the Middlebury Institute of International Studies in Monterey, Calif.
“It’s not a nice thing for Iran to do, but that’s not the standard,” Mr. Lewis wrote in an email, referring to Iran’s transfer of weapons to the Houthi rebels.
Ms. Haley also said that the nuclear deal between Iran and six world powers, including the United States, has failed to curb Tehran’s support for terrorist groups. President Trump has disavowed the deal but has declined to tear it up, as he promised to do during his campaign.
Iran dismissed her assertions. Alireza Miryousefi, a spokesman at Iran’s mission to the United Nations, called them fabricated and part of a pattern of false accusations by Washington, according to Agence France-Presse, the French news agency.
The Iranian foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, tweeted side-by-side photos of Ms. Haley at Thursday’s news conference and Colin Powell, the former secretary of state, during his infamous 2003 speech at the United Nations arguing for an invasion of Iraq. It was in that speech that Mr. Powell outlined for the world what turned out to be the Bush administration’s false case asserting that Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction.
“When I was based at the U.N., I saw this show and what it begat,” Mr. Zarif, who was Iran’s representative to the United Nations at the time, said on Twitter.
Analysts at the Defense Intelligence Agency also showed parts of a weaponized motorboat that was recovered by Emirati forces last year in the Red Sea. The boat, defense officials said, was identical to one used to attack a Saudi frigate this year. On display was the computerized guidance system for the vessel, a 33-foot-long fiberglass Shark weaponized motorboat, powered by two outboard motors and fitted with a warhead from a Styx anti-ship cruise missile.
Ms. Haley did not reference Saudi Arabia’s bombings in Yemen. Saudi Arabia has faced mounting international pressure to justify its campaign of more than two years, which has damaged its image abroad as military errors led to civilian casualties.
In October 2016, the Saudi-led coalition bombed a funeral reception in Sana, Yemen’s capital, killing more than 100 people. The Saudis later said the attack had been based on false information, but the debacle prompted the Obama administration to block a transfer of precision weapons.
The Saudi government also claimed to have shot down one of the Qiam short-range ballistic missiles that were on display on Thursday after it was fired at the King Khalid International Airport in Riyadh on Nov. 4. But arms experts dispute that the intercept was successful, and the Qiam parts that Ms. Haley pointed to showed no signs of damage from another missile, further eroding the Saudi claims, according to Mr. Lewis.
For all the hardware on display, the administration may face an uphill battle getting European allies, let alone Russia or China, to take tougher measures against Iran. The Bush administration’s accusations about Iraqi weapons of mass destruction could long haunt United States diplomats trying to get the United Nations to sign on to tougher measures based on American intelligence.
What’s more, the Trump administration has its own short history of uneasy relations with the United Nations.
