U.S.|Texas Prisons Ban 10,000 Books. No ‘Charlie Brown Christmas’ for Inmates.
Texas Prisons Ban 10,000 Books. No ‘Charlie Brown Christmas’ for Inmates.
The nearly 150,000 inmates in Texas prisons are barred from using Facebook, possessing cellphones and receiving snacks in the mail. They are also prohibited from reading the pop-up edition of “A Charlie Brown Christmas,” “The Color Purple” and the 1908 Sears, Roebuck catalog.
Security at the roughly 50 state prisons across Texas extends beyond barbed-wire fences and cell-by-cell searches to include the careful reading of every book and magazine sent to inmates. The reviews are conducted not by guards but rather by mailroom staff members who skim the pages looking for graphic sexual content and material that could help inmates make a weapon, plot an escape or stir disorder.
More than 248,000 titles are on the approved list, which was published by The Dallas Morning News in November. It extends to all genres, from self-help to mysteries and how-to guides to romance.
It also includes 20 books by the humor writer Dave Barry. But one of his books, “All the Dave Barry You Could Ever Want,” a compilation of four books, was banned. It includes “criminal schemes,” another no-no, the corrections department said.
Mr. Barry, a longtime columnist at The Miami Herald, was baffled by the decision.
“I can’t imagine why the Texas Department of Criminal Justice would ban them, unless they’re worried that the inmates would overpower the guards using fart jokes,” Mr. Barry said in an email.
Another South Florida writer, Carl Hiaasen, has several books on the approved list, but one of his novels — ”Double Whammy” — was outlawed. A thriller with dark humor, “Double Whammy” is about a private detective who investigates a suspected cheater in bass fishing tournaments.
Inmates are prohibited from reading it, the department said, because it contains information about manufacturing explosives.
For inmates, reading is not only a form of escapism during their sentences but also an opportunity to improve their chances of assimilating back into society after their release, reports about literacy in prison have found. In general, inmates suffer from illiteracy or struggle to read at rates far greater than the rest of the population, according to a 1994 study of inmates in federal and state prisons.
Federal courts have upheld the right of prisons to censor books. Still, the lists of approved and banned books in Texas prison have surprises. Many controversial books are allowed. They include “American Psycho” by Bret Easton Ellis, about a serial-killing Manhattan businessman, and “Lolita” by Vladimir Nabokov.
But the pop-up edition of “A Charlie Brown Christmas” is prohibited (could hide contraband inside it), as is “The Color Purple,” the 1983 novel that won the Pulitzer Prize and the National Book Award (incest). As for that 1908 Sears, Roebuck catalog, it includes information on weapons.
Also banned is the 2005 best seller “Freakonomics,” which challenges conventional wisdom and argues eyebrow-raising theories, including the theory that the drop in violent crime in the 1990s can be attributed to the legalization of abortion in 1973.
The sections of “Freakonomics” that discuss race, the Texas Department of Criminal Justice said, led it to be banned.
