Dec. 15-17; dayfornight.io.
In an era glutted with music festivals big and small, it’s not easy for new arrivals to stand out. The two-year-old avant-garde carnival Day for Night, which will return to downtown Houston on Friday, Dec. 15, has done so with enviable grace, drawing national attention for its thoughtful lineup of performers and its kaleidoscopic visual art installations.
A rare solo set by Thom Yorke of Radiohead is among this year’s main attractions. Other notable acts — on four stages in and around a decommissioned post office — include the R&B seer Solange, the alt-rock stalwarts Nine Inch Nails, the singer-guitarist St. Vincent, the chart-topping rapper Cardi B, the punk firebrands Priests and the electronic innovator Jlin.
Dec. 15; amazon.com.
Jean-Claude Van Damme is retired and miserable. A once super-famous actor with age-spotted temples and sagging pecs, he now gets mistaken for Nicolas Cage or maybe Val Kilmer. Then he runs into his former flame Vanessa (Kat Foster) and proclaims that he’s back — not just as JCVD, his movie-star cover, but as the black-ops agent who goes by the alias Johnson.
His mission, should he choose to accept it, in the Amazon series “Jean Claude Van Johnson,” debuting Friday, Dec. 15: Shoot an action version of “Adventures of Huckleberry Finn” in Bulgaria while taking down a bloodthirsty drug cartel and reigniting the love of Vanessa. It is easier said than done.
Even before financing was in place for “The Ballad of Lefty Brown,” opening Friday, Dec. 15, Jared Moshe, the film’s writer and director, sent Bill Pullman’s agent the script. “He seemed to sense that I was at a point where I needed to do what he calls ‘a coming-of-age story for a 63-year-old man,’” Mr. Pullman wrote in an email.
Mr. Pullman sits tall, and then taller, in the saddle as Lefty, a loyal if bumbling cowboy sidekick on what becomes a surprisingly heroic quest to avenge the death of his longtime partner, a newly elected Montana senator (Peter Fonda). Mr. Moshe set his film in that state after falling under the spell of a historic ranch outside the town Whitehall, which is in the shadows of the Tobacco Root and Highland Mountains — and about 20 minutes from Mr. Pullman’s home.
Dec. 13; icaboston.org.
Boston-based photographer Nicholas Nixon has been shooting an 8-by-10, black-and-white portrait of his wife, Bebe, and her three sisters every year since the mid-70s.
But the series has neither the narcotizing nostalgia nor the impersonal monumentality that such cross-sections of fleetly passing life might fall into. Instead it catalogs, by means of changing postures, hairstyles, clothing and expressions, a range of human possibility that feels very much rooted in the present moment, whatever that moment happens to be.
Dec. 13-16; bam.org.
The filmmaker Charles Atlas had a long and pioneering artistic partnership with the choreographer Merce Cunningham. In the early 1970s, the two began collaborating on video dances, choreographic works created specifically for and with the camera. Mr. Atlas was the Merce Cunningham Dance Company’s resident filmmaker through 1983; the pair continued working together until Cunningham’s death in 2009.
Dec. 13; roulette.org. Dec. 14; abronsartscenter.org.
For those already exhausted by the omnipresence of “Messiah” performances this month, there is fortunately an alternative December staple: the meticulously whimsical, biennial UnCaged Toy Piano festival.
Steeped in the playfully experimental ethos of John Cage — who introduced the children’s instrument to the concert world in a 1948 suite — the festival has taken an increasingly audacious approach to the toy piano. Under the supervision of UnCaged founder Phyllis Chen, two evenings are programmed around a newly invented “robot toy piano,” designed by sound artist Ranjit Bhatnagar.
Opens Dec. 10; abronsartscenter.org.
The last time that the performance artists Julie Atlas Muz and Mat Fraser brought a fairy tale to the stage, it came with a warning label. Their acclaimed adaptation of “Beauty and the Beast,” in 2014, was erotic and definitely not for the kiddies. But now Ms. Muz, a burlesque dancer, and her husband, Mr. Fraser, a British actor best known for playing Paul the Illustrated Seal on the FX series “American Horror Story,” have gone legitimately family-friendly.
