This week, we’re taking on some of the questions you’ve asked via the form at the bottom of our climate FAQ. You can continue to submit questions there, and we will continue answering them here on occasion.
Are we an invasive species?
In a high-rise in Malaysia’s capital in 1999, a group of scientists — convened by the International Union for Conservation of Nature to designate “100 of the World’s Worst Invasive Alien Species” — asked themselves this very question.
“Every single person in the room agreed, humans are the worst invasive species,” said Daniel Simberloff, a professor of environmental science at the University of Tennessee, who was at the meeting. “But the I.U.C.N. disagreed.” Homo sapiens, which has colonized and deforested much of the Earth and pumped enough carbon dioxide into the atmosphere to change its climate, was excluded from the list.
While the meaning of “invasive” has been the subject of some debate, the generally accepted definition is a plant, animal or other organism that, aided by humans, has recently moved to a place where it is nonnative, to detrimental effect. Humans don’t fit that definition, said Piero Genovesi, chairman of the I.U.C.N.’s invasive species group, because they are the ones doing the moving. A more useful way to think about ourselves, Dr. Genovesi said, is as the drivers of every problem conservation tries to remedy.
If my cup of water doesn’t overflow when ice melts, why would sea levels rise if glaciers melt?
The problem with that analogy is that the glaciers, unlike the ice in the glass, aren’t on the water yet. The melting ice sheets that concern scientists are on land, not in the ocean.
As the climate warms, those ice sheets melt into the surrounding seas. It’s like taking ice cubes from the freezer and plunking them into an already-full glass of water: the cup will overflow. This is why sea levels rise as glaciers melt.
Keep in mind that melting glaciers aren’t the only cause of sea level rise. Warm water occupies more space than cooler water, a physics concept known as thermal expansion. As temperatures rise, water molecules expand, also contributing to sea level rise. Studies suggest that much of the rise in sea level we’ve seen since the 1880s is the result of thermal expansion.
Melting glaciers, though, can worsen the situation. The Greenland ice sheet contains enough water to raise sea levels by 24 feet. The Antarctic ice sheet is even larger. If it melted, sea levels would rise by 200 feet. Philadelphia, which is now roughly sixty miles inland, would be underwater.
According to Maureen Raymo, a paleoclimatologist at Columbia University’s Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, if we don’t reduce greenhouse gas emissions it would still take somewhere more than several centuries — but less than 10,000 years — for the polar ice caps to fully melt. But as some people living in low-lying regions can attest, humans are already beginning to feel the impacts of sea level rise.
I had no idea plane emissions were so bad! Is there any effort to make planes fly using alternative energy?
— Kristin Close, Norwich, Vt.
Jet engines burn a lot of fuel, producing a lot of carbon dioxide. For a coast-to-coast round trip, an economy-class passenger’s share of the plane’s emissions is about one-fifth of what a car produces in a year. Globally, aviation accounts for about 2 percent of carbon emissions, and that percentage is expected to increase.
Design changes, like the winglets seen on many planes and jet engines with fans that are so large that a person could stand inside the cowling, have helped cut fuel use and reduce emissions.
Extensive use of biofuels could produce much more significant reductions. Conventional fuel is made from oil; when it is burned it adds ancient carbon back into the atmosphere. Biofuels are made from plants, and when burned release carbon dioxide that the plants absorbed while growing, so net emissions are much lower.
But airlines have only recently begun to use biofuels, and current consumption is just a minuscule fraction of the 17 billion gallons of fuel used by United States carriers each year. Cost is one barrier. And as with biofuels for cars and trucks, production of large quantities of aviation biofuels could lead to changes in land use — clearing forests to grow crops, for example — that could increase emissions.
Another approach would be to eliminate jet engines altogether in favor of electric motors that could be powered by renewable energy. But at this point, the weight-to-power ratio of such alternative designs is problematic.
In 2016, an airplane powered only by solar panels flew around the world. But it flew slowly and carried only two people.
Batteries, or hybrid systems that couple batteries with an engine that could charge them, hold more promise. NASA and a few start-ups are designing and in some cases building prototypes of small, battery-powered planes. But large electric airliners are a long way off, if they ever become reality.
As Greenland Melts, Where’s the Water Going? Each year, Greenland loses 270 billion tons of ice as the planet warms. New research shows that some of the water may be trapped in the ice sheet, which could change how scientists think about global sea levels.
Builders Said Their Homes Were Out of a Flood Zone. Then Harvey Came. In the years leading up to Hurricane Harvey, a wrinkle in the federal flood-mapping system helped a company build homes in an at-risk Houston suburb.
Conservationists Face Once-Remote Prospect in Arctic Drilling Fight: Defeat A measure to open the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge to oil exploration is in the tax bill before Congress. Drilling advocates have cause for optimism.
