Even after Mr. Simmons sold his remaining stake in Def Jam for a reported $100 million in 1999, he served as an ambassador for hip-hop through comedy (“Def Comedy Jam”), clothing (Phat Farm) and activism. Today, his company Rush Communications oversees an array of businesses and nonprofits.
The media mogul Russell Simmons is accused of raping three women. Our culture reporter Melena Ryzik talks about The New York Times’s investigation into Mr. Simmons and the significance of women of color speaking out about alleged predatory behavior.
Russell Simmons is an entertainment mogul. He started out in music. He was one of the forces behind Def Jam records, helping to bring hip-hop to the mainstream in the ’90s, and now he is being accused by four women of sexual misconduct. Three of the women say that he raped them. His alleged misconduct continued to have an impact on the lives of these women. Even decades later, it upended their professional lives in some ways. It certainly had an impact on their personal lives. This is stuff that may have happened decades ago. And yet they are still living with the consequences today. All of these stories that we have heard now in the few months since the Weinstein allegations came out, they mostly focused on the stories of white women, white men. The impact of this stuff on people of color has — is sort of just coming to light. And I think the women in our story felt that they would have a harder time coming forward, that their place in this industry may have been more tenuous. And so their allegations might have a harder time being believed, or that’s how they felt anyway. The intimidation for them was very real. These stories are not easy to talk about. They’re painful. It’s very common for these interviews to involve tears. But in the end, they know the women decided that they were ready to come forward on the record. Russell has denied the allegations of rape. He has said there was no non-consensual sex, that all of his relations were consensual. He did acknowledge other misconduct. He said there was inappropriate behavior with one of his employees at Def Jam records. And last month, he stepped down from his companies and apologized for any behavior that he said was inappropriate. I think the #MeToo Movement has really touched on a lot of industries — certainly film TV, media, classical music, the art world. But these stories about Russell Simmons are some of the first that have taken hold in pop music and hip-hop. And if the experience that we’ve had before is any guide, it may be that the floodgates will now open for that genre.
