Solita Hanna unexpectedly rose from her seat when social workers asked women at a Brooklyn shelter to share their talents during a party.
Some of the homeless women were known as vocal and outgoing, so it was no surprise when they recited poems.
But staff members at the shelter were surprised when Ms. Hanna, still fairly new to Transitional Living Community, for women with severe mental illness, came forward.
Ms. Hanna was not sure what to sing. She looked over to Adrienne Terry, the shelter’s program director, for guidance. “What’s in your heart?” Ms. Terry asked her.
Ms. Hanna, 28, developed her hidden talent in San Francisco, one of several cities where she has lived in homeless shelters. With help from borrowed money, she paid an instructor to help her learn the more technical aspects of singing operatically.
On her own, she has studied YouTube videos of the sopranos Kathleen Battle and Leontyne Price. “I listen to their renditions over and over again,” Ms. Hanna said.
Music seems to be the most consistent aspect of Ms. Hanna’s unstable life, made more unpredictable by the mental illness she has struggled with since childhood. Ms. Hanna, who said she had a traumatic childhood, has stayed in shelters and psychiatric hospitals for most of her adult life.
Last December, she came to New York after a plan to work in Connecticut did not pan out. She did not find a job as a bartender as planned. She wore out her welcome on couches. She ran out of money for hotel rooms. She wandered near the Port Authority Bus Terminal in Midtown Manhattan with tags still on her suitcase.
A stranger, who was also homeless and recognized the signs of someone with nowhere to stay, approached Ms. Hanna and told her where she could charge her phone and find shelter. Ms. Hanna said she was pleasantly surprised that New York City’s shelter system was more accessible than those in other cities, where shelters limit intake to business hours.
Ms. Hanna was directed to a women’s shelter in Brooklyn and said she had enough money for the subway ride there. She was given a bed around 7 a.m., though “I thought it looked like a jail,” she said.
She was transferred in March to Transitional Living Community, operated by Brooklyn Community Services, one of the eight organizations supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
“I had never heard of mental health shelters until now,” Ms. Hanna said.
Through the shelter, Ms. Hanna has access to a counselor, a therapist and a psychiatrist. The shelter has also tried to nurture her talents by encouraging her to sing at gatherings, and in September, Neediest Cases funds were used to buy her a microphone and an amplifier for $232.
Ms. Hanna, who said “Sweeney Todd” was her favorite musical and that neoclassical dark wave was her favorite genre, has sung songs from “Madama Butterfly” and “The Merry Widow” during events at the shelter.
“I wouldn’t consider myself an opera singer,” she said, adding that she was nowhere near as skilled as the professionals she admires.
But Gordon Chambers, a award-winning songwriter, recognized her voice as special this year.
Mr. Chambers — who wrote the Grammy-winning “I Apologize,” sung by Anita Baker, and the Grammy-nominated “If You Love Me,” made famous by Brownstone — began volunteering at Brooklyn Community Services after his brownstone in Brooklyn was damaged by a fire on Valentine’s Day 2016.
The blaze was devastating and Mr. Chambers said he went through a depression. But he was heartened because “Say It” from Tory Lanez, which sampled part of the hook from the song Mr. Chambers wrote for Brownstone, was still heating up the music charts.
Mr. Chambers said he also found perspective by giving back to people who had experienced hardships worse than his. At a Mother’s Day program this year at Transitional Living Community, he planned to sing several of his hits, but there were technical difficulties. So he decided to sing a cappella and asked the women to join in.
“I noticed I could hear this voice stronger than the others,” he said, recalling how he learned that it was Ms. Hanna singing. He invited her to come forward.
Ms. Hanna said she might try her hand at busking someday. For now, she has fans among the women and the staff at the shelter and Mr. Chambers.
