For as long as he could remember, Father Gregory Greiten, a Roman Catholic priest in Wisconsin, lived with an oppressive secret.
As a seminary student, he was told that speaking about his secret would get him expelled. As a priest, he was told it could hurt his ministry. At one point in his life, he perched on a window ledge, tears running down his face as he contemplated leaping.
But in a column published Monday in the National Catholic Reporter, Father Greiten, who is 52, wrote three words: “I am gay.” That phrase, he said, would finally free him, both as a man and as a minister who could better serve parishioners — gay and straight — at St. Bernadette Catholic Parish in Milwaukee.
Father Greiten’s statement also comes at a time when gay men and lesbians have a wider role in ministry and in Catholic activities, said Francis DeBernardo, the executive director of New Ways Ministry, who has been an advocate for gay Catholics for four decades. In the past decade, about half a dozen priests in the United States have publicly said they are gay, he said.
“In every case that I know of they have been greeted with overwhelming support by parishioners,” he said in a telephone interview on Wednesday.
Part of that, he said, is because of Pope Francis, who shook the Catholic world with his comment about gay priests in 2013, saying “Who am I to judge?” Pope Francis has also appointed archbishops and other senior church leaders who are more welcoming to L.G.B.T. Catholics.
But the pope has also sent mixed messages on homosexuality, gender and same-sex marriage, and the Vatican issued instructions last year saying that men who “present deep-seated homosexual tendencies or support the so-called gay culture” are not to become priests.
“I think statements like the Vatican statement are designed to pretend that gay men are not in the priesthood, and to sort of uphold the myth that all priests are heterosexual, when the reality is far from that,” Mr. DeBernardo said.
The Rev. Warren Hall was fired from Seton Hall University’s ministry in 2015 after he came out as gay. In 2004, the Rev. Frederick Daley, now a pastor at All Saints Parish in Syracuse, came out, angered by what he called the “scapegoating” of gay priests during the church sexual abuse scandal.
Father James Martin, a Jesuit priest who has written a book called “Building a Bridge,” about L.G.B.T. Catholics, said that between 20 percent and 30 percent of Catholic priests are celibate gay men and that a larger reason they have not been public about their sexuality is homophobia in the church.
Father Greiten, who was ordained in 1992, wrote that he had carried the “heavy burden” of keeping his sexuality a secret because of the church’s teachings, saying that each time he wanted to speak out he was challenged or discouraged by other priests and church leaders.
He said that before coming out he had informed Archbishop Jerome E. Listecki of Milwaukee of his plans. The priest also delivered the news to his parishioners during Sunday services, at which he was given a standing ovation, according to a report in The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel.
“We need healthy role models to be out there, to be able to say there is nothing wrong with being gay,” Father Greiten told WTMJ, a local news station, on Tuesday.
In a statement Monday, Archbishop Listecki backed Father Greiten’s decision to share his sexuality with his parish.
In his column, Father Greiten described the difficulties with coming forward in an institution that, he said, pretends gay priests and followers do not exist. He apologized to L.G.B.T. men and women for remaining silent, saying that his announcement would allow him to better serve them.
