“I think the floodgates have opened for white women,” the actress and rape survivor said of the #MeToo movement, which coincided with her new memoir.
In a penthouse suite at the Gramercy Park Hotel on a cloudy fall day not long ago, the actress Gabrielle Union was stretching her body out on a chartreuse velvet couch: resting her long legs with ease, a red pillow propped up behind her, saying absolutely nothing.
Though the tiny room was filled with half a dozen people — Ms. Union’s publicist, a photographer clicking away, the photographer’s assistant, Ms. Union’s stylist, her makeup artist, her hairdresser and this reporter, who slunk quietly into a corner — the space was silent.
The silence went on for a few minutes. It wasn’t uncomfortable, but it wasn’t the kind of atmosphere one might expect around someone like Ms. Union, who, at least on social media, appears to be a natural extrovert. And who, as an advocate of sexual-assault victims for over 20 years, feels a deep need to be emotionally available, open and talking.
After a few minutes, once she was comfortable, Ms. Union asked for some music.
“Tina on shuffle?” her publicist said.
The cheerful cover of Ms. Union’s book, “We’re Going to Need More Wine,” belies the serious stories within.
Ms. Union’s silence, it turned out, was recuperation from the intense emotional experience of a monthlong book tour spent listening to painful stories of hundreds of women (and some men). For many showing up to buy her recently published memoir, “We’re Going to Need More Wine,” the area around her served as a sort of pop-up safe space to express their pain.
Some of her readers, she said, have experienced the most horrific abuses imaginable. The kind of abuses, she said, if someone were to put it in a movie, it wouldn’t seem realistic.
Some would wait at the end of the line to meet her so they could get more time. End-of-the-line people were especially raw, Ms. Union said, as if their traumatic event just happened. Their story would tumble out in the seconds it would take for her to sign their book. And then came the tears.
Ms. Union would weep too, in her hotel room every night on the tour, thinking of what some of these women had suffered. “Crying like I’m at a funeral,” she said.
The actress has been in the public eye for over 20 of her 45 years, so it’s fair to say that these people sharing sensitive material with her don’t feel as if they’re meeting her for the first time.
And the likes poured in.
Since 2013, after big roles in “Bring It On,” “10 Things I Hate About You” and “Ugly Betty,” Ms. Union has been playing the lead character in the award-winning BET drama series “Being Mary Jane.” ABC is developing “White Dave,” a comedy that she will executive-produce along with LeBron James. And she is in early discussions, she said, about turning her book into a television series.
If this materializes, it promises to be harrowing. “We’re Going to Need More Wine” contains Ms. Union’s own heart-wrenching, deeply personal stories: about her infertility struggles, her childhood during which she lived in the all-white Pleasanton, Calif., for the school year and spent summers with her grandmother and cousins in a predominantly black neighborhood in North Omaha. About her first marriage, to the N.F.L. player Chris Howard, and subsequent divorce; her relationship with her father; and about the time she was raped at gunpoint when she was 19. Her assailant was caught, and he took a plea deal of 33 years in jail. She doesn’t know if he’s still there. She doesn’t want to know.
The book was the natural outgrowth, Ms. Union said, of years of therapy.
Her house in Cleveland is so quiet that a buck often hops into her backyard. She likes having a cup of coffee when no one is around, and stares at that deer.
But such solitude isn’t always easy to find. Mr. Wade has sole custody of two sons (Zaire, 15, and Zion, 10) from his first marriage, to Siohvaughn Funches, as well as custody of his nephew (Dahveon, 16). Ms. Union said she will sometimes claim “gastrointestinal issues” in the bathroom just to get a few minutes alone.
“I fake diarrhea a lot,” she said, laughing.
When she first saw #MeToo trending, her arm went numb, she told Ms. Roberts. “Post-traumatic stress syndrome from the rape,” Ms. Union said on the air, visibly shaken, her mouth quivering.
All of the hugging and the touching on the book tour, as rewarding as it’s been, can be difficult for her as a trauma survivor, she said at lunch. In “We’re Going to Need More Wine,” she writes, “No one understands how much female celebrities are physically touched and grabbed and shoved and fondled.” She needs to sit facing out in restaurants such as this one, for instance, because she cannot enjoy her meal with her back to the door.
One store, she said, began promoting her book only after the store was deluged by a Facebook campaign.
Kima Jones, the founder of Jack Jones Literary Arts, a publicity company, and who mostly represents black authors — including the Pulitzer Prize winner Tyehimba Jess and the PEN America prize winner Rion Amilcar Scott — was not surprised that Ms. Union, who is not her client, felt “We’re Going to Need More Wine” received inadequate support.
Ms. Union thinks she didn’t visit enough cities or enough stores. She’d like to do a second leg of the book tour. And maybe there will be one, especially given how invested she is in the public discussion around sexual assault. A lot of times her tour stops felt like a revival, she said.
 She calls herself a “perfect victim”: not just because of her current celebrity status, but also because she was raped at work, because it was caught on surveillance and the police were called — but also because the majority of sexual assaults aren’t reported to the police, according the Rape, Abuse and Incest National Network.
“When we have the microphone, how often do we pass it back to the people who are experiencing a different challenge, but who are equally worthy as having the microphone?” Ms. Union asked.
And then she stopped herself. “I just did this,” she said, and stretched her hand backward, over her head, as if she was symbolizing a passing of the microphone to someone behind her.
But the microphone shouldn’t be passed behind, she said, acknowledging that many people still feel ignored.
