There was no shortage of news for “Saturday Night Live” to tackle after being off last weekend. It was the show’s first episode since the firing of the NBC morning television host Matt Lauer, and it aired one day after President Trump’s former national security adviser, Michael T. Flynn, pleaded guilty to lying to the F.B.I. The writers took aim at both Mr. Flynn and Mr. Lauer right at the top.
Mr. Day then warned Mr. Baldwin that ghosts of Mr. Trump’s past would be visiting him that same night. The first one was the former “Today” show host Billy Bush, played by Alex Moffat. Mr. Bush, who appeared on the “Access Hollywood” tape that emerged near the end of the presidential campaign, was suspended by NBC and ultimately left the network.
“S.N.L.” has recently found itself in the uncomfortable position of criticizing names close to the show. Aside from being one of NBC’s biggest stars, Mr. Lauer has only slight ties to “S.N.L.” compared with recent targets like the comedian Louis C.K. and Senator Al Franken of Minnesota. After Mr. Moffat departed, Beck Bennett resurrected his impersonation of President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, followed by another ghost of Mr. Trump’s past: Hillary Clinton, played once again by Kate McKinnon, and wearing a black robe.
“You, Donald, have given me the greatest gift of all: sexual gratification in the form of your slow demise,” Ms. McKinnon said.
The other digs at Mr. Lauer came later during the “Weekend Update” segment.
Mr. Jost followed up: “On Wednesday, the Rockefeller Center Christmas tree was lit, and so was Ann Curry,” a reference to Ms. Curry’s much-publicized exit from the “Today” show in 2012.
A digital short titled “Welcome to Hell,” featuring this week’s host, Saoirse Ronan, as well as Aidy Bryant, Cecily Strong, Kate McKinnon and other female members of the cast, was a searing sendup of the public shock at the flood of powerful men recently accused of sexual misconduct.
“All these big, cool, powerful guys are turning out to be — what’s the word? Habitual predators?” Ms. Bryant said, with lollipops, rainbows and clouds in the background.
“S.N.L.” has struggled to find the proper tone to address the spate of sexual misconduct allegations that have dominated the news cycle. Some of this has been because of timing. When the Harvey Weinstein allegations initially broke, it was late in the week and the show shelved a sketch before airtime. A week later, the show aired an uncomfortable sketch riffing off a panel of actresses at the New York Film Festival discussing Mr. Weinstein. During an episode in early November, Alec Baldwin, in the headlines himself for making awkward comments about sexual harassment, cracked jokes as President Trump about Mr. Weinstein.
Mr. Jost and Michael Che spent a large portion of “Weekend Update” bashing Senate Republicans for their sweeping tax overhaul and also targeting Mr. Flynn.
You know, once the Republicans get this tax bill passed, they won’t need Donald Trump anymore. I mean, they already got what they wanted. 
This week’s sketch about a man who is discovered to have a suspicious affection for American Girl dolls in the aftermath of a gas line explosion was fairly brilliant. The way Mr. Day’s character starts hesitant and evasive before finding himself unable to refrain from expressing his obsession with his doll is a deft arc. The laserlike focus on Mr. Day’s peculiar fascination by all the sketch’s characters — even in the midst of the explosion’s debris — was a neat bit of commitment from the writers.
Kate McKinnon playing Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain was, unsurprisingly, amusing. Ms. McKinnon aimed to portray Ms. May as a stiff world leader now willing to engage in “social media fisticuffs” with Mr. Trump. The escalation from “Mr. Kim Jong-un. Good sir. Do grow up. #Please,” to telling Prince Harry, “You look like Ed Sheeran minus the abilities,” was a bizarre and worthwhile journey.