The first time I met Esraa, we sat in a coffee shop in downtown Cairo. It’s a part of the city that feels as if it reverberates with the fading chants of revolution.
Years earlier, when the Arab Spring erupted on these streets, clouds of tear gas hovered in the air. People, many of them young and hopeful, stood up against oppression. I remember it clearly because I am an Egyptian who was there covering it as a journalist.
I saw voters go to the ballot box, replacing President Hosni Mubarak, who had ruled unchallenged for nearly 30 years, with Mohamed Morsi, a leading member of the Muslim Brotherhood. And I saw the election change very little.
Gradually, the crowds of protesters thinned. The bullhorns fell silent. And the country slipped back into the grip of another authoritarian government.
Today, the same streets are eerily quiet. Esraa mostly whispered when she told me her story. A young woman who was tired of living under the thumb of the government, she risked her life by openly rebelling against Egypt’s conservative mores.
I have returned to Egypt for at least six reporting trips since 2011. Never was I looking for a story related to the revolution. But every time I landed, I noticed a pronounced change in the mind-sets of the generation whose political consciousness was shaped by the Arab Spring and influenced by social media, where these young people engaged with the world.
On the heels of the revolution, a palpable social transformation had begun and continued to advance despite the severe crackdown on political freedoms. Many Muslims, ordinary men and women, started to grapple with the perversion of their religion by extremism, realizing that radical ideas had seeped into the mainstream.
They were debating what it means to be Muslim and confronting the future prospects of a region consumed by a cycle of violence. Just two weeks ago, Muslim extremists opened fire on Muslim worshipers in a mosque in Egypt, killing more than 300.
Through my reporting, I met women who had removed the veil, Islamic reformists who were challenging conventional sheikhs, groups of outspoken atheists, and young Muslims turning to mystical Sufism as an alternative to the austere Salafi creed. Eventually someone introduced me to Esraa.
Esraa was in high school when the revolution started. She took to the streets with her parents, celebrating Mr. Mubarak’s fall and rejoicing over the Brotherhood’s victory in the country’s first democratic election.
I chose to follow Esraa for this documentary because she was remarkably thoughtful and uncharacteristically open. Because of her candor, a strange familiarity developed between us. I wanted my film to feel intimate, but I also worried that Esraa was revealing too much.
Her every act was one of rebellion. Living in a coed space with friends. Showing her affection for a man who was not her husband. Smoking cigarettes in public. Investigating human rights abuses in secret.
She was politically cynical and now had her doubts about God. To do so, in her world, was to risk losing her family, her freedom and her life.
Like almost every girl she knew, Esraa started wearing a head scarf when she was in middle school. At the time, she thought she had chosen it.
But in college, when she joined student movements and led protests fighting to preserve the right of free expression, she started to realize how limited her choices were. “When I looked to see what was wrong with me, I saw the veil,” Esraa told me in that first meeting.
It was a bold statement in a country where the large majority of women are still veiled and where the veil is loaded with meaning. It is modesty, it is ideology, it is culture, it is tradition, it is sacrifice, it is identity — ripping it off is akin to changing skins.
The first time Esraa and I spoke, she was nervous. But as she relaxed and I began achieving the much-coveted “fly on the wall” status, I grew nervous.
We often filmed with our iPhones to avoid drawing attention to Esraa or to our work, especially when we were in public. And I reminded her repeatedly that I was a journalist, that the camera was rolling and that she had a mic attached to her. Esraa laughed because she had stopped caring.
Why take the gamble? I asked her on our last day of shooting.
She saw in my camera an opportunity to be who she wanted to be. The small stage I offered Esraa, the direct questions I asked her and the interest I took in her personal evolution were everything she craved. She understood the consequences of letting herself be heard.
I did, too, but I did not imagine that I would see them play out as soon as they did.
The last time I met Esraa was in late November. I had not been able to reach her for days. She had changed her number and deactivated her Facebook account.
Her good friend Sarah helped arrange our meeting. When I sat down with Esraa, she told me she was hiding.
The story goes like this: In September, Esraa attended a concert for a Lebanese rock band whose lead singer is openly gay. It was in Cairo, she was with her friends, the music was thumping, she was dancing, a friend lifted her up on his shoulders, and before she knew it, she had a rainbow flag in her hand.
Without a moment’s hesitation, she waved the flag, high over her head. And her friend snapped a picture. Esraa posted the photo to her Facebook account accompanied with a post where she denounced discrimination.
A few other concertgoers waved the flag, too. The act, extraordinary in its audacity, provoked public outrage. And it set off a campaign of targeted arrests.
Esraa was not at her mother’s place when the police came for her. And she has not returned to visit since then. She left her job, she moved apartments and she has been living in a state of total paralysis.
In early December, there were no official charges, but those who had been arrested were accused of “inciting debauchery” and could face years in prison.
I reminded Esraa of her words to me when we were filming: I am not scared of anything.
I asked her again if she was afraid.
