Dec. 29; netflix.com.
Beware the mind probe: That might be the biggest takeaway from Season 4 of “Black Mirror,” returning to Netflix on Friday, Dec. 29. But it’s the humans, with their penchant for tech addiction and abuse, who are still the most terrifying inhabitants of Charlie Brooker’s sci-fi anthology. Six new episodes, from the playfully romantic to the downright macabre, traverse lonely roads in desolate lands alongside overcrowded sensory byways.
In “Arkangel,” directed by Jodie Foster and starring Rosemarie Dewitt, an overprotective mother has her daughter’s mind uploaded onto an app that allows her to filter her child’s experiences. In “Hang the DJ,” directed by Timothy Van Patten and starring Georgina Campbell and Joe Cole, a dating service provides its users with a stream of prospects until they make their perfect match.
Dec. 30; tenet.nyc.
In 2010, the soprano Jolle Greenleaf launched the Green Mountain Project to perform Claudio Monteverdi’s landmark 1610 Vespers on the four hundredth anniversary of its publication.
Now under the auspices of Tenet, the stellar New York-based early music ensemble, the project overlaps this year with the composer’s 450th birthday. Tenet will mark the occasion at St. Joseph’s Church in Greenwich Village on Saturday, Dec. 30, with selections from Monteverdi’s rarely performed “Selva morale e spirituale,” a massive collection of liturgical music published in the final years of the composer’s life.
Dance: ‘The Hip Hop Nutcracker’ in Charlotte, N.C.
Dec. 27-30; hiphopnutcracker.com.
It’s been a whirlwind couple of months for “The Hip Hop Nutcracker,” and not just because of the spins, flips and other break dancing tricks that ignite this boisterous reimagining of the holiday classic.
Choreographed in 2014 by Jennifer Weber, the founder of the Brooklyn-based hip-hop troupe Decadancetheatre, the production is wrapping up a seven-week, 28-city national tour that culminates in six performances at the Knight Theater in Charlotte, N.C., Dec. 27-30.
Dec. 25; mollysgame.movie.
If the skier Molly Bloom had made it down the slope as planned, the next stop might have been the Olympics. Instead, a freak collision with a pine bough resulted in a crash-and-burn and set into motion the events that led to her christening as the Poker Princess.
In “Molly’s Game,” opening Christmas Day, Aaron Sorkin adapts Ms. Bloom’s 2014 memoir and, in his directorial debut, follows her up the money mountain as she lures Hollywood stars, pro athletes and Russian mobsters into high-stakes poker games — and then gets busted by the F.B.I.
Jessica Chastain, who earned a Golden Globe nomination for playing the whip smart Molly, brandishes Mr. Sorkin’s rat-a-tat dialogue in verbal duels with Kevin Costner, as her psychologist father; Michael Cera, as a celebrity card shark; and Idris Elba, as her defense attorney, who can’t understand why she doesn’t take the government’s deal — and the $4 million it confiscated from her.
Dec. 28-31; thegarden.com.
Phish played Madison Square Garden for the first time on Dec. 30, 1994. Exactly one year later, the four musicians who make up the band returned for two performances that have been hailed as among their very best. Soon enough New Year’s residencies at the Garden became a beloved, semiregular tradition for Phish heads.
The group’s four-night farewell to 2017, which starts on Thursday, faces higher stakes than usual. After all, it has to follow Phish’s 13-show stand at the Garden this summer. Those shows delighted old fans and new ones with high-concept jokes, anarchic surprises and upward of 230 songs, all performed.
Dec. 27-31; neofuturists.org.
The inferno that roared through the Iroquois Theater in Chicago on the afternoon of Dec. 30, 1903, started onstage — sparked, it seems, by a light, then fed by highly flammable scenery. The show was a spectacle called “Mr. Bluebeard,” and the matinee crowd was packed with families. Of the more than 200 performers, nearly all lived. But for about 600 audience members, the brand-new theater proved a deathtrap.
Through Feb. 4; invisible-exports.com.
Genesis P-Orridge is best known either for “Pandrogeny,” a radical, yearslong, surgery-assisted effort to transcend gender and identity by merging with wife Jacqueline Breyer or for founding the pioneering industrial rock band Throbbing Gristle. But in the mid-1970s, the Manchester-born P-Orridge was also involved in Mail Art, and an upcoming show at Invisible Exports in Manhattan will include 30 obsessive marker drawings on envelopes containing other artists’ work.
