LOS ANGELES — President Trump has finally arrived at Walt Disney World.
The Hall of Presidents, in the Liberty Square area of the Magic Kingdom, one of four theme parks in Orlando, Fla., that constitute Disney World, was closed on Jan. 17, three days before Mr. Trump’s inauguration. “Currently being prepared to welcome our new president,” a red, white and blue sign at the entrance has read since.
The attraction, which tells the story of the United States and the men who have governed it, with an emphasis on bedrock values, was initially supposed to reopen in late June, in time for the Fourth of July holiday. In a blog post on June 27, the company gave a new date — “late 2017” — and indicated that Mr. Trump had not yet recorded the dialogue for his robot.
The Hall of Presidents has been a hagiographic fixture at the Magic Kingdom since 1971. Visitors enter a theater inside a building that resembles Independence Hall in Philadelphia and watch a short historical film. An animatronic Abraham Lincoln then gives a speech. The program culminates with a museum-style diorama that appears to come to life. Animatronic figures of every other president nod or wave at the audience during a roll call.
In the original version, “The Battle Hymn of the Republic” played as visitors left the theater. As the show has gone through different updates over time, that song has sometimes been replaced by “America the Beautiful.” Presidents are added as they are elected.
Speculation that Mr. Trump would be muzzled may have sprung from a Change.org petition that was circulated around the time of his inauguration. The petition, which drew support from more than 15,000 people (falling short of its goal of 25,000), demanded that Disney break with precedent and not allow of Mr. Trump to speak — citing his history of making “degrading, insulting and demeaning” comments.
Disney Imagineering, the company’s research and design division, goes to extraordinary lengths and expense to build animatronic figures of the presidents that look as lifelike as possible. As it did with Mr. Obama, Disney asked the White House to provide Mr. Trump’s exact measurements.
Along with Mr. Trump, the reopened Hall of Presidents features an upgrade to its theater, including a new sound system, lighting and high-definition projection system, Disney said.
Like some of other long-running attractions at Disney World (the Country Bear Jamboree, for instance), the Hall of Presidents has lost some of its thrill over the years. It’s hard for robotic presidents offering a history lesson to compete with “Star Wars” rides and “Toy Story” parades.
But for parkgoers willing to brave the Florida heat, the Hall of Presidents does have one big thing going for it: The theater is air-conditioned.