For months, black political leaders watched the bare-knuckled, back-room race to lead the New York City Council with a mix of hope and trepidation. Five of the eight candidates were black or Hispanic — offering the prospect of a first black speaker — but two of the most prominent front-runners were white men.
In the end, one of those white men, Councilman Corey Johnson of Manhattan, emerged victorious. Now black leaders are railing against a process that produced another white face atop the government of a majority-minority city that already has white men in the roles of mayor, comptroller, three of five district attorney’s offices and at the heads of various city agencies.
Resentment has been barely concealed in the wake of the selection by county bosses of Mr. Johnson, a decision that leaked out unofficially on Wednesday and was publicly endorsed soon after by Mayor Bill de Blasio, whose potential objection was widely seen as the only roadblock.
But many black leaders expressed frustration, discontent and feelings of being taken for granted as the core of a Democratic base that is propping up the party, both in New York City, where Democrats outnumber Republicans more than 6 to 1, and in places like Alabama, where black voters helped elect a Democratic senator for the first time in decades.
Attention to the race spread beyond the five boroughs with some national groups looking at the City Council race, usually a more internecine contest among local power brokers, as something of a bellwether.
Although the official vote among council members does not occur until Jan. 3, almost all of the other candidates have conceded to Mr. Johnson. But not Mr. Cornegy, who was widely seen as the front-runner among black candidates.
Behind the scenes, Mr. Cornegy has received support from black political leaders and politicians who believe he should remain in the race to help ensure that he and other minorities land in powerful positions like head of the finance or land use committees.
Councilman Jumaane D. Williams of Brooklyn, who has also not yet conceded to Mr. Johnson, said in a call with reporters about race in the speaker contest that he was glad Mr. Cornegy was staying in.
The Rev. Al Sharpton, president of the National Action Network, said he was also disappointed that there would not be a black speaker. He and others said that they believed the number of black candidates divided support.
Mr. Johnson was also a formidable candidate, Mr. Sharpton said. At a recent forum of speaker candidates at the National Action Network’s headquarters in Harlem, Mr. Johnson won over the crowd when he recounted that he worked in New Hampshire on Al Sharpton’s 2004 presidential bid in New Hampshire.
Powerful black leaders such as Mr. Meeks and Representative Hakeem Jeffries never came out fully in favor of Mr. Cornegy, and Mr. King said he believed it was because they didn’t want to be on a losing side.
