UNITED NATIONS — A lopsided majority of United Nations members rebuked the United States on Thursday, denouncing its decision to recognize Jerusalem as Israel’s capital and ignoring President Trump’s threats to retaliate by cutting aid to countries voting against it.
In a collective act of defiance toward Washington, the United Nations General Assembly voted 128 to 9, with 35 abstentions, for a resolution demanding that the United States rescind its Dec. 6 declaration on Jerusalem, the contested holy city.
The resolution is nonbinding and therefore largely symbolic, but the vote indicated the extent to which the Trump administration’s departure from a 50-year international consensus on Jerusalem’s status has unsettled world politics and contributed to America’s diplomatic isolation.
Major allies like Britain, France, Germany and Japan voted for the resolution, though some allies, like Australia and Canada, abstained.
Carrying out a promise to his base of supporters, Mr. Trump upended decades of American policy with his decision on Jerusalem, aggravating an emotional issue that has festered since the 1967 Arab-Israeli war, when the Israelis occupied the entire city.
The new resolution raised questions about whether Mr. Trump would deliver on his threat on Wednesday to withhold American aid from countries that broke ranks with the United States. While he has significant legal latitude to do so, experts said it would be very difficult to substantially cut off countries like Egypt and Jordan that are strategic partners of the United States in the Middle East.
Israel denounced Thursday’s vote, likening it to a 1975 resolution equating Zionism with racism, a decision that was repealed after 16 years because of intensive American pressure that included withholding American dues payments to the United Nations.
“It’s clear that many countries prioritized their relationship with the United States over an unproductive attempt to isolate us for a decision that was our sovereign right to make,” the mission said in the statement emailed to journalists.
The decisive rejection of the American shift of position on Jerusalem, on the world’s biggest diplomatic stage, was a setback for a president who is still looking for a major foreign achievement after nearly a year on the job. It also appeared to deepen the tension between Mr. Trump and the United Nations, which he once likened to a social club.
“I think this was a significantly self-inflicted wound and really unnecessary, clumsy diplomacy on the part of the United States,” Stewart M. Patrick, a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations, said of the outcome.
Many diplomats who spoke before the vote — from Turkey, Venezuela, Pakistan, the Maldives, Bangladesh and others — took offense at the pressure campaign by the White House, including last-minute threats by Mr. Trump to cut off aid to countries who voted for the resolution.
“History records names, it remembers names — the names of those who stand by what is right and the names of those who speak falsehood,” said Riad Malki, the Palestinian foreign minister.
The Palestinian ambassador to the United Nations, Riyad H. Mansour, said in an interview after the vote that the Trump administration’s approach had worked against the United States.
Pakistan’s ambassador, Maleeha Lodhi, said her country remained a steadfast supporter of the Palestinians “despite the kind of threats we have received in recent days” from the United States.
Aside from Israel, the only countries to side with the United States by voting no were Guatemala, Honduras, Togo, the Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, Nauru and Palau — mostly tiny countries heavily dependent on American aid.
The outcome threatened to alienate Arab allies of the United States and further complicate prospects for a two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Egypt, Jordan, Afghanistan, Iraq and Pakistan are among major recipients of American aid that defied Mr. Trump’s warning and voted for the resolution. Three other recipients — Haiti, Mexico and South Sudan — abstained. Mr. Trump has already threatened to withhold aid from Pakistan unless it cooperates more on counterterrorism operations.
Administration officials said Mr. Trump had significant flexibility to hold up aid — even from countries, like Egypt, where it is congressionally mandated. The White House delayed nearly $300 million in aid to Cairo last summer over concerns about human rights abuses and evidence that it was playing host to guest workers from North Korea.
But the practical effect of Mr. Trump’s threats seemed blunted, analysts said, by Washington’s reliance on countries like Egypt and Jordan. Israel, analysts said, would be among the first countries to protest a cutoff of aid to Egypt, because it fears the instability that would result from such a decision.
Already on Thursday the administration seemed to backtrack somewhat.
“The president had said yesterday that the U.N. vote is really not the only factor that the administration would take into consideration in dealing with our foreign relations and countries who have chosen to go one way or the other,” said Heather Nauert, the State Department’s spokeswoman.
Timothy A. Lenderking, a deputy assistant secretary of state for Arabian Gulf Affairs, insisted that Mr. Trump’s remarks were not “an empty threat at all,” but was circumspect when asked about Yemen, home to a humanitarian crisis and civil war, and Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, which are strategic partners of the United States. All three voted for the resolution.
Mr. Trump is not the first president to have an antagonistic relationship with the United Nations. Since Franklin D. Roosevelt pushed for the creation of a world body after World War II, presidents have frequently felt stymied by the defiance of its members toward the United States or its allies. For a few, it was “a dangerous place,” in the words of Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the American ambassador to the United Nations under President Gerald R. Ford.
In 2003, President George W. Bush clashed with allies at the United Nations over Iraq, after he claimed authority under Security Council Resolution 1441 to invade the country.
Relations improved under President Barack Obama, who reemphasized the role of the United Nations as an agent for confronting global problems. The United States, however, continued to oppose Security Council and General Assembly resolutions that singled out Israel.
In the final days of Mr. Obama’s presidency, however, the United States abstained from voting on a resolution condemning Israel’s settlement construction. The episode has since come under scrutiny because the Israeli government contacted officials of Mr. Trump’s transition team to try to head it off.