Sue Grafton, a prolific author of detective novels known for an alphabetically titled series that began in 1982 with “A Is for Alibi,” died on Thursday night in Santa Barbara, Calif. She was 77.
Her daughter Jamie Clark, announcing the death on the author’s website and Facebook page, said Ms. Grafton had cancer.
Ms. Grafton’s husband, Steven F. Humphrey, said her illness had prevented her from making any progress on the planned final book in the series, although she did have the title.
Sue Taylor Grafton was born on April 24, 1940, in Louisville, Ky. Her father, C. W. Grafton, was a lawyer who also wrote mystery novels, and her mother, the former Vivian Harnsberger, was a teacher.
Ms. Grafton graduated from the University of Louisville in 1961 and tried but quickly abandoned a graduate program, instead moving to California. Her first novel, “Keziah Dane,” was published in 1967. She helped adapt her second, “The Lolly-Madonna War” (1969), into a screenplay, and after that movie was released in 1973, she worked intermittently writing for television. A series she created, “Nurse,” ran for two seasons on CBS in the early 1980s.
But she did not care for the dynamics of writing for TV and film.
She had actually written seven novels before she began the alphabet series.
The notion of the alphabetical series, she said, was inspired by “The Gashlycrumb Tinies,” Edward Gorey’s macabre 1963 rhyming book in which 26 children meet bizarre ends.
Kinsey’s debut, though, did not impress at least one critic.
The reading public apparently thought otherwise. The Millhone books routinely made best-seller lists. They also established a star female presence — both character and author — in a genre that leaned heavily male.
“Ms. Grafton and P. I. Millhone floated in on the same zephyr of welcome fresh air that during the past decade has brought us a number of other women writing about women operatives in the traditionally male-dominated genre of American private eye fiction,” the writer Ed Weiner said in reviewing “F Is for Fugitive” for The Times in 1989.
Ms. Grafton said one difference between her books and the ones with male protagonists was her willingness to deal with the “human and emotional ramifications” of violent crime.
In addition to Mr. Humphrey, her third husband, whom she married in 1978, and Ms. Clark, her daughter from a previous marriage, Ms. Grafton is survived by another daughter, Leslie Twine, and a son, Jay Schmidt, also from previous marriages; four granddaughters; one great-grandson; and a sister, Ann Cox. She had homes in Santa Barbara County and Louisville.
Ms. Grafton was forever being asked how much of her was in Kinsey Millhone, and she acknowledged that there was a sort of alter-ego connection between author and character. But, she noted to The Seattle Times in an interview in August, there was one big difference: She realized early in the series that if she was going to write the entire alphabet, Kinsey could not age in real time and still be limber enough for a fast-moving detective yarn.
