In August 2006, my father fatally shot himself with a gun he pilfered from a friend’s bedroom. I wanted to do something positive in my mourning, so I went on a suicide-prevention walk organized by a nonprofit organization called the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention in Santa Monica, Calif.
After conversations with the A.F.S.P. staff area director in Los Angeles about my passion for suicide prevention and gun control — issues she told me she cared about, too — I joined the group’s Greater Los Angeles Chapter board, which required me to donate or raise $1,000 a year. I also helped organize an “Out of the Darkness” walk in Pasadena, Calif.; the organization raises more than $22 million a year at such walks around the country.
Things got weird right away. After the announcement, the A.F.S.P. staff told the board that volunteers who wanted to talk about the documented higher risk for suicide deaths for those who keep firearms in the home had to keep quiet about gun control. I believe in the broader purpose of advancing suicide prevention, so I complied.
On Aug. 15, 2016, the A.F.S.P. decided to exclude from its walks local gun violence prevention groups that it deemed “interested in gun control.” They included a group that had been allowed to sponsor and distribute information at walks.
Then, my walk co-chairwoman, a vocal advocate who had also lost a family member to suicide by firearm, was asked to step down. A little more than two weeks later, I was removed as chairwoman of the Pasadena walk and from the board.
I was left to draw the terrible conclusion that the nonprofit to which I had given time and money had become captive to the gun lobby. It sickens me that I raised money for it.
Despite what it claims, the A.F.S.P. doesn’t have a neutral stance on guns. It is still excluding groups like the Brady Campaign from donating and participating in its regional walks. And it is concealing the indisputable fact that firearm ownership is linked to a higher risk of suicide.
According to the most recent information published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, nearly half of all suicides are by firearm. Guns account for only 6 percent of all suicide attempts annually in the United States, but they result in death 82.5 percent of the time. They are far more lethal than any other means.
While many choose to write off suicide victims as choosing their own fates, the reality is that many make impulsive choices that turned quickly irrevocable. Their deaths would be preventable with exactly the type of insight that the gun lobby is actively trying to suppress.
This misleading partnership between the A.F.S.P. and the National Shooting Sports Foundation was sold by the A.F.S.P.’s staff and executives as a way to educate low-information gun owners about suicide prevention. But the reality is that this partnership provides no information for the general public, gives incomplete advice and has had the effect of covering up clear and present dangers inside the home to depressed individuals.
While the two groups have developed a brochure that talks about storage options for firearms, it is woefully insufficient from a health perspective. Nowhere does it mention that having a gun in the home is associated with an increased risk of firearm suicide — regardless of whether the gun is kept in a secure location or of the number of guns in the home, according to a study in the American Journal of Epidemiology.
The A.F.S.P. advocates “temporary” removal of firearms “during periods of increased risk of suicide” — yet it offers no guidance on how a civilian can legally remove a firearm from its owner. The dissonance is further heightened when gun owners hear from the other powerful voice in the room, the National Rifle Association, whose training materials state, “A gun stored primarily for personal protection must be ready for immediate use.” This is confusing and potentially deadly for gun owners and those inside their homes who may be thinking of taking their own lives. They need to be nowhere near a gun.
I learned many hard lessons after my dad died. I witnessed the carnage that a single bullet can create. I learned that suicide is preventable. And I discovered that one critical way to reduce the risk is to teach others that removing guns from a home significantly reduces the risk of an impulsive suicide.
That the A.F.S.P. seems willing to sacrifice these people with a deceptive partnership is appalling and a betrayal of the memory of my father.