From where Tara Blackman sat — on a beach chair in the glow of a warm sun — the mere sight of Jake Musiker created visions of sand castles in her mind.
Her chair parked a heartbeat away from Mr. Musiker and his entourage, Ms. Blackman pretended to be reading as she listened in on their conversation.
Smitten by what she called Mr. Musiker’s “charisma and good looks,” Ms. Blackman was soon introduced to him, albeit briefly, by Ben Weindorf, a mutual friend who went to Roslyn High School on Long Island with Mr. Musiker and to Binghamton University with Ms. Blackman. Mr. Weindorf had invited Ms. Blackman to the beach outing.
But Mr. Musiker did not reply, nor did he reply the next day, or the next.
“Tara wasn’t thrilled about Jake not calling, but she’s always been a very confident girl and basically said, ‘Well, if it didn’t work out, it didn’t work out, it’s time to move on,’” Mr. Weindorf said.
As it turned out, Mr. Musiker never bothered to check Facebook messages, as was his policy. “My issue with Facebook messages in those days was that most of them consisted of washed-up acquaintances from high school inviting me to some kind of nightclub,” said Mr. Musiker, also 29, who graduated from Colgate and is a media planning professional at Fearless Media, an advertising agency in Manhattan.
By the time he got around to checking his messages, it was June 2014. Another year and a half had slipped away — and so, it seemed, had his chances with Ms. Blackman.
She reached out again, this time with better results, arranging a first date with him at a bar in Manhattan, where they were both living at the time.
That friend was Rachel Klein, who knew Ms. Blackman from their days growing up in Wayne, N.J., where they attended youth groups together.
But there were hurdles to clear, especially in the early minutes of their first date, when their conversation nearly drowned in a pool of awkwardness.
He made a few more silly jokes, including one about her water breaking on their first date, and she was soon laughing, the awkwardness gone in a single guffaw.
Their conversation took a more serious turn when Ms. Blackman mentioned her mother, Claire Blackman, who died in September 2013, around the same time that Mr. Musiker’s parents — Elizabeth Hartman and Robert Musiker, both of Manhattan — got divorced.
They made plans to go out a week later, on a Sunday at 6 p.m., but two hours before their date was to begin, she had not yet heard from him.
Ms. Blackman, who didn’t believe him, immediately called an aunt to vent her frustration. “I said to her, ‘Oh my God, I just got stood up and lied to,’” she said.
This time around, however, Ms. Blackman did not have to wait a year and a half to hear back from Mr. Musiker. He called an hour and a half later to apologize again, and to invite her out on a next date, which became dinner at a Jamaican restaurant in Manhattan.
“I felt much better after that phone call,” Ms. Blackman said.
Another hurdle cleared, they began dating steadily, each learning to cope with and appreciate the other’s personality traits, habits and quirks — “We want to inspire each other to be better people,” Ms. Blackman said — while bonding over shared family values, ambitions, as well as a love of travel, theater, comedy clubs and long walks around New York City.
In December 2014, they reached a significant milestone, each telling the other, “I love you,” for the first time. A year later, another milestone, as they moved into an apartment they bought together in the Clinton Hill section of Brooklyn.
“Our road together has just been a real nice, steady, natural progression, and along the way, she’s laughed at about 51 percent of my jokes,” Mr. Musiker said. “I’ve come to find out that Tara is the most confident, goal-oriented person I have ever met in my entire life, and that she has a heart the size of the entire universe.
That steady road led them to the Palm House, an event space on the leafy grounds of the Brooklyn Botanic Garden, where Ms. Blackman and Mr. Musiker were married on Dec. 2.
A few moments later, the groom took his left hand and held it out momentarily for both of his parents to clasp, a way of getting them back together, if only for a symbolic moment.
Later at the cocktail hour, Ms. Blackman’s father, standing beside her stepmother, Beth Blackman, smiled as his eyes followed his daughter and her husband through a maze of tuxedoed servers carrying Champagne and hors d’oeuvres.
“Though I’m sad that Tara’s mother is not here to see this, it is still the happiest day of my life,” said Mr. Blackman, as the newlyweds pranced around the room, hugging and kissing many of their 230 guests.
