Jonas Mekas turned 95 this year and won a lifetime achievement award in Frankfurt, Germany. Ping Wong, 92, learned new rules for playing mah-jongg. Helen Moses, who turned 93, mostly gave up talk of marrying Howie Zeimer, her steady companion of the last eight years. Ruth Willig, 94, broke a bone in her foot and feared it was the beginning of the end.
John Sorensen’s ashes wait to be scattered on Fire Island. Fred Jones would have turned 90 in March.
Nearly three years ago, I started following the lives of six New Yorkers over the age of 85, one of the fastest-growing age groups in America. The series of articles began the way most stories about older people do, with the fears and hardships of aging: a fall in the kitchen, an aching leg that did not get better, days segueing into nights without human contact. They had lived through — and some were still challenged by — money problems, medical problems, the narrowing of life’s movements.
Here was another perspective on getting old. It was also a lesson for those who are not there yet.
Older people report higher levels of contentment or well-being than teenagers and young adults. The six elders put faces on this statistic. If they were not always gleeful, they were resilient and not paralyzed by the challenges that came their way. All had known loss and survived. None went to a job he did not like, coveted stuff she could not afford, brooded over a slight on the subway or lost sleep over events in the distant future. They set realistic goals. Only one said he was afraid to die.
Gerontologists call this the paradox of old age: that as people’s minds and bodies decline, instead of feeling worse about their lives, they feel better. In memory tests, they recall positive images better than negative; under functional magnetic resonance imaging, their brains respond more mildly to stressful images than the brains of younger people.
John Sorensen, who liked to talk, brought cheer to every conversation, even those about wanting to die. Helen Moses and Ping Wong knew exactly what they wanted: for Ms. Moses, it was her daughter and Mr. Zeimer; for Ms. Wong, it was mah-jongg and the camaraderie it entailed, even if the other players spoke a different dialect or followed the rules of a different home region. Mr. Jones, Ms. Willig and Mr. Mekas all spent their energy on the things they could still do that brought them satisfaction, not on what they had lost to age.
For three years, visiting them has been a lesson in living, and a rejoinder to the myth that youth is life’s glory, after which everything is downhill. Their muscles weakened, their sight grew dim, their friends and peers gradually disappeared. But each showed a matter-of-fact resilience that would shame most 25-year-olds.
So it went with all of them. Their message was so counterintuitive that it took a long time to sink in. 
Their examples were so life-changing that I wrote a book about it. But this is their story, not mine.
Helen Moses, who lives at the Hebrew Home at Riverdale, enjoys the finer things, like socializing with Howie Zeimer, her companion of eight years, listening to music, and getting her nails done.
Fred Jones died of a heart attack in April 2016, just past his 89th birthday. John Sorensen died two months later, refusing food in a nursing home he had never wanted to see. He spent his last days listening to his favorite operas and thanking anyone who came near.
For the others, 2017 was a year of continuities and great changes.
Helen Moses invented a new word for what set her apart from others around her. It was a day in early December, and Ms. Moses greeted her visitors with a sound like a motorcycle.
“Vroom, vroom,” she said.
Her hand shook slightly, and she was noticeably more subdued than in the past, closing her eyes between questions. But flashes of the old spirit shined through.
She smiled at her own invention.
She was wearing new sneakers given to her by her son, and copper enameled earrings made for her by Mr. Zeimer. She was not wearing her new hearing aids because one had cracked — and because she did not like wearing them.
Otherwise, she said, being 93 was about the same as being 92.
And of course, there was Mr. Zeimer. “I love Howie,” she said.
This year brought changes for Ms. Moses, both from within and from without.
Since the start of the series, she and Mr. Zeimer lived two rooms apart in the Hebrew Home at Riverdale, in the Bronx. They ate all their meals together and watched television in Ms. Moses’ room every night, especially during baseball season.
But when the home went through renovations this year, Ms. Moses and Mr. Zeimer were moved to different floors. This meant eating separately, in different dining rooms, and navigating longer distances to visit each other. Ms. Moses uses a walker; Mr. Zeimer uses a wheelchair and requires an attendant to push him.
She noted another change in their relationship.
“His kisses are getting better,” she said.
With the new year approaching, Ms. Moses considered what she was looking forward to. “Just a nice old age,” she said.
What did that mean to her?
Was she living one now?
Ms. Moses did not hesitate.
Ping Wong now lives in a nursing home near some family members in southern New Jersey. She is still playing mah-jongg. This year she learned some new rules.
For Ping Wong, who began the year in a nursing home near her daughter in southern New Jersey, 2017 was a year of making adjustments. She was in new surroundings, among new people, facing changes in both her body and her mind. After a fall in the nursing home, she had to use a wheelchair, and without exercise, her artificial hips became stiff and sore. Her memory lapses were more frequent, her daughter, Elaine Gin, said.
In one conversation Ms. Wong gave her age variously as 90, 92, 98 and almost 100. “I live a long life,” she said.
One night she called her daughter in a panic because she thought Japanese soldiers were going to kill her, a flashback from the occupation of Hong Kong during World War II.
But by her birthday in May, when three generations of relatives visited with a cake from Chinatown, Ms. Wong seemed alert and adapting to her new home. Like the others, she described her life through its continuities, not its disruptions.
“At the beginning, of course, I don’t like this place, but gradually I think it’s good for me to stay here, because I meet a lot of honest friends,” she said.
Ms. Wong said it took almost a year to adjust to her new home. But by December she had formed a very close friendship with another resident, as well as several more casual friendships. She played mah-jongg and dominoes, and called out the numbers at bingo. It was a smaller life than she had had in her apartment in New York, but it suited her energy level.
Ruth Willig, who lives in Sheepshead Bay, was injured this summer but has been committed to physical therapy. She likes to share family photos, including some of her first great-grandchild, born in April, and one from her wedding day.
After a week, when it did not get better, she went for X-rays and learned she had broken a metatarsal bone. Her doctor prescribed a walking boot that went nearly up to her knee, with Velcro straps that were difficult for her to fasten.
But she was determined not to let the injury take over her life, she said. She refused to pay for an attendant to help her with the boot, or to stop walking.
Then with the boot on, Ms. Willig fell again in October, injuring her arm and hip and pelvic bone. This time the pain terrified her.
Her mood revived. By year’s end, she was looking forward to a 2018 spring wedding of her granddaughter in New Hampshire, and showing off photographs of her first great-grandchild, who was born in April.
She said she still did not want to live to 100. But maybe she would consent to a party next year for her 95th birthday, she said.
She brightened at the afternoon sun filling her apartment.
Mr. Ragazzi, 33, an art curator from Milan, was in town to assemble an exhibition of Mr. Mekas’s work at a fashion boutique on Madison Avenue, and he was noting the resemblance between the diary-based films Mr. Mekas started making in the 1970s and the social media that followed decades later.
Mr. Mekas this year made progress toward a goal that has driven him since the start of the series: raising money to expand Anthology Film Archives, the nonprofit organization and theater he helped start in the 1970s.
On March 2, a crowd that included Greta Gerwig, Jim Jarmusch, John Waters and others bid nearly $2 million at an art auction to benefit the archives. Performing onstage, Patti Smith altered the lyrics to her biggest hit to “Because the night belongs to JONAS,” to big applause.
For Mr. Mekas it was a year of reckoning: how much money the organization still needs to raise ($6 million); how far was too far to travel at age 95 (Seoul, where he did not attend an exhibition of his work); and how to make ends meet in the coming years.
This last was a trickier matter. He could no longer afford the rent on his Brooklyn loft, he said. “I have to move to a cheaper place,” probably within a year, he said.
But Mr. Mekas put the disruption in perspective. His life has been nomadic since the 1940s, including years in Nazi labor camps and United Nations camps for displaced persons. Moving to a smaller place somewhere in Brooklyn was a hiccup.
He remained sanguine, despite some reservations about current world leaders. Totalitarianism, in his experience, did not endure, whereas art, nature and the teachings of the saints all were as powerful as ever — they were what composed his life. He did not use the word optimistic, but he felt that solutions were more durable than problems.
So ends another year for four members of New York’s oldest old: not with a whimper, but with small joys to ease their aches. Each lost a little and moved a year closer to death, as we all did. But each welcomed another morning, the start of another year to come. All had beaten the odds just to get this far.
