For the latest news on the wildfires, read our Friday live updates here.
More than 200,000 people in Los Angeles and Ventura Counties have been told to leave their homes. The city of Ojai, nearly surrounded by fires, was evacuated on Thursday, as were parts of the coastal city of Carpinteria. And hundreds of schools were closed and roads were blocked. With well over 100,000 acres scorched, residents were on edge, watching the news footage of hills and canyons going up in smoke.
The bone-dry Santa Ana winds blowing from the northeast picked up speed, gusting to 60 miles per hour in places, adding to firefighters’ struggles with thick brush and rugged terrain, though it did not reach the extreme speeds forecasters had feared. Officials warned that with several large fires that were still burning (and no more than 15 percent contained), as well as winds that, though easing a bit, were expected to remain high on Friday, dangerous surprises could still be in store.
As if to illustrate the danger, several new fires cropped up across Southern California. A fire near Bonsall in San Diego County ignited and within hours spread to more than 4,000 acres with zero containment. It injured at least three people as hundreds of residents were forced to evacuate and at least 20 structures were destroyed.
• Fire and smoke forced the closing of the 101 freeway — the main coastal route north from Los Angeles — between Ventura and Santa Barbara. Here is our list of road closings in the Los Angeles area.
• Late Thursday, with the fire that began in Ventura threatening scores of homes, Mr. Brown extended a state of emergency declaration to Santa Barbara County. He also requested an emergency declaration from the president that would make it easier for federal aid to reach Southern California.
• Eric Garcetti, the mayor of Los Angeles, said late Thursday that he was not aware of any human deaths connected to the Los Angeles fires. But Daryl L. Osby, the chief of the Los Angeles County Fire Department, confirmed reports that horses had perished.
He paid $25,000 for their two-bedroom trailer, in the Blue Star Mobile Home Park, where his two sons share one room, his two daughters the other, and Mr. Rodriguez and his wife, Aracely, sleep on a pullout couch in the living room.
They do not have homeowners’ insurance, and when asked about savings, Mr. Rodriguez said through tears that they had none. As an undocumented immigrant, he is not entitled to receive federal emergency assistance to repair or rebuild his home, even though his children are American citizens.
Brian Jones, a concrete contractor from Bonsall, went to the Del Mar Fairgrounds on Thursday night to drop off his three horses. Mr. Jones, 58, has had to evacuate his home in the past, and he said he had spent several hours wondering whether to do it again.
State and local officials said the fire near Murrieta, in Riverside County, east of Los Angeles, continued to grow on Thursday, reaching 300 acres by late afternoon. One structure was destroyed, officials said, and the fire was 5 percent contained.
