Mr. Hackett said he would travel to Chicago after the holidays to speak with employees there.
Harassment complaints had prompted several previous lawsuits and two settlements with the federal agency that combats workplace discrimination, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. In August, the agency reached a $10 million agreement with Ford over sexual and racial harassment at the plants. A separate lawsuit with about 30 plaintiffs is still making its way through the courts. In the 1990s, a string of lawsuits and an E.E.O.C. investigation resulted in a $22 million settlement and a commitment by Ford to crack down. As is customary, Ford did not admit liability in either settlement.
Suzette Wright, a former Ford worker who joined one of the suits, has long awaited this moment. After a settlement was announced in 1999, she barged into a news conference and demanded an apology from a Ford executive, who issued a carefully parsed statement that stopped short of the unreserved apology Mr. Hackett issued on Thursday.
When told of the letter, Ms. Wright began to cry. “I’m glad they did that,” she said. “You can’t make a change without acknowledging that you did something wrong.” Ms. Wright said she left Ford after she was told it was a condition of her settlement; Ford lawyers said that was optional.
Gwajuana Gray, who has worked at Ford since 1991 and joined a lawsuit in the 1990s, said that after the Times article was published online Tuesday, she began experiencing retaliation from a supervisor. She said he docked her pay by recording fewer hours than she had actually worked. The supervisor did not respond to messages seeking comment.
When Mr. Hackett visits the plants, she said, she would like him to speak to workers individually, away from plant or union officials. She and many other workers interviewed said that some officials at the local United Automobile Workers union have harassed women themselves or discouraged them from filing complaints.
Mr. Hackett outlined a number of measures that Ford had taken, including extensive training programs, increased staffing to investigate complaints, monetary awards that would be available through the settlement and independent monitors who would oversee compliance for up to five years.
But Mr. Hackett acknowledged in the letter that there was more to do. “This has been a learning experience about how difficult it is to root out bad behavior,” he said.