From her slicked-back ponytail and chunky eyeglasses to her love of acid-bright hues (a lemon blazer here, an electric orange lipstick there), Lyons’s style has been copied down to its smallest detail. That’s due in part to her innate approachability — her skill at mixing unexpected elements to achieve a look that feels fanciful if not quite fancy — but also to an act of brilliant corporate image-making: Throughout her eight years as president and decade as creative director of J.Crew, the company made her singular aesthetic achievable, convincing its customers that they, too, could mix coral coats with torn jeans and sequined heels.
This past April, the 49-year-old Lyons departed the company after 27 years. She’d started as an assistant men’s wear designer right out of college, but by 2014, profits had tumbled, and J.Crew had become a symbol of brick-and-mortar retail’s global decline. Faced with the first stretch of aimlessness in her adult life, she spent three months jumping “from the pool to the couch to the kitchen to the pool” at her house upstate in Berryville, N.Y. — while refusing to jump into any decisions about her next steps. “It took me the summer to decompress and think about what’s important to me,” Lyons says. “Is it making big shifts, or doing something small?” While there have been offers, she says, she hasn’t seriously entertained any of them yet, nor is she planning to any time soon.
Instead, Lyons has been spending her days in her newly redesigned apartment, a 3,500-square-foot loft on the fourth floor of a 19th-century cast-iron building in SoHo. Much has happened in Lyons’s world, not just professionally, in the six years since she sold the Brooklyn townhouse that made zebra-hide rugs a more popular (and populist) necessity than they might have previously been: Her 2011 divorce from artist-turned-restaurateur Vincent Mazeau was followed by a relationship with Courtney Crangi — co-founder, with her brother Philip, of the N.Y.C.-based jewelry line Giles & Brother — that has since come to an end.
15 things we love in her inimitable SoHo loft.
After purchasing her apartment in 2012, Lyons spent a year in a rental down the street, the better to oversee every aspect of the loft’s transformation from a drab artist’s studio, with yellowing floors and featureless walls, into a heavily accessorized, sumptuously textured home that might feel familiar to her many acolytes. For Lyons, the effort that went into pulling off that specific mix was as satisfying as the result — “the real goal was having it look like something you’ve never seen before,” she says.
WALKING OFF THE elevator into Lyons’s apartment, one is greeted by a living area that blends eclectic modernism (Monstera deliciosa leaves, leopard-print poufs) with a bit of Old World Paris (antiqued mirrors, toile-printed panels): It’s feminine without being sweet, busy but not forced. The room is also gloriously sunny, thanks to five eight-foot-high, west-facing windows.
On display throughout is Lyons’s signature playfulness, from the giant, gold-foil numeral 10 left over from her son Beckett’s birthday, to the framed geometric prints by Fred Sandback leaning casually against the fireplace, to the room’s showpiece: an original drawing by her favorite artist, Cy Twombly, announcing a 1979 show of his work at Yvon Lambert’s Paris gallery. Still, interiors buffs who memorized every nuance of her Park Slope house will detect a deeper richness, as if here, Lyons has permitted herself to unfurl into the tactile luxury that comes with real achievement. The cozy softness of the room’s milky gray walls, the pale oak herringbone parquet floors — after much deliberation, left unsealed to develop a patina — the verdigris side table that contrasts against a massive couch in what she calls a “truly faded-out persimmon” pink: All speak to Lyons’s idiosyncratic genius for color and texture, but also to her exacting and precise eye, one trained over years superintending dozens of store openings and developing an understanding for how a space is meant to spotlight only the most central elements.
Thus, her apartment was conceived around a few key pieces: The kitchen’s custom-made brass counter complements the room’s dominant structure, a sweeping island topped by a three-inch-thick expanse of honed marble that once decorated a California courthouse. Lyons discovered the stone when it was being used as a tabletop at West Hollywood’s Galerie Half, then had it painstakingly joined to a matching slab of giant white birch. Likewise, the midcentury Venini light fixture that hangs over the island — featuring hundreds of Murano glass polyhedrons — had to be accommodated in each of the many renderings she envisioned for the space with her friend and designer Gray Davis, of the New York-based Meyer Davis.
The legs are indeed beautiful — though a good part of their beauty lies in their inimitability. For a woman who’s been copied her entire professional life — “imitation is flattering,” she says, but it also makes you “adamant about not doing the same thing again” — just knowing that they are entirely hers may be the most precious thing of all. And anyway, Lyons couldn’t think of a way to improve upon them. She rolls up the drawings carefully and puts them away. These, no one can replicate.