Americas|Bermuda Legalized Same-Sex Marriage 6 Months Ago. Now, It’s Going to Be Banned.
Bermuda Legalized Same-Sex Marriage 6 Months Ago. Now, It’s Going to Be Banned.
LONDON — At a time when support for same-sex marriage seems to be slowly advancing in some parts of the world, legislators in Bermuda have restored a ban on the unions, just six months after the island’s highest court approved them.
The Senate in the wealthy, self-governing British territory voted 8 to 3 in favor of a new law to allow only domestic partnerships for same-sex couples. The vote represented a rare reversal of an international trend broadening the number of jurisdictions that recognize same-sex marriage.
The vote on Wednesday came less than a week after the House of Assembly, the lower house of Parliament, voted 24 to 10 in favor of the same proposal. To take effect, the Atlantic island’s governor, John Rankin, would have to sign the bill into a law, but that is usually a formality.
Most of mainland Britain legalized same-sex marriage in 2014, but Northern Ireland has not followed suit.
Andrew Simons, a senator from the party One Bermuda Alliance, which opposed the new law, said the change in legislation was “an affront to people’s dignity,” according to the Royal Gazette, a local news outlet.
“As human beings, we should have the ability to enter into a marriage between two people who love each other, and this relationship should be recognized by the state,” he said.
In July, however, the Progressive Labor Party, which is backed by many traditionally conservative church organizations, took power and began to mobilize legislative support for a reversal of the ruling.
The development in Bermuda recalled a comparable sequence of events in California in November 2008, when the State Constitution was amended to define marriage as between a man and a woman, ending five months of legalized same-sex marriage and reversing a ruling by the State Supreme Court in June of that year. That law, known as Proposition 8, was later overturned in the courts.
In June 2015, the United States Supreme Court ruled that the Constitution guarantees a right to same-sex marriage.
