Earlier this year, I suffered my first major panic attack. For days afterward, my heart would race and my mind would fill with doomsday visions as I worried about everything around me, including whether I’d have more panic attacks and if I’d ever be able to stop them.
Knowing that it wasn’t just me, however, was strangely reassuring.
“Anxiety disorders are the most common condition in psychiatry,” said Dr. Naomi Simon, professor of psychiatry at N.Y.U. School of Medicine and director of the Anxiety and Complicated Grief Program at N.Y.U. Langone Health. Some 40 million people aged 18 or older in the United States, or 18 percent of the population, will suffer from an anxiety disorder each year, according to the Anxiety and Depression Association of America. In the course of a lifetime, that rate goes up to 28.8 percent of the American public.
There’s an important distinction between anxiety and an anxiety disorder, Dr. Simon said.
“Anxiety is an excessive focus on something that might happen in the future,” said Bea Arthur, a licensed mental health counselor in New York and founder of the mental health machine learning start-up The Difference.
Ms. Arthur also suggested “editing your life” to help bring back a sense of empowerment. This means giving up things that don’t make you feel in control. The book “Essentialism: The Disciplined Pursuit of Less” by Greg McKeown is a great place to start, she said.
Talk therapy is rarely a bad thing. Many doctors urge caution, however, with regard to prescriptions, as well as indulging too heavily in “self-medicating” with beers or rosé with friends.
“They do have a role for some patients either short or long term as they are generally safe under the care of a doctor,” Dr. Simon added.
As for alcohol, moderation is the key. “If you’re drinking with people you like and enjoy,” she said, “I think that’s a good thing.” Keep in mind, however, that there’s an increased association between anxiety and alcohol and other substance abuse, Dr. Simon pointed out. And drinking too much can ultimately make you feel even more anxious. So turn to rosé cautiously.
A meditation practice, she said, will help you start to feel more empowered.
“If I sit down and enter a space I’ve decided is safe and healthy and healing, it sends a message to the rest of my system that I’m not just at the whim of all these other things that are going on,” she said.
This is also where you might work in gratitude, or the practice of being grateful for what you have. I have a friend who keeps a list of things on her iPhone that make her feel good (reading a few of them made me feel good, too!). Others write in journals or think of a positive thing — or several — before going to sleep at night.
Dr. Simon recommended “going to nature and attending to the trees and beautiful weather, taking your attention away from the worries and appreciating and noticing something around you.” You might also try “volunteering in your community or donating to fund-raising” as a way to do something positive while accepting that some things can’t be controlled, she said.
Your phone is not your B.F.F.
I sleep with my phone, or right next to it. It’s generally the first thing I look at in the morning, and the last thing I look at before I go to bed. And I know that’s bad; it makes me feel bad. I started turning off my ringer so I wouldn’t immediately respond to texts or calls, including those that woke me in the middle of the night.
“It is important that you get off the devices and try to spend time with people you care about and not only be interacting around these topics,” Dr. Simon said.
Dr. Simon is engaged in a research study sponsored by the National Institutes of Health and the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health that’s looking at how yoga compares with cognitive behavioral therapy in coping with stress.
“The reason we’re doing it is that anecdotally, and through some growing data, there’s evidence it may be helpful for some people,” she said. Plus, unlike medication, not only can exercise “help reduce stress and anxiety, it’s also good for your cardiovascular health,” she said.
Packing our schedules with activities and obligations takes a toll, no matter how much we want to do them. Cory Nakasue, a somatic therapist and astrologer, told me she’s getting over her “FOMO issues” — Fear of Missing Out — and instead enjoys missing out on things.
Inspired, I canceled several plans. It felt great.
Need some ideas? When I asked a handful of people what they were doing to care for themselves in these times, they mentioned taking time out roughly three times a week to do a sheet mask (which requires the maskee to lie down motionless); adopting an anti-inflammatory diet; sleeping at least eight hours a night; “so much fitness”; reading poetry or fiction and “not reading all the articles”; and watching an impressive variety of non-news TV, including escapist favorites like “30 Rock,” “The Great British Baking Show,” “The Real Housewives” and HGTV.
Sarah Miller, a writer in Nevada City, Calif., said one of her anxiety releases is to sob into the soft fur of her elderly blue heeler, Merle.
I eventually texted a friend, who came over immediately. She brought packets of Natural Calm, a magnesium supplement you add to water (I don’t know if it calms me, but it tastes good); advice on dealing with stress (watch “Golden Girls” reruns!); and reassurances that she’d stay until I fell asleep.
The next day, I made an appointment with a doctor and got a prescription for Klonopin, just in case. So far, I haven’t had to take too many of the pills, thanks to diligently incorporating several of the tips above into my life. 