President Trump’s nominee to oversee the Environmental Protection Agency’s chemical safety division on Wednesday withdrew his name from consideration for the post in the face of mounting opposition.
The nominee, Michael L. Dourson, a longtime researcher whose studies often bolstered safety claims by manufacturers of pesticides, flame retardants and other products under federal scrutiny as possible public health hazards, had been working as an adviser to the agency while awaiting confirmation.
But the Senate never scheduled a confirmation vote for Mr. Dourson, who resigned from his job at the University of Cincinnati in October. And in recent weeks, two Republican senators came forward to say they would not support him.
Senator Thomas R. Carper, Democrat of Delaware and a member of the Environment and Public Works Committee, had pushed his colleagues to reject Mr. Dourson. He said Wednesday that his objections were not partisan.
Mr. Dourson notified the White House late on Wednesday of his decision to withdraw his name, according to a Senate aide, adding that Mr. Dourson would not remain at the agency.
The decision was welcomed by environmental and public health advocates.
Mr. Dourson declined to respond to a request for comment sent to the agency’s public affairs office.
His withdrawal followed the release of several hundreds of pages of his correspondence with chemical industry officials while he was being considered for the E.P.A. job. The New York Times obtained the emails from Greenpeace, which received them in response to a Freedom of Information request to the University of Cincinnati. A lawyer for the university confirmed their provenance.
Emails sent or received by Michael L. Dourson and his team that show regular interaction with chemical industry officials even after he learned he was to be nominated for a key E.P.A. post.
The emails detail an unusually close relationship with the American Chemistry Council and with individual companies whose products are scheduled for priority review by the E.P.A., among them trichloroethylene, known as TCE, a volatile organic compound widely used in industrial and commercial processes, and flame retardants. The E.P.A., citing the significant health hazards of the chemical TCE, which is widely used as a degreasing agent and a spot cleaner on clothing, had proposing banning it. If he led the division, Mr. Dourson would have had to finalize that plan, even though he had recently handled work for the industry defending the commercial use of the same substance.
The documents also show that Mr. Dourson’s center at the university, which accepted money from the trade group and other companies for research, sent a draft paper based on that research to the industry council to edit before submitting it to a journal for publication — considered by most to be an unacceptable practice in academia.
Mr. Dourson did not respond to a request for comment on the emails.