Watching is The New York Times’s TV and film recommendation website. Sign up for our thrice-weekly newsletter here.
Every month, as various licenses expire, streaming services lose movies and TV series from their catalogs. Here are 13 great movies and TV shows leaving Netflix in January.
The notion of dusting off old television shows and turning them into big feature films with contemporary stars was still relatively novel in 1991, when Barry Sonnenfeld directed this big-screen blow up of the darkly funny 1960s sitcom. And it works, thanks in no small part to the leading performances of Raul Julia and Anjelica Huston, who go at the roles of Morticia and Gomez Addams with gusto, playing up both their cheerful morbidity and their gothic sensuality. And Sonnenfeld (who went on to direct “Men in Black”) finds the right cockeyed comic-strip look and sensibility for the movie. Also, keep an eye out for Christina Ricci, sharp and memorable in one of her first roles as deadpan daughter Wednesday.
Winner of the best picture Oscar for 2002, Rob Marshall’s adaptation of the long-running stage musical is a snazzy, sexy tale of the Jazz Age in the Windy City, drawing its inspiration from the real-life stories of women whose sensational arrests and trials became fodder for the tabloids of the era. Catherine Zeta-Jones and Renée Zellweger singe the screen as a murderess torch singer and the up-and-comer who replaces her as the media sensation of the moment. Richard Gere is both sharp and slippery as their go-to shyster lawyer. And John C. Reilly nearly steals the show as Zellweger’s sad-sack husband.
Seven years after “Jaws,” Spielberg conquered the zeitgeist yet again with this story of an alien visitor from another world. But considering its premise and its blockbuster commercial reception, “E.T.” is a surprisingly muted and gentle piece of work, less about special effects and monster makeup than about the heartwarming connection between little Elliott (Henry Thomas) and the extraterrestrial he discovers in the shed behind his suburban home. The film has the expected magical powers and evil government types, but ultimately this is a story of emotional longing and fulfillment, in which an outsider comes into a broken home and makes it whole again.
The ’70s Broadway smash “Grease,” which harked back to the poodle skirts and leather jackets of the 1950s, got the big screen treatment in this 1978 film adaptation. John Travolta and Olivia Newton-John create sparks aplenty as a would-be couple whose summer fling grows a bit more complicated once the school year starts anew. But the plot is not the selling point here. It’s the songs — catchy and energetic numbers like “Greased Lightnin’,” “You’re the One That I Want,” and “We Go Together” — and the charismatic cast, which also includes Stockard Channing, Jeff Conaway, Lorenzo Lamas and Frankie Avalon.
A scene from “Gremlins.”Warner Bros.
 They’re so simple you can’t believe Billy Peltzer (Zach Galligan) screws them up — but then again, there wouldn’t be much of a movie if he didn’t. This beloved 1984 horror-comedy seems, in its opening scenes, to be borne of the same gentle, suburban community portraiture that gave us “E.T.” But then director Joe Dante shows his teeth, as the film turns into a melee of death and destruction, executed with skill and with a wink. All that, and a monologue about hating Christmas that packs a real holiday wallop.
The clique-based high school comedy has rarely been told with the rapier wit or the surgical precision of this 2004 teen comedy from Mark Waters, directing a script adapted by Tina Fey from Rosalind Wiseman’s book “Queen Bees and Wannabes.” Fey turned Wiseman’s youth-focused self-help book into the fabulously funny story of a new girl (Lindsay Lohan) who must quickly learn how to navigate a new and tricky social stratum. Rachel McAdams is deliciously despicable as the most popular (and thus, the most powerful) girl in school, while the “Saturday Night Live” veterans Amy Poehler, Tim Meadows, Ana Gasteyer and Fey herself shine in supporting turns.
Three crime stories — a hit man out to dinner with his boss’s wife, a boxer who decides not to throw the big fight and a contract killing gone awry — are shuffled like cards in a deck, told out of order and with delightful narrative curveballs, in this 1994 action/comedy/drama hodgepodge from writer-director Quentin Tarantino. Strictly speaking, these are short stories, but one of the pleasures of Tarantino’s bravura sophomore feature is the pleasure he takes in creating unexpected connections between them. He also writes the kind of tasty, self-aware dialogue that actors love to devour, and he puts together an enviable ensemble cast of big names, fallen stars and rising talents to deliver it. Few films in recent memory were as blatantly replicated as this one. But none of them could touch the original, or diminish its crackling electricity.
The hellhole of abusing drugs — from the “hard stuff” of heroin to the seemingly harmless likes of diet pills — is brought to blunt, brutal, visceral life in Darren Aronofsky’s adaptation of the novel by Hubert Selby Jr. The focus is on three friends in Brighton Beach who soon put their dreams on the back burner in pursuit of the next high, which gives way to the pursuit of the next one, and so on and so on (in increasingly shorter intervals). But the showcase performance here is Ellen Burstyn, who was nominated for an Oscar for her performance as an aging mother who becomes addicted to pills and gets increasingly lost in herself. Pounding and relentless, it’s one of the most harrowing movies ever made about the horrors of addiction.
A scene from “The Secret Garden.”Warner Bros.
The classic children’s novel from Frances Hodgson Burnett becomes an elegant, engaging family film under the sure hand of director Agnieszka Holland (best known for European art films like “Europa Europa”). It tells the story of an orphaned girl rattling around an empty British estate, the friendship she forges with the brother of a maid and the long-buried discoveries they make about the home and the people who’ve lived there. This is the rarest of beasts, a family film that’s truly for the entire family.
John Ford’s 1939 biopic of President Abraham Lincoln is very much an origin story, concerning Lincoln’s early years as an Illinois lawyer and ending before his transition to politics. In fact, it’s as much courtroom drama as political biography, focusing on young Lincoln’s first big case, but as with Steven Spielberg’s “Lincoln,” from 2012, “Young Mr. Lincoln” uses that single episode to illuminate much about Lincoln’s entire life and character. Henry Fonda is magnificent in the title role, digging beneath the iconography to discover the real man underneath — still tentative and uncertain, yet already doggedly dedicated to the principles that later defined him.
One of modern television’s most discussed and dissected, analyzed and agonized, loved and loathed programs was the six-season story of a group of plane-crash survivors, trapped on a mysterious and (presumably?) deserted island. This simple setup proved fertile soil for shocking twists, weekly cliffhangers and copious fan theories, as well as for an admirably all-rules-are-off sense of storytelling, regularly veering off into extended flashbacks, flash-forwards and even the occasional flash-sideways. Some of its loose ends are frustrating, and some of the answers are unsatisfying. But it’s nonetheless a bold experiment in longform storytelling, and one whose “Wait, WHAT?” episode endings made for essential binge-watching.
Disney’s third animated feature — following the immediate critical and commercial successes of “Snow White” and “Pinocchio” — was a surprise, jettisoning the unified narrative approach in favor of a series of unconnected animated sequences set to well-known classical music compositions. The audacious film failed to find an audience upon its original release in 1940, but subsequent viewers have come to value its inventive marriages of sound and image, and the experimental animation techniques that give each segment a unique look and feel. And on top of all that, it includes “The Sorcerer’s Apprentice,” one of Mickey Mouse’s most memorable appearances.
The Asian monster movie gets a modern twist in this wickedly funny and gleefully entertaining effort from director Bong Joon Ho — who went on to direct “Snowpiercer” and “Okja,” films that similarly (and unapologetically) mix their action motifs and political positions. This film — his last in his native Korean tongue — concerns a deadly sea creature forged from environmental carelessness, and the group of survivors who vow to destroy it, no matter what it takes. The film keeps elements of comedy, horror, science-fiction and drama active simultaneously, yet somehow it lets none of them crash.
Have questions? Feedback?
Read our FAQs or contact us to let us know how we’re doing.
Your preference has been saved.