What’s past is product. Career retrospectives, live recordings, archival digs and technological upgrades share the landscape of boxed sets released this year, bringing new perspective to both superstars and cult figures. Here, the music critics of The New York Times choose some of the most notable collections of 2017.
“At the Louisiana Hayride Tonight” collects performances from the 1950s country-music broadcast.
In the 1950s, country singers made sure to visit the Shreveport Municipal Auditorium to appear on the Louisiana Hayride, a weekly three-hour broadcast featuring performers like Hank Williams, Kitty Wells, George Jones and, starting in 1954, a newcomer named Elvis Presley who got the crowd roaring. Famous names and local sensations mingle on this exhaustive, chronological collection of fiddle and banjo breakdowns, swinging honky-tonk, torch-y ballads and countrified R&B along with homey radio banter. In live takes around a microphone or two, rural pride meets casual virtuosity. J.P.
David Bowie’s co-producer, Tony Visconti, supervised the latest remastering of his albums released from 1977 to 1982.
David Bowie reached his creative pinnacle with “Low,” “‘Heroes’,” “Lodger” and “Scary Monsters.” Matching his ever-expanding ambitions to the era’s punk and art-rock ferment, the albums, released from 1977 to ’80, are full of sonic, verbal and structural experiments focused by Bowie’s pop intelligence. The albums’ co-producer, Tony Visconti, supervised the latest remastering for a box that also includes the 1978 live album “Stage” in original and 2017 (resequenced, expanded) versions, along with singles and songs from 1982 for Bertolt Brecht’s “Baal.” The remastered “Low” has a bigger, rougher bass, and Mr. Visconti made a purist’s choice not to use digital noise reduction against analog tape hiss, as previous reissues have. The set’s first pressings also had a problem in the song “Heroes” that Parlophone has promised to correct. On the bright side, Mr. Visconti’s disc-length “Lodger” remix makes the original (also included) sound dusty. Just add your older “Low” CD to the box. J.P.
The most ornamented of any of the Wu-Tang Clan’s solo albums, GZA’s “Liquid Swords” is a fully realized universe of kung fu imagery, street-corner mythology and serrate rhymes. It inspires a particular kind of Talmudic dedication, and this boxed set is for the faithful. The album’s commercial singles are reproduced here on 7” singles (with the original art), but the highlight is new artwork by Andrew Hem, a set of five prints of illustrations inspired by each of those songs. The limited deluxe edition of this set is signed by GZA, and includes a pair of swords. Yes, swords. J.C.
It may seem odd now, but for a time in the late 1990s and early 2000s, the theatrically gory horrorcore innovator duo Insane Clown Posse was signed to a major label. “The Great Milenko,” the first album from that partnership, is a lo-fi curiosity: Violent J and Shaggy 2 Dope come off like Beastie Boys starring in a Troma film. The music is intermittently great, and sometimes groan-worthy, but always fascinating. This expanded reissue includes a bonus disc of outtakes and, most importantly, a DVD of the 1997 documentary “Shockumentary,” with oodles of excellent footage of the early-days Juggalo faithful. J.C.
Three archival releases of Thelonious Monk material are worth hearing.
Jaco Pastorius’s performance at Lincoln Center’s Avery Fisher Hall is captured on a new boxed set.
In the summer of 1982, Jaco Pastorius had just left Weather Report, and he was widely known as the best electric bassist in the world. He had a new large ensemble, the Word of Mouth Big Band (named after the 1981 Pastorius album that provided much of its repertoire). Collecting some of the best young figures in jazz and fusion, the group was a startling reminder of how broad Pastorius’ talents were: He was able to arrange his bubbling jazz-funk on a grand scale, using a rather traditional jazz band format (well, plus steel pan). “Truth, Liberty and Soul” comes from the band’s performance at Lincoln Center’s Avery Fisher Hall, during the Kool Jazz Festival that year. Some highlights don’t involve the full 22-piece band at all: Pastorius’s long, Hendrix-quoting solo on “Bass and Drum Improvisation”; and his duet with the harmonica player Toots Thielemans on Duke Ellington’s “Sophisticated Lady.” G.R.
This enthralling set begins with four songs Elvis Presley paid to record on his own in Memphis — “I’ll Never Stand In Your Way” is the best — before signing with Sun Records and beginning his high-profile dismantling of American musical boundaries. The set — which includes every known Presley recording of this era, including myriad alternate takes and various live performances, and a detailed accompanying book — doesn’t reveal much that isn’t already known. But it documents Presley’s voice going from unformed whimper to confident croon and leaves room to appreciate the gentle charms of early hits like “I Forgot to Remember to Forget” without worrying about the world-shaking smashes just around the corner. J.C.
Catalog dumps are typically graceless, but here is an example with historical merit and also a sense of wit. Weird Al Yankovic has been a scavenger at pop’s margins for four decades. Thanks to “My Bologna,” a joke remake of “My Sharona” recorded in a bathroom at his college in 1979, he became a Dr. Demento favorite. And a few years later, as MTV was redefining the rules of musical fame, he became a genuine pop star, thanks to his affectionate, clever retooling of pop hits into … funny pop hits. “Squeeze Box” isn’t for the faint of gut — every one of his 14 studio albums is included here, as is a rarities collection. Sure, revisit “Eat It,” “Amish Paradise,” “White & Nerdy” and other parody classics, but also the polka medleys that he includes on each album. His true love is clear from the packaging: a black accordion with the LPs resting snugly inside the bellows. J.C.
The full-length “Halloween 77,” with WAV files on a USB drive, documents six Zappa concerts, with nearly identical set lists, from four days in 1977 that also yielded the film “Baby Snakes.” Despite the obsessive, strenuous detail of Zappa’s arrangements, the music wasn’t frozen. The band kept finding different improvisational interstices while Mr. Zappa kept challenging the musicians, like speeding up “Camarillo Brillo” nightly. Zappa’s amalgam of genre-hurdling compositions, cynical humor and sleazy gross-outs was his alone. Less completist fans can also get the Oct. 31 concert on three CDs or download individual shows. J.P.