This year, we asked experts in their respective fields to teach us how to improve ourselves. And there are simple, concrete changes you can make starting today that will help you live a better, smarter, life. From how to improve your outlook on life to the condition of your clothing and home, and from how you parent now to your long-term financial prospects, these are lessons anyone can learn from.
Behavioral scientists have spent a lot of time studying what makes us happy (and what doesn’t). We know happiness can predict health and longevity, and happiness scales can be used to measure social progress and the success of public policies. But happiness isn’t something that just happens to you. Everyone has the power to make small changes in his or her behavior, surroundings and relationships that can help set you on course for a happier life.
No matter your age or athletic ability, strength training is the key to flexibility, mobility, improved performance and lower injury risk. We’ll teach you the basics of strength training in the comfort of your own home. It’ll take only nine minutes of exertion to complete a full-body strength-building workout. Grab a towel and get ready to feel strong.
Building a successful team is about more than finding a group of people with the right mix of professional skills, it’s about the art of fostering a strong sense of teamwork. Here we review important guidelines for creating a highly productive team that can communicate, cooperate and innovate in an atmosphere of mutual trust and respect.
Every home — big, small, apartment or vacation home — gets dirty. And while there’s not just one way to clean your living space, there is a smarter way to get the job done. Take this guided tour of your home — from the kitchen and bathroom to the bedroom and living areas — to learn the basic rules of cleaning as well as some tips and short cuts that will help you clean thoroughly and efficiently, starting now.
While most workers are responsible for their own retirement savings these days, high schools don’t have required classes on 401(k)’s and Individual Retirement Accounts (I.R.A.s). And colleges usually don’t teach anything about Roth I.R.A.s or 403(b)’s. That’s where we come in. Here is what you need to know about saving for life after you stop working and getting on the path toward a comfortable retirement, no matter your career or the size of your paycheck.
Worldwide, heart disease and strokes are the leading causes of death. But about 80 percent of all cases of cardiovascular disease are preventable. You can lower your risk markedly by making some changes to your lifestyle including doing some things that are easy, simple and even enjoyable. (Two of our favorites? Drink red wine and get a dog.) Here’s what you need to know about heart health, along with some of the best ways to improve and protect yours.
Television has changed remarkably over the past few years. It might be time for your viewing habits to change as well. Consider joining the growing ranks of consumers who have “cut the cord” and are now getting their favorite TV shows, movies and even live sports through the internet and streaming services. Making this change requires some preparation, though. Here’s a step-by-step guide to the cord-cutting process.
Buying clothes built to last is one thing — but there’s a lot you can do to make them endure. We polled designers and the dry cleaners they trust for tips on how to take care of our clothes. And our biggest takeaway is that first and foremost, everything we wear should be enjoyed — accessorized with a joie de vivre and not a fear of getting ruined. Here are the experts’ tips for wearing, storing and even cleaning your clothes correctly to prolong the life of your favorite items.
When your home is your biggest investment, as it is for most Americans, maintaining it is a must. Home maintenance can feel like a daunting chore — particularly for a new homeowner who’s never seen a boiler up close, let alone drained one. But it doesn’t have to feel overwhelming. A home operates with the seasons, coming to life in the spring and hunkering down for the winter. 