Ten is too small a number to list all the great television of 2017.
That may be what makes it the correct number. If I went longer — 20 shows, 25, even more — I’d seem to be simply listing everything I liked watching that year. (And I’d still be leaving out dozens of shows.) At ten, I’m making cuts that hurt.
Those cuts included, but were not nearly limited to: “Better Call Saul,” “BoJack Horseman,” “The Carmichael Show,” “Catastrophe,” the final season of “Girls,” “Insecure,” “Legion,” “Master of None” and “Mindhunter” — and that’s just A through M.
“The Americans,” one of TV’s best dramas, aired what felt more like the first half of a double final season. “The Handmaid’s Tale,” “I Love Dick” and others had inconsistent seasons but transcendent episodes. Maybe I should have included “The Vietnam War,” but for simple apples-to-apples manageability I stuck to scripted TV.
‘American Vandal’ (Netflix) Like an obscene image spray-painted on your car, this docu-parody was an out-of-nowhere surprise, but in this case a welcome one. It began as a raunchy sendup of true-crime documentaries, developed into an astute comedy of teen social-media mores and ended up a surprisingly moving study of how pigeonholing kids can set them onto a life path before they have the chance to learn who they really are.
‘Better Things’ (FX) Pamela Adlon elevated the second season of her comedy into a raw and poetic story of the feverish love-hate relationship between three generations of mothers and daughters. (That Louis C.K., disgraced for sexual offenses, wrote much of the season should not overshadow Ms. Adlon’s feat as creator, star, writer and director.) The show is devastating without being sentimental, and Ms. Adlon’s Sam Fox is one of the best character studies on TV today.
‘Crazy Ex-Girlfriend’ (The CW) I prefer not to repeat series on my list from one year to the next. But this one tracked me down and stalked me. The third season, beginning this fall, interrogated the “crazy” in Rachel Bloom’s musical comedy of obsession by exploring her character Rebecca’s diagnosis with borderline personality disorder — while still delivering multiple spot-on song parodies a week.
 A drama about the 1970s sex business, on a channel with a penchant for salacious sex, could have gone wrong in many ways. It went right, very right, because David Simon and his collaborators (including female writers and directors) treated sex work as work: an economic system with dangers, calculations and financial and physical pressures.
‘The Good Place’ (NBC) The network sitcom with the most insight into life just happens to be full of characters who are dead. This afterlife comedy, about a group of misfits in a troubled paradise, is full of twists I don’t have the room to list or the heart to spoil, but its real appeal is a top-notch cast performing prime time’s most entertaining philosophy lesson.
‘The Leftovers’ (HBO) The last season of this series about faith, loss and mystery was constructed like an octagonal chapel, each of its eight episodes a stained-glass window lit with emotion and humor. It may or may not have answered its central question — what happened to millions of people who vanished from the earth — but it was a powerful expression of the ways people soldier on through the unknown.
‘One Day at a Time’ (Netflix) You’d have thought they didn’t make them like this anymore. This reimagining of the 1970s comedy revived a staid genre — the socially conscious, three-camera family sitcom — by updating the characters and their problems. Centered on a Cuban-American family in Los Angeles, the new “One Day” also spotlighted working-class struggles and veterans’ issues, enlivened by crack performances from Justina Machado and Rita Moreno.
‘Twin Peaks: The Return’ (Showtime) Look, I can’t explain it either. Sure, the reunion of David Lynch and Mark Frost had a nominal plot: the odyssey of Dale Cooper (Kyle MacLachlan) back from the otherworldly waiting room where he’d spent the 25 years since he last tasted cherry pie. But mainly it was a direct download from the subconscious of Mr. Lynch, who directed every episode: part horror story, part slapstick, all twisted fantasy. It was a well, to paraphrase the mysterious Woodsman, that descended deep and retrieved strange, intoxicating water.
Historically, America has supplied the rest of the world with television shows. But that longstanding trade imbalance is being redressed. And how. With specialty sites like Acorn TV, BritBox, MHz Choice and Walter Presents joining the major streamers, the deluge of foreign series on our screens matches and maybe even exceeds the flood of domestic shows impossible to keep up with in the first place.
‘Fauda’ (Netflix) The grittiest, tightest, most lived-in thrillers come from Israel, and “Fauda,” which came out here at the end of 2016 before breaking out this year, is the current standard-bearer. A crack counterterrorist team, outfitted in T-shirts and sandals and driving a beat-up van, chases a Hamas member around a hilly Arab-Israeli town, and while the outcome is predictable, the story ventures into the lives and minds of characters on all sides of the conflict.
‘To Walk Invisible: The Brontë Sisters’ (PBS) Sally Wainwright, known for creating shows about tough female cops (“Scott & Bailey,” the terrific “Happy Valley”), wrote and directed this crisp, astringent two-hour film about three tough writers who revolutionized English literature. She tells the story of Anne, Charlotte and Emily Brontë’s struggle to publish through the lens of their relationship with their brother Branwell, possessed of lesser gifts and greater expectations. Finn Atkins (Charlotte), Chloe Pirrie (Emily), Adam Nagaitis (Branwell) and Jonathan Pryce (their father, Patrick) all excel.
‘Chewing Gum’ (Netflix) Some of the best shows around — “Better Things,” “Insecure” — are in the category of personal, if not autobiographical, comedies by female writer-actresses. The most raucous and wildly funny is Michaela Coel’s “Chewing Gum,” about a very demonstrative young woman in a London housing project trying very hard to lose her virginity. Ms. Coel is a brilliant clown, and she also has the good sense to let the brilliant Susan Wokoma steal scenes as the main character’s uproariously intense sister.
‘Valkyrien’ (Walter Presents) Nordic and noir but mostly uncategorizable, this nutty, blackly comic thriller concerns a surgeon who hides his terminally ill wife in an abandoned subway station (where he can give her illegal experimental treatments) and finds himself sharing space with a disgruntled civil-defense worker who’s preparing for the apocalypse.
‘Norsemen’ (Netflix) A deadpan spoof of bloody, bawdy historical-ish dramas like “Vikings” and “Game of Thrones,” the Norwegian “Norsemen” puts contemporary words and ideas in the mouths and brains of 8th-century marauders to hilarious effect. (A chieftain returning from a raid beats a newly captured slave, then sadly reflects on the limits of “fear-based leadership.”) There’s some Monty Python here and a lot of “The Office,” with Kare Conradi marvelous in the role of the Viking village’s pusillanimous Michael Scott.
‘Line of Duty’ (Hulu) Hulu had a banner year for British shows with “Harlots” and “National Treasure,” but the fourth season of this perennial procedural favorite makes the list for Thandie Newton’s tightly wound performance as a detective suspected of cooking evidence. The plot takes some typically wild turns but Ms. Newton is believable in the most unlikely circumstances.
‘Stranger’ (Netflix) The murder mystery “Stranger” has less of the usual awkwardness and obviousness of many South Korean dramas as well as another big advantage: It stars the immensely likable Bae Doo-na as a fearless cop.
Cue up the Boyz II Men: It’s hard to say goodbye. Among the rich bounties of 2017’s TV offerings came some tough finales — some abrupt and unwelcome, some thoughtful and intentional.
1. ‘The Leftovers’ (HBO) On “The Leftovers,” the weight of grief was so enormous it could bend truth. That’s how things wrapped up — as if things wrap up — for the endlessly evocative, almost too-beautiful series, with a finale that was truer than true. The tragic, captivating Nora (Carrie Coons) went to Australia, convinced a machine there could send her to the other side, the side where the 2 percent of the population that vanished in “the departure” now live. The side where her husband and children would be.
And maybe it worked, and maybe it didn’t, but what she did find — decades later, from half a world away — was her other husband, Kevin (Justin Theroux), handsome and compassionate. What do you do when nothing in the world makes sense the way it used to? The best you can, same as before.
2. ‘Please Like Me’ (Hulu) This Australian coming-of-age comedy blends its sweet disposition with its unsentimental view of the world, creating room for both darling goofballs and catastrophic depression. Many ensemble comedies are aspirational (“Friends,” say) and the ones that aren’t tend to be cynical (“It’s Always Sunny in Philadelphia”). “Please Like Me” is neither of those things. Instead, it’s thoughtful and welcoming, often hilarious and just oddball enough.
3. ‘American Crime’ (ABC) ABC was never going to be the right home for this bleak, substantive drama anthology, so the fact that it ran three seasons is some kind of blessing. Regina King won two Emmys for her performances on the show, and she should have won a third for this final season, where she played a devoted but weary social worker.
4. ‘Halt and Catch Fire’ (AMC) A so-so first season gave way to a gorgeous second, an aggressive third and this satisfying, confident fourth installment. The show followed the early days of personal computers, and despite occasional struggles to make forgone conclusions feel like real points of drama — are people really going to want to use “the internet?” — it always found deeper and more human stories beyond the clickety-clackety keyboards. The series blossomed narratively in Season 2, but it wasn’t until Season 4 that the show became its fully actualized self.
What “Halt and Catch Fire” understood better than most other shows is how people get stuck with one another. It’s not always out of adoration or compatibility. Sometimes the most potent kind of love is mutual passion.
5. ‘Girls’ (HBO) A lightning-rod show from before it even premiered, “Girls” died as it lived: surrounded by angry blog posts but also telling some stories in an extraordinarily deft fashion. The final-season episode “American Bitch,” a two-hander for guest-star Matthew Rhys and the show’s star and creator, Lena Dunham, was a late-in-the-game stunner, probing the cultural confusion around lecherous, literary men.
6. ‘Downward Dog’ (ABC) One might have guessed that a talking-dog show would not be long for this world, but one probably would not have guessed that the talking dog would sound like an anxious podcaster and be a wistful philosopher. “Downward Dog” only aired eight episodes, but that was enough to solidify its place in the one-and-done hall of fame. The show’s specialty was its tender approach to ordinariness, its baked-in knowledge that what makes a dog special — or an owner special, or a friend special — is that they’re yours.
7. ‘Orphan Black’ (BBC America) Clones, glorious clones. “Orphan Black” was the rare sci-fi thriller with an emotional core, thanks in large part to its star, Tatiana Maslany. Her fascinating, specific performances as several different characters breathed life and vitality into what can sometimes be a genre where construction matters more than execution. While the show’s intricate plotting could drift to the arcane, particularly in later seasons, the series never gave up its central humanity — or its occasional, welcome moments of humor.
8. ‘Underground’ (WGN) This historical drama about slavery and the Underground Railroad was frequently devastating and disturbing — and sometimes sudsy and juicy. But the standout episode by far was this season’s “Minty,” essentially a full-episode monologue performed by Aisha Hinds as Harriet Tubman. Other shows are not trying formats like this, and the untimely cancellation of “Underground” means we’re unlikely to see anything like it again any time soon.
9. ‘Playing House’ (USA) After an almost two-year hiatus, “Playing House” returned for a third season in 2017 — a season that lasted a mere four weeks. Thanks for nothing, USA. The comedy, created by and starring Jessica St. Clair and Lennon Parham, was gentle and goofy, and the Season 2 episode “Officer Of the Year” is arguably the best romantic comedy of the last several years.
10. (tie) ‘Sweet/Vicious’ and ‘Switched at Birth’ (MTV and Freeform) These shows are at opposite sides of the teen-TV spectrum: “Sweet/Vicious” was slick and snarky and barely eked out 10 episodes, while “Switched at Birth” could be painfully earnest and enjoyed a 104-episode run. But both were centrally attached to the idea of female companionship, and both told stories about young women being their own most capable advocates — particularly in the wake of assault, abuse or discrimination.