As an admirer of Mr. Long’s beautiful — and colorful — picture books, like the Otis the tractor series, “Of Thee I Sing,” by Barack Obama, “Little Tree” and his newest book, “Love,” which will be published Jan. 9, I was shocked too. I asked him if he’d tell me more. These are edited excerpts from the conversation.
How did you first discover it?
I look back at that and I think, what if I hadn’t had that direct and immediate response from my mother? I might have given up right then on the idea of being an artist.
And yet you went to art school, and from there became a professional artist.
I did. I learned color theory, the science of color. I could draw and compose a picture, but still, not being able to see subtle hues, I realized I could never be a classical portrait painter.
How did you get your first job as an artist?
But I managed to prove my value and they made a concession for me on matching Pantone colors. I’d gotten good at knocking on my neighbor’s door or looking over the cubicle wall, and asking people to help. Before that it had been my mother helping me with color, but then I had other people around me. I didn’t want anyone in the world to know I was colorblind, but I had to. It’s like an illiterate person who may be very intelligent, but just never learned to read, and many times leads a successful life because they learn ways around it.
And now there’s my wife. We’ve been married 22 years, and she’s my main color consultant. Then my two sons came along, and they started helping me, too.
And your books have done so well.
Yes, I’m very fortunate and yet I’ve always felt like a bit of an underdog because of my struggles with color.
You’re about to go on a national tour for “Love,” with the book’s Newbery Medal-winning author, Matt de la Peña. You’ll no doubt be getting lots of attention. Do you think you’ll talk about your colorblindness?
I’ve come to a place where I’m comfortable speaking about it. I would never want to make it seem like, “Oh, look at me, I have this problem and I’ve overcome this major thing.” But maybe there’s some other 13-year-old boy or girl who wants to be an artist, and either has the same situation, or just something else in the way. Maybe there’s somebody else who has an obstacle and could be inspired by this.