For months, Ariel Ortega’s paychecks would bounce when he went to deposit them at his bank each Friday. He says he never saw the promised overtime pay for his extra hours on Saturdays remodeling a 12-floor apartment building in Brooklyn.
Mr. Ortega considered quitting. But when he voiced concerns, his boss, Michael Stathakis, would grow agitated and threaten not to pay the remainder of what he was owed if he quit, Mr. Ortega said.
Mr. Ortega, 30, was vindicated last week when his employer, Whisk Remodeling Corp., owned by Mr. Stathakis, pleaded guilty to fraud, admitting he failed to pay Mr. Ortega and dozens of other workers, many of them immigrants, more than $90,000 in wages.
Mr. Ortega’s case is not unique — and prosecutors in New York have taken note.
District attorneys in all five boroughs of New York City and in other counties, in coordination with state agencies, have ratcheted up efforts against wage theft in the construction industry. A string of indictments this year detailed more than $2.5 million in unpaid wages for more than 400 construction workers in Manhattan and beyond, Cyrus R. Vance Jr., the Manhattan district attorney, said at a news conference on Monday.
Low-wage workers across a range of industries nationwide are often denied adequate overtime pay and paid less than the minimum wage, research shows. Sometimes workers are not paid at all.
The allegations presented by New York prosecutors in nine cases across five jurisdictions reveal a pattern: Employers often falsified payroll summaries and underpaid workers by issuing bad checks or failing to pay the prevailing wage. One construction company failed to pay $13,000 in wages, and another as much as $700,000, prosecutors say.
The $2.5 million in unpaid wages announced by prosecutors may seem insignificant compared to the estimated $1 billion in lost wages that affect tens of thousands of workers in New York each year. But officials and worker advocates say the cases may deter employers from conducting such wage violations in the future.
In New York, workers lose approximately $10 million to $20 million per week in unpaid wages, according to a report commissioned by the U.S. Department of Labor. And New York workers who are not citizens of the United States are three times more likely to be cheated, the report said.
Immigrant workers like Mr. Ortega, who speaks little English, are susceptible to underpayment because of language barriers. And immigrants in the country illegally are especially prone to wage theft because they are often fearful of speaking out, several studies show.
Many construction workers are hired through informal agreements, and that makes them more susceptible to wage theft, said Maria Figueroa, a director of labor and policy research at the Worker Institute of Cornell University.
The most recent charges came on Monday.
City Metro Corp., a construction company, was charged in an indictment in State Supreme Court in Manhattan for failing to pay over $241,000 in wages to more than 45 construction workers hired to do cement work for a hotel being built in Midtown.
The company, prosecutors said, routinely failed to pay workers or gave them bad checks between June 2015 and April 2017. Many workers quit after realizing they were not going to be paid, but the company would find new workers through their network of contacts and defraud them as well, prosecutors said.
The two owners of the company, Nikitas Nikolis, 61, and Anthony Caggiano, 54, pleaded not guilty before Judge Joseph P. Burke on Monday.
“I’m confident that my client will be vindicated at the end of this,” said Karl J. Silverberg, the lawyer defending Mr. Caggiano.
The aggressive prosecution of wage theft may also lead officials to crack down on hazardous safety conditions at construction sites — a problem that has plagued the city for years. A report found that New York construction companies that have a history of wage and hour violations are more likely to be safety violators, too.
“As investigators, we know that wage theft can be a red flag to other misconduct,” Mark Peters, the commissioner of the Department of Investigation, said.
Since 2011, the state has recovered nearly $150 million in unpaid wages for more than 21,000 workers, Roberta Reardon, commissioner of the state Department of Labor, said on Monday.