Two (big) books of poems by the same poet kick off our list of recommendations this week: a pair of volumes of “The Complete Poems of A. R. Ammons,” by a two-time winner of the National Book Award who died at 75 in 2001. You might also want to take a look at two new books about comics (by different authors) — “Cartoon County,” a memoir by Cullen Murphy, the son of the artist behind the strip “Prince Valiant”; and “Why Comics?,” Hillary L. Chute’s wide-ranging look at how and why the medium has become so popular. There’s more, including a novel set during the French Resistance, a memoir of being held captive by the Taliban and the diaries Tina Brown kept during her years atop Vanity Fair.
WHY COMICS? From Underground to Everywhere, by Hillary L. Chute. (Harper, $40.) Chute offers a tour de force of the world of comics, from high-minded graphic novels to Superman, analyzing what exactly makes them a unique and relevant art form right now. The book includes history, content analysis, artist interviews, amusing asides and more than 100 pages of illustrations.
THE KITES, by Romain Gary. Translated by Miranda Richmond Mouillot. (New Directions, $27.95.) Rendered in English for the first time, Gary’s last novel before committing suicide tells a story of the French Resistance as it was lived in the Norman countryside while also capturing the themes of identity and reinvention that obsessed the celebrated French author.
GO, WENT, GONE, by Jenny Erpenbeck. Translated by Susan Bernofsky. (New Directions, paper, $16.95.) This timely novel brings together a retired classics professor in Berlin and a group of African refugees. The risk of didacticism is high, but the book’s rigor and crystalline insights pay off, aesthetically and morally.
THE TRADE: My Journey Into the Labyrinth of Political Kidnapping, by Jere Van Dyk. (PublicAffairs, $28.) Van Dyk was held captive by the Taliban for 45 days, yet focuses less on his imprisonment than his effort to unravel precisely who ensnared him — and the dangerous lack of a global policy on ransom payments.
THE DIARIES OF EMILIO RENZI: Formative Years, by Ricardo Piglia. Translated by Robert Croll. (Restless Books, paper, $19.99.) Before dying of A.L.S. in January, Piglia prepared his 327 notebooks for publication in a trilogy. This splendidly crafted first installment covers 1957-67, the salad days of a whip-smart, arrogant, ambitious young man determined to forge himself as a writer.
THE VANITY FAIR DIARIES: 1983-1992, by Tina Brown. (Holt, $32.) A brave, self-revealing, real-time history of the mania and despair of a particularly bipolar decade. Brown is fundamentally covering herself, setting a bonfire of her own vanities. Journalists will feast on the book, but so will anyone interested in media.
THE CITY OF BRASS, by S. A. Chakraborty. (HarperVoyager/HarperCollins, $25.99.) The first of a projected trilogy, this fantastical adventure novel riffs on the imagery of Islamic folklore.
I’M JUST NO GOOD AT RHYMING: And Other Nonsense for Mischievous Kids and Immature Grown-Ups, by Chris Harris. Illustrated by Lane Smith. (Little, Brown, $19.99; ages 6 and up.) This debut collection joins the pantheon that includes Shel Silverstein — short, clever, funny poems written specifically for children, with rhythm and rhyme that deliver jolts of happiness to all ages.