TUESDAY PUZZLE — I’m sure you all read the constructor’s notes that appear on these posts; one of the things that always strikes me is how long it can take to usher a puzzle from conception to publication. When you look at the newspaper you’re holding in your hands, literally or virtually, some days the crossword is probably its most long-deliberated component.
Not so today, as David J. Kahn has built his grid around a record-breaking purchase, involving a jaw-dropping amount of money, that happened just a few weeks ago and is still an intriguing (and possibly unfinished) story. We eat this stuff up, don’t we? I thought I’d dust off some old Gilded Age anecdotes for this post but upon googling “ostentatious displays of wealth” found myself sinking into a truffle-scented morass of modern day Caligulas watering their golf courses using golden blimps filled with Evian water and hiring someone to “do” their dishes by flinging dirty ones into the trash and bringing in new sets for every meal.
38A is the central theme answer to this puzzle. The painting in question is Leonard da Vinci’s “Salvator Mundi,” or “Savior of the World,” and it is the most expensive painting ever sold by a country mile, assuming that country is in OPEC. The back story is pretty thrilling if you don’t know it. I confess I sort of glazed over the whole thing when it happened, but suffice to say someone bought this exact same painting in 1958 for 45 British pounds. Also, it depicts Jesus, head on, and it really seems as if he’s just about to say “if you’re not worth billions, don’t even look at me.” Actually, that’s not true. But the whole convergence is very dissonant.
If you’re knowledgeable about art and the auction world you’ll have no problems with the other seven themed entries in this grid. The artist of the painting runs directly down the middle at 7D, forming a cross with the painting’s name, and there are entries at 14A, 65A, 10D, 12D, 35D and 60D. The strategy required to make all these clues show up in perfect symmetry makes this puzzle really lovely, a little work of art. Who can spare a hundred mil or two for Mr. Kahn?
I did not fly through this Tuesday puzzle, but looking back over it I think the difficulty I encountered was in some of the cluing, all of which I liked.
17A: “Gets excited about, e.g.” sent my mind looking for a kinetic term that would reflect some agitation; REACTS TO seems more neutral, but it works in this context too.
35A: Turns out there are so many different nymphs! I was sure that OREADs, a flavor of mountain nymph, would be seen flitting fairly infrequently through the puzzle, but they are actually pretty common, more so than dryads and naiads. I only got this on crosses.
11D: “Lie on one’s back and not move, maybe” is my very favorite yoga pose. I usually focus on this pose when I do my vigorous yoga regimen. In this case we are looking for Pogo rather than Yogi, though, Pogo being one of those possums that PLAY DEAD.
32D: “Make a declaration with a straight face” again conjured up gambling; I guess I’m cynical but my first thought was something to do with a bluff, or maybe a practical joke. No, sometimes you actually MEAN IT.
When I read about the sale of the painting “Salvator Mundi” a few weeks ago, I saw right away the nice crossing of the painting’s name and artist. (Unfortunately, that’s the way you think after you’ve been writing puzzles for a while!) I still wasn’t sure I wanted to write an art-related puzzle because I didn’t know how many solvers would be interested. But I found some interesting fun facts about the painting and, even better, was able to get them to interlock with everything else. So the puzzle sort of tells a little story.
Obviously, the price paid for the painting was astounding and it was fascinating to read about how it was marketed to get such a high price. The buyer is Prince Bader, a Saudi royal. (Pretty interesting that a Muslim would buy a portrait of Christ, who’s not considered a savior in the Muslim world.) The buyer apparently is strapped for cash so after a $100 mil down payment, the rest will be paid over six months to the painting’s previous owner, a Russian billionaire.
Because of an editing error, the clue in Sunday’s puzzle, “Full-Body Cast,” for 41-Down — “Where I-30, I-65 and I-85 all meet” — was incorrect for the entry, ATLANTA. I-65 should have been I-75.