The day after the early-morning surprise assault on Pearl Harbor, on Dec. 7, 1941, the United States formally declared war on Japan and entered World War II. Over the next few months, almost 120,000 people of Japanese ancestry, over 60 percent of whom were American citizens, were removed from their homes, businesses and farms on the West Coast and forced to live in internment camps. Why? The United States government feared that these individuals, simply because of their ethnicity, posed a national security threat.
In this lesson, students use original Times reporting and other resources to investigate the forced internment of Japanese-Americans — and track how the government has gradually apologized for some of its actions over the decades. Students will also have the opportunity to look for echoes in today’s world of this difficult chapter in American history.
Headline from a Feb. 12, 1942 article.
Background: Over time, almost 120,000 Japanese-Americans, regardless of whether they were immigrants or had been born in the United States, were evacuated from their homes and brought to temporary assembly centers before being confined to one of several remote internment camps.
Activity: Working in small groups, students should read one or more of these New York Times articles from the time period. Their goal? To figure out what they can find in 1940s news coverage that explains why the American government forced people from their homes into internment camps simply because of their ethnicity, and why the rest of the country let it happen.
Explicit reason provided in the article: Raids on Japanese communities yielded large quantities of contraband that “fifth columnists” might find useful.
Clues within the writing: The subheadline is startling: “FBI Raids Net 38 Japanese, Guns, Radios, Ammunition and Signal Devices.” It suggests that the Japanese-Americans involved might indeed be guilty of planning an act of treachery. But information at the end of the article explains that the contraband items were seized from a sporting goods store “operated by an alien Japanese.” In this way, even ordinary activities and businesses can appear threatening if they are said to involve Japanese-Americans.
Sourcing: Only government sources (including the Los Angeles mayor, the California attorney general and an Army lieutenant general) were provided.
Students can also compare reporting in The Times with accounts and editorials in newspapers on the West Coast, where most Japanese-Americans lived and anti-Japanese hysteria was particularly acute. Is there a noticeable difference in tone? Explain.
Background: Dorothea Lange, a photographer best known from her photographs of migrant farmers during the Great Depression, also documented the internment of Japanese-Americans.
Activity: Look at images taken by Ms. Lange in this slide show (at the top of this page) as well as these photos. What do they reveal about the forced evacuation and internment of Japanese-Americans and about life in the camps?
Then imagine you are a museum curator with room for only five images to tell the story of internment. Which five images would you choose from the slide show? For each image, explain why.
In an interview from May, Bob Fuchigami remembers the Amache internment camp in Colorado, where he was sent when he was 12 years old.
Background: Bob Fuchigami was sent to the Amache internment camp in Colorado with 10 family members when he was 12 years old. In this video, he returns to the camp at 85 to tell the story of his imprisonment.
And, in another video, Hiroshi Kashiwagi shares his memories of life at the Tule Lake internment camp.
Activity: While students watch one or both of these videos, invite them to consider the following: What can you learn about what internment was like for these people and their families? How did it affect their lives? What is the legacy of internment for them, and the nation, today?
Activity: Read these Opinion pieces and consider the arguments being made. Then, write your own Op-Ed using the history of Japanese internment to argue a position on an important issue today. Do you see any echoes of history in today’s current events?
Most of all the settlement looks like an oasis in an endless desert of sand, sage, mesquite and giant cacti. Around the double cluster of barracks that serve as houses, schools, workshops, mess halls, cooperative stores, offices and hospitals are nearly 17,000 acres of vegetable gardens, wheat, alfalfa and rice fields and pasture lands startlingly neat and green in a framework of shallow irrigation ditches.
And a March 1943 Times article reported on white women performing “spartan” duty (PDF), working as teachers, nurses and secretaries at Tule Lake. But The Times did not publish many articles detailing what life was like in the camps.
1. What can we learn from reading about life at the camps in newspaper articles published from 1942 to 1945?
2. What are the ways the news stories in the camp newspapers, published by Japanese internees, differ from reporting in The Times and other mainstream newspapers?
3. How can we evaluate the reliability of these various accounts?
The 442d suffered huge casualties; Capt. Daniel K. Inouye, now a United States senator from Hawaii, lost his right arm in battle. The team became famous for its rescue of the Texan “Lost Battalion,” saving more than 200 men who had been surrounded by German troops.
In 2000 President Bill Clinton awarded the Medal of Honor to 22 Asian-Americans; 20 were Japanese-Americans. When George T. Sakato died in 2015, he was the last to die of seven Japan-Americans who had lived to receive this honor. In 2011 Congress granted several Japanese-American veterans Congressional Gold Medals.
Activity: Consider whether serving in the military would have been easy or hard to do when the rest of your family was kept in an internment camp. Then write a frank one-page letter home to your family as a Japanese-American soldier.
Background: After Fred T. Korematsu in 1942 defied his military evacuation order, the American Civil Liberties Union branch in Northern California took up his case. But he lost his appeal and the Supreme Court ruled against him in 1944. Gordon Hirabayashi and Minoru Yasui also separately defied their curfew orders and refused to report for internment, resulting in legal challenges that the Supreme Court rejected.
The 1942 legal challenge by Mitsuye Endo (PDF) that also landed in the Supreme Court is credited by some as leading to President Roosevelt’s 1944 suspension of Executive Order 9066, as a law professor detailed a 2016 Sacramento Bee opinion piece.
Evidence was discovered proving that the wartime government suppressed, altered and destroyed material evidence while arguing my father’s, Yasui’s and Hirabayashi’s cases before the Supreme Court. The government’s claims that people of Japanese descent had engaged in espionage and that mass incarceration was necessary to protect the country were not only false, but had even been refuted by the government’s own agencies, including the Office of Naval Intelligence, the F.B.I. and the Federal Communications Commission.
In 1983 a judge overturned Mr. Korematsu’s conviction, “based on newly obtained information revealing that the government had knowingly exaggerated the threat of sabotage and espionage posed by ethnic Japanese on the West Coast.” And in 1998, President Clinton gave Mr. Korematsu the Medal of Freedom.
Activity: Choose any of these court cases related to Japanese internment to research further. What is the background of the case? What were the legal issues involved? What did the court decide? What is the significance of that decision?
Background: In the 1980s Congress initiated an investigation of the internment camps. The hearings of the Commission on Wartime Relocation and Internment of Civilians, some 40 years after the war, produced a report in 1983, concluding that the relocation and internment of Japanese-American citizens and resident aliens in World War II amounted to a “grave injustice.” Five years later, President Reagan signed the Civil Liberties Act of 1988, which granted reparations to Japanese-Americans who had been interned by the United States government during the war.
To locate potential recipients of the reparations, the Justice Department created the Office of Redress Administration; but the process of tracking down eligible people was laborious and time-consuming, and former internees were dying. In September 1989 the Senate tried to speed up the process, yet more wrangling resulted, with the checks not to be sent until funds were made available in late in 1990. By 1992, only 50,000 people had been paid.
Activity: Students should read about the conclusions of the 1983 report and discuss the following: What are the most striking points? Did Congress and the president make the right decision in issuing apologies and paying reparations?
Now imagine having President Roosevelt’s ear at a reception in 1942 for 10 minutes. What should he be told about the role that Japanese internment camps have played in American history?
Background: In 2006 Congress sent President George W. Bush legislation (which he signed) to preserve the internment camps. Two camps are now National Park Service sites: the Manzanar National Historic Site and the Minidoka Internment National Monument (created by President Clinton’s 2001 order).
Activity: Students can do this exercise on their own: Consider whether an internment camp would be the type of place you’d like to visit and list your reasons. Whatever your response, do research online about a camp and in your own words create a one-page summary of a tour that could be given there. Or create a museum gallery for the historic site.
Alternately, write an Op-Ed about whether more or less should be done to preserve these sites for the future.
In 2007 Holly Yasui filed a legal brief to aid Muslim immigrants who sought to overturn a Brooklyn judge’s ruling allowing for the detention of noncitizens; Ms. Yasui’s father, Minoru Yasui, had once challenged a Supreme Court ruling on World War II restrictions.
2. Refugees from Syria’s civil war: In November 2015, a Roanoke, Va., mayor caused a firestorm, explaining his opposition to welcoming Syrian refugees to the U.S., saying the internment of Japanese-Americans had been justified. Then he recanted. For some former Japanese internees, the debate over Syria’s refugees has evoked painful memories.
Mr. Trump cited Roosevelt’s classification of thousands of Japanese, Germans and Italians living in the United States during the war as “enemy aliens.” He said he was not endorsing something as drastic as the camps where American citizens of Japanese descent were interned. Instead, he referred to three proclamations by which Roosevelt authorized government detention of immigrants, and which led to the internment of thousands of noncitizen Japanese, Germans and Italians.
A few days later Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt’s granddaughter roundly rejected Mr. Trump’s ideas, as did Representative Doris Matsui, who had been interned in a camp. A 16-year-old student wrote a contest-winning essay for The Learning Network connecting the internment of ethnic Japanese with excluding Muslims from immigrating to America.
Shortly after his election in November 2016, Mr. Trump reaffirmed his intention to restrict immigration by Muslims. A Trump supporter, Carl Higbie, evoked the “precedent” of the Japanese internment camps in citing the need to prevent homeland terrorism in a Fox News appearance.
Promptly following his inauguration, President Trump issued a series of executive orders to limit immigration or travel to the United States by people from seven countries with largely Muslim populations. Legal challenges followed, but in September Mr. Trump responded by imposing a more sweeping ban; a judge halted it in October. Earlier this week the Supreme Court permitted the travel ban to go forward even while legal challenges continue.
Activity: Students can select one of the above examples from the past two decades when political leaders or activists have invoked the legacy of the Japanese internment and determine the following: What are the relevant lessons from the Japanese internment experience that should inform this situation? Explain.
