NAPLES — Above the throng shoving its way along Via dei Tribunali, this pizza-crazed city’s historic pizza thoroughfare, Antonio Borrelli leaned over the fake lemons hanging from the “Balcony of Song” above Antica Pizzeria Gino Sorbillo and dared sing something else.
The delighted crowd sang along with Mr. Borelli in Neapolitan dialect, and then lost its collective marbles when he pointed out that the celebrity pizza maker Gino Sorbillo had stepped out of the restaurant and onto the street.
Dressed in a couture jean apron over chef whites, the pizzaiuoli prompted a feeding frenzy outside his restaurant as he handed out free folded pizzas from an enormous copper pot and posed for hundreds of selfies. (“Not even Clark Gable,” said one of Mr. Sorbillo’s waiters, shaking his head.) Through it all, the media-savvy pizza maker flaunted a special pie with “Pizza Unesco” written in white ricotta di bufala on a red marinara face.
Immaculately groomed and bespectacled, Mr. Sorbillo walked into the kitchen, past a cardboard cutout of himself holding his new book, “Pizzaman.” He took a ball of dough from atop a stack of pink, green, blue and red boxes, tossed some flour on the marble countertop and smacked the dough down hard.
Mr. Sorbillo traces the road to recognition back 300 years ago, but appreciation from Unesco began more recently, when, in 2009, Pier Luigi Petrillo, an Italian professor and expert in “lobbying theories and techniques,” made three applications to Unesco on behalf of Italy’s Agriculture Ministry.
The first to win was the Mediterranean diet, in 2010, (“It has given rise to a considerable body of knowledge, songs, maxims, tales and legends”), followed in 2014 by the practice of cultivating Zibibbo wine on the Sicilian island of Pantelleria. (“The technique consists of several phases.”) That same year, Italian advocates started collecting what ended up being two million signatures for the pizzaiuolo cause.
He competed against “female traditional interior wall decoration in Asir, Saudi Arabia,” “Cultural practices associated to the 1st of March” in Bulgaria, and “Taskiwin, martial dance of the western High Atlas,” in Morocco. But the pizza lobbying paid off.
Mr. Oliva’s great-grandmother started making pizzas in the same building of the tough Sanità section of the city where he works his magic today, with little more than an oven and a window to hand the bread out on the street.
It is a profession, Mr. Oliva said, that has allowed him to give back to the community, offering free pizzas and paying for English lessons for local children. He has a loyal following of foodies, and across a courtyard strewn with laundry, a high-tech storage room for his adored dough to rest and mature.
