Each of these books, in a hard year, was one I didn’t know I needed until it appeared.
How else to put it? This was a corkscrew of a year. Its exceptionalness — the sheer blinding drama of it all — seems to have determined my reading preferences, repeatedly guiding me toward topical subjects. Not on this list, but worth mentioning: Joe Biden’s “Promise Me, Dad” and Hillary Clinton’s “What Happened,” two strong political memoirs, a true rarity (the genre’s generally a dud, an excuse to peddle bromides dipped in chloroform). Not everything on this list is political, of course, and neither are some of my honorable mentions. I particularly enjoyed the thriller “Fierce Kingdom,” by Gin Phillips, and the lively true-crime procedural “American Fire,” by Monica Hesse.
Because this is my final month on the job, I ask one minor indulgence: While my fellow staff critics have done the customary list of 10, I’ve added one more for the road. It’s “Cork Dork.” We can always use a good glass of wine, perhaps especially this year.
As it turns out, nearly every book on my list is a history of violence. More than half are stalked by monsters — real or imaginary. Several are tinged with elements of horror, science fiction and the gothic.
Mine is the strangest of these lists. I left The Times’s staff two and a half years ago, but apparently I won’t go away. I write intermittently about books with the potential to be popular.
The good ones are hard to find. So rather than stick to books I actually reviewed this year, I drew on favorite things I read in 2017, even though one dates back to 1993 and another was reviewed by Dwight Garner. One criterion for this list is: “Is this something you’d give to a friend?” Everything on my list meets that standard.
I’ve left out major titles, like Ron Chernow’s “Grant,” that I reviewed but hardly need attention here. I’d like to mention two first-rate books by actors: Tom Hanks’s “Uncommon Type,” a short-story collection that offers him a second career path if this movie thing doesn’t work out, and Alec Baldwin’s frank memoir “Nevertheless.” Finally, thanks to Bill O’Reilly for “Old School” (written with Bruce Feirstein). He’s right about many things, particularly when it comes to the rigidity of thought on college campuses. But the very idea of a morality lecture from O’Reilly made this the best unintended humor book of 2017.
‘LOST TYCOON: THE MANY LIVES OF DONALD J. TRUMP’ By Harry Hurt III (Echo Point Books). When president-elect Trump booted the author of this 1993 unauthorized biography off one of his golf courses, I sensed that Hurt’s book might be of interest. Yes, indeed. It’s a prescient account of Trump’s business ethics, calculated manipulation of his inner circle, flair for fact-free hyperbole and nascent political ambitions at a time when anyone who knew him thought he was joking. P.S.: It’s filled to the gills with gossip. Read with caution.