“Get Out,” his docu-horror-thriller-comedy about race in America, was the movie of the year. What will he show us next?
On Halloween, we had lunch at one of those casually cool American bistros in Los Angeles where all the food seems as if it was grown out back. He chose a spot outside, not to be seen (although a few people saw him) but mostly to see. Peele, who is 38, lives in his head, and he watches the world around him intensely. I got the duck, then so did he, and while we ate I was pretty sure I could hear him thinking. It was toward the end of the meal when he saw someone he recognized. Well, he thought he did.
“He’s dressed like Chris,” he said with some amusement. “Do you think he’s being Chris?” He was looking past me, so it was hard to turn all the way around to confirm with any subtlety. But Peele’s gaze made it perfectly obvious to the person approaching that Peele was looking at him. “Are you Chris from ‘Get Out’ for Halloween?” Peele asked, committing less an act of racial profiling than an uncanny identification of his own handiwork. “Get Out,” of course, is the surprise hit movie that Peele wrote and directed about a black man named Chris, who discovers that his white girlfriend’s family is running a nasty racist conspiracy. Chris has big, watery eyes that seem red from weariness (or weed) and wears a collarless blue chambray shirt over a gray T-shirt and jeans.
It has been 10 months, and we’re still talking about this movie and its alarming presentation of white racism. “Get Out” opened at the top of the box office at the end of February and has grossed many, many times the $4.5 million it cost to make. Racism is old, but Peele found a poetic new way of talking about it. He gave us language we didn’t know we lacked.
For a white audience, the movie might be one of the few times they’ve been asked to identify with a regular, imperiled black person without the sweetener of a white co-star — no Spencer Tracy or Sandra Bullock here, just Catherine Keener and Bradley Whitford as the Armitages, the sort of parents who’ll inquire about the history of their daughter’s interracial relationship by asking: “How long’s this been going on? This thang,” as daddy Armitage does. For a black audience, the movie could have ended right there. What does an affluent, middle-aged, suburban white dude know about a thang? And what’s he doing saying the word with this much insinuating self-delight, this much put-on jive? “I didn’t want any white saviors,” Peele said over lunch. White saviors hog the history of race in American film. 
As a concept, the sunken place has grown even more capacious. It has been repurposed to explain both institutional disenfranchisement and racial self-estrangement — an explanation for the behavior of black people who seem to be under white control, based on either their sustained proximity to whiteness or statements construable as anti-black, or probably both. Sunken-place entrants include Clarence Thomas, Ben Carson, Tiger Woods, O.J. Simpson, sometimes Kanye West and any black person with something nice to say about President Trump. It’s more generous than “sellout” and less punitive than “Uncle Tom,” a dis and a road to redemption.
Before he noticed fake Chris, Peele had been talking about the restricted ways bigotry is discussed. “We’re never going to fix this problem of racism if the idea is you have to be in a K.K.K. hood to be part of the problem,” he said. The culture still tends to think of American racism as a disease of the Confederacy rather than as a national pastime with particular regional traditions, like barbecue. “Get Out” is set in the Northeast, where the racial attitude veers toward self-congratulatory tolerance. Mr. Armitage, for instance, gets chummy with Chris by telling him he’d have voted for Obama a third time. “Get Out” would have made one kind of sense under a post-Obama Hillary Clinton administration, slapping at the smugness of American liberals still singing: “Ding dong, race is dead.” Peele shows that other, more backhanded forms of racism exist — the presumptuous “can I touch your hair” icebreaker, Mr. Armitage’s “I voted for Obama, so I can’t be racist” sleeper hold are just two. But Clinton lost. Now the movie seems to amplify the racism that emanates from the Trump White House and smolders around the country.
A few people have remarked to me, not unreasonably, that “Get Out” isn’t terribly plausible. The cabal doesn’t make sociological sense. How does the cotton stuffing go from the armchair into Chris’s ears? What does a weekend at the Armitages look like with no black visitor? None of the terror stands up to logic! But when is terror logical? Peele developed a tone, other than hysteria, to present the black experience of discomfort in seemingly benign white worlds and the way their residents chronically deny the reality of that experience. Peele takes that reality as a given, but he is amplifying the paranoia that results from its constant denial. It’s a movie made by a person having the same bad dream I and lots of other black people have had.
Every time I’ve seen it, I’ve thought about that moment not too far into Toni Morrison’s “Song of Solomon” when somebody asks, “What difference do it make if the thing you scared of is real or not?” What befalls the black characters in “Get Out” is the thing we’re scared of.
On an overcast afternoon, Peele’s assistant, a chill young man named Alex Kim, drove us into the Hollywood Hills to the Spanish-style colonial house that for about eight months has been the office of Peele’s production company, Monkeypaw. Like a lot of the residences up here, this one is nestled into the geological table and seems charmingly underfurnished. Most of the common space feels spare in a lonely, college-y sort of way. Some rooms have rugs, but the longer you’re there, the more rugs you want to put down. There were no visible markers of any coming projects, just walls of inspired fan art and designer posters, like the black-and-white image of a coffee mug fashioned with Kaluuya’s worried face and a spoon stirring where the top of his skull should be.
These guys might be too busy to worry about décor. Peele is producing a new “Twilight Zone” for CBS All Access and, with Misha Green and J.J. Abrams, another anthology series for HBO based on the 2016 novel by Matt Ruff, “Lovecraft Country.” Peele’s comedy “The Last O.G.” — in which an ex-con played by Tracy Morgan adjusts to, among other things, Brooklyn gentrification — is set to start on TBS in the spring. Monkeypaw is co-producing Spike Lee’s next movie, “Black Klansman,” in which an undercover detective somehow winds up running a chapter of the K.K.K. And then there’s the diversification initiative for young writers and filmmakers working in what lots of fans and critics call “genre,” which combs the country for voices — women of color, say, or gay people — that Hollywood tends to ignore. And of course there’s Peele’s own movie.
The reason for the visceral response to this movie being called a comedy is that we are still living in a time in which African-American cries for justice aren’t being taken seriously. It’s important to acknowledge that though there are funny moments, the systemic racism that the movie is about is very real. More than anything, it shows me that film can be a force for change. At the end of the day, call “Get Out” horror, comedy, drama, action or documentary, I don’t care. Whatever you call it, just know it’s our truth.
Blackness is the orienting principle of Peele’s art. Its richness, its strangeness, its beauty, its complication, its ridiculousness, its divisiveness, its allure, its very realness. Many a black artist has explored blackness, but few have found it as fascinating as Peele appears to. It perplexes, amuses and excites him, the way language obsesses some novelists and food delights certain cooks. Increasingly, though, he has wanted to do more for blackness — building that pipeline, for instance, through which other artists’ ideas would flow.
You can see the shift from frolic to duty in his sketch work with Keegan-Michael Key. Their Comedy Central show, “Key & Peele,” was, in some ways, a lab for “Get Out,” one in which they did as much critiquing of blackness as they did of white people’s relationship to it.
One sketch from Season 1 features a fake documentary about the bar mitzvah “party motivators” Gafilta Fresh (Key) and Dr. Dreidel (Peele). They blast into a banquet hall with a dose of rappity-rap B-boy blackness. They’re Kid ’N Play. They’re a minstrel act. And everybody digs them.  It’s like a scary ride. And the kids just love it.” The father tells the filmmakers: “You just really can’t put a price on the look on your child’s face when they see a black person for the first time. It’s just magical.” Gafilta and Dreidel do all kinds of stereotypical black-party shtick, in the hope, they say, of exposing Jewish kids to black people early enough so that they don’t discriminate. It’s a walk around the rim of a sunken place.
Key and Peele’s was a classical comedy combo: tall and shorter, zany and chill, wet and dry, Jerry Lewis and Dean Martin, Martin Lawrence and Will Smith. Key’s exuberant virtuosity can upstage Peele’s subtlety. Peele is quieter and seems to be doing less. Whether Key is Michael Jackson or Tim Cook, he boils over, melts down, blows up, simmers, stews and karate-kicks. He’s the rocket. Peele is the control center. He doesn’t appear to hunger for applause the way Key does. You laugh at Key because he works so hard. You laugh at Peele because, by comparison, he makes it look easy.
Peele suspects that the self-investigation he is undertaking through his work has something to do with his father, whom he didn’t see after his 7th or 8th birthday. He contrasts his relationship to his blackness with that of Key, whose biological and adoptive fathers were black. “If you had a black father around, I think that role model gave him a context to understand his blackness,” he says. “I would probably have been the voice in ‘Key & Peele’ that was pushing and pushing and pushing to expand the definition of ‘African-American.’ I can see how that is something I’ve been searching for in my art.” He and Key played scores of black people of every type, and many with no type at all. For some African-Americans, for a long time, rules for what counts as black have been apparent. And they’ve been fixed. The joy of Peele’s comedy with Key was in their violation of those rules. The show was about how lost in this stuff we all are. “Get Out” is a determination to be found.
In November, Peele was in good spirits as he sat in the greenroom before a conversation with Seth Meyers at the 92nd Street Y. He was dressed in new jeans, white sneakers and a black sweater with a taxi-cab-yellow stripe across the front. It was a variation on his usual streetwear (baseball caps, varsity jackets, hoodies, boots) but even fresher. As he was getting ready to go onstage, I asked him if he missed performing. His answer was firm. “I don’t miss it. I just don’t.” Did he not miss it for the moment? Like, was he on a break from it? Or did he existentially not miss it?
Through eighth grade, Peele went to local public schools. Then he attended the Calhoun School, about a 20-minute walk from his apartment. He was a nerd, a black nerd, before black nerds were a thing, before there were “blerds” (a word he and Key both casually use). They were nerds in the time of Lamar from the “Revenge of the Nerds” movies and Steve Urkel from “Family Matters” and, in a different way, Carlton Banks from “The Fresh Prince of Bel Air.” If you reminded anyone of them, you were dead. But he never got hassled in the cafeteria or between classes. In seventh grade, Peele had a bunch of Garfield shirts he liked to wear. There’s nowhere to hide for a black kid in a Garfield shirt. “I never tried to wear the clothing to not get me beat up,” he said. “I was into musical theater, I was into movies, I was into being free. I was a child, and I’m still that child. Part of being a child internally is not falling victim to fashion, not feeling like you have to present something that you’re not.” He was charming and funny and had some close friends, two of whom now work with him at Monkeypaw.
Growing up, Peele came to love “Rosemary’s Baby” — he lived a few blocks from the Dakota, the mega manse in the movie. Tim Burton’s “Edward Scissorhands” was another personal landmark. He has a warm memory of his mother’s taking him to see it at the Ziegfeld Theater, the single-screen palace that projected its final film last year. “The movie just crushed me,” he said. “I thought it was, you know, the best movie I had seen, and still, any day, it could debatably be my No. 1.” Burton’s persecuted misfit artisan spoke to him. So did Burton, one of Peele’s favorite directors, whose approach to filmmaking revolves around the experience of belonging: “I feel like I don’t quite fit in, like how I am supposed to fit in,” he said, summing up one of Burton’s themes.
Peele’s father, Hayward Peele, wasn’t around much and had other children with other women in different parts of the country. Peele has fond memories of him and of the limited time they spent together. And yet he remains curious about a major part of himself that stood out in the context of his mother’s white extended family. When I spoke to Peele’s mother, Lucinda Williams, on the phone, stories from her life and life with her son poured out. She tried to keep Peele’s father connected to their son, first through visits, but she learned not to count on those after he stood Peele up a few times. Then she tried to keep the culture of him around — the jazz and food that he liked. But some things she wouldn’t have, like the time he asked Peele why he “talked white.” “I knew I couldn’t allow that,” she said.
Peele said he was never made to feel different. He was loved. But the void he felt was out of his mother’s control. It was out of his too. He knows that in some ways he’s searching for something through his work that he may never sufficiently resolve in his life. When Peele was an adult, a half brother reached out to him through social media and shared details about his father’s life after he left them, but this only compounded the questions. In July, Peele became a father himself, and he wants, as best he can, to protect his son from these nagging mysteries of the self. Perhaps his adolescent plunge into the worlds of fantasy and sci-fi and horror was a respite from the question “Who am I?” But in adulthood, he’s using genre as an instrument of self-discovery and social X-ray: This is who we are.
Peele talked about his childhood over two tiny croque-monsieurs and a couple of mimosas at a busy French place less than a quarter mile from the apartment he grew up in. Maybe bringing all this up saddened him, but it didn’t show. He even laughed through some of it. Peele curses a lot, and he’s fond of using “man” as an interjection. There’s an enthusiastic crack of adolescence, of nasality, in his voice that might sound nerdy but is also warm. Ascribing whiteness to it might say more about the ascriber than about Peele. It permits you to miss what the voice is saying. He sounds perfectly black to me.
Peele is married to Chelsea Peretti, the wry, sneakily blunt observational comedian. While we walked around the Upper West Side, he told me that the acidity and audacity of her humor struck him. He looked up some videos of her and watched a web series she made. “Oh! You know what?” he said, interrupting his train of thought. “The first time I fell in love with her was this ‘Comedy Bang! Bang!’ episode.” The guests on the podcast included Peretti and some of her fellow writers on “Parks and Recreation.” “They were pretending to be sort of bad, obnoxious comedians, and it was really subversive and subtle, and I said to my assistant, ‘Who is that?’ He was like, ‘That’s Chelsea Peretti,’ and I said to him right there — no joke — ‘There’s a 10 percent chance I will marry that woman right over there, because she is cracking my [expletive] up.’ ” Naturally, he reached out to her on Twitter. “I slid up in them DMs,” he clarified.
Peele didn’t mean for Chris and his girlfriend, Rose, to function as avatars of his marriage. He was thinking more universally.  “I wrote it before I met Chelsea. This is why you marry a comedian: because she gets it,” he said. “I knew that something would ring true about the narrative of the white family and the white woman and the trap that that can be for a black man.” He has never felt trapped by the Perettis. He wanted to challenge Hollywood’s idealization of interracial relationships. They’re a fact of American life and yet also still suspicious, even to enlightened people, even to people in an actual interracial relationship.
“It’s still a principle that’s disapproved of from both sides,” Peele said. “Part of me thought: I don’t know if people will want to come and see an interracial love story, even put in this sort of horror setting, because there’s something about it that makes people uncomfortable. At the same time, there’s a conventional way we’re meant to deal with miscegenation in pop culture, which is with a certain reverence. It’s Romeo and Juliet. It’s Martin Luther King’s dream.” Peele jaundices the romance. Rose is no Juliet: She’s a bloodthirsty vacuumer of black souls. But the movie isn’t only about black men and the white women they date. It’s entirely possible the movie is about something else. About the terror of black America accusing you of “talking white.” About feeling suspicious as a black person among white people. Maybe they’re guilty of, say, coveting you, and maybe the covetousness is all your fault, a result of having gotten so close in the first place.
In an out-of-the-way spot on the first floor of the Monkeypaw office hangs one of the only “Key & Peele” references in the house. It’s an image from a Season 3 sketch called “Continental Breakfast.” It stars Peele, in a black toupee and thin mustache, as a rootin’-tootin’ businessman who is informed that his stay at a Comfort Inn-type hotel includes a continental breakfast. “It’s ... continental?” he asks, before he saunters up to the thingy that dumps Froot Loops into a plastic-foam bowl and renames the bewildered Latino busboy “garçon.” At first, the joke appears to be about the corporate sham of fancifying such shabbiness. Then it appears to be about the kind of black small-timer who takes “continental” at its word and permits inexperience to recast the business-travel buffet spread as the apotheosis of upper crustiness. (“Paper and everything,” he says, marveling at one of those tiny, oily muffins.) But when Peele sits down and begins to sample his selection, his nincompoopery blossoms into musicality.  (“Baked to perfection,” he sings after he chomps into an unpeeled banana.) He doesn’t eat so much as conduct an orchestra of gluttony (Strauss provides the musical soundtrack). His elation segues first into orgasm, then into blubbering.
I always laugh so hard at this sketch that I lose the joke. Peele is that absurdly moving. He gave dozens of tremendous, tremendously original performances. This one happens to be my favorite. The comedy comes from a place of intense passion and utter abandon.  But Peele insists that anyone who can love even this food this deeply deserves more than your laughter.
The image that hangs in Peele’s office comes from the sketch’s punch line: It’s a black-and-white photograph of the businessman character beaming at a banquet-hall table, the one black face in an ocean of well-heeled, blank-looking white ones. “Continental Breakfast Buffet 1935,” it reads. The dateline could also be: “Sunken Place, forever.” The sketch was part of that season’s Halloween episode (the last shot alludes to the last shot of Stanley Kubrick’s “The Shining”). A close-up of that photo is also Peele’s Twitter avatar. It’s an embrace of his comedic brilliance that also feels like a reminder: Stay woke. Maybe that fear of alienation fostered his fascination with blackness and fueled his determination not to lose touch with or forsake it, no matter how many white best friends and girlfriends and co-writers and producers he has had. I’ve been there. Lots of black people have been there. “Get Out” is a hit because Jordan Peele is not alone. It’s a hit because, not so secretly, it’s about a profound fear of being black and isolated.
In the movie, Chris’s best friend is a T.S.A. agent named Rod Williams, who is played by the stand-up Lil Rel Howery. Rod’s skepticism is a surrogate for the audience’s. His sarcasm is more than comic relief; it’s black people talking back to the screen. Howery delivers all the easy laughs. But when the Armitage cabal snares Chris, it’s Rod to the rescue. Comedy saves Chris from horror. But Rod feels far more crucial than that. It’s important that Chris’s best friend is a more down, average black person. It’s important that Rod works for the T.S.A., a para-law-enforcement outfit that screens for safety, often staffed, depending on your city, almost entirely by black people. It’s this guy who comes to save Chris from all this whiteness. They might not be friends in the real world. But in the metaphor, the relationship makes sense. Who else would have realized that two and two equals “coagula”? Who else could get Chris out of the sunken place but a man who refuses to be sunk? Rod is justice of a sort and unconditional support. He’s the movie’s secret weapon and moral SEAL team.
