Art & Design|Hito Steyerl Is an Artist With Power. She Uses It for Change.
Hito Steyerl Is an Artist With Power. She Uses It for Change.
BERLIN — Blurry selfies, pixelated screen shots, Photoshop disasters: Low-quality, mass-reproduced pictures flood our screens every day. They are easy to dismiss, but the German artist Hito Steyerl makes a case for their value.
“They spread pleasure or death threats, conspiracy theories or bootlegs, resistance or stultification,” she wrote in her 2009 essay “In Defense of the Poor Image.” “Poor images show the rare, the obvious and the unbelievable.” They can show us secrets, she says, if only we’re willing to look.
In her films, lectures and essays, Ms. Steyerl, 51, has never shied from revealing the secrets she uncovers. She illuminates the world’s power structures, inequalities, obscurities and delights. She pushes buttons as she spins parables.
Her work has never been more recognized or relevant: This year she became the first female artist to top the British magazine ArtReview’s Power 100 list; her “Liquidity Inc.” show opened on Dec. 13 at the Institute of Contemporary Art/Boston, where it runs through April 22; and her newest essay collection, “Duty-Free Art: Art in the Age of Planetary Civil War” was published in October. She represents a new paradigm of the artist not as solitary genius but as networked thinker.
Ms. Steyerl’s films are densely packed, mixing fact and fiction, documentary footage, computer-generated images and often appearances by the artist herself. They zoom in on, and pan out from, some of the most complex, pressing issues of our time — among them surveillance, alienated labor, militarization, protest culture, corporate domination and the rise of alternative economies.
But the films’ politics are served up with appealing, accessible pop-culture aesthetics, sardonic humor and the odd four-letter word. Viewers have stood in long lines at venues like the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles or the German pavilion at the 2015 Venice Biennale to enter Ms. Steyerl’s installations, which present the films in environments that might look like a giant wave or the blue lines from the 1982 movie “Tron.” Visitors might leave pondering exploitation, dancing to a disco tune from the soundtrack, or both.
“In my films, accessibility is something I do on purpose,” said Ms. Steyerl (pronounced SHTYE-earl), speaking in measured English sentences in a cafe in the Kreuzberg district here. When not lecturing to packed audiences or teaching media art at this city’s University of Arts, she works from her home nearby. “I don’t want to make films that are so specialized that they’re only accessible to people with prior knowledge or histories or references.” The films always, she explained, have one layer that anyone can understand.
And there’s something almost digital about reading her essays, many of which evolve from her talks. The writing seems almost as if it were toggling among browser tabs.
“Hito’s writing is stylistically very different than that of an academic or a journalist — there are juxtapositions and allegories that go far beyond the usual range of writing,” said the American artist Trevor Paglen, a longtime friend whose art also explores information flows and power structures.
Steyerlisms like “circulationism” (the more an image moves through the digital or real world, the more power it accrues), or “junktime” (the fragmented, distracted experience of the harried freelancer) fascinate undergrads and professors alike.
Ms. Steyerl explained the concept in her new book’s title. On the one hand, “duty-free art” can refer to art in “free ports,” tax-free storage facilities in places like Switzerland or Singapore: “nondescript and pedestrian buildings in the suburbs, where a lot of art would accumulate without being seen,” she said.
“But duty-free art,” she continued, “could also be art that’s not subject to the duty of having to represent either a culture of a nation or some other interests involved in presentation and production.” Does she mean the avant-garde dream of truly autonomous art? “There’s no complete autonomy — you can only even start thinking about autonomy in relation to other things,” Ms. Steyerl said.
Many of the book’s essays were previously published in e-flux journal, a theory periodical published by the art website e-flux. “There’s an incredibly close relationship between Hito and the journal,” said the site’s co-founder Julieta Aranda, who explained how the intellectual discussions of a group of like-minded Berliners, including Ms. Steyerl, led to the journal’s founding in 2008.
As broad as Ms. Steyerl’s practice is, she sees herself first and foremost as a filmmaker. Born and raised in Munich, she trained as a camera operator, then studied filmmaking in both Japan and her hometown. In the late 1980s, she worked as an assistant to the German director Wim Wenders. She intended to become a classical documentary filmmaker, but things didn’t quite work out that way.
“While I was at film school, or even earlier, maybe the late 1980s, the market for independent-film production collapsed, and existing funding for long-form documentaries just stopped,” said Ms. Steyerl, whose work found its way into the art world in 1999 when she had her first exhibition in Vienna. By 2004, her films were on view in major shows like the roving Manifesta biennial of European contemporary art and the fourth Berlin Biennale, and at Artists Space in New York. In 2013 she began showing with Andrew Kreps Gallery in New York; her work sells primarily to contemporary-art institutions. She finances her films with commissions, prize money and her own funds.
Is this good or bad? “I’m always an optimist,” said Ms. Steyerl, whose even most critical works contain glimmers of hope. “In Danis Tanovic´s 2001 film, ‘No Man’s Land,’ two guys are sitting in a minefield. One says, if you’re a pessimist in these times, you think things are as bad as they could be. If you’re an optimist, you think things could still get much worse!” she said, bursting into laughter.
For all the accolades and recent ubiquity — or claims, in some circles, that she takes advantage of the very system she critiques — Ms. Steyerl is refreshingly humble. She is also inquisitive, punctual, quick to respond to emails, and married with a 12-year-old daughter. She was even uncomplainingly game for walking through mud in her trademark hot-pink sneakers to be photographed.
