Your Money|Leave the Bucket Lists to Those Ambitious Boomers. It’s Tee Time.
Leave the Bucket Lists to Those Ambitious Boomers. It’s Tee Time.
Before Art Lerner retired, he could not imagine how he would fill the days. He had few hobbies — come to think of it, only one: fishing. But at his firm’s urging, Mr. Lerner, a money manager, had already stayed on the job for three more years than he intended, and “I’d had enough,” he said.
Now, 14 years into retirement, Mr. Lerner, 75, looks back in amusement at his fretting.
He plays golf four mornings a week and goes fishing once or twice a month. In between, he watches television and putters around his house in Palm Beach Gardens, Fla., his full-time residence since he sold his Manhattan apartment and his weekend home in New Jersey.
For many baby boomers, retirement is neither a chance nor an excuse to take it easy. Rather, it’s an opportunity to take a class (or six). Then there’s mastering a language or an instrument, writing a novel, climbing a mountain, maybe starting a business.
But some are choosing to retire more in the manner of their parents than in the style of their striving peers. 
Heni Weisfogel, a mother of four who went to law school at age 40 and then became a high school teacher and administrator, reluctantly retired last year and moved from Highland Park, N.J., to Boca Raton, Fla.
“I wasn’t ready, but I had an hour commute to work each way, and I hated the winters,” Ms. Weisfogel, 72, said.
Once she did retire, snow started looking pretty good. That was before she discovered canasta.
Most of her friends, she said, achieved all they wanted in the business world and do not feel a need to achieve more now that they have left it. “They like the idea of playing golf every day and not having a timeline,” Ms. Weisfogel said.
Attitudes about retirement have changed markedly since the introduction of Social Security in 1935, said Ken Dychtwald, the founder and chief executive of Age Wave, a consultancy focused on issues related to the aging population.
“In retirement 1.0, you reached a place where you weren’t perceived to be quite as valuable as you used to be, and it was time to make way for younger people,” he said. “It wasn’t assumed you’d live much longer after you retired.
Not much was expected of retirees for a generation, and, perhaps more to the point, retirees did not expect much of themselves. Now, in what could be called retirement 3.0, “a highly educated, active group is looking at what might well be 25 years of leisure, and a lot of people are saying, ‘Sounds boring to me,’” Mr. Dychtwald said. “The upside is that many of them are finding fulfillment in trying new things. They’re looking to achieve more of their potential. Maybe they’re hoping they will be late bloomers.
David Demko, a semiretired clinical gerontologist in Orange Park, Fla., agreed. “People will judge each other for their choices,” he said. “It’s similar to the feminist movement, when stay-at-home mothers felt they were being looked down on by working mothers, and working mothers felt their priorities were being questioned by stay-at-home mothers.
A waste of time? Golf? Those are fighting words in some precincts.
Some may choose to give a wide berth to personal enrichment and self-improvement in retirement because they had their share of both at work. David Daubert, a former marketing manager at Procter & Gamble, went to several Dale Carnegie seminars during his career and took part in many skill-development and leadership seminars offered by P. &G.
When he retired 17 years ago, he wanted to play golf, travel with his wife, garden and play more golf. That’s exactly what he is doing.
Terry Walzman thought maybe he should learn Spanish when he retired six years ago and he and his wife began splitting their time between Edison, N.J., and Boynton Beach, Fla. So far, he has done nothing about it. That’s fine with him.
Mr. Lerner, the former money manager, speculated that if he had a wife, she might tell him to get out of the house and “take old-age classes,” he said, referring to the Osher Lifelong Learning Institute at Florida Atlantic University. “My friends who take courses told me to look in the catalog, but there wasn’t one subject that interested me.
