When Ben Toth, a freelance composer, finally decided to settle down in New York after a decade of bouncing between coasts, he and his girlfriend, Sarah Taylor Ellis, had one major — and majorly difficult — requirement: They wanted a home in the city that didn’t feel like it was in the city.
“We like shorter buildings and sky,” said Ms. Ellis, who teaches composition at the Nightingale-Bamford School on the Upper East Side.
When the two started dating in 2013, they both had apartments in Ditmas Park, a Brooklyn neighborhood that met their bucolic requirements. But while they conducted their courtship at Mimi’s Hummus on Cortelyou Road and loved the area’s spacious Victorians, they found the neighborhood too un-urban in one respect: the dearth of train lines. When repair work shut down the Q, it made the neighborhood feel like a small town in the middle of nowhere — and not in a good way.
Googling around for other options, Ms. Ellis found an old New York Times article about Kew Gardens, Queens. “This feels right for us,” she told Mr. Toth. A visit confirmed as much: They loved the Tudor houses, the retail strip that felt like a quaint main street and the presence of not only several subway lines, but a Long Island Rail Road station.
Even more appealing was the rental they found there: a house dating to the 1920s.
A doctor’s office takes up part of the first floor, but the couple have the rest of the house, which includes two bedrooms, two bathrooms, a working fireplace, a driveway, the front yard, the attic and the basement. They moved in two and a half years ago and currently pay $2,700 a month.
“To be able to have a house in New York, it’s so unique,” Mr. Toth said.
“And we’re musicians, so it’s not like we’re making tons of money,” Ms. Ellis added.
They share the space with their Persian cat, E.L. Doctorow, an Egyptian stray they adopted from the North Shore Animal League. Large canvases printed with photos of E.L. line the staircase, while books by the cat’s namesake are displayed prominently beneath the stained-glass window on the landing.
“Before, I had the keyboard, but there was no sense of home until I had a piano,” Mr. Toth said.
Other benefits of living in a single-family house include having so much storage that Mr. Toth was able to convert a large, windowed closet off the dining room into an at-home gym with a treadmill. There is also a washer and dryer, window seats with built-in storage and an eat-in kitchen where he roasts his own coffee beans, which he buys in bulk from a vendor in Red Hook.
Since they moved in, he has been so loath to leave home that he decided to stop working as a touring music director. With the encouragement of their real estate agent, he got his license and now works as an agent for Voro, in addition to composing, and he has funneled some of his commissions into producing. The first project for which he will be credited as a producer is a musical version of “Emma,” written by Ms. Ellis, with book and lyrics by the playwright Meghan Brown, being workshopped in London this spring.
One of the few downsides of their living situation is having to pay a gardener several hundred dollars a month to take care of the lawn and shrubberies. Also, there aren’t many good public transit options between Kew Gardens and Ditmas Park, which makes it hard to get together with friends in their old neighborhood.
Their regular dinners at Mimi’s Hummus were another casualty of the move, but when they were married in the house in February, they were able to persuade Mimi Kitani, the restaurant’s founder, to come to them. She cooked for the newlyweds and their two guests in the home’s kitchen.
They love the house so much, they said, that in their most recent lease, Mr. Toth negotiated an additional clause: a right of first refusal should the owners ever want to sell.