Thomas Chatterton Williams wrote about the filmmaker and his new Netflix series, based on his first feature film.
I loved this profile of Spike Lee, who is truly one of the great artists of our time and completely underrated. I hope his point about the importance of Hollywood gatekeepers — and perhaps gatekeepers in all industries that are critical to defining culture — doesn’t get lost.
Unfortunately, I feel that the title of this piece is not true: Our culture has not caught up to Spike Lee. The conversations we have about being “woke” are shallow ones; we are as segregated by class and race as a nation as we have ever been. There have been some victories, but as the writer notes, “Do the Right Thing” (like “She’s Gotta Have It”) feels as timely now as it did when it was made. I do think, however, that Spike Lee is a model of the importance of black artists — and artists, period — persevering in a strategic way to protect their vision over time so that it remains theirs and, hopefully, timeless.
Though Lee is a Brooklyn icon, and I can think of no other filmmaker who so thoroughly captures the black American experience, he is never given credit for his art that transcends these categories. One of Lee’s greatest works is “25th Hour”; however, because the film doesn’t neatly fit into the convenient Spike Lee mold (it’s not a film about race), it is often ignored. Give Lee his due, and treat him like the great filmmaker — no additional adjective needed — that he is. Earl DePass, Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y.
Seth Freed Wessler wrote about the United States Coast Guard’s detainment of low-level smugglers.
This story should make every American cringe. These extrajudicial prison boats are slave ships, with inmates shackled to the floor, defecating in buckets and subsisting on rations more suited for animals than humans. It amazes me how cavalierly those who promote this travesty pick and choose legal precepts solely for their benefit, creating an inhumane and comically unjust situation.
While I’m fine with the Coast Guard interdicting drugs (though such efforts do nothing to affect drug availability or use), I have a huge problem with it rounding up the lowest of the low-level traffickers, detaining them inhumanely for months and sentencing them to a decade in United States prisons on the backs of United States taxpayers.
What is this accomplishing? Clearly not deterrence, as evidenced by the article itself. Clearly not reduction in drug availability or use, as evidenced by troves of data. Clearly not remediation of those caught, as they’re more likely to come out of jail as hardened or career criminals than anything else. Clearly not improvements in the Central American countries from which the imprisoned come.
We’re funding drug-interdiction efforts that, beyond capturing drop-in-the-bucket amounts of drugs, primarily cause human rights abuses and add to our ineffective, corrupt prison-industrial complex. How is this even remotely O.K.? Ryan Hickey, Missoula, Mont.
Before reading this article, I thought that Donald Trump was the only senior member of the executive branch ignorant of the legal documents that govern our nation. But it is clear that the White House chief of staff, John Kelly, needs to read the Constitution of the United States.
Kelly’s advocacy for and approval of a program interdicting individuals in international waters represents a most interesting concept. How can you go detain somebody if they haven’t violated the law? Prosecuting them without proving the drugs they carried were bound for the United States is in clear violation of Fifth Amendment due-process protections, as found by the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals.
