LONDON — At a time of a sharpening global focus on cases of sexual abuse dating back decades, an authoritative and highly critical report accused the Church of England on Friday of failing to respect “the rights of both sides” in investigating allegations made long after his death against one of its most revered bishops.
The case, involving Bishop George Bell and accusations that he abused a young girl in the 1940s and 1950s, raised tangled questions about the rights and reputations of people who have died and are thus unable to defend themselves against abuse charges. Mr. Bell died in 1958, but the accusations were not made until 1995.
In 2015, the Church of England issued a formal apology and paid compensation of 16,800 pounds — around $22,000 at today’s exchange rates — to a woman in her 70s, identified only by a pseudonym, Carol, who had accused Mr. Bell of serial abuse over four years, beginning when she was five. The abuse was said to have happened in the palace Mr. Bell inhabited as the bishop of Chichester.
In 2016, the Church of England asked Lord Carlile, a lawyer and former adviser to the government on terrorism legislation, to review the case. He sent his 74-page report to the church two months ago but it was not made public until Friday.
In the case he was asked to review, he said, the available evidence did not suggest there would have been “a realistic prospect of conviction” in court, the standard that prosecutors in England and Wales use in deciding whether to pursue a case.
According to the accusations made against him, Mr. Bell took the young Carol to secluded parts of the palace, and had her sit on his lap. He performed acts that he told her showed that she had been “chosen by God as a special child but that I must not tell anyone or God would be angry,” she said in an email sent in 1995 to one of Mr. Bell’s successors as bishop of Chichester.
Mr. Carlile’s report was published on the same day a panel in Australia uncovered what it described as an epidemic of child sexual abuse going back decades, with tens of thousands of cases of in schools, religious organizations and other institutions.
This case, however, also reflects a particular British reckoning with past sexual abuse. The country has been grappling with evidence of widespread malfeasance in past decades since 2012, when Jimmy Savile, a television personality who had died the previous year, was revealed to have been a serial sexual predator. A subsequent police investigation, Operation Yewtree, questioned many entertainers and other prominent people, and secured several convictions.