A Colorado baker’s refusal to make a wedding cake for a same-sex couple has led to showdown at the Supreme Court.CreditCredit...Nick Cote for The New York Times. Technology by Samsung.
WASHINGTON — The Supreme Court entered the latest battleground in the culture wars on Tuesday, hearing arguments in a hard-fought clash between gay rights and claims of religious freedom that was a sort of sequel to the court’s 2015 decision establishing a constitutional right to same-sex marriage.
The new case involves the refusal of a Colorado baker, Jack Phillips, to make a wedding cake for a gay couple, and it had some justices worried that a ruling in his favor would undermine the 2015 decision’s promise of equality. But other justices said that a tolerant society must leave room for good-faith dissent based on religious principles.
Justice Anthony M. Kennedy, who almost certainly holds the crucial vote in the case, said both things.
He asked whether a baker could put a sign in his window saying, “We do not bake cakes for gay weddings.” A lawyer for the Trump administration, which supports Mr. Phillips, said yes, so long as the cakes were custom made.
Justice Kennedy looked troubled. “You would not think that an affront to the gay community?” he asked.
The case arose from a brief encounter in 2012, when David Mullins and Charlie Craig visited Mr. Phillips’s bakery, Masterpiece Cakeshop, in Lakewood, Colo. The couple were going to be married in Massachusetts, and they were looking for a wedding cake for a reception in Colorado.
Mr. Phillips turned them down, saying he would not use his talents to convey a message of support for same-sex marriage as that would clash with his religious faith. The couple say they were humiliated by Mr. Phillips’s refusal to serve them, and they filed a complaint with Colorado’s civil rights commission.
Kristen K. Waggoner, a lawyer for Mr. Phillips, said the state should not be able to force him to endorse same-sex marriage in violation of his religious principles. But she took a different position about whether a baker could refuse to create a cake for an interracial marriage.
Solicitor General Noel J. Francisco, the Trump administration lawyer, also said that it would be harder to justify discrimination against interracial couples than gay ones. “Race is particularly unique,” Mr. Francisco said.
But Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. said the court’s 2015 decision had anticipated good-faith disagreements over gay unions.
The remark was a sign of Justice Kennedy’s central role in the new case, Masterpiece Cakeshop v. Colorado Civil Rights Commission, No. 16-111. He is at once the court’s most prominent defender of gay rights and its most committed supporter of free speech.
At Tuesday’s argument, he said a broad ruling for Mr. Phillips could undermine the decision by allowing all sorts of artists, artisans and professionals to refuse to provide goods and services for same-sex weddings.
Frederick R. Yarger, a lawyer for the commission, said he disavowed the commissioner’s comment, but Justice Kennedy did not appear satisfied.
The practical implications of Justice Kennedy’s concerns were unclear. They left open the possibility, for instance, that the Supreme Court could return the case to the commission for a rehearing before an unbiased panel. That prospect seemed to intrigue Chief Justice Roberts.
Tuesday’s argument, which lasted almost 90 minutes instead of the usual hour, appeared to divide the justices along the usual ideological lines.
The more liberal justices questioned whether all sorts of people — tailors, hair stylists, makeup artists, chefs, architects — could refuse to supply goods and services for same-sex weddings. Conservative justices considered whether artists can be required to convey messages with which they profoundly disagree.
Justice Sonia Sotomayor also seemed unpersuaded. “When have we ever given protection to a food?” she asked.
Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr. said there was an odd feature to the Colorado case. When Mr. Phillips turned down the couple, Justice Alito said, same-sex marriage was not yet legal in the state. “So if Craig and Mullins had gone to a state office and said we want a marriage license, they would not have been accommodated,” Justice Alito said.
That position puzzled Justice Kennedy. “Didn’t he express himself when he made it?” Justice Kennedy asked.
Toward the end of the argument, Justice Kennedy appeared to reject an argument from Mr. Cole, the couple’s lawyer, that Mr. Phillips had discriminated against the couple based on their identity as gay men.

“I think your identity thing is just too facile,” Justice Kennedy said.