Mr. Simmons, a powerful gatekeeper in the entertainment and media worlds, damaged careers and self-confidence with his pattern of sexual assault and harassment, the women say.
In 1995, Drew Dixon was working her dream job as an executive at Def Jam Recordings, helping to oversee a chart-topping album and a ubiquitous single by Method Man and Mary J. Blige. But as her star rose, Ms. Dixon, then 24, was spiraling into depression, she said, because of prolonged and aggressive sexual harassment by her direct supervisor, Russell Simmons, the rap mogul and co-founder of the label.
On work calls, he would talk graphically about how she aroused him. At a staff meeting, he asked her to sit on his lap.  Late that year, Mr. Simmons raped her in his downtown Manhattan apartment, Ms. Dixon said. She quit Def Jam soon after.
“I was broken,” she said.
In recent interviews, four women spoke on the record about a pattern of violent sexual behavior by Mr. Simmons, disclosing incidents from 1988 to 2014. Three of the women say that he raped them.
In each case, numerous friends and associates said they were told of the incidents at the time. The women said they were inspired to come forward in the aftermath of the accusations against Harvey Weinstein, as victims’ stories have been newly elevated and more often believed.
Last month, Mr. Simmons — a forefather of hip-hop who went on to great success in fashion, media and more — apologized for being “thoughtless and insensitive” and announced he was stepping down from his companies after the screenwriter Jenny Lumet became the second woman to publicly accuse him of sexual assault at the time.
“I have re-dedicated myself to spiritual learning, healing and working on behalf of the communities to which I have devoted my life,” he said in his statement on Wednesday. “I have accepted that I can and should get dirt on my sleeves if it means witnessing the birth of a new consciousness about women.
The most powerful men and companies in popular music have thus far gone largely unscathed in the national reckoning over sexual abuse. A major reason: Sex and debauchery are built into the music industry, where the boundaries between work and play blur in late nights at clubs and studios, and many women have scant power or incentive to complain about being mistreated.
These women still face powerful industry gatekeepers like Mr. Simmons, whose pedigree and ability to make or break careers allowed his abusive behavior to go unchallenged for decades, his accusers contend. “Russell was like the king of hip-hop,” Ms. Dixon said.
Black women, especially, felt powerless against Mr. Simmons and his cohort in the small world of urban music, with several saying that misconduct against them could go unchecked because their place in the industry was so tenuous. They feared being ostracized, or worse.
Three of the women now accusing Mr. Simmons were pursuing careers in the music industry that they said were disrupted or derailed in part by their experiences with him.
First known as a hyperactive party promoter turned manager from Queens who helped boost Run-DMC, Mr. Simmons was among the first to view hip-hop as a big business and cultural force. In 1983, with the producer Rick Rubin, he made Def Jam the defining rap label of its era, with hits by the Beastie Boys, LL Cool J and Public Enemy.
Even after Mr. Simmons sold his remaining stake in Def Jam for a reported $100 million in 1999, he served as an ambassador for hip-hop through comedy (“Def Comedy Jam”), clothing (Phat Farm) and activism. Today, his company Rush Communications oversees an array of businesses and nonprofits.
In 1987, Toni Sallie, a music journalist for the trade magazine Black Radio Exclusive, met Mr. Simmons while on assignment. She found him to be a charming, if gruff, playboy. They ended up going on a few dates before Ms. Sallie, then 28, decided they were not a match.
Toni Sallie, a music journalist, in the late 1980s. She first met Mr. Simmons while on assignment in 1987.
The media mogul Russell Simmons is accused of raping three women. Our culture reporter Melena Ryzik talks about The New York Times’s investigation into Mr. Simmons and the significance of women of color speaking out about alleged predatory behavior.
Russell Simmons is an entertainment mogul. He started out in music. He was one of the forces behind Def Jam records, helping to bring hip-hop to the mainstream in the ’90s, and now he is being accused by four women of sexual misconduct. Three of the women say that he raped them. His alleged misconduct continued to have an impact on the lives of these women. Even decades later, it upended their professional lives in some ways. It certainly had an impact on their personal lives. This is stuff that may have happened decades ago. And yet they are still living with the consequences today. All of these stories that we have heard now in the few months since the Weinstein allegations came out, they mostly focused on the stories of white women, white men. The impact of this stuff on people of color has — is sort of just coming to light. And I think the women in our story felt that they would have a harder time coming forward, that their place in this industry may have been more tenuous. And so their allegations might have a harder time being believed, or that’s how they felt anyway. The intimidation for them was very real. These stories are not easy to talk about. They’re painful. It’s very common for these interviews to involve tears. But in the end, they know the women decided that they were ready to come forward on the record. Russell has denied the allegations of rape. He has said there was no non-consensual sex, that all of his relations were consensual. He did acknowledge other misconduct. He said there was inappropriate behavior with one of his employees at Def Jam records. And last month, he stepped down from his companies and apologized for any behavior that he said was inappropriate. I think the #MeToo Movement has really touched on a lot of industries — certainly film TV, media, classical music, the art world. But these stories about Russell Simmons are some of the first that have taken hold in pop music and hip-hop. And if the experience that we’ve had before is any guide, it may be that the floodgates will now open for that genre.
But the two remained cordial, Ms. Sallie said, and in the fall of 1988, Mr. Simmons invited her to his Manhattan apartment for a party he said he was hosting for his girlfriend. When Ms. Sallie arrived, the place was empty except for Mr. Simmons, she recalled. Saying he wanted to show her the apartment, Mr. Simmons led her to his bedroom.
“He pushed me on the bed and jumped on top of me, and physically attacked me,” she said. “We were fighting. I said no.” He raped her, she said. Two friends, Sheila Brody and Arlene Hirschkowitz, and a colleague confirmed that Ms. Sallie told them about the assault around the time it happened.
Through his lawyer, Brad D. Rose, Mr. Simmons acknowledged that he dated Ms. Sallie but denied any nonconsensual sex.
Following the reports of alleged misconduct by Mr. Simmons in November, Ms. Sallie said she contacted the Manhattan district attorney’s office to accuse him.
A law enforcement official confirmed that a woman contacted the district attorney’s office to report an incident from 1988 and added that a different anonymous woman had recently reported an incident from 1991. The official said the incidents had occurred so long ago that the statute of limitations had lapsed and the crimes had not been prosecuted. There are no details about the woman from the 1991 incident.
But the official said the women had been referred to the New York Police Department’s Special Victims squad so that there would be a record of their complaints if more recent allegations were to emerge.
Ms. Baker, the singer, thought Mr. Simmons could elevate her career as her new manager. She had performed as a backup vocalist for Madonna and Bruce Springsteen, and, as Tina B, released pop and dance records in the 1980s.
One night in late 1990 or early 1991, she ran into Mr. Simmons at a club, and he invited her back to his apartment to discuss her career. “I didn’t think anything of going,” Ms. Baker said, having been there many times without incident.
She cried the whole way home, she said. In interviews and email, her ex-husband, Arthur Baker, a music producer; her psychologist, Dr. Robin Goldberg; another therapist; and a former roommate all confirmed that she told them she was raped.
After the assault, Ms. Baker remained tethered to Mr. Simmons professionally, she said. She returned to his apartment for a meeting; Mr. Simmons liked to conduct business while working out in his penthouse. But as soon as he stopped exercising, she said, he pulled out his penis and moved toward her. She fled.
The cover of “January February,” a dance track Ms. Baker released under the name Tina B in the mid-80s.
Amid strife with her label, she tried to extricate herself from her contract with Mr. Simmons, she said, but he ignored her. Her music — two years’ worth of songwriting and recording — languished. “I went into a deep depression,” she said, and her recording career foundered.
Mr. Simmons said he “did everything he could to professionally promote her career” while Ms. Baker was signed to a label, and then stopped representing her, according to his lawyer.
Drew Dixon left Stanford University in 1992 to join the hip-hop revolution.
After about two years on the fringes of the business, Ms. Dixon — whose mother, Sharon Pratt, was mayor of Washington, D.C., from 1991 until 1995 — had a professional breakthrough: Russell Simmons, whom she had met through friends, was looking for a new A&R executive at Def Jam to scout talent and coordinate hit records.
She said he was a decadent figure, complete with a Rolls-Royce — the “living, breathing personification of hip-hop and glamour mixed up” — and his sexual advances started right away and became relentless. At a restaurant, Mr. Simmons pushed Ms. Dixon into a broom closet, she said, and tried to kiss her. At work, he would close the door to her office and expose himself, leading her to give a copy of her key to a male co-worker.
“I was like: ‘If I ever buzz you, don’t pick up, don’t call me back — just open my door. 
Through his lawyer, Mr. Simmons acknowledged that he engaged in “inappropriate conduct” with Ms. Dixon while she worked at Def Jam.
At the same time, Ms. Dixon knew Mr. Simmons valued her expertise. She had an ear for emerging talent, even bringing a rising Notorious B.I.G. to the office.
“I didn’t want to cut off my one conduit to having any hope of a career,” she said. “I thought if I could survive long enough to have a hit — a real bona fide hit with my name on it — I would move categories,” from sexual object to respected colleague.
In 1995, Ms. Dixon thought she had found her lifeline. Her first major project — a soundtrack for the music documentary “The Show,” featuring Tupac and A Tribe Called Quest — went platinum. She and Mr. Simmons were listed as executive producers.
Ms. Dixon when she was an executive at Arista.
One night, as she left the Bowery Bar near Mr. Simmons’s apartment to get cab money from an A.T.M., she ran into him. “You have the No. 1 record in the country; I’ll order you a car,” she recalled him saying.
Denise Gayle, a friend who was then staying with Ms. Dixon, recalled her coming home in a daze. “She pretty much told me right away that he had sexually assaulted her, that she had told him no, cried and that he didn’t seem to be interested in stopping,” Ms. Gayle said. “She mentally deteriorated instantly.” Three others confirmed that Ms. Dixon told them about the assault and harassment around that time.
Mr. Simmons “emphatically states that he did not have sex with her,” his lawyer said.
Soon after, Ms. Dixon said she composed her resignation letter to Def Jam by hand, humiliated and in a panic, crossing out her mistakes rather than starting again. “I was going to give up,” she said.
But even at Arista, the long shadow of Def Jam remained, partly over a dispute about what she said were unpaid business expenses. Ms. Dixon hired a lawyer and threatened to sue Mr. Simmons for sexual harassment, as well as outstanding bills from the label. In 1997, the parties settled out of court. Mr. Rose, Mr. Simmons’s lawyer, confirmed the settlement.
A list of men who have resigned, been fired or otherwise lost power since the Harvey Weinstein scandal broke.
Ms. Dixon hoped to move on with her career at Arista. But in 2000, L.A. Reid replaced Mr. Davis atop the label. Mr. Reid began sexualizing her, Ms. Dixon said, and would turn cold when she denied his unwanted overtures.
Ms. Dixon said she tried to parry his come-ons as best she could without offending him. But when she openly defied his demands — declining his invitation to meet him late at night at his hotel; wearing jeans when he insisted on skirts — she worried that her artists would receive short shrift.
“It was a quid pro quo: ‘I have power, you want access, sleep with me — or I’m going to be really mean to you the next day. And there will be consequences,’” she said.
Post-Def Jam, Mr. Simmons rebranded his image from high-rolling modelizer, partying with Donald Trump and Naomi Campbell, to “Uncle Rush,” a spiritual yogi and elder statesman. He released books like “Success Through Stillness” and “The Happy Vegan,” while focusing on philanthropy and political advocacy.
Ms. Dixon said that years after her experience with Mr. Simmons at Def Jam, he apologized to her at an industry event. “He said, ‘I have daughters and I do yoga now, Drew, and I know what I did was wrong, and I’m sorry,’” Ms. Dixon said.
Yet this Mr. Simmons is not the one that Christina Moore said she encountered in Miami at Art Basel in 2014. Ms. Moore, who was 26 at the time, and a friend bumped into Mr. Simmons in the elevator of Soho Beach House.
The women were meeting friends at a bar there, but were lost, Ms. Moore said. Mr. Simmons suggested he knew where to go. Ms. Moore and her friend followed him; he led them to his room. “I felt duped,” she said.
Immediately, Mr. Simmons began to run a bath, Ms. Moore said, and then pushed her up against a column in the room — “hands all over my body, up and down,” she said. “I felt assaulted.” He told Ms. Moore that she was a bad girl and threatened to tie her up, she said. Ms. Moore and her friend bolted.
Mr. Simmons recalled meeting Ms. Moore and her friend. He said the women followed him to his room of their own accord and asked him about getting into parties. His lawyer said running the bath was Mr. Simmons’s “signal to Ms. Moore and her friend to leave.” He denied any misconduct.
The whole interaction lasted about five minutes, Ms. Moore said, but it stayed with her. “I felt a lot of shame and guilt at ending up in that situation,” she said.
When reports of Mr. Simmons’s alleged sexual misconduct began circulating, Ms. Moore grew more alarmed and decided to come forward. “I would hate to think what would have happened if I were alone,” she said.
Ms. Baker, too, spent years feeling guilt over how she handled the situation with Mr. Simmons. After the Weinstein revelations, “I started to get very agitated and emotional,” Ms. Baker said, scanning for mentions of misconduct by Mr. Simmons. She concluded that she had a “moral duty” to tell her story.
The professional price Ms. Dixon paid was steep, she said. She cannot listen to the taste-shifting music she helped create; it’s too emotionally taxing. Her promising career was curtailed, her ear for talent wasted.
