It was Monday evening when the cellphone of Heather Stewart, a liberal activist in New York, buzzed with a text message from the new executive director of the state Democratic Party, Geoff Berman.
The “I.D.C. news” was the sudden deal proposed by four influential players in New York Democratic politics to reunite the long-warring factions of the party in Albany that have divided it for years and left Republicans, while still a minority, in charge of the State Senate.
In his voice mail, Ms. Stewart said that Mr. Berman predicted that she would be “happy” with the developments — especially because they came just days before a Democratic rally they were planning together to protest President Trump in Midtown Manhattan, starring Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo.
But as Ms. Stewart read the fine print of the proposed agreement — including delaying unification for months — she was anything but happy. “This feels really duplicitous,” she said.
Three dozen grass-roots groups would denounce the terms, even as both the mainline Senate Democrats and the breakaway group known as the Independence Democratic Conference, or I.D.C., agreed to it.
And the rally, intended to be a symbol of New York Democratic unity in the face of a Republican-led federal government, was moved across town to be outside Mr. Trump’s Cipriani fund-raiser. The governor’s office declined until late Friday to confirm that Mr. Cuomo would not attend, even though he had sent the original invitation to party activists.
What had begun so promisingly on Monday as the first real breakthrough in years had quickly given voice to the familiar bickering and backbiting that has come to define dysfunctional Democratic politics in the state.
The governor — a deal-making centrist, proud of his pragmatism — said that it was impossible to please all the people, all the time.
Some of the activists on the left seem intent on punishing the I.D.C. members for their nearly seven-year relationship with the Republicans and want nothing short of complete surrender, highly unlikely while they still hold the keys to the majority.
Phone banking against I.D.C. candidates has also continued this week, as volunteers text and call potential primary voters in their districts, urging them to reject so-called Trump Democrats.
The dissatisfaction stems from a variety of concerns, including the lack of enforcement mechanisms for making good on the promises of unity; the planned timing of the unification, after the all-important budget season in March, allowing Senate Republicans to hold power during that period; and the fact that the I.D.C. had promised to return to the fold before, in 2014.
That time around, the Democrats suffered humiliating losses in the general election, and the I.D.C. returned to working with the G.O.P. And that makes die-hard liberals very wary.
“Talk about déjà vu,” said Zephyr Teachout, who mounted a surprisingly strong Democratic primary challenge to Mr. Cuomo in 2014. “There’s a number of questions here, including whether you should believe it at all.” Ms. Teachout seemed particularly vexed by the idea that Mr. Cuomo wouldn’t call special elections for two soon-to-be empty seats — in usually Democratic districts — until after the budget, leaving the party short-handed.
Mr. Cuomo has not said exactly when special elections will occur, but the letter which sketched out the deal on Monday said it anticipated “a post-budget special election to fill those seats.” The letter was signed by Representative Joseph Crowley, the highest-ranking New York Democrat in the House; Byron Brown, the state party chairman; Christine C. Quinn, the party vice chairwoman; and Héctor J. Figueroa, president of 32BJ Service Employees International Union.
The plans they detailed for the 23-member Senate Democratic Conference and the eight-member Independent Democratic Conference to unify were the most concrete of the yearslong stalemate.
Two other I.D.C. members — Senators David Valesky, of the Syracuse area, and Jesse Hamilton of Brooklyn — may also be facing primary fights.
There is also the small issue that even if a real deal were to materialize, the Democrats are still short the 32 votes they need to lead the 63-seat chamber. That’s because another Democrat, Senator Simcha Felder of Brooklyn, has been siding with Republicans since 2012, and hasn’t committed to returning to the fold.
Republicans in the Senate — faced with the prospect of losing their sole foothold of power in a deep blue New York — have also suggested that even without Mr. Felder, they could still hold power through 2018 thanks to the rules of Senate, which prevent changes in leadership without a 38-seat majority.
For their part, Senate Democrats said that they will not mount any primaries against the I.D.C. if the deal holds, and that they hope to take a leadership role before the 2018 session concludes in June.
“We have always said we wanted Democrats to work together and that must be accomplished during this legislative session,” said Mike Murphy, a spokesman for Senator Andrea Stewart-Cousins, the leader of the mainline Democratic coalition.
On Friday, the governor’s office was also defending the potential deal, including from an attack this week from Mayor Bill de Blasio, who called such negotiations “a charade.” Aides pointed out the agreement outlined by Mr. Brown also was signed by liberal stalwarts like Mr. Figueroa, whose union is a major supporter of the Working Families Party, whose own state director had questioned its timing.
Mr. Cuomo has also argued that primary fights would be counterproductive in a year in which Democrats have high hopes both in the state and nationwide, and are facing major conservative challenges to policies like reproductive rights and health care.
Ms. Stewart said that as late as Sunday she had been in discussions with Mr. Berman about what Mr. Cuomo would say at the rally.
By the end of the week, liberal activists were busy making plans for another demonstration outside a different Cipriani location: protesting a fund-raiser featuring former President Bill Clinton to be held for Mr. Cuomo this month.