For nearly half a century, the reputed wise guy Vincent Asaro has escaped conviction on an array of criminal charges, having been accused — and then acquitted — of, among other things, strangling a man with a dog chain and taking part in the infamous Lufthansa heist in 1978.
On Thursday, however, at age 82, Mr. Asaro was sentenced to eight years in prison for what may be the pettiest allegation he has ever faced: ordering his underlings to set fire to the car of a motorist who cut him off in traffic in Queens.
The sentencing, in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, was almost certainly the final chapter in what the government has slyly described as Mr. Asaro’s “literal life of crime.” Since the 1960s, prosecutors say, Mr. Asaro has held various positions in the Bonanno crime family, and though he is alleged to have engaged not just in murder, but also in bookmaking, loan-sharking, extortion and robbing delivery trucks, he has largely managed to avoid being punished.
That, of course, changed when Judge Allyne R. Ross handed down his sentence on Thursday, telling the court that in deciding on the eight-year term, she had given weight to the very crimes that Mr. Asaro was acquitted of at the Lufthansa trial two years ago. Judge Ross herself presided at the trial and noted that, despite the jury’s verdict, she was “firmly convinced” that the government had proved its case.
Minutes earlier Mr. Asaro’s lawyer, Elizabeth Macedonio, had asked Judge Ross not to consider the acquitted conduct in rendering a sentence, saying it would “turn the American justice system on its head,” if her client received a lengthy prison term because of charges that a jury had decided were less than verifiable. In court papers filed this month, Ms. Macedonio wrote that the arson case, which was filed in March, smacked of “vengeful blindness” by the same prosecutors who had failed to convict Mr. Asaro in 2015.
The arson — and the episode of road rage that preceded it — occurred in April 2012 when Mr. Asaro was 77.
In trying to secure a lesser sentence, Ms. Macedonio told Judge Ross that Mr. Asaro’s health was in shambles. In late October, she said, he was hospitalized for cardiac testing and ever since has been on what she described in a sentencing memo as a “stroke alert.” Appearing in court with a stack of medical records eight inches high, Ms. Macedonio added that Mr. Asaro had hypertension and hepatitis C. He also had heart surgery four years ago.
Judge Ross acknowledged that Mr. Asaro was not the man he used to be — but only in terms of his physical condition. His involvement in the arson, she said, suggested that he still had the same “explosive temper” and “desire to carry out revenge” that he had displayed in a criminal career that reached back to the years of Richard Nixon.
It was in 1969, she said, that Mr. Asaro and a partner, the Irish mobster Jimmy Burke, murdered Paul Katz, a truck driver who worked with them and who was thought to be an informant. After killing Mr. Katz, the government says, the two men buried his body beneath the floor in the basement of a house in Queens.
It was obvious that Mr. Asaro’s loved ones, sitting in the front row of the courtroom, were deeply disturbed by Judge Ross’s seeming nullification of the Lufthansa jury’s verdict. One of them got up in the middle of the hearing and stormed from the room muttering “This is ridiculous” beneath her breath.
As for Mr. Asaro, he remained stoic through the proceeding.
