As the founder of Mama Glow, a wellness resource for both expecting and new mothers, Latham Thomas has made a career out of teaching self-care to women all over the world. Sunday is when she practices what she preaches. “I want to be with my son and fiancé and show myself some love,” she said. Ms. Thomas, 37, lives in Chelsea with Thomas Rasmussen, 55, who works in finance, and her 14-year-old son, Fulano Librizzi, who is a D.J.
NO RUSH I hang out in bed until 8. It’s great to not have to get up right away and rush out of the house for work. Thomas also stays in bed, and we lie together and chat. Fulano usually spends Saturday nights with his dad and doesn’t come home until late Sunday afternoon.
As part of her beauty routine, Ms. Thomas applies two facial masks and takes a bath with salts and flower petals.
PRETTY IN PINK I have the time today for a more leisurely beauty routine. I’ll exfoliate and use two different masks- one to moisturize and one to give my skin a glow. While my masks are on, I take a really hot bath with bath salts which turn the water pink. I often have fresh flowers at home and will even throw petals into the water.
SUSTENANCE I’ll make breakfast. Usually, it’s some sort of smoothie with coconut water, açaí berries, chia seeds, a vanilla protein powder and some granola. If we’re not having a smoothie, it’s a hot cereal like quinoa porridge with almond milk.
FITNESS COMPROMISE Thomas is a gym rat, and I’m more of a yoga girl, but because we want to spend time together on Sunday mornings, we’ve found an exercise compromise and will head out for a run along the West Side Highway. You get great views of the water, and it’s refreshing to be outdoors.
ME TIME With our workouts done, we usually go our separate ways for a few hours. I get a massage at Soho House. My therapist is this woman named Emma, and I’ve been going to her for four years. She’s a master at getting rid of all my muscle tension.
NACHOS WITH THE LADIES I have a great group of girlfriends, but I don’t get to see them often because we all work so much. I like to spend quality time with at least one of them over brunch. Sometimes, there are a few of us. I am obsessed with this tiny vegan Mexican place on East Broadway called JaJaJa. They have the best nachos, which are great for sharing. Their frozen margaritas are killer, and I also get the pupusas, these corn tortillas stuffed with beans and serranos.
RETAIL THERAPY The beauty of living in New York is that there are so many little boutiques selling things you can’t find anywhere else. I’ll go to different neighborhoods to check out these stores. Williamsburg is one of my favorite areas. There’s a store I always go to there called Species by the Thousands. It sells candles, crystals and bohemian-style jewelry.
CENTERING I pop into this meditation center, MNDFL, for a class. There are three locations, and I go to the one I am closest to, which is inevitably in Williamsburg or the Village. Meditation gives me peace of mind and helps ground me for the long week to come.
TONIC Before heading back to my apartment to see Thomas and Fulano, I stop at the End Brooklyn, this cafe in Williamsburg that has these amazing tonics loaded with super foods. I get the Unicorn latte which has blue green algae, cold pressed lemon juice, cayenne and frothed coconut milk.
MUSICAL INTERLUDE Fulano plays guitar and is getting into songwriting, and once I’m back home, I settle into the couch and listen to him play and sing.
CHOP CHOP Somewhere around 7, Fulano and I will start getting dinner ready. Over the years, I’ve taught him some basic knife skills, and he’s a great chopper. He’s also into experimenting with recipes. I’m a strict vegan, and Thomas and Fulano are vegetarians, but we cook only vegan at home. It might be some type of grain-based salad like farro and kale or a lentil stew or casserole loaded with veggies.
DINNER, UNPLUGGED Thomas sets the table with napkins and all, and we sit down for a nice meal, where phones or any other technology is barred. It’s so nice because we really connect and talk about our plans for the week and tell jokes.
QUIET After dinner, I run a bath for Fulano. He takes one every night to help him relax. Then, I may curl up on the living room couch and read a book.