WASHINGTON — President Trump has broken with many of the norms set by his predecessors, but in few ways has this been clearer than his cheerleading about the roaring stock market.
He is the unapologetic First Bull.
He has crowed about the stock market at least once a week for the past two months. In two Twitter messages early Tuesday morning, the president cited a 5,000-point rise in the Dow Jones industrial average this year, and then said the market had more room to roar once the impact of tax legislation he is expected to sign this week becomes law.
Stocks and the economy have a long way to go after the Tax Cut Bill is totally understood and appreciated in scope and size. Immediate expensing will have a big impact. Biggest Tax Cuts and Reform EVER passed. Enjoy, and create many beautiful JOBS!
Other presidents have occasionally talked about market booms, but often avoided saying anything that could move markets, particularly on individual company stocks. More commonly, they have talked about unemployment numbers, housing starts and other indicators that are less sensitive to market forces.
Mr. Trump has ignored those conventions, with relish.
Even at a speech on national security on Monday, he took a detour to talk again about records being set in the markets. The market performance is now an almost standard part of any address he makes.
“I think that in some sense, he might be responsible for the show he is putting on for some of the increase in stock prices, but I don’t think it is rational,” said Robert J. Shiller, a Yale University economist and a 2013 Nobel laureate.
The peril for Mr. Trump is that market cycles invariably have downturns, too, sometimes significant ones, and claiming credit for the rise could also mean owning the fall.
Mr. Trump inherited a strong economy from President Barack Obama. The unemployment rate was 4.8 percent in January when Mr. Trump took office and the nation had a solid record of adding private-sector jobs.
Stock markets have been rising essentially since March 2009, when the global financial crisis was near its worst. The stock markets are now in the second-longest bull run in history, trailing only the rally that lasted from 1987 until 2000.
Wall Street and investors are emboldened by the tax cut proposal as well as Mr. Trump’s reversal of several major regulatory measures on environmental matters, financial services and the telecommunications industry. But analysts also attribute the robust market performance to strong corporate earnings.
Consumer confidence is also on the rise, which helps to add to an overall pro-market investment psychology.
That is a compelling statement — as long as the market climbs. But even the longest bull markets have eventually come to an end.
President Bill Clinton also benefited from a stock market surge in the late 1990s, but within the White House, there was concern about aligning too closely with the gains.
“We felt like jobs and wages were what we should focus on, as well as the deficit,” he said.
According to a CNN poll released on Tuesday, Mr. Trump’s overall approval rating was 35 percent.
