Ms. Garner had been placed in a medically induced coma last week after an asthma episode precipitated a major heart attack. She was being treated at Woodhull Medical and Mental Health Center in Brooklyn, and died there. No official cause of death has been given.
Ms. Garner became a central figure in the charged conversation about race and the use of force by the police after a New York Police Department officer placed her father into an unauthorized chokehold on Staten Island in 2014 while responding to complaints he was selling untaxed cigarettes.
As Mr. Garner, who also suffered from asthma, was being choked by the officer, Daniel Pantaleo, he repeated the words “I can’t breathe” 11 times — a phrase that became a rallying cry for the Black Lives Matter movement and other activists.
An autopsy by the city’s medical examiner ruled Mr. Garner’s death a homicide. No charges were brought against Officer Pantaleo.
Ms. Garner was initially apprehensive about becoming a face of the movement for police accountability, according to her website. But she became outspoken, organizing a “die-in” on the same corner where her father was placed in the chokehold, and accusing Mayor Bill de Blasio of not caring about African-Americans.
In an interview this month with Benjamin Dixon, the host of a progressive podcast and YouTube show, Ms. Garner described the frustrations and physical toll of her activism.
Ms. Garner had an 8-year-old daughter and a 4-month-old son, whom she named after her father.
DeRay Mckesson, a national voice for the Black Lives Matter movement, said in an interview on Saturday that Ms. Garner had inspired other activists.
“Erica took the truth with her everywhere she went, even if that truth made people uncomfortable,” he said, recalling her willingness to confront President Barack Obama and demand that he take a stand against racially charged policing tactics.
Civil rights activists and celebrities flooded social media with tributes to Ms. Garner.
Even as Ms. Garner pressed politicians and law enforcement officials to hold the police accountable for her father’s death, she was emphatic that her personal tragedy was also a public one.
In addition to her children and mother, she is also survived by two sisters, two brothers and her grandmother, Ms. Snipes said.