The Fingerling Monkey may be this year’s hottest toy, but its popularity is far from unparalleled. A new must-have toy seems to arrive every holiday season. Richard Gottlieb, the chief executive of Global Toy Experts and publisher of Global Toy News, discussed some of the Fingerling’s craze-making predecessors over the last generation.
Popular toys are often like comets across the sky, drawing attention quickly and fading just as fast. “A good fad is about eight months from explosion to collapse,” Mr. Gottlieb said. While few toys outlast the initial hype, the ones he listed have endured as cherished memories from childhood and helped shape play time expectations long after they left the shelves.
These pellet-stuffed animals, Mr. Gottlieb said, had an outsize cultural and financial impact. “It became an investment portfolio if you will,” he said.
He described how the company voluntarily limited supplies, leading to long lines of customers whenever a store got a fresh shipment. But the bubble quickly burst.
Although the dolls may have appealed to people’s humanity, they did not always bring out the best in shoppers.
Mr. Gottlieb said he still sees people riding these metal scooters to work today. Although they have had some staying power, they also represent the dangers of a product getting too popular, too quickly.
Since their release, Hasbro has kept the brand alive by expanding the Transformers universe. “It really created an entire category,” he said.
Some parents criticized Bratz for wearing clothes they viewed as sexualized, but Mr. Gottlieb said sex appeal was not the reason the dolls had staying power. Rather, they became so popular because America was becoming more diverse, and children wanted to play with a doll that looked more like they did.
“It started in what I like to call the schoolyard social network” in the United States. Several years after its start in video games in Japan, the Pokémon craze in America centered around groups of children who collected and traded the cards, and local merchants who catered to them, Mr. Gottlieb said.
“Teddy Ruxpin was kind of the first animatronic plush animal,” Mr. Gottlieb said. Although it was somewhat unreliable at first — about half of the early versions failed and were returned by customers — it broke the mold for how toys and technology could mix.
This fantasy-style card game had intricate rules and a huge number of possible paths to the final win-or-lose outcome, and helped bring a small gaming subculture into the mainstream. “It's a little bit of an outrider, but I included it because it was a real popularizer of the concept of the Dungeons and Dragons gameplay to a wider audience,” Mr. Gottlieb said.
Mr. Gottlieb said that the game genre grew in popularity thanks partly to “Magic.” The play format continues to attract people today.