1. No officials, no flag and no anthem.
The International Olympic Committee barred Russia from the 2018 Winter Games in South Korea over systematic doping, a punishment unprecedented in Olympic history.
Russian athletes can apply for permission to compete wearing a neutral uniform, but the record books will forever show that Russia won zero medals. Above, a fan waved a Russian flag at the 2014 Winter Games.
2. President Trump told Middle East leaders he would recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, a move that upends decades of U.S. policy, upsets peace efforts between Israel and the Palestinians and threatens to ignite unrest.
It is Mr. Trump’s riskiest decision in the realm of Middle East diplomacy, and Arab and European leaders had warned against it. For now, the U.S. Embassy will stay in Tel Aviv while logistics are worked out.
We talked to top experts and delved into our photo archives for this article about the history of Jerusalem, and why it’s such a flash point. Above, the Dome of the Rock at the Aqsa Mosque compound.
3. The justices of the Supreme Court heard arguments in the case of a Colorado baker who refused to make a wedding cake for a gay couple, above, Charlie Craig, left, and Dave Mullins.
The case pits claims of religious freedom against the fight for gay rights. Justice Anthony Kennedy almost certainly holds the crucial vote, and he sent some contradictory messages.
This 360 video takes you inside the bakery, called Masterpiece Cakeshop. “It’s more than just a cake, it’s a piece of art,” the baker told us.
4. Representative John Conyers Jr. of Michigan, who faces allegations that he sexually harassed former employees, announced his resignation.
The 88-year-old, who was the longest-serving current member of the House and the longest-serving African-American in history, called into a local radio show to deliver the news.
He endorsed his son, John Conyers III, to replace him. But another relative is also vying for his seat: Ian Conyers, a state senator and the grandson of Mr. Conyers’s brother.
5. Blue states will be the biggest losers under the Republican tax plan.
We crunched the numbers and found that people in Democratic counties who earn more than $200,000 a year are most likely to see their tax bills rise.
The New York area will be hit particularly hard. “The whole game has shifted,” said Cynthia Metcalf, a homeowner in a commuter town, above with her daughter.
And here is some of the best writing from the right and left on the bill.
6. The outdoor gear retailer Patagonia plans to sue over the president’s plan to reduce the size of two national monuments in Utah.
7. Two major wildfires roared through Southern California, forcing tens of thousands of people from their homes.
The first was in Ventura County and burned up 45,000 acres overnight. The second, in Los Angeles County, has burned about 4,000 acres. Both were fed by dry conditions and fierce winds that are expected to continue through the week.
8. Also in Los Angeles tonight: A sold-out live event with our reporters who broke the Harvey Weinstein story. We’ll live-stream it on nytimes.com at 10 p.m. Eastern.
Here’s their latest report: How Mr. Weinstein, above, used a network of enablers and spies to silence his accusers.
Across the country, women are debating how the reckoning in sexual harassment cases should work: Who’s the judge? Who’s the jury?
Read more about it in the latest installment of our new gender newsletter, The #MeToo Moment.
9. Finally, a little escapism: Here are five of our favorite travel stories from 2017.
From a Unesco Biosphere Reserve, above, to the Galápagos Islands to an icy Swiss valley, there are plenty of options to explore.
