Our critics Jon Pareles and Jon Caramanica share their picks for the best pop albums of the year, and Giovanni Russonello selects the best jazz albums.
Ms. Mitchell, a flutist, recorded a couple of outstanding albums this year (the other was “Liberation Narratives,” with the poet Haki Madhubuti). On this one, her eight-piece Black Earth Ensemble draws inspiration from an Afrofuturist concept, creating freely improvised music that’s wide open, deeply rooted and utterly cooperative.
Mr. Smith’s trumpet is all the things that electrified music ostensibly isn’t: slow, shapely, somatic, preverbal. But the five tracks on this album — full of bubble and clang and spilling electric guitars — take on the understated demeanor of his playing, while pressing their case.
Sometimes charging forth, sometimes rerouting, the debut album from Ms. Branch is always on the move. A formidable solo performer, she could get by on extended technique alone. Instead she’s enlisted a wonderfully unorthodox band (Tomeka Reid on cello, Jason Ajemian on bass and Chad Taylor on drums), and created a work of hardscrabble imagination.
A magnum opus from one of the Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians’ most vital elders, this two-CD suite is full of open space — bell tones and scattered piano and staccato saxophone — but it hardly lacks form. The bigness invites you in, asks you to hear your way into the room where the album’s nine musicians convened.
Mr. Mitchell is a pianist of dynamic sensitivity and dauntless energy. He’d already mastered many of the saxophonist Tim Berne’s scattered, mischievous compositions before the two met; now they’re musical confidants. So this one’s only logical: a lush solo piano album consisting entirely of Mr. Berne’s tunes.
Mr. Virelles here plays pianist, bandleader, scholar and student. Surrounded by a dozen musicians (many, like him, Cuban-born), he travels with his band into various zones of disquiet. Rhythmic patterns become uneasy pacts, open spaces shudder with dark energy.
Led by the trumpeter Mandla Mlangeni, this alliance of young South African musicians delves into the country’s syncretic cultural heritage — then ventures beyond. You hear Balkan folk, American funk, West African high life, South African free jazz. Most of all, you hear five bristling improvisers dancing together, modeling a kind of thoughtful communion.
Ms. Gentile, a drummer and vibraphonist, deals in commingled motion and variegated textures. On this searing debut, recorded with a quartet, her key sparring partner is Mr. Mitchell, who doubles on piano and electronics.
Mr. Mahanthappa, an alto saxophonist, writes along the divide between contemporary jazz and South Asian classical, always with a sense of acute direction and well-hewn architecture. But it’s his trio’s synergy that gives “Agrima” what it needs: possibility, irony, tenderness.
Days after the 2016 presidential election, Mr. McCraven, a drummer, convened a one-off quartet at a Chicago dive to play what must have been a body-shaker of a show. What you hear here — the inky throb of the bass, the rattling kick drum, the sibilant tape — is not what that audience heard. Mr. McCraven recorded the gig to a four-track, then set about mincing and splicing and augmenting the sounds, until he had this.
Ms. Schweizer — a veteran Swiss pianist with a vast vocabulary — teams up for the first time with the drummer Mr. Baron. Together they’re rambunctious, comic, openhearted.
There’s still room in jazz for an acoustic quartet playing thorough, pensive, slowly mounting music. And for the voice of a starkly affecting trumpeter.
La Parranda El Clavo has been playing Afro-Venezuelan folk songs for 30 years. Much of this declamatory, infectious music comes from deep in the past; all of it feels both venerable and vibrant.
On his first quartet album, Mr. Taborn’s piano can dance and nearly catch fire without ever losing its poise.
Ms. Shyu says each of these nine songs — sung in eight languages, and played on an array of instruments — is a “door.” Into what? Memories that never formed, maybe, and new visions.
Leading a powerful quintet, Mr. Miles — an underappreciated talent, as both cornetist and composer — uses these eight tunes to meditate on experiences of disappointment, discrimination and transcendence. He and the band sound loose and warm and free, as if unburdened by the reckoning.