In Cali, dancing can start as early as the afternoon, and the energy never lets up.
Two kinds of dancers pack the salsa clubs of Cali, Colombia. There are the purists, who like to keep their footwork on the ground, the way salsa was first danced in the 1970s. Then there are the more daring — typically younger — provocateurs, who incorporate demanding tricks and lifts frowned upon by traditionalists. If you’re keen on finding a partner, you may want to stick to the original formula.
Not long after, dance clubs called salsatecas sprang up in Cali, especially in the working-class neighborhood of the Barrio Obrero. Colombian musicians began forming salsa bands to make their own contributions to the growing scene. Mr. Caicedo cited Grupo Niche, Orquesta Guayacán, Orquesta La Identidad and La Gran Banda Caleña as some of the most popular bands in the early days of Colombian salsa.
Taking its name from the city that developed it, the Cali style developed from a mix of pachanga (a dance best recognized for its shuffled side-to-side steps), charanga (a riff on a traditional Cuban dance) and boogaloo (another form born in New York City, which mixes several styles) dances.
The photographer Rose Marie Cromwell came across Cali’s vibrant salsa scene almost by accident. “I heard people tell me that Cali was the capital of the salsa,” she said. It was enough to pique her interest.
Once an exercise class for the elderly in the early 1990s, the viejoteca became a refuge for Cali-style purists, according to Mr. Caicedo. Now, viejotecas are weekend parties that start in the afternoon and wind down around 10 p.m. It’s a very different scene from New York, where salsa dancing normally begins in the late evening. Cali’s earlier start time also cuts down the drinking hours. “Not everyone’s drinking. It’s more of a social event, not a drinking event,” Ms. Cromwell said.
There are other differences separating Cali styles and stateside styles. Most of the salsa dancing in the United States requires couples to move back and forth on the dance floor. In Cali, couples move from side to side like a mirror image. Their upper body and arms are supposed to remain still while their feet quickly work through steps that look like a Latin-tinged jive.
Depending on the style you’re dancing in the United States, the motion can vary from big showy gestures and spins to tightly controlled movements confined to the couple’s personal space.
Yet other characteristics remain the same between salseros. The steps are always fast, and the hips are meant to move. The couple should hold onto each other, with the follower reading every change in the leader’s position as a signal for the next move.
Throughout salsatecas large and small, there’s an unmistakable look of focus and energy on the faces of professional and recreational dancers. Some are smiling while holding onto their partners. Others are concentrating on remembering their rehearsed choreography. The dancers on the sidelines watch on or catch their breath. Women wave fans for a cool breeze, and men dry themselves off with handkerchiefs.
Roman Yavich contributed reporting.
