Love her or hate her, the former reality show star turned White House aide has never shied away from controversy.
“I’m an African-American woman.  We have to be—” “—and he brings me such joy and I hope that you one day you can find that kind of joy, Joy, in your life.” This is Omarosa Manigault Newman. “—inner city issues issues, issues in the economy—” “How do we go from Iraq to Black Lives Matter? Stay focused Tamara.” “Um—” Love her or hate her, the former reality show star turned White House aide has never shied away from controversy. She became known as the villain on “The Apprentice” and “The Celebrity Apprentice,” where she got fired three times by Donald Trump. “Life is full of problems. You’re fired.” During the campaign, Newman was responsible for outreach in the African-American community and her loyalty to Trump landed her a spot in the West Wing. “Every detractor will have to bow down to President Trump.” Trump made her director of communications for the Office of Public Liaison, a role that confounded many. There were reports that Newman had an ill-defined job and often dropped into meetings uninvited. She’s outspoken and has sparred with the press. “I will tell my story—” “I allowed you— Ask a question about me, about my brother, about my fa— Yes, that’s what they invited me to talk about. In some ways, she’s a bit like the president: When someone punches— “Tamara says that Donald Trump—” “TA-ma—ra. It’s TA-ma-ra.” She’s quick to hit back. “You want to come out with big boobs. You deal with the pronunciation of your name. Look, Donald Trump stands firm.” She once reportedly caused a stir after bringing her 39-person bridal party to the White House for a photo shoot. But after John Kelly took over as chief of staff, Newman’s role in the White House started to diminish. “John Kelly and I sat down in the situation room. I wanted to make the one year mark. That was one of the goals that I set out to, and then get back to my life.” Her tenure at the White House ended with her resignation. But the president continues to stand by her.
WASHINGTON — Every must-watch television show needs two ingredients to survive its first season: a believable villain and a nail-biter of a cliffhanger. Omarosa Manigault Newman, a veteran of “The Apprentice,” President Trump’s former boardroom-high jinks reality show competition, has delivered both production-perfect elements to the Trump White House.
Ms. Newman, in multiple public appearances this week, has maintained that it was in fact her choice to resign as the director of communications for the White House Office of Public Liaison, a job that is set to continue to pay out her $179,700 salary as she officially remains on the staff until late January, though with reduced access to the White House.
Still, the woman who cultivated a reputation as the ultimate TV villain is urging viewers to stay tuned to find out why she really left.
As the spectacle surrounding Ms. Newman’s departure promises to carry over into the Trump administration’s second year, her telegenic antics have not been entertaining to several West Wing aides. In a workplace where drama and chaos have been features, not bugs, Ms. Newman was known for contributing to both.
Among the open questions Ms. Newman is leaving is one surrounding her frustration as the most high-profile black aide in a White House that has been noted for its lack of racial diversity, and besieged by criticism over how it handled racially tinged episodes like the deadly violence in Charlottesville, Va.
The world will have to wait. Ms. Newman has not elaborated, other than to say that she had been trying to raise “grave concerns” about an issue that would “affect the president in a big way.” Former and current White House officials said they were uncertain what she was referring to. But she has rejected one suggestion: that Mr. Trump holds racist views.
Other than the hints she has left on national television, it is still unclear what, exactly, led to Ms. Newman’s abrupt departure after a nearly yearlong tenure punctuated by conflicts with other White House aides, a lavish wedding at Trump International Hotel in Washington and a public meltdown at a conference for black journalists. Whatever the catalyst, her departure was handled by Mr. Kelly; the White House counsel, Donald F. McGahn II; and Joseph Hagin, a deputy chief of staff.
On Facebook, Armstrong Williams, a conservative media personality and a friend of Ms. Newman’s, noted that her departure had closely followed the loss by Mr. Trump’s preferred candidate in the Alabama Senate race, “Funny how her story is knocking Roy Moore off front pages.” On Friday, Ms. Newman declined to comment.
Ms. Newman’s time came to an end in the Situation Room during a meeting with Mr. Kelly. It is an unusual place to hold a discussion about employment, but one where the backdrop is both intimidating and quiet, perhaps to calm an exchange that had the potential to spiral out of control.
Ms. Newman said that the two “had a very candid conversation,” and that Mr. Trump learned that she had departed while watching television news.
Mr. Trump and Ms. Newman had forged a friendly bond after years of “Apprentice”-related activities and several memorable televised firings. When Mr. Trump entered the presidential race, Ms. Newman was among the few prominent minorities to lend support. “Every critic, every detractor will have to bow down to President Trump,” she said in a 2016 interview.
When Mr. Trump took office, Ms. Newman was a familiar face for the president in a sea of newness, and she enjoyed relatively easy access to the Oval Office.
Ms. Newman’s bond with the president was not one that extended to the president’s other aides. Tension had been building from the start, according to a senior West Wing official. She could be biting, several staff members said.
Ms. Newman helped broker meetings between black ministers and Mr. Trump during the campaign, but after a year, there was little to show for her work in the White House, a position crucial for building coalitions with groups open to supporting the president, one aide said. She had also fallen out of favor with others in the president’s circle, including Jared Kushner, the president’s son-in-law and senior adviser.
She is not the only former Trump aide who has made the rounds to talk about her time in the White House. On Thursday, Sean Spicer, the former White House press secretary, appeared on Fox News to say he did not know why Ms. Newman had been hired. “She was very loyal to the president,” Mr. Spicer offered when pressed.
Others close to the president think Ms. Newman may choose to remain in Mr. Trump’s good graces instead of speaking out against his administration, despite the end of her White House plotline.
