 I had loved animals from toddlerhood — and had begun assembling a small menagerie that would eventually include fish, a rabbit and a fire-bellied toad — but I was not yet acquainted with the staggering diversity of wildlife around the world. I would cradle that book on my lap for hours at a time, memorizing facts about the planet’s creatures, silently reciting their common and scientific names. Ever since, I have made it a point to learn the names of wildlife I encounter, seeking whatever tools might help me: hefty field guides to mushrooms, pocket-size pamphlets of backyard birds, archives of wildflower photos that let you search by petal color and bloom time.
iNaturalist is a novel hybrid of artificial intelligence and ceaseless human curiosity. In 2008, Ken-ichi Ueda and several other students at the University of California, Berkeley, founded iNaturalist as an online community for biologists, citizen scientists and people who simply enjoyed observing wildlife. Members helped one another identify species, eventually amassing a database of more than six million labeled photos. When the iNaturalist app was introduced, it was essentially a mobile version of the website. But it has been updated several times, and the current version employs a neural network trained to recognize species using images from the rich library compiled by human users.
I’ve been mulling over his question. Learning the names of wild things changes the way we look at nature and the way we think about it. Consider bees. Most people know two types: honeybees (the genus Apis) and bumblebees (the genus Bombus). There are in fact thousands of distinct bee species flying around us all the time — small as gnats or larger than horseflies, fuzzed in hair as orange as Cheddar or armored in metallic green. Some, like the familiar honeybee, are highly social. Many others are solitary. Some construct elaborate hives, while others nest in dry grass, wood or dirt. Most of us are oblivious to this winged panoply, even in our own backyards, because our perception is circumscribed by our ecological illiteracy. Learning the names of our many wild neighbors is an exercise in perspective and empathy, transforming the outdoors from a pastoral backdrop into a world of parallel societies inhabited by diverse creatures, each with its own character and career.
More than an identity, a creature’s name is also a password. It gives you access to entire realms of knowledge about the natural world that would otherwise be inaccessible, because you did not know the right phrase when you went knocking. “Small brown bird” does not have much purchase on Google or in a library, but “house sparrow” (Passer domesticus) will open every relevant portal. The name of the rose is the key to its whole story, to its evolutionary arc and cultural entanglements, to the names and narratives of its many cousins. One discovery inevitably leads to another.
 I had no idea what they were. iNaturalist identified them as common chicory (Chicorium intybus), which I then learned is the wild ancestor of endive and radicchio. Another day, while gardening, I noticed a particularly furry bee. iNaturalist informed me that it was in fact a fly that evolved to mimic bees, part of a much larger family of flies (Bombyliidae) costumed as bees for defense against predators.
