BEND, Ore. — On an autumn weekday here in Deschutes County, Oregon, a chain-saw roar ripped through a pine-scented neighborhood. Tree specialists were removing flammable lodgepole pines in Sunriver, a 4,000-home resort community. With summer crowds gone, the Sunriver Owners Association was reducing wildfire risk.
This is a year when huge wildfires, characterized by exceptionally strong winds, continue to ravage Ventura County and other parts of Southern California, after an October in which blazes in Santa Rosa destroyed thousands of homes. But experts believe that a cohesive strategy involving public education, community outreach, landscape restoration and robust emergency response could at least begin to mitigate the potential for such devastation. And that is what is at work here, hundreds of miles to the north of the California fires.
Deschutes County, population 175,000, has become a national leader in pursuing such a comprehensive approach. It too experiences regular wildfires. Nevertheless, no house has burned here since 2003, even as fires caused enormous property damage elsewhere in the West — from exurban metropolitan areas to similarly sized counties like Chelan and Oakanogan in Washington, where fires in 2015 burned over 100 structures.
Bob Roper, a retired fire chief of Ventura County, Calif., endorses the approach in general, saying, “Everything that they’re doing can be replicated somewhere else,” even though the strategy may still be unable to completely protect against the damage that increasingly ferocious winds pose in fire season.
What are the measures being taken here? The comprehensive approach, at its core, is an effort to eliminate flammable materials near vulnerable homes and preserve enough room between housing and fire-prone areas to reduce the ability of flying sparks to ignite structures.
At Sunriver that fall day, the workers were thinning trees to promote the growth of fire-resistant ponderosa pines. They also pruned low-hanging branches and raked up pine needles, two types of “ladder fuel” that send wildfires upward.
Sunriver’s aggressive landscape maintenance has earned it the Firewise seal, a designation from the National Fire Protection Association for neighborhoods that observe guidelines to protect against wildfires.
Back then, policy called for planting two trees for every one removed. That approach satisfied Sierra Club instincts in this arboreal haven surrounded by national forest land, but it contradicts the current science on wildfire management.
In the 1990s, destructive fires in Deschutes County served as alarms for Sunriver, and it voluntarily revised its approach. Now residents maintain their properties or risk violating homeowners association rules.
All 3,055 square miles of Deschutes County, one of the fastest-growing areas in the United States, are a declared a wildfire hazard area. A county-sponsored outreach campaign called Project Wildfire works with neighborhoods and homeowners to teach best practices for managing wildfire risk and offers a potential model to help people learn to live with fire.
The High Desert Museum — where signs read “Extreme Fire Danger. Please Absolutely No Smoking” — explains how the ponderosa pine forests here work as a fire-based ecology. Winter precipitation saturates the soil, which sprouts bitterbrush and sagebrush in the spring, offering a food source and habitat for wildlife. Hot, dry summers then turn that forest floor into fuel, and on average every seven years a wildfire sweeps and restarts the cycle. But mature specimens of ponderosa pine generally fare well during such fires.
Fire-suppression tactics in the western United States have disrupted this natural cycle. For over a century, the prevailing strategy has been to extinguish all fires as soon as possible. Initially that served to protect valuable timber stands; today’s justification is protecting private homes. Since the 1960s, the percentage of Americans who reside in these areas, known to experts as the “wildland-urban interface,” grew from 25 million to 140 million people, according to Census Bureau statistics.
In Oregon, Drabin says, he has gained “more peace of mind” since he began implementing Project Wildfire’s recommendations, especially “defensible space.” Wildfire experts believe that eliminating fuels within a 30-to-50-foot radius of a house greatly reduces risk. That means practicing Sunriver’s large-scale maintenance on an individual level: pruning and thinning trees, clearing gutters of pine needles and screening off crawl spaces where debris collects. Embers, which travel a few miles ahead of wildfires and are the main culprit behind burned houses, can spark those fuels.
Sunriver, too, made mistakes, like originally requiring wood-shake roofs. Experts now recommend class A fire-rated material, which flammable wood shake is not — though it can be treated with fire resistant chemicals. That revelation led the Sunriver Owners Association to ban shake roofs. Such a 180-degree move might leave homeowners scratching their heads, but Palcic says education is essential. “You can tell the rules, or you can sell the rules,” he said.
For example, the Owners Association offers a recommended plant list for xeriscape, or water-conserving gardens, and offers a demonstration garden at the Sunriver Nature Center. It also inspects every home annually for ladder fuels. Recalcitrant owners are scolded for noncompliance and repeat offenders can face fines up to $2,500 per month. With wildfire, the weak link can compromise the entire chain.
Drabin, president of his neighborhood’s homeowners association, is a “spark plug,” Project Wildfire’s term for its community liaisons. They are the information conduits for fire-safe practices and specific initiatives like the “sweat equity program,” under which the county will pick up woody debris the same way it picks up garbage, provided that homeowners bring it to the curb. Deschutes County also hosts semiannual “FireFree Weekends” when residents can drop off woody debris free of charge. Drabin says that over time, his neighbors have made this yardwork routine.
Drabin is skeptical of his former home city’s willingness to take responsibility for wildfire risk. “A typical homeowner in L.A. seeing smoke on the horizon,” he says, “will just say, ‘I hope it doesn’t come near my house, and if it does, I hope somebody takes care of it.’” But he believes that with enough commitment and resources, the Deschutes County model could work in any community, large or small.
There are some structural challenges in other areas of the fire-prone West, however. Santa Rosa’s dense clusters of houses, while important for providing more supply in the nation’s most expensive housing market, also made it easier for fire to spread from house to house.
Dewey argues for stricter regulation: “The cities and the county should be saying any time you remodel your house, you have to use fire-resistant materials.” Oregon’s Forestland-Urban Interface Fire Protection Act requires defensible space in theory, but homeowners are liable only if a wildfire strikes.
Drabin, on the other hand, finds the pro-regulation attitude unrealistic. “A large number of people have moved specifically to this area because they didn’t want to have to deal with rules and regulations,” he said.
