WASHINGTON — Michael T. Flynn, President Trump’s former national security adviser, told a former business associate that economic sanctions against Russia would be “ripped up” as one of the Trump administration’s first acts, according to an account by a whistle-blower made public on Wednesday.
A portion of the letter Mr. Cummings sent to Mr. Gowdy.
“This is going to make a lot of very wealthy people,” Mr. Copson said.
Attempts to reach Mr. Copson on Wednesday were unsuccessful. A lawyer for Mr. Flynn declined to comment.
Senator Richard Blumenthal, Democrat of Connecticut, accused ACU of providing misleading statements to him in November in response to questions about the company’s dealings with Mr. Flynn.
“You said that ACU had ‘no dealings and no relationship since May 2016’ with Mr. Flynn and has ‘no knowledge’ of Mr. Flynn’s efforts to advance the ACU project while on the transition team or in the administration,” Mr. Blumenthal wrote in a letter to Mr. Copson.
President Obama first imposed economic sanctions on Russia in 2014, after Russia’s military incursions in Crimea and Ukraine, and again last December to punish Russia for its attempts to disrupt the United States presidential election.
Earlier this year, various plans to lift the Russia sanctions circulated through the Trump administration, but Mr. Trump ultimately decided not to repeal the measures. Mr. Flynn lasted just 24 days as national security adviser before he was forced out amid questions about whether he lied to administration officials about the nature of his phone calls with Mr. Kislyak.
Representative Elijiah E. Cummings, Democrat of Maryland, wrote a letter on Wednesday to Representative Trey Gowdy, Republican of South Carolina and the chairman of the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee, explaining that a whistle-blower had come forward with information on Michael T. Flynn, President Trump's former national security adviser.
Mr. Cummings sent the letter to the chairman of the House Oversight and Government Committee, Trey Gowdy, Republican of South Carolina, and asked him to investigate the whistle-blower’s claims. The whistle-blower, Mr. Cummings said, is willing to meet with Mr. Gowdy if he agrees to protect the person’s identity.
But Mr. Gowdy signaled that the committee was not going to investigate the whistle-blower’s claims. In a letter responding to Mr. Cummings on Wednesday afternoon, he said the claims “fit squarely within” Mr. Mueller’s jurisdiction, adding that he had promised Mr. Mueller that he would not interfere with his investigation.
Mr. Cummings said Mr. Gowdy should subpoena the White House and the Flynn Intelligence Group, Mr. Flynn’s former company, for documents that the House committee had requested in March but had not yet been provided. The subpoena to the White House should be for “all documents — including emails and text messages sent on personal devices” about Mr. Flynn’s foreign contacts, payments and efforts to promote the proposal. Mr. Cummings said that Mr. Gowdy should subpoena Mr. Flynn, Mr. Copson and four others to testify before the panel.
Mr. Gowdy and Mr. Cummings have a long history of clashing publicly over politically charged investigations. Mr. Gowdy was the chairman of the special committee that investigated the 2012 attacks in Benghazi, Libya, and Mr. Cummings was that panel’s ranking member. As part of that investigation, Mr. Gowdy also scrutinized Hillary Clinton’s use of a private email account when she was secretary of state.
In the letter, Mr. Cummings appeared to try to anticipate Mr. Gowdy’s argument that he cannot investigate the whistle-blower’s claims as long as Mr. Flynn was still under investigation by Mr. Mueller’s team.
“As chairman of the Benghazi select committee, you pursued your investigation of Hillary Clinton during an ongoing criminal investigation,” Mr. Cummings wrote.