The tax plan approved by Congress nearly doubles the standard deduction for individuals and families. That could simplify the filing process for millions of Americans, but it will complicate the giving strategies for many who have made a habit of deducting their charitable contributions.
Under the new bill, the standard deduction — the amount taxpayers can subtract from their taxable income without listing, or itemizing, deductions on their tax returns — will rise to $12,000 for individuals and $24,000 for married couples. That means people who are close to the cutoff may stop giving altogether, as they may no longer see tax savings from their giving. Or they might consider pooling their gifts in certain years to beat the expanded standard amount and maximize their tax savings through itemization.
Earl Molander, a retired business professor in Portland, Ore., has given the situation a lot of thought. Mr. Molander said he donates regularly to a nonprofit organization that funds college scholarships for students at his hometown high school in Marinette, Wis., while his wife supports various health and social causes. They will continue giving under the new tax rules, he said, but will plan to make their donations and itemize their gifts every other year, when they can beat the standard deduction. This year, for instance, they will double up on contributions. Then in 2018, the couple will skip donating and take the standard deduction; in 2019, they’ll make gifts and itemize, and so on.
“It’s what they call ‘bunching,’ in accounting terms,” Mr. Molander said of his strategy. Combined with other tweaks in their schedule of paying property taxes, he said, he estimates the approach will allow the couple to save about $700 a year in taxes over the next four years.
These “bunching” strategies, however, leave open a big question. What happens to the charity or nonprofit organization, which has relied on a steady stream of donations to operate every year?
“A donor-advised fund is an ideal solution for this,” said Timothy M. Steffen, director of advanced planning at Baird’s private wealth management group. Donors can make gifts of cash and securities, such as appreciated stock. Donors, of course, must assess whether they can afford to accelerate donations or whether doing so would impair their cash flow, Mr. Steffen said.
Donor-advised funds have been around for years, particularly at community foundations aiming to encourage giving to local causes. But they have become increasingly popular over the last decade with the growth of national funds affiliated with big financial services companies like Fidelity, Vanguard and Charles Schwab. Fidelity Charitable, for instance, received more than $4 billion in donations in 2016, topping United Way Worldwide, which Forbes has ranked as the largest nonprofit organization by private donations.
Q. When is the deadline for contributing to a donor-advised fund for a 2017 tax deduction?
The deadline is Dec. 31. But as a practical matter, it is wise to act earlier, depending on how the contribution is made, according to financial advisers and managers of donor-advised funds. If someone is establishing a fund affiliated with a company where they already do business, transferring funds is relatively simple. Fidelity Charitable, for instance, says assets can be transferred from Fidelity Investments over the phone or online as late as Dec. 31.
There is still time to use a donor-advised fund, but it’s best to act sooner to avoid last-minute snafus and make sure a gift is counted for 2017 for tax purposes. “I would not wait until the middle of next week,” said Howard Hook, a financial planner and principal at EKS Associates in Princeton, N.J.
Q. Is there a minimum donation to establish a donor-advised fund?
Q. Do I get a tax deduction when I make a gift from my donor-advised fund?
No. You take the tax deduction when you contribute the money to the fund; you do not get another one when the money is actually sent to your selected charity.