Uganda has a strategy for giving scarce morphine to patients in pain. But many poor nations won’t emulate it, over fear of an opioid epidemic.
KAMPALA, Uganda — Pain is only the latest woe in John Bizimungu’s life.
Rwandan by birth, he has lived here as a refugee since his family was slaughtered in the 1994 genocide. A cobbler, Mr. Bizimungu used to walk the streets asking people if he could fix their shoes.
Now, at 75 and on crutches, he sits at home hoping customers will drop by. But at least the searing pain from the cancer that has twisted his right foot is under control.
The cobbler’s desperate need exemplifies a problem that deeply worries palliative care experts: how they can help the 25 million people who die in agony each year in poor and middle-income countries without risking an American-style overdose epidemic abroad or triggering opposition from Western legislators and philanthropists for whom “opioid” has become a dirty word.
The American delegation to the International Narcotics Control Board, a United Nations agency, “uses frightening war-on-drugs rhetoric,” said Meg O’Brien, the founder of Treat the Pain, an advocacy group devoted to bringing palliative care to poor countries.
Uganda has implemented an innovative solution. Here, liquid morphine is produced by a private charity overseen by the government. And with doctors in short supply, the law lets even nurses prescribe morphine after specialized training.
About 11 percent of Ugandans needing morphine get it. Inadequate as that is, it makes Uganda a standout not just in Africa, but in the world.
Yet there is very little opioid abuse here; alcohol, marijuana and khat are far bigger problems.
A recent major study by The Lancet Commission on Global Access to Palliative Care and Pain Relief described a “broad and deep abyss” in access to painkillers between rich countries and poor ones.
The United States, the report said, produces or imports 31 times as much narcotic pain-relievers it needs whether in legal or illegal form: morphine, hydrocodone, heroin, methadone, fentanyl and so on.
Haiti, by contrast, gets slightly less than 1 percent of what it needs. And Nigeria, on a per-capita basis, gets only a quarter of what Haiti gets: 0.2 percent of its need.
Even in big countries with domestic pharmaceutical industries, citizens still get shortchanged on pain relief, the report said. India and Indonesia, the second- and fourth-most populous countries on the planet, each supply only 4 percent of their own needs. Russia is at 8 percent. China, at 16 percent, barely beats Uganda.
“Each country has its own barriers,” said Dr. James F. Cleary, director of pain and policy studies at the University of Wisconsin’s medical school and a member of the commission that produced the Lancet study.
Pharmaceutical companies are uninterested in selling the generic morphine needed by poor countries because it is cheap and yields little profit.
Enough morphine to treat the entire world for end-of-life suffering would cost only $145 million a year, the Lancet report found.
Moreover, to treat all the children underage 15 needing it — for severe burns, surgery, car accidents, pain from sickle cell disease, cancerous tumors crushing spinal cords and so on — would cost a mere $1 million.
Some pharmaceutical companies do try to market patented time-release oxycodone and other highly profitable opioids in middle-income countries — but governments are often wary because of the epidemic of drug abuse that has swept the United States.
“You only have to see one Time magazine cover, and countries say, ‘This isn’t something we want,’” Dr. Cleary said.
Demand for pain relief “needs a champion in each country,” said Felicia Marie Knaul, a health economist at the University of Miami and lead author of the Lancet report.
• The policy had outspoken local champions: Dr. Anne Merriman, a former missionary nun who in 1993 founded Hospice Africa Uganda to care for the terminally ill; Rose Kiwanuka, the first nurse trained in palliative care in this country, who now heads the Palliative Care Association of Uganda; and Dr. Jack Jagwe, a health ministry official who recognized the need.
• Uganda’s president, Yoweri Museveni, who has been in office since 1986, accepted the import of opioids after Dr. Jagwe endorsed them. Mr. Museveni’s response to AIDS was also forward-thinking; when other presidents were denying their countries even had it, he pioneered “ABC prevention” — Abstain/Be Faithful/Use Condoms.
• And perhaps most important: the only opioid the government permits outside hospitals is pint bottles of morphine diluted in water. The drug is distributed free, at government expense, undercutting incentives for pharmaceutical companies to fight for market share.
The bottled morphine comes in two strengths: 0.5 gram or 5 grams per 500 milliliters. Even the weaker one dulls the pain suffered by Mr. Bizimungu, who is succumbing slowly to a form of Kaposi’s sarcoma that is not triggered by H.I.V.
The bottles are a simple and ingenious way to prevent addiction. Getting high would require drinking gallons of the bitter, slightly nauseating solution. Distilling enough morphine to inject would require boiling away gallons.
“You can drink a whole bottle and all you’d get is some nausea and constipation, and be sleepy,” said Rinty Kintu, the Uganda coordinator at Treat the Pain.
At the Cancer Charity Foundation, a hospice for adults with cancer in Kampala, liquid morphine is easing the last days of John Kanakura, 55, whose colon cancer has spread to his liver.
Mr. Kanakura’s daily bottle gives him about eight hours of pain relief, letting him get some sleep, his son, Philip Mutabazi, 18, said.
Morphine is not prescribed nearly as freely in Uganda as opioids have been in the United States.
In a telephone interview from Scotland, Dr. Merriman, sometimes called Uganda’s “mother of palliative care,” described the early days of mixing morphine powder imported from Europe in buckets with water boiled on the kitchen stove.
Once cool, it was poured into empty mineral water bottles scrounged from tourist hotels.
She also recalled early opposition from older doctors who equated giving morphine to dying patients with euthanasia.
“You need someone to shout and scream and keep it going,” Dr. Merriman said.
Initially, donors like the Diana, Princess of Wales Memorial Fund and George Soros’s Open Society Institute helped, and the British and American governments provided money to help dying AIDS patients. But those funds slowly dried up as drugs for AIDS became more available.
Some hospitals began mixing their own morphine solutions. Then a morphine shortage occurred in 2010 following price squabbling between the health ministry and private wholesalers.
In 2011 the national drug warehouse was made the sole legal importer of morphine powder, and Hospice Africa was asked to mix solution for the whole country.
Treat the Pain stepped in to help. Its founder, Dr. O’Brien, a former epidemiologist at the Clinton Health Access Initiative, said she created the nonprofit after reading a 2007 New York Times series describing how millions died without pain relief and hearing an H.I.V. doctor describe his patients screaming in pain.
The nonprofit, which is now part of the American Cancer Society, paid about $100,000 for machines to sterilize water, make plastic bottles, fill them and attach labels.
Further mechanization is needed. On a recent visit to the operation, a pharmacist whisked powder and water together in what looked like a 40-gallon pasta pot, and medical students screwed caps onto the bottles.
Despite its imperfections, the Ugandan model inspires others.
The health ministries of about 20 countries now use inexpensive morphine, Dr. Merriman estimated. But it is often available only in hospitals in the capital.
Efforts like these in Africa, Asia and Latin America “have laid the groundwork in the last twelve years for what could happen,” said Dr. Kathleen M. Foley, a palliative care specialist at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center.
