One could say the same thing about Rottenberg’s videos, which swallow the viewer whole thanks to their unprecedented scale. Staring into the winding Technicolor tunnels featured in “Cosmic Generator,” one experiences the fleeting jolt of a roller-coaster ride.
A prime example of this philosophy plays out in Converso’s booth, a first-timer at the fair, where an entire living room designed by the iconoclastic California Modernist Albert Frey is on display. The economy and simple lines of the set hint at a focus on the people who inhabit a space — rather than the objects.
Art Basel Miami Beach is open from Wednesday, Dec. 6 to Sunday, Dec. 10 at Meridian Avenue & 19th Street, Miami Beach, Fla.
Art Basel Miami Beach feels decidedly unpolitical this year, serving up its usual mix of monumental sculptures, loud neons and wall-swallowing paintings by name-brand artists. Thankfully further from the gravitational pull of blue chip dealers like Gagosian and Gavin Brown, these tropes break down and new names emerge. Such is the case at the Pilar Corrias booth, where one can spot the bright, patchy figures of Tschabalala Self, a young painter, whose works starred in the New Museum’s “Trigger: Gender as a Tool and a Weapon” show this fall.
The Nova sector, dedicated to younger galleries and their artists, feels particularly rich thanks to unexpected pauses like the ethereal mix of Dawn Kasper’s glowing, dangling sculptures and a monumental abstract painting by Lucy Dodd at David Lewis. There are also more solo presentations in this sector, allowing visitors the chance to really immerse themselves in the work. A solo presentation by the New York-based artist Torey Thornton at Essex Street gallery, which stands out for its minimal design and an eye-catching, acid green painting one can see all the way down the hall.
NADA Miami returned to the Ice Palace Studios, a film studio, this year, and the fair’s exhibitors took advantage of the space’s soaring ceilings and roomy corridors by creating booths that feel simultaneously domestic and cinematic. Take, for example, the Detroit-based artist Marie Herwald Hermann, who paired her own sculptural still lifes with a wallpaper by William Morris at fair first-timer Reyes Projects’s booth.
Many exhibitors embraced a salon-style approach. Canada stacked up works by both established and emerging painters — including a new figurative work by Katherine Bradford — and a small set of broccoli drawings by Adrianne Rubenstein. At the Southfirst booth, small furious drawings line the walls; these images are the output of the groundbreaking filmmaker Joe Gibbons, who spent his time in prison sketching banal scenes and goods sourced from magazines and catalogs.
The prevalence of group presentations and gallery partnerships highlights the sense of community that permeates this fair. One feels this collaborative spirit peak at Queer Thoughts and What Pipeline’s booth, where the two galleries came together to celebrate the figurative work of young artists like Quintessa Matranga, Bailey Scieszka and Hannah Quinlan and Rosie Hastings.
One of Miami’s longest-running art fairs, Pulse places a special emphasis on educating and engaging public on direct terms. “I’ve been organizing art fairs for a very long time, so I’ve seen the change,” says its director, Katelijne De Backer. “Art is becoming a lot more democratic because of the art fairs. Even for those who cannot collect, the fair offers an opportunity to meet and talk with artists you would never otherwise have access to. I think this kind of generosity is important, especially now.” While not all fairs offer direct contact, at Pulse, it is common to see artists roaming around and engaging onlookers.
This intimacy carries into the work on view. Several of the site-specific commissions projects stem from personal narratives, including Fischer Cherry’s installation, “Fertility.” Comprising rows and rows of the artist’s grandmother’s crystal dinnerware stuffed with vials and needles, the installation reflects on the artist’s experience going through extensive fertility treatment. “The entire experience felt like one failure after the next,” she says. “I felt like I had to make something beautiful, light and uplifting with the leftovers after all the pain and disappointment,” Cherry hopes the piece will allow other hopeful mothers that they are not alone.
If the art fair crowds don’t appeal, a trip to the Temple House, designed by the architect Murray Dixon, will cheer you up, thanks to a bubbly installation by the design duo Studio Swine and the Swedish fashion brand COS. When the line first tapped Studio Swine, a collective comprising the artist Alexander Groves and the architect Azusa Murakami, for a collaboration, the duo imagined an installation inspired by nature that would encourage a sense of optimism. Their solution, “New Spring,” a large tree structure made of recycled material emitting scented bubbles, ticks both boxes.
First shown in Milan in a darkened theater, the kinetic sculpture finds a new life in the airy atmosphere of Dixon’s whitewashed space. Groves and Murakami selected the building because of its connection to Miami’s distinctive architecture. “In Miami, there is this amazing heritage of Art Deco architecture, and we wanted to reflect that in the tree as well,” says Murakami. “The sculpture is comprised of arches and straight lines, which are always able to change based on the context. We changed the design to reflect back those influences.” In addition to altering the tree’s structure, the duo created five new scents inspired by the city, including a vibrant citrus and a dose of freshly cut grass.
The installation is open from Wednesday, Dec. 6 to Sunday, Dec. 10 at the Temple House, 1415 Euclid Ave, Miami Beach, Fla.