Months before his ascendancy in June, M.B.S. signaled that the influence of the clergy could be an obstacle to economic growth and Saudi Arabia’s ability to wean itself off its oil-revenue dependency. If the clerics resist having their wings clipped, they are likely to openly oppose encroaching westernization just as Saudi Arabia seeks to attract and retain foreign investors.
The royal family may therefore have to buy the clerics’ support, or at least their silence. For example, M.B.S. might offer them greater latitude in areas that are less crucial to the economy, such as “da’wah” — the spreading of Wahhabi Islam. Since 1973, the Saudi government and its semipublic “charitable” foundations have spent billions of dollars spreading fanatical Wahhabi ideology abroad, and further bolstering da’wah would be bad news for the international community’s anti-radicalization efforts.
Already we are seeing Saudi politics being breathlessly stage-managed. On the same evening in November that M.B.S. began wielding the ax against his political rivals, Riyadh announced that a Yemeni missile was intercepted near its international airport, and the Lebanese prime minister, who happened to be visiting the kingdom, publicly resigned, citing security concerns about Iranian-backed Hezbollah. Since then, ripples continue to be felt across the region.
The stakes are high. If M.B.S. succeeds in his modernization efforts, Saudis will benefit from new opportunities and freedoms, and the world will benefit from curtailing the Wahhabi radicalization agenda. A decade from now, the kingdom could look more like the United Arab Emirates, its prosperous and relatively forward-looking neighbor.
Middle Eastern politics is regarded by nearly all players as a zero-sum game; to compromise is to bring shame upon one’s family and entire culture. Instead of acquiescing to the gulf states’ ultimatums — such as requiring that it shut down news organizations and distance itself from groups like the Muslim Brotherhood — Qatar has only deepened its alliances with Iran and Turkey. These forces are already in conflict in Yemen, in what is arguably a proxy war between the region’s Sunni bloc and Iran and its allies. The next obvious battleground will be Syria, where Iran (to say nothing of Russia) stands to be the principal beneficiary of the defeat of the Islamic State. Also in play in the year ahead will be Iraqi Kurdistan.
Ayaan Hirsi Ali is a research fellow at the Hoover Institution and founder of the AHA Foundation, a nonprofit focused on protecting women’s rights that are threatened by cultural and religious practices.
