Rivers Schwenn is only 16, but she says she already knows that she never wants children.
It’s not that she doesn’t like kids. She does. Lots. But after spending the last year and a half watching her 9-year-old sister, Parker Monhollon, die of cancer, the thought of witnessing another child go through that is unbearable.
Rivers Schwenn applies makeup to her sister, Parker Monhollan.
During her sister’s illness, Rivers talked to a counselor twice, but it wasn’t for her. And she wasn’t interested in attending camps like Okizu, in Novato, Calif., or the Hole in the Wall Gang Camp, in Ashford, Conn., which offer sessions for ill children and their siblings.
“Normal,” of course, is a relative term when your sibling is seriously ill. About 5 to 8 percent of children in the United States will experience the death of a sibling, but the loss is rarely discussed, and siblings of terminally ill children are often overlooked.
There is also little social support for bereaved siblings. A 2010 study in the Journal of Paediatrics & Child Health of 109 major pediatric hospitals in the United States and Canada found that only 48 percent provided sibling support. A 2014 study of young adults who lost siblings to cancer found that most were still grieving two to nine years later.
Beyond the lifestyle changes and the terror of the unknown, the healthy sibling’s role in the family shifts. Parents are in triage mode, and by default, the well child must take a back seat: Their needs simply aren’t as important, or so the thinking has gone.
“I don’t think my parents checked my homework for a year,” said Rebecca Matz, 12, of Mullica Hill, N.J., whose younger sister, Ellie, now 8, was diagnosed with leukemia in December 2014. After telling her that Ellie had cancer, her parents acknowledged that although it wasn’t fair, the family was going to have to accommodate Ellie until she got better.
Not surprisingly, research has found that preteens who had lost a sibling had higher anxiety and depression levels than those who did not. They also had more attention problems, likely a result of their disrupted routines.
Ms. DeVita-Raeburn remembers the woman who accosted her at her brother’s funeral and told her that she would now have to behave, because “your parents are going through a lot.” “It told me my experience didn’t matter, so you suppress it,” said Ms. DeVita-Raeburn.
Other children withdraw, which is what Ashlyn Bentley, 17, of Scottsdale, Ariz., did when her 9-year-old sister, Abriel, was given a diagnosis of Ewing’s sarcoma two years ago.
After meeting Michael Gillette, a documentary filmmaker with the Truth 365, a nonprofit group that gives voice to children and families fighting cancer, Ms. Bentley decided to do something for siblings. In January, Mr. Gillette and Ms. Bentley began traveling around the country and interviewing siblings on camera. They are slowly releasing the stories online; a full-length documentary is slated for next year.
Another issue, she found, is that healthy siblings are not necessarily part of the discussion about their sibling’s illness or treatment plan. This affects how the sibling copes with the loss; the less cohesive the family unit, the harder it is to grieve.
Christina G. Hibbert, a clinical psychologist in Flagstaff, Ariz., and author of “This Is How We Grow,” was 18 when her 8-year-old sister died of cancer. When Ms. Hibbert was 32, another sister who was 16 months younger died after overdosing on alcohol and Tylenol. Dr. Hibbert said she is close to her two surviving sisters and one brother.
The good news is that studies have found that people who have experienced illness or loss at a young age show a resilience and emotional maturity that others don’t. A 2013 study of 40 young adults ages 17 to 24 explored the impact of growing up with an ill sibling on the healthy siblings’ late adolescent functioning. The authors found that growing up with an ill sibling gives the healthy sibling an opportunity to develop empathy and compassion well before their same-age peers.
“They recognize the fragility of life, they’ve seen somebody hurt,” said Sasha Fleary, an assistant professor of child study and human development at Tufts University and one of the study’s authors.
