Among many other indignities, the $1.5 trillion tax plan pushed through Congress this week, as others have pointed out, unleashes a special enmity at coastal cities and the Soul Cycle- and science-loving people who live in them. To the extent that tax cuts for the extraordinarily wealthy function as a means to push further measures of austerity — to provide the excuse to reduce federal funding for social programs on which cities rely — we can anticipate ever-escalating rates of inequality in places like New York, where the divisions between rich and poor are already severe. During the coming weeks and months, accountants and policy analysts will be kept very busy trying to parse the specific impact of the new tax code on individuals, families, institutions and markets of different kinds.
The new law caps the total deduction for state, local and property taxes at $10,000. Will this spur an exodus from New York, where state and city taxes are particularly high? Is the next Brooklyn ultimately going to be Boca Raton?
This is unlikely. Studies that have examined the flight question have concluded that people don’t typically move from one state to another simply to avoid certain taxes. “If people haven’t moved to Florida by now,’’ said James Parrott, director of economic and fiscal policies at the New School’s Center for New York City Affairs, “it’s hard to believe they are going to do it because of a worsening of the differential.” And the difference isn’t consistent across income brackets. Say you belong to a family, living in Manhattan, with an annual income of $500,000, your tax bill — adjusting for the loss of deductibility of state and local income tax and property tax — will go down by $19,417 under the new law. Moving to Florida will save you only an additional $326. The genuinely significant differences kick in for those making more than $5 million a year, a group that is less vulnerable to feeling pinched.
In the past, families feeling financially constrained by life in the city would move to the suburbs, but under the new tax code that would be self-defeating because of the much-higher property taxes that afflict communities in Westchester County, on Long Island, in New Jersey and Connecticut. In New York City, property tax bills that exceed $10,000 make up only 22.7 percent of households; on Long Island the figure climbs to 46.5 percent. So the parents who constantly brag about Templeton’s backhand, the ones you can’t stand seeing at the potluck, probably aren’t moving to Oyster Bay.
New York and other major cities are in the midst of an acute housing crisis. How will the tax plan affect the continued development of affordable apartments for the working and middle class?
In short: negatively. Through the national Community Re-Investment Act, passed in the 1970s to address discrimination in lending, any bank receiving federal insurance must make sure it offers credit to a broad span of communities. To comply, banks became the largest purchaser of low-income housing tax credits in New York City. These credits are the instrument through which affordable housing is largely paid for. But the reduction of the corporate tax rate to 21 percent means that there is now less of an incentive for banks to reduce their tax liability using these credits. They’ll still invest, but they’ll invest less money — in fact, this has already been happening in anticipation of the lowered corporate tax rate. “It’s nothing short of chaos,’’ said Aaron Koffman, principal at Hudson Companies, a major developer of affordable housing in New York.
New York is a generous city. What sort of impact will the new tax law have on charitable giving?
It’s complicated and no one knows for sure. Last week, Sarah Shannon, the chief operating officer of the Brooklyn Community Foundation, a donor-advised fund that works to fight poverty in Brooklyn, received calls from three of her biggest benefactors, each saying that their accountants told them to hold off making contributions until next year, when more could be understood about the implications of the tax law. December is typically the most robust time of year for charitable giving, and this uncertainty doesn’t help. Nationally, the second week of the month saw an 8.5 percent decline in the amount of money donated to charity online, according to The Chronicle of Philanthropy, compared with the same period last year, despite otherwise strong economic indicators. (Though some people may have reached their spending limits earlier in the year donating to help hurricane victims.) A doubling of the standard deduction means fewer taxpayers will itemize their deductions on their returns, reducing the financial incentive to give.
Among ultra-wealthy donors who give large amounts of money away to minimize their tax burdens, big cuts and loopholes under the new plan may produce less of a need to give. On the other hand, unprecedented windfalls — from, say, changes in the rules governing the estate tax — could inspire some people, to give more magnanimously. What charities that help the needy fear most right now is the collision of major government cuts with a steep plummet in giving.
What does the tax plan do to a school system where the better-off are already so much more advantaged?
It arguably privileges them even more. The plan allows a federal exemption of up to $10,000 each year for private-school tuition, through the establishment of a special account called a 529. That might not seem like such a boondoggle in New York City, where annual tuition is often four times that. But the benefit allows private-school families the opportunity to reduce their state tax burdens. As Nat Malkus of the American Enterprise Institute recently estimated in an Op-Ed article in The New York Times, this could result in a $3 billion reduction to the state’s income tax base.
Of course, state and local taxes could be raised on the highest earners to make up for the shortfall. But we saw what happened when Mayor Bill de Blasio tried to raise taxes on those making more than a half-million dollars a year to fund his universal prekindergarten program: The governor, having pledged to reduce taxes, stepped in with funds to avert the unthinkable.