PENSACOLA, Fla. — President Trump’s crowd was here in Florida on Friday night, but his audience was in Alabama.
Just four days before a crucial special election for a Senate seat in Alabama, Mr. Trump again offered his unequivocal backing for the Republican nominee, Roy S. Moore, a candidate dogged by accusations from women, including one who was 14 at the time, that he had assaulted them or had inappropriate contact with them decades ago.
Mr. Trump was about 45 minutes into his speech, though, before he even mentioned Mr. Moore. But when prompted to do so by a man in the crowd, the president quickly obliged.
The president also highlighted a discrepancy in the story of one Mr. Moore’s accusers and said voters should be wary of her lawyer, Gloria Allred.
“The future of this country cannot afford to lose a seat in the very, very close United States Senate,” Mr. Trump said.
“We can’t afford to have a liberal Democrat who is completely controlled by Nancy Pelosi and Chuck Schumer. His name is Jones and he’s their total puppet,” a reference to Mr. Moore’s Democratic opponent, Doug Jones.
Mr. Trump was less than 30 miles from the border with Alabama, which shares media markets and many conservative cultural affinities with its neighbor.
His address was a rhetorical journey from elation about the economy to condemnation of a familiar group of targets.
He waded further into cultural matters by cheering the signs in the arena that said Merry Christmas.
While the event was part of the president’s political operation, it was the campaign in Alabama that was the focus of attention. And Mr. Moore found plenty of support among the president’s backers.
Mr. Moore has denied the accusations against him, and the president has cited those denials as a justification for his endorsement, saying that Mr. Moore would be better than having “a liberal” in the Senate, a reference to Mr. Jones.
By endorsing Mr. Moore on Monday, staking his credibility on Mr. Moore’s denials, Mr. Trump is taking a position decidedly at odds with many in his party in the growing debate over sexual harassment in the worlds of politics, news media and entertainment, choosing to support a man who stands accused rather than the women who say he abused them.
Mr. Trump has already made a campaign appearance in the Alabama Senate race, but it was not for Mr. Moore.
At a rally in September in Huntsville, the president implored Republican primary voters to support Senator Luther Strange, Mr. Moore’s opponent. But even as he did, he expressed misgivings.
If Mr. Strange loses, Mr. Trump mused aloud, adopting the dramatic tone of a television newscaster, it will be portrayed as “a total embarrassment” for him. The state’s voters rejected Mr. Strange.
Here in Pensacola, even with steady rain and temperatures in the 30s, the president had an approving crowd in an arena where he made two campaign appearances in 2016.
His rally was the lead story in The Pensacola News Journal for two days straight, and the local congressman, Representative Matt Gaetz, a Republican, gave the president a boisterous welcome.
Mr. Trump ran up strong numbers in Florida’s Panhandle — he won Escambia County here by 20 points — and that helped propel his victory in the state in 2016, and his popularity in Alabama is as robust as any state in the country.
Mr. Trump’s decision to not travel to Alabama was not a calculated one, said Raj Shah, a White House spokesman.
Polling in the Alabama campaign indicated a relatively close race between Mr. Moore and Mr. Jones, but there are great divisions in the Republican Party over Mr. Moore’s candidacy.
After Mr. Trump’s endorsement, the Republican National Committee reversed itself and decided to contribute to Mr. Moore’s campaign. But the Republican Senatorial Campaign Committee has withheld any assistance. Most Republicans in the Senate have condemned Mr. Moore’s candidacy, and several have said he would face an Ethics Committee investigation should he win.
Republicans are in a particularly delicate position. Mr. Trump was accused of harassment and assault from at least a dozen women on the record, and he was recorded on an “Access Hollywood” tape boasting of sexual conquest and celebrity entitlement. He later apologized for his language on the tape, but he has consistently denied the women’s allegations.
Mr. Trump is scheduled to travel to Jackson, Miss., on Saturday for the opening of the state’s civil rights museum, which has drawn protests. But he will again be a toe-touch and a TV screen away from Alabama voters.