The theme of this year’s Great Performers issue is horror. In the process of making a series of short films that embody the genre, we revisited some of our favorites. Our list is below; let us know what we missed.
“The Shiver of the Vampires” (1971), by Jean Rollin. The French director was a pioneer of the genre.
“The Hunger” (1983), by Tony Scott. Catherine Deneuve is more than 2,000 years old and eternally elegant.
“Only Lovers Left Alive” (2014), by Jim Jarmusch. Tilda Swinton and Tom Hiddleston are a vampire couple living in a grand apartment in a burned-out Detroit neighborhood.
“Blood Diner” (1987), by Jackie Kong. Two brothers make a special dish with human flesh to serve at their run-down restaurant.
“Hannibal” (2001), by Ridley Scott. Anthony Hopkins reprises his role as Dr. Lecter.
“Raw” (2017), by Julia Ducournau. A coming-of-age tale in which a young vegetarian goes to vet school.
“Tourist Trap” (1979), by David Schmoeller. Friends are stalked by an army of mannequins at a roadside museum.
“Dolls” (1987), by Stuart Gordon. Travelers stranded by a storm take refuge in a house inhabited by a special collection of puppets.
“Annabelle” (2014), by John R. Leonetti. A vintage doll with paranormal powers.
“Village of the Damned” (1960), by Wolf Rilla. All the women in town are impregnated with demon babies.
“Kill, Baby … Kill!” (1966), by Mario Bava. One of the most memorable “evil little girl” characters in cinema.
“Ringu” (1998), by Hideo Nakata. A videotape kills anyone who watches it within seven days.
“Ju-on: The Grudge” (2002), by Takashi Shimizu. A supernatural tale of vengeful spirits haunting everyone who enters their house.
“A Tale of Two Sisters” (2003), by Kim Jee-woon. A young girl returns from a stay in a mental hospital to reckon with the trauma that drove her mad.
“Killer Klowns From Outer Space” (1988), by Stephen Chiodo. A galactic twist on the bloodthirsty clown.
“It” (2017), by Andy Muschietti. Adapted from Stephen King’s novel of the same name, the movie follows a group of outcast children fighting off a predatory clown.
“The Fall of the House of Usher” (1928), by James Sibley Watson and Melville Webber. It adapts the Edgar Allan Poe classic into a 13-minute silent film.
“Corpse Bride” (2005), by Mike Johnson and Tim Burton. An animated tale of a murdered bride who finds new life after death.
“The Innkeepers” (2012), by Ti West. The employees of a haunted hotel receive unwelcome visits from the ghost of a bride abandoned at the altar.
“Deep Red” (1975), by Dario Argento. An early entry in the slasher-film-driven-by-a-faceless-killer genre.
“American Psycho” (2000), by Mary Harron. Based on the Bret Easton Ellis novel, it stars Christian Bale as a serial killer hidden among New York’s moneyed class.
“The Merry Skeleton” (1897), by the Lumière Brothers. Less than a minute long, it was one of the first filmic depictions of a danse macabre.
“The Red Spectre” (1907), by Segundo de Chomón. A demonic magician faces off with a good spirit.
“The Shining” (1980), by Stanley Kubrick. Jack Nicholson plays a writer so tormented by writer’s block that he is driven to murder.
“The Devil’s Candy” (2015), by Sean Byrne. A painter’s stroke of brilliance damns him to a nightmarish ordeal.
“Repulsion” (1965), by Roman Polanski. Catherine Deneuve turns the tables on her male abusers.
“Alucarda” (1977), by Juan Lopez Moctezuma. Two teenage girls rebel against their religion and embrace Satanism.
“Possession” (1981), by Andrzej Zulawski. Isabelle Adjani plays a woman who becomes increasingly disturbed after separating from her husband.