SETTING This home was the first building constructed on Southgate Avenue in the historic Murray Hill neighborhood of Annapolis. Built for William Scott Southgate, the rector of St. Anne’s Episcopal Church, several blocks away, it is within walking distance of downtown and the city’s recently revitalized arts district. Two nearby magnet schools for the performing and visual arts serve students in sixth through 12th grades.
INDOORS The home was renovated and expanded about 10 years ago, with new materials, fixtures and moldings blending in with the original construction. It retains, for example, its curved staircase, tiled coal-burning fireplaces, pocket doors and exposed kitchen brick, but the reclaimed-wood floors and plantation shutters throughout are recent. All the windows offer interesting views, among them the sight of St. Anne’s Church and the Maryland State House.
Three bedrooms and two full bathrooms are on the second level, including a master suite with a walk-in closet and a bathroom with a tub and stall shower.
The third level has a mother-in-law suite that includes a living area with a kitchenette, a bedroom, a bathroom with radiant heated floors and a balcony with views of Spa Creek.
OUTDOOR SPACE The home has a front porch and a back porch, both large enough for seating. Steps from the back porch lead down to a large brick-paved terrace with a cocktail wall. A new stone wall surrounds part of the .3-acre property.
SETTING Built for a man who is a lawyer and art lover, this home is in the warehouse district of Houston. It is convenient to the municipal courthouse and theater district, and is three blocks from Buffalo Bayou.
INDOORS Designed to display the owner’s extensive collection of art photography, the home has vast stretches of white wall space in open interiors. The ground level includes a large gallery-like room with African slate floors and a half bathroom. (This was the only level to take in water during Hurricane Harvey and has been fully repaired.) A custom stainless-steel-and-cherrywood stairway zigzags through three floors of living space; the building also has an elevator.
The living room starts on the second level and rises to the third with floor-to-ceiling glass-block windows, cherrywood floors, a fireplace with a custom metal surround and a balcony. The open kitchen has custom cherry cabinets, a mosaic-tile backsplash and honed slate countertops and island. There is also a wet bar, a wine refrigerator, a butler’s pantry and a half bathroom.
On the third level, a mezzanine space overlooking the living room, with a wall of built-in shelves, is used as an office. Two guest bedrooms and a bathroom decorated with penny-round tiles complete the floor.
The fourth level is taken up by the master suite. The bedroom has a concrete balcony with views of downtown Houston. The bathroom has a centrally located tub that fills from the ceiling, with bathwater flowing over infinity edges into a space that insulates the interior. There is also a glass-tiled stall shower.
OUTDOOR SPACE The .14-acre property encompasses three townhouse lots. The house sits on one, the second has a saltwater pool and fountain screened by bamboo and the third is a fenced-in grassy area.
SETTING The home is a block from lower Main Street in the Old Town historic district of Park City, and is within easy walking distance of the town lift, with access to the Park City Mountain resort.
INDOORS The interior décor and mechanical systems were recently updated. The front door opens onto a foyer with a built-in banquette with a plush backrest for comfortable sitting while removing ski gear. An open living and dining area transitions to a kitchen with antique-style fixtures and finishes. The master bedroom, which has a tiled bathroom with a stone-topped double vanity, is also on this floor. Upstairs, beneath the eaves, are two additional bedrooms and a full bathroom.
OUTDOOR SPACE The frame house, painted a preservation-society-approved forest green with rust trim, sits on a stone terrace and is set back slightly from the street. 
