Love Andujar says she learned how to be selfless from her maternal grandmother, who raised her in the South Bronx.
As an adult she, too, became a caretaker. Ms. Andujar had been working for seven years at a law firm, screening phone calls of potential clients, when she left her job in 2012 to care for her aging grandmother, Carmen Moreno.
Ms. Andujar, the mother of a daughter, now 17, and a son, 12, who has autism, began relying on odd jobs, babysitting and her son’s disability check to support herself and her family. Her son attends a school for students with autism but does not require additional care.
About three years after Ms. Andujar began caring for her grandmother, her mother, Magalys Rosa, was told she had Stage 4 small-cell lung cancer. Ms. Andujar’s relationship with her mother had been strained because of Ms. Rosa’s absence in her childhood. But after learning of the illness, Ms. Andujar sought to reconnect with her before it was too late.
But now, Ms. Andujar was stretched thin as she struggled to tend to two ailing relatives, as well as to her own children.
A few months after her mother’s diagnosis, just before Thanksgiving 2015, Ms. Andujar was running late one morning to give her grandmother breakfast. She first had to drop off a dish for a potluck at her son’s school.
Ms. Moreno had fallen in her bedroom. She was unable to get up and was taken to the hospital. After a few days, she was sent home. While waiting for a home health aide to be assigned, Ms. Moreno developed a bed sore. She was taken back to the hospital and placed in a rehabilitation center. Ms. Andujar would visit often and bring her food.
Five months later, at 88, Ms. Moreno died there.
Nine months after Ms. Moreno’s death, Ms. Rosa’s condition worsened and she was placed in hospice care. Ms. Andujar went to see her frequently, and said that the time she spent with her mother was a gift.
In preparation for returning to the work force after spending years as a caregiver, Ms. Andujar enrolled last year at Grace Institute, a job-training center in Lower Manhattan.
“It was time to do something for me,” she said.
She hoped to pick up some administrative skills to bolster her chances of finding a job.
Ms. Andujar, who receives $511 a month in food stamps, said she was determined to complete the program and to support her family. She is still in a relationship with her children’s father, who was not working then, but he “helps out as much as he can,” Ms. Andujar said. At the time, the family’s only steady source of income was her son’s $700 monthly disability check.
When a teacher asked in class what might deter students from completing the program, Ms. Andujar responded: “Transportation.” She was then directed to the Community Service Society, one of the eight organizations supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, which used $233 from the fund to buy her two monthly MetroCards.
In January, her mother died at age 59. She missed a week of classes.
She made up her assignments and completed the program in February. She is now looking for employment in customer service.
