New York|New York City Planned to Put 400 Teachers in Jobs. It’s Placed 41.
New York City Planned to Put 400 Teachers in Jobs. It’s Placed 41.
Earlier this year, New York City’s Department of Education announced that it would place roughly 400 teachers who had been caught in a kind of educational limbo — without full-time jobs but getting paid — in classrooms full time.
But on Thursday, the department said that it had placed only 41 of the teachers, who were part of a pool known as the Absent Teacher Reserve. As critics of the plan had feared, they were disproportionately employed in schools that serve high-needs students.
According to the education department, the teachers were placed in jobs in 39 schools in districts across the city. An analysis done by the New Teacher Project, which works to improve teaching and had criticized the plan, found that the schools where reserve teachers were placed serve disproportionate numbers of black students and poor students, and disproportionately few white children.
A similar analysis, done by the Education Trust-New York, found that the elementary and middle schools that received reserve teachers had an average proficiency rate of 33 percent on the state reading tests and 27 percent on the math tests (compared to 41 percent and 38 percent citywide), while the high schools had an average graduation rate of 71 percent, compared to the citywide graduation rate of 79 percent.
One of the schools, the Coalition School for Social Change, in East Harlem, is in the city’s Renewal program, a $582-million effort to turn around the city’s most struggling schools. A department spokesman, Will Mantell, said that the school’s principal had asked for a teacher from the pool.
“This raises major equity concerns,” Ian Rosenblum, the executive director of the Education Trust-New York, said of his group’s analysis. He added that the city had not supplied any information about the past performance ratings of the 41 teachers, or how long they had been in the reserve.
The reserve was largely the result of a deal that the Bloomberg administration struck with the teachers’ union to give principals more control over who worked in their schools. Under the deal, teachers could not simply be fired, so they were put into the reserve. Over time their numbers grew, and in the last school year, salaries for teachers and other staff members in the reserve cost the department more than $150 million.
Teachers in the reserve are disproportionately low-performing compared to teachers in the system over all. Of the teachers who were in the pool at the end of the last school year, 12 percent had received the lowest possible ratings of effectiveness in the 2015-16 school year; only 1 percent of teachers in the city as a whole had done so poorly. And some teachers linger in the reserve for years: Of the group who were in the pool last spring, 25 percent had also been in it five years earlier.
Most teachers in the reserve ended up there because they worked at a school that closed, or because they lost their position because of declining enrollment or other budgetary changes. Roughly a third of the teachers in the reserve at the end of the last school year had entered the pool because they faced legal or disciplinary charges. In the past, teachers in the reserve have rotated through schools for a month at a time, sometimes filling in as substitutes.
The department said on Thursday that none of the 41 teachers it had placed were in the reserve because they faced legal or disciplinary charges.
Under Mayor Bill de Blasio, the city has tried to shrink the pool by offering severance incentives to teachers in it, as well as incentives to principals to hire them. In July, it announced that in an effort to get the numbers down further, it would place teachers with appropriate licenses in any school that still had a vacancy by October 15. If, at the end of the school year, those teachers received effective ratings from their principals, the department said, their jobs would become permanent.
The department said on Thursday that there had been 1,202 teachers in the reserve on the first day of school this year, a decline of 20 percent from the year before. Since then, it said, 359 teachers had either been permanently hired by schools or were in long-term assignments that could become permanent, including the 41 reserve teachers who were placed after October 15.
It was not immediately clear why the department ended up placing so many fewer teachers than it had anticipated. One possibility is that the threat of having a teacher forced on them led principals to bite the bullet and hire teachers from the pool before the October 15 deadline, giving them more say in the hiring.
The department said that some vacancies turned out to represent teachers who were on short leaves of absence; in other cases, it said, schools that had listed vacancies turned out to have lower enrollment than expected and did not need an additional teacher.
The department had said that its goal was to reduce the size of the reserve by half by the end of the 2018-19 school year. It said on Thursday that it was still on track to do so.