LIVERPOOL, England — The Liverpool Olympia is best known as a music venue, having hosted storied acts like the Beatles and the Rolling Stones. But on a morning in June, this 112-year-old theater had been turned into a TV set for “Peaky Blinders,” the gritty-chic crime drama with a cultural imprint that is more modest in scale, though perhaps not in intensity.
“Peaky Blinders” has become a cult hit for the BBC and Netflix, drawing famous fans like David Bowie and Leonard Cohen, who each offered songs for its soundtrack, and style disciples inspired by its story of a natty and ruthless Birmingham crime family in the era between the world wars.
It’s a phrase fans tend to shout with glee and a bad brummie accent, no matter where they’re from. Such is the infectious allure of this series, the top-rated drama on BBC Two — Netflix doesn’t release viewing data — with a pop culture impact that, à la shows like “Mad Men,” arguably outpaces the numbers. In England, there are Peaky Blinders bars, restaurants, tours, parties, weddings. The distinctive undercut hairstyle went from the bane of the actors to the subject of how-to articles in men’s magazines, and the popularity of the show’s slick early 20th-century tailoring led its creator, Steven Knight, to partner on a Peaky clothing line.
“To influence people — not people involved in the industry but real people who watch TV and then go out and do something about it — it’s great,” Mr. Knight said.
As a primarily Roma group in Birmingham, the Peakys are a departure from the usual pop culture gangsters. The new menace — a New York-based Mafioso with a grudge played by Adrien Brody — represents the first time they will tangle with the more classic version. The Shelby family, which also includes Aunt Polly (Helen McCrory) and Tommy’s brothers Arthur (Paul Anderson) and John (Joe Cole), has been arcing toward respectability, but the new threat will force them to return to the old neighborhood.
But while it deals in a specifically British theme, “Peaky Blinders” does so with an amalgam of disparate influences and elements — American westerns, a lithe Irish actor playing a tough crime boss, an art punk soundtrack — that add up to an arresting whole.
“Peaky Blinders” was born from the stories Mr. Knight heard about his father’s uncles, members of the real Peaky Blinders gang in Birmingham. The name came from the members’ signature flat-caps that became “blinders,” the probably apocryphal story goes, when weaponized with razor blades sewn into the peaks.
The stylized look and feel — the dazzling suits, the cathedral-like neighborhood pub, the slow-motion shots of the gang swaggering through grimy streets — is designed to approximate the wonder Mr. Knight felt upon hearing these marvelous tales while growing up in that city.
Though it’s a crime show, “Peaky Blinders” was inspired by American westerns, specifically the way they turned what was fundamentally “19th-century agricultural labor” into a heroic genre full of chivalry and myth.
Caryn Mandabach, an executive producer, couldn’t see the slender Mr. Murphy as an imposing crime boss. Until she met him. “He was so powerful in the room that it didn’t matter that he was physically not a big guy,” she said.
Decked out in Peaky wear — robin’s-egg shirt, charcoal vest and gold-chain sleeve garters — Mr. Murphy does look smaller in his trailer than he had on the monitors minutes before, though he has a coiled physicality and the actor’s gift of filling a room with his presence.
As the anchor of the Shelbys and the show, Tommy displays the classic contradictions of the gangster antihero — a family man who murders without compunction. But in his case the dissonance has a specific source: his time in World War I, which physically and emotionally decimated a generation of Europeans. “I wanted Cillian to encapsulate that closed-down, totally war-damaged male that shows no emotion,” Mr. Knight said.
The core relationship of the show is between Tommy and Ms. McCrory’s Polly, who comes somewhat undone in Season 4 but remains Tommy’s most trusted ally. The dynamic is emblematic of the show’s strong female roles, a rarity in gangster dramas.
The signature Peaky cut, high and tight, with the sides shaved every couple of days, initially “horrified” the actors, Mr. Knight said. The style was inspired by the World War I cuts favored by infantrymen to discourage lice — now “footballers in England with multimillion-pound contracts are having them,” he said.
Within the show, the most striking aesthetic element is the charged and often surprising soundtrack, an anachronistic mix of modern rock and punk with quieter, brooding works along the lines of its sinister theme song, “Red Right Hand” by Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds.
The tracks suggest the seething emotion beneath Tommy’s placid exterior — Nick Cave “is Tommy’s spirit animal,” Ms. Mandabach said — and the soundtrack benefits from the fact that “Peaky Blinders” is popular among musicians.
Antony Genn, the show’s composer and a former member of the English rock band Pulp, joined the show this season, and has placed more emphasis on original recordings featuring “my talented friends who are also outlaws,” like Flea, Iggy Pop and Jarvis Cocker.
