President Trump said all final status issues, like border issues in Jerusalem, remain open to negotiation between the parties. So he may not have actually denied that Jerusalem could be negotiated to be the capital of not only Israel but also Palestine: to be a shared capital.
This could decrease the high emotion on all sides, and would seem the most important question to ask him about where United States policy stands today on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
JAMES ADLER, CAMBRIDGE, MASS.
President Trump, in his speech about Jerusalem, called attention to President Harry S. Truman’s recognition of the state of Israel 70 years ago. But what Truman did not do was to recognize Jerusalem as its capital.
Truman supported what we now call a two-state solution, a partition plan drawn up by the United Nations. Palestine would be divided into two separate states, one Jewish and one Arab. They would be tied together in an economic union.
As for Jerusalem, an international zone would be established around the city to guarantee access by all faiths to their holy sites. Jews welcomed the partition. The Arabs did not. Truman believed that was a great missed historic opportunity.
President Trump’s decision on Jerusalem will likely be seen as a great historic mistake, making a lasting peace between Israel and the Palestinians that much more difficult, if not impossible, to achieve.
KARL F. INDERFURTH, MCLEAN, VA.
The writer served as an assistant secretary of state in the Clinton administration.
When President Harry S. Truman recognized the state of Israel, he was not deterred by critics, many in his own State Department, who predicted Muslim violence. Truman knew what was right, and he did it.
President Trump, in recognizing Jerusalem as Israel’s capital, was not deterred by critics, many in his own State Department, who predicted Muslim violence.
Bullies always threaten violence. Courageous leaders do the right thing and are not deterred by bullies. Like President Truman, President Trump knew what was right, and he did it.
RICHARD SHERMAN, MARGATE, FLA.
The subheading says, “Trump has only formalized what all Israelis know.” Well, no, maybe not all: The reason the rest of the world is reacting with hostility to this Trump perspective is that this decision is not Israel’s alone to make. There is another party whose wishes must be considered: the Palestinians.
As Israelis know, though they may want to ignore it, this decision was to be made as an outcome of negotiations between the Israelis and the Palestinians, who also claim Jerusalem as their capital. That’s what all previous American presidents and the rest of the world, as stated in many United Nations resolutions, understand.
Of course President Trump doesn’t necessarily know or care about United Nations resolutions, any more than he knows or cares about the Constitution.
