Black homeownership has declined in the city and nationally in the last 20 years, hindered by gentrification and inequitable lending policies.
Kirkland Lynch, a 35-year-old Black renter, has a six-figure job with Google, a law degree from Harvard, sterling credit and a mortgage pre-approval. But after a six-month house hunt in Brooklyn, with six unsuccessful bids, he is close to giving up, disheartened by slights that verge on discrimination.
The pandemic has compounded the challenges of an already difficult housing market, particularly for Black home buyers, who face a range of additional obstacles, and it threatens to widen the gap between Black and white homeownership to levels not seen since housing discrimination was made illegal five decades ago.
In New York — once a destination for Black families leaving the South, and more recently Caribbean immigrants, including Black Latinos — gentrification, limited affordable inventory, and a subprime mortgage crisis that disproportionately affected people of color, have stunted new home buying and pushed out many longtime owners.
From 2002 to 2008, the number of Black homeowners in the city dropped 10 percent, to 189,000 from 210,000, and there is evidence that the share dropped another 3 percent by 2017, according to the Center for N.Y.C. Neighborhoods, an affordable housing advocacy group.
Homeownership is often the largest source of intergenerational wealth for families. In 2015, the median net worth for white households was $139,300, and $156,300 for Asian households, compared to just $19,990 for Hispanic households, and $12,780 for Black households, according to a census report.
To explore the difficulties that Black New Yorkers face, The Times interviewed more than a dozen Black homeowners across the city, from new buyers to longtime owners, in condos and co-ops, brownstones and grass-hemmed houses. They described the challenges of qualifying to buy a home, fending off predatory lenders, keeping a home amid rising costs, and dealing with aggressive cash-investors making unsolicited offers.
But there was also a current of pride, community, and a sense of defying the odds, sometimes as the first to own property in their family.
Steph McLeod, 37, who works in health policy, and her partner, Kirya Traber, 36, a playwright, came to New York from the Bay Area in 2012 with a goal.
In May, they bought a two-bedroom, one-bath condo in Crown Heights for $775,000, after a three-year search in Central Brooklyn.
New York is one of the most segregated cities in the country, and Black residents don’t always benefit from fast-rising prices in racially divided communities undergoing gentrification. But after decades of discriminatory housing policies, some of the city’s Black homeowner enclaves persist in part because they remain cultural hubs for people of color.
“Here, people sound like my aunt — accents that you’re only used to sharing with close family,” said Ms. McLeod, who is of Jamaican descent. Prepandemic, the West Indian Carnival, one of the largest Caribbean gatherings in the nation, would wend through their neighborhood in late summer.
In 2019, nearly 60 percent of home purchase loans made by Black home buyers were in just three areas: parts of Southeastern Queens, Central Brooklyn, and northeastern Bronx, according to an analysis of public mortgage data by Jaime Weisberg, with the Association for Neighborhood and Housing Development, a housing coalition.
Note: Loans are shown by Public Use Microdata Area.
New York was ranked the ninth most segregated city in the country, according to a June study by the Othering & Belonging Institute at the University of California Berkeley. And the broader New York area, including parts of northern New Jersey and Long Island, was the most segregated metro area in the country.
There are material consequences. Nationally, household incomes and home values in segregated white neighborhoods are nearly twice as high as in segregated communities of color, according to the study.
Those conditions have led to many longtime Black residents moving away, said Abdul Sulaiman, 35, a founder of a chess mentoring program and Bronx resident, who last year bought a two-bedroom condo with his wife, Randi, a behavioral therapist, in the Clason Point section of the borough.
Many of his friends have moved to nearby suburbs to escape New York’s high cost of living. “I’m the only one crazy enough to try and purchase in the boroughs,” he said.
But Ms. McLeod and Ms. Traber said they found a sense of belonging in Crown Heights they hadn’t experienced in the Bay Area, where they had watched the Black population dwindle with rising home prices.
They also recognize that their new home, a condo converted from a predominantly Black rental building, is part of the gentrification that is changing the demographics of the neighborhood. When a new condo board is established, the couple said they planned to defend the rights of the remaining renters, many of whom have lived in the building for decades.
“We really have folks here that have our backs,” Ms. Traber said.
Gina Bolden, a 52-year-old civil servant, became the first homeowner — and landlord — in her family, when she bought a two-family house on the North Shore of Staten Island in 1999 for $165,000.
Black homeowners account for nearly a quarter of the owner-occupied, two-to-four family homes in New York, the largest share behind white homeowners, who own 43 percent, according to the Center for N.Y.C. Neighborhoods.
But unexpected costs can be more severe for first-time Black homeowners, who often have been saddled with riskier mortgages, and who likely made their purchases without financial help from family members.
Ms. Bolden, who rents the lower unit to help cover her mortgage, nearly lost the home in 2008, when she refinanced into an adjustable-rate mortgage to help pay for her son’s college tuition.
The financial crisis hit Black homeowners harder, in part because of higher loan costs. The percentage of Black borrowers in New York City with subprime loans was seven times higher than for white borrowers in 2007, according to the New York University Furman Center.
Ms. Bolden, who grew up in public housing, saved for two years to muster an $8,000 down payment on the home. She has been working full-time, as a single mother, since graduating early from high school; she got her bachelor’s degree in 2001.
In 2013, she consolidated her debt through a federal loan modification program and remains current on the mortgage, but the new loan, after fees, was over $450,000, or nearly three times her purchase price in 1999. “It’s like I started all over again,” Ms. Bolden said.
Even in families where the opportunity to pass a home onto the next generation exists, it’s not always assured.
When Kenyatte Reid, 47, who works for the Department of Education, and Crystal Granderson-Reid, 48, a writer, were newly married, they knew they wanted to buy Mr. Reid’s family brownstone in the Lefferts Manor Historic District in Brooklyn. But their window was closing.
Some members of Mr. Reid’s family were eager to sell and move South, but the couple needed more time to qualify for a mortgage. The relatives reached a compromise allowing the couple to rent the home for four years while improving their credit and savings, a luxury many do not receive.They bought the house for less than $300,000 in 2003; today it’s worth about $2.2 million.
“We would never sell it,” said Mr. Reid, who had dreamed of buying the house that his grandparents, one of the first Black families to own in the neighborhood, purchased in the 1950s.
Mr. Reid comes from a history of homeowners, dating back to Black oystermen in Sandy Ground on Staten Island, one of the oldest free Black settlements in the country, established before the Civil War.
Ms. Granderson-Reid’s experience was more common: Her mother sold the family home, a big house on a hill in White Plains, N.Y., below market value in order to split the proceeds with family members, and she grew up renting. “The cycle broke,” she said.
Many families are forced to sell because financial hurdles make it difficult for one family member to buy the others out. From July 2019 to June 2020, 10 percent of Black applicants in the United States were rejected for mortgages, 2.5 times the rate for white applicants, according to a report from the National Association of Realtors, a large trade group.
Black borrowers also incur the highest financing fees — nearly $14,000, compared to $6,000 for white borrowers, who paid the lowest fees on average, according to the Center for N.Y.C. Neighborhoods.
“Very rarely do you get to tell these stories of Black generational wealth,” Ms. Granderson-Reid said, and they take stewardship of the home seriously. The couple and their three daughters spent years restoring the facade and architectural details of the three-story, 1901 brownstone, including three large tapestries woven into the walls that show Dutch colonists arriving in Brooklyn.
Nilea Alexander, 39, inherited a nearly 100-year-old townhouse in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, from her great-uncle, a cobbler and bank worker from Trinidad, who bought the home in the 1960s and left it to her, after she spent years managing his estate and caring for him. Then the offers came.
“I can’t tell you how many times I’ve had to say ‘Get out of my yard,’” to speculative investors seeking to flip or rent homes at a premium, she said.
Nearly all of the homeowners interviewed described cash buyers making aggressive offers for their properties. For a house in Queens, one bidder showed up in the evening and told the owner a full-cash offer was in the trunk of his car.
These offers can be tempting because the cost to repair an old home can be onerous. Black owner-occupant homeowners have the highest proportion of homes with a maintenance deficiency, 35.5 percent, according to the Center for N.Y.C. Neighborhoods.
Black home buyers, on average, also go into greater debt for lower-valued homes, compared to white borrowers, according to a 2019 report by the Urban Institute, a policy think tank.
But Ms. Alexander and her husband, Lamine Diagne, with whom she owns the nearby restaurant, Café Rue Dix, have no plans to sell.
“He gave my family, for generations and generations, a gift that keeps on going,” she said.
She is undertaking a major renovation and the home was recently featured in a project called “On My Stoop,” a photo series about Black female homeowners, produced by the groups FourTwo Creative and Sunday School.
Judith Bell, 76, is at risk of losing her primary home in St. Albans, Queens and an investment property in nearby Jamaica, because of ill-advised borrowing during the height of subprime lending.
Ms. Bell, a former teacher, had paid off the homes, but took out new loans in 2004 and 2008 to make repairs and cover living expenses. She had taken a reverse mortgage on her St. Albans home, essentially a cash advance on the value of the property, which must be paid in full to the lender either when the borrower dies or sells the home.
Encouraged by a relative to consider the once uncommon loans, which were advertised on television with celebrities declaring them a safe way for seniors to keep their homes, she agreed to a loan with a 3.25 percent interest rate that could eventually jump to 13.25 percent.
Data suggest Black homeowners received a disproportionate share of these loans. In Philadelphia, from 2010 to 2016, Black borrowers received two-thirds of all reverse mortgages, according to Reinvestment Fund, a community development group.
In late 2007, Ms. Bell was diagnosed with breast cancer, and quickly burned through her savings on medical expenses. Because of an unpaid property tax of around $5,000 on the St. Albans home, the lender, Champion Mortgage, attempted to foreclose on the property, which was valued at $570,000. “I just wanted to live, and they just went ahead and did what they wanted,” Ms. Bell said.
She caught up on the taxes in 2015, but said she continues to get foreclosure notices, even though a spokeswoman for the lender confirmed that she is no longer behind on her payments.
The upcoming expiration of a New York State stay on foreclosures could soon have a disproportionate effect on Black and Latino homeowners like Ms. Bell, who have fallen behind during the pandemic, said Lori Miller, the executive director of Neighborhood Housing Services of Jamaica, a nonprofit housing counseling agency.
“We are all steeling ourselves for what we think will be an overwhelming number of at-risk homeowners,” she said.
One of the most entrenched problems in communities of color is a lack of support for longtime homeowners, said Yangchen Chadotsang, the associate director of homeownership at Chhaya, a nonprofit housing group that is working with Ms. Bell.
Mr. Lynch, the well qualified, 35-year-old lawyer looking to buy in Brooklyn, recognizes his biggest competition: buyers with more cash on hand.
His budget is about $1.1 million for a two-family home, and he is pre-approved for a mortgage backed by the Federal Housing Administration, a loan popular with many first-time buyers, because it allows them to pay as little as 3.5 percent down payment.
He moved from Los Angeles to start a new job with Google in March, with temporary housing on the Lower East Side of Manhattan until October. But after seeing 15 homes and losing bids on six of them, he is still searching.
He gravitated toward Crown Heights and nearby parts of Brooklyn, because it reminds him of his childhood in West Philadelphia. “It’s wild to me, these neighborhoods that were the only places we could go, are becoming neighborhoods we can’t go,” he said.
“Ten times out of 10, a seller is going to go with a non-F.H.A. buyer, if they have options,” said Abdul Muid, the principal of Ivey North, a real estate firm.
In Mr. Lynch’s latest rejection, on a home in Bedford-Stuyvesant, despite his mortgage pre-approval, the seller’s agent asked a number of invasive questions about his credit history, like how much he pays in monthly student loan debt. The seller went with another offer, even though Mr. Lynch was willing to bid higher.
Mr. Lynch was disheartened, but not surprised.
