“It’s an intriguing question to ask whether there were environmental thresholds for those earlier dispersals, even though those dispersals may have been limited or short-lived,” said Rick Potts, a paleoanthropologist who directs the Human Origins Program at the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History.
Dr. Manica and Robert Beyer, a researcher at the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research in Germany, first devised their ecological approach in 2018. Scientists had already modeled the climate as far back as 125,000 years, but Dr. Manica and Dr. Beyer wanted to go back to the date of the earliest anatomically modern human fossils, which were found in Morocco and are estimated to be at least 300,000 years old.
“That’s the moment when you see our species actually existed,” Dr. Manica said. Mario Krapp, a research fellow at Antarctica New Zealand and an author on the paper, developed an emulator for the existing climate model to go back deeper into time.
To predict when Homo sapiens feasibly could have moved through northeastern Africa and the Arabian Peninsula, the researchers needed to find out the absolute minimal conditions in which humans could survive. “We wanted to build up this catalog of the good times and bad times,” Dr. Manica said.
They looked at distribution maps of present-day hunter-gatherers and found that human populations are generally not recorded in areas where precipitation falls below 3.5 inches of rain per year. Rainfall this trifling is not enough to sustain green patches of reeds, grasses and shrubs that feed the grazing animals that early humans may have depended on.
Once the researchers set the threshold of survivability at 3.5 inches, they overlaid their climate reconstructions to see when conditions might have been sweet enough to travel through two possible routes into Eurasia: the Sinai Peninsula up north and, further south, the Strait of Bab-el-Mandeb , which separates the Horn of Africa from contemporary Yemen.
Their model revealed a handful of historical windows during which there was enough rainfall and relatively low sea levels to sustain a human migration out of Africa. The Sinai land bridge was crossable several times, as early as 246,000 years ago, and the southern strait had even more favorable windows, including the period 65,000 years ago.
So the question still stands: If some Homo sapiens were able to colonize Eurasia far earlier, why were they not successful?
The model had to make several assumptions, including that the southern strait would always have been crossable by humans and that those people might have had the boat technology to make the crossing. The model breaks down the geography of the region to a grid with a resolution with half a degree latitude and longitude, or around 30 miles. This approach inevitably ignores the mosaic of vegetation and topography that exists on the ground.
On the other hand, Dr. Potts, the paleoanthropologist, noted that the minimum level of rainfall in the model would have been “far too low” to allow hunter-gatherers to successfully disperse out of Africa. Dr. Potts pointed to previous research suggesting that early humans could only have dispersed in the continent when the mean average rainfall was more than 3.9 inches per year, and typically dispersed when there was at least 10 inches of rain. The more interesting research question, in Dr. Potts’ eyes, is what dispersal paths would have been available in these windows of more abundant rainfall.
