Mr. Habré, who received a life sentence for crimes against humanity including torture and sex offenses, was said to be out of prison for medical treatment at his death.
DAKAR, Senegal — Hissène Habré, the former president of Chad, died on Tuesday while serving a life sentence in Senegal for crimes against humanity, including killings, torture and sex offenses, during his rule in the 1980s. He was 79.
His death was confirmed by Lt. Mame Balla Faye, the director of the Cap Manuel prison in Senegal, the West African country where Mr. Habré was being held after being convicted there in 2016. Mr. Faye did not provide further details.
He was not in prison at his death, however, according to news media reports. He had spent 10 days in a nearby clinic receiving treatment for complications of diabetes and high blood pressure, Senegalese news media said. Some outlets reported that he had been infected with the coronavirus.
Mr. Habré was allowed out of prison for 60 days in April 2020 after a judge said he was particularly vulnerable to the coronavirus. His wife had long petitioned the Senegalese authorities to release him on health grounds even before the pandemic.
Mr. Habré was the first former head of state to be convicted of crimes against humanity by another country’s courts.
A former defense minister, he took power in 1982 in a coup backed by the United States, and once in office he received weapons and assistance from France, Israel and the United States to keep Libya, Chad’s northern neighbor, at bay.
His rule was violent from the start. Prisoners of war and political opponents were killed. But the Reagan administration kept supplying him with weapons to keep up the fight against Libya, led by Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi.
A Chadian truth commission found that Mr. Habré’s government had killed more than 40,000 people believed to be enemies of the state, including those who had merely come under suspicion.
Mr. Habré lost power in 1990 the way he had taken it, in a coup. He then fled to Senegal, taking $12 million from the national bank accounts with him. For years he lived quietly in coastal Dakar, the country’s capital, buying properties there and remaining untroubled by the government of Abdoulaye Wade, which kept delaying his prosecution.
It was the government of Mr. Wade’s successor, President Macky Sall, that tried him, setting up a special court with the African Union to do so — the Extraordinary African Chambers.
On the first day of his trial, Mr. Habré was dragged into the courtroom kicking and shouting insults at the judge. “Down with colonialism!” he said. 
When he was convicted, those victims rejoiced, punched the air, cried and ululated in the court. They had fought for justice for decades.
But five years later, nearly 8,000 victims are still waiting for the $150 million in compensation they were jointly awarded.
Mr. Abaifouta said that Mr. Habré’s death would bring no relief to his victims, because many former subordinates had not faced justice and still permeated Chad’s government.
The imprisonment, killings and torture carried out by Mr. Habré’s secret police, the Directorate of Documentation and Security, became widely known, thanks in part to the meticulous documentation of victim testimonies by Souleymane Guengueng, a survivor who had almost died in jail. Mr. Guengueng promised himself that if he ever got out, he would bring his torturers to justice — and eventually, he did.
Mr. Habré’s successor and onetime army chief, Idriss Déby, died on the battlefield in April and was succeeded by his son Mahamat, a 37-year-old four-star military general.
Hissène Habré was born on Aug. 13, 1942, to a family of herders in Largeau, in northern Chad, then a colony of France. Excelling in school, he went to work for the French colonial administration and earned a scholarship to study in France, where he took up political science and law. Chad achieved full independence in 1960.
After his return to Chad in the early 1970s Mr. Habré joined an insurgent movement fighting against Chad’s first post-independence government. After that government was toppled in a military coup, he became prime minister for a short spell in a power-sharing agreement, but six months later it fell apart amid fighting between his forces and the national army. He became a rebel once more, leading the successful coup in 1982.
His survivors include his two wives, Fatime Hachem Habré and Fatime Raymonde Habré.