The treaty has long been criticized by human-rights advocates who said it tacitly encouraged asylum-seekers to circumvent Canada’s official land borders.
MONTREAL — A Canadian court has ruled that a treaty with the United States that allows Canada to turn away asylum-seekers coming from the United States if they originally entered there from a third country violates Canada’s constitution.
Human-rights advocates have long criticized the pact, saying it tacitly encourages asylum-seekers to circumvent Canada’s official land borders because if they try to enter at an official crossing, they will be refused entry and returned to the United States, subject to some exceptions.
In a more than 60-page ruling, Justice Ann Marie McDonald cited the conditions asylum-seekers said they had faced while in detention in the United States, including lack of access to adequate health care or legal counsel.
In her ruling, the judge wrote that “Canada cannot turn a blind eye to the consequences that befell Ms. Mustefa in its efforts to adhere to” the treaty.
Among the groups bringing the court challenge were Amnesty International and the Canadian Council for Refugees.
Mary-Liz Power, a spokeswoman for Canada’s Minister of Public Safety, said the ministry was reviewing the court’s decision, which does not become effective until Jan. 22.
The Canadian government has six months to respond to the ruling and can appeal to the Federal Court of Appeal. If the ruling is overturned, the litigants could potentially appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada.
Canadian proponents of the treaty argue that it is an effective means to control the border and that the agreement was entered into on the basis that the asylum systems of both Canada and the United States meet the necessary level of protection for asylum-seekers under international law.
Justin Mohammed, a law and policy adviser at Amnesty International Canada, said the legal case was part of a longstanding effort to press Canada to recognize that the human rights of asylum-seekers were being violated in the United States, a situation, he said, that had worsened amid the anti-refugee ethos of the Trump administration.
He added that the decision was all the more important during a global pandemic when overcrowding in American detention centers posed an even greater risk to the health and security of asylum-seekers.
“The court decision throws cold water on the idea that when Canada returned refugees to the United States that they will be treated with respect for their dignity and human rights,” Mr. Mohammed said.