President Trump announced an overhaul of the National Environmental Policy Act, a key conservation law, to speed up construction permitting for freeways, power plants and pipelines.
For decades, the single biggest obstacle to building a modern transportation system has been the mountains and mountains of bureaucratic red tape in Washington D.C. But all of that ends today. We’re doing something very dramatic. [applause] We just completed an unprecedented — I don’t want to say it’s absolutely unprecedented — top to bottom overhaul, should have been done years ago, of the infrastructure approval process. This approval process that has cost trillions of dollars over the years for our country and delays like you wouldn’t believe. This is a truly historic breakthrough, which means better roads, bridges, tunnels and highways for every U.P.S. driver, and every citizen all across our land. Together, we’re reclaiming America’s proud heritage as a nation of builders, and a nation that can get things done.
In doing so, the Trump administration claimed it would save hundreds of millions of dollars over almost a decade by significantly reducing the amount of time allowed for completing reviews of major infrastructure projects.
The president announced the final changes to the rule at the U.P.S. Hapeville Airport Hub in Atlanta, making the case that “mountains and mountains of red tape” and lengthy permit processes had held up major infrastructure projects across the country, including a lane expansion to the perpetually clogged Interstate 75 in Georgia.
And in one of the most bitterly contested provisions, the rule would free federal agencies from having to consider the impacts of infrastructure projects on climate change. It does so by eliminating the need for agencies to analyze a project’s indirect or “cumulative” effects on the environment and specifying that they are required to only analyze “reasonably foreseeable” impacts.
Conservationists like to call the National Environmental Policy Act the “Magna Carta” of environmental law. Just as the charter of rights protected English citizens from monarchical rule, activists note, the foundational environmental policy gives United States citizens a voice in every federal road, housing project, airport or major infrastructure development.
Activists opposed to fossil fuel expansion have used the environmental policy to challenge a proposed major coal terminal in the state of Washington. Last year a federal judge found that the Obama administration did not adequately take into account the climate change impact of leasing public land for oil gas drilling in Wyoming, a ruling that also presented a threat to Mr. Trump’s plans for fossil fuel development.
But despite tasking at least a half dozen people from various agencies to finish the regulation this summer, the final rule is not likely to be safe from the Congressional Review Act, a law that had hardly been used until Mr. Trump took office. Under the law, Congress can overturn a federal agency’s rule-making within 60 legislative days of its finalization, something Democrats have pledged to do next year if they have the votes. Otherwise, the rule is expected to be subject to a lengthy court battle.
Documents obtained under public records laws by Documented, a watchdog group that tracks corporate influence in government, show that the White House has been working with conservative allies to build support for the measure.
