After a weekslong campaign, artists in Britain welcomed the move, which will provide support to recipients like “local basement” music venues and museums.
LONDON — Britain’s arts sector, largely shuttered since March because of the pandemic and warning of an imminent collapse, is being given a lifeline through what Prime Minister Boris Johnson described as a “world-leading” rescue package for cultural and heritage institutions.
The organizations will be handed 1.57 billion pounds, about $2 billion, the culture ministry said on Sunday evening.
The money will go to a variety of recipients, including Britain’s “local basement” music venues and museums, he added, although he did not provide details. Museums in England were allowed to reopen on Saturday, but it is unclear when theaters and music venues will be permitted to.
Although Mr. Johnson’s claim that the package is “world-leading” aligns with his tendency toward hyperbole and tub-thumping, the figure is on par with rescue packages for the arts in Europe’s largest nations.
On Friday, Germany’s Parliament approved a fund of 1 billion euros (about $1.13 billion) to get its culture sector back up and running, building on already generous support from its regional legislatures. Many state-funded theaters in Germany receive 70 to 80 percent of their income from the state, compared with about 20 to 30 percent in Britain.
France’s culture ministry said in a news release last week that it had committed €5 billion toward the arts, although much of that included unemployment benefits and job retention initiatives that did not figure in the British or German bailout totals.
Smaller countries have also pledged money for the sector. The Netherlands has committed about €600 million to help protect its cultural life, a spokesman for its culture minister said in an email. That includes rent holidays for museums and measures to help self-employed artists, he said.
The British package was met with surprise by the country’s theater industry, which had been running a coordinated, celebrity-led campaign for weeks in a bid for support as theaters announced major layoffs. On Friday, the National Theater in London told 400 employees that they would lose their jobs in August.
The package is a recognition that many performing venues cannot operate profitably with social distancing measures in place, Philip Bernays, the chief executive of the Theater Royal, Newcastle — another venue that had announced layoffs — said in a telephone interview.
Some freelance theater workers expressed concern on social media that the rescue package did not seem to benefit freelance artists, some of whom had been unable to get unemployment benefit since March because of quirks in the country’s system.
“I hate to sound cynical, but I’m still trying to understand how the government package will directly help freelancers and independents,” Liz Barker, a theater lighting and sound technician, wrote on Twitter.
Late Sunday, UK Theater, a trade body, said it was stepping in to help theater people who were out of work, starting a fund to provide one-off grants of £1,000 to those most in need.
Netflix has provided £500,000 to the fund, Anne Mensah, the company’s vice president of original series, said in a news release, in recognition of the “pipeline of emerging creative talent” that British theaters supply to the streaming giant.
