Assessing the virus’s real death rate could offer clues on what to expect next. Data shows how much harder the pandemic is hitting Black and Latino Americans.
Phoenix has a testing crisis, and FEMA refuses to help, the mayor says.
In Texas, caseloads soar, hospital beds dwindle, and political divisions sharpen.
The fullest look yet at the racial inequity of the coronavirus.
Masks are now mandatory in Iran.
In Australia, thousands are told they can’t leave their homes, effective immediately.
Mayor Kate Gallego of Phoenix said on Sunday that with cases and death counts soaring in Arizona, testing sites in her city and surrounding Maricopa County are overwhelmed, but the Federal Emergency Management Agency has rebuffed her pleas for help.
In an interview later in the day, Ms. Gallego, a Democrat, said she had been trying since April to get more testing resources for Phoenix, both from FEMA and from the private sector. But testing, she says, remains woefully inadequate, especially for those who lack health insurance.
More than 20 percent of tests in Arizona are coming back positive now, she said. “Public health officials tell me that when you’re doing the appropriate amount of testing, it should be around 2 percent,” she said.
An aide to the mayor said that FEMA had responded to the city’s most recent request by saying the agency was “getting out of the testing business.” Maricopa County officials were told the same thing when they asked FEMA for help, the mayor said.
Cases have doubled in Arizona in recent weeks; more than 3,400 new cases were announced Sunday. The state marked a record on Saturday with 3,182 confirmed and suspected virus hospitalizations.
“I hope they understand what it’s like out here,” Mayor Gallego said. “I wish I could have the president with me as people fill their cars with gas so they can wait in lines for eight hours, while they’re sick and it’s 110 degrees outside,” to get a test.
Vice President Mike Pence, who visited Phoenix on Wednesday, said last week that testing was readily available to anyone in the country who needed it.
An administration official said the federal government is working to resolve Arizona’s need for testing supplies and that the city should work through the state to get the help it needs.
Public health experts and officials on Sunday disputed President’s Trump’s characterization of the seriousness of the coronavirus.
Cases have risen steeply in recent weeks, and infections announced across the United States last week totaled more than 330,000 — a record high that included the five highest single-day totals of the pandemic. On Sunday, more than 40,000 new cases had been announced nationally by evening.
On Sunday, the former F.D.A. commissioner Dr. Scott Gottlieb said that “certainly more than 1 percent of people get serious illness” if they are infected. Speaking on the CBS program “Face the Nation,” he estimated that when all cases were counted, including asymptomatic ones, between 2 and 5 percent of infected people become sick enough to require hospitalization.
Dr. Stephen Hahn, the commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, sidestepped repeated questions about that statement on three television news shows. “I’m not going to get into who is right and who is wrong,” he said at one point.
Dr. Hahn told CNN’s Dana Bash that it’s “too early to tell” if it’s safe for Republicans to hold their convention in Jacksonville, Fla., next month. “We’ll have to see how this unfolds in Florida and elsewhere around the country,” he said.
Even some Republicans pushed back at the president’s assertions.
“The virus is not harmless,” Miami’s mayor, Carlos Giménez, said on “Face the Nation,” noting that positivity rates in Miami-Dade County — the share of coronavirus tests that come back positive — were now above 20 percent. Florida has reached record highs for new cases several times in the past 10 days, reporting more than 11,400 new cases on Saturday alone, according to a New York Times database. More than 10,000 new cases were announced in Florida on Sunday, and the state has now had over 200,000 total cases.
Mr. Trump and other administration officials have also highlighted the country’s declining death rate.
“By the time somebody gets infected, it takes a couple weeks before they get hospitalized and get really sick, and another week or 10 days before they die, ” he said.
He also said that many of the people now being infected were younger adults and less likely to develop severe illness.
Studies that have calculated the death rate based on broader antibody testing that takes silent cases into consideration suggest an infection death rate of less than 1 percent, Dr. Jha said.
And many who have recovered are still struggling to regain their pre-disease lives, and may face long-term health issues.
Hospitals in Austin, Texas, could be “overrun” within two weeks if current trends hold, Mayor Steve Adler warned on Sunday.
“If we don’t change the trajectory, we are within two weeks of having our hospitals overrun,” the mayor said on the CNN program “State of the Union.” He said intensive care units could fill up even sooner, perhaps within 10 days.
Houston’s mayor, Sylvester Turner, issued the same two-week warning in an appearance on the CBS program “Face the Nation,” noting that roughly one in four virus tests in the city was now positive and that the demand for testing was exceeding capacity.
The virus is spreading rapidly in Texas, one of the first states to lift stay-at-home orders and reopen businesses. It has broken daily records for new cases several times in the past week. More than 195,000 cases have been identified over the course of the pandemic in the state, which hit a single-day high on Wednesday with more than 8,100 new cases. Texas broke another record over the weekend with 8,181 patients hospitalized as of Sunday.
Travis County, Austin’s home, has confirmed more than 11,000 cases since the pandemic began, according to a database maintained by The New York Times. Harris County, Houston’s home, has reported 35,913.
But the virus has moved beyond Texas’ generally liberal cities, reaching into the deep-red regions of the state that have resisted aggressive public health regulation.
In Lubbock, more people tested positive in the last three weeks than in the previous three months combined. Two months ago, on the day that Gov. Greg Abbott began to reopen the state, the city recorded eight positive tests. On Wednesday, there were 184.
Mayor Adler said that the most important thing about the order Governor Abbott signed on Thursday making masks mandatory in most counties was that people would now be getting the same guidance from both state and local officials.
Our correspondent Sheri Fink goes behind the scenes at Houston Methodist Hospital as coronavirus cases rise.
“We’ve got a possible Covid. 52-year-old male. 10 minutes out. H.F.D., shortness of breath. Covid, possibly.” “I’ll be honest with you, I can barely keep track.” This is Dr. Aric Bakshy. He’s an attending physician here at Houston Methodist Hospital. And I asked him how many patients have you seen here just on your single shift since 1 o’clock this afternoon? “One, two, three, four, five. I mean, I have over a dozen people here, at least. And these are all Covid. A lot of them are Covid.” He actually trained at the hospital, Elmhurst, that sort of came to represent one of the hardest-hit hospitals in New York City. I’m Sheri Fink. I’m a correspondent at The New York Times. I’ve been reporting from hospitals in New York City from the beginning. I looked at the emergency room, new I.C.U.s, pregnant mothers who had coronavirus, and now I’m in Houston. So we are here at Houston Methodist Hospital, which is the largest hospital in Houston. And right at this moment, the number of coronavirus cases is really rising dramatically in the city. How does it feel? Similar or different to March? Although they had a moderate peak in April, now they’re more than double the peak that they ever reached at that time. And the numbers look like they’re going to just keep rising. “Since March we’ve had a trickle of patients. Everyone was — everyone stayed at home. People were not really getting sick in numbers that would overburden the system. Dr. Bakshy here.  Since, probably, Memorial Day it’s been a lot busier. Every patient who comes into the hospital now, we’re testing for Covid. Deep breath.“ So this is Carlos Clara. He has a confirmed case of coronavirus. He had gone for a test when he was an outpatient, and he’s here in the emergency room because he’s having trouble breathing. “Body aches? Are you having chest pain?” Like many patients we’re meeting, he’s part of a family where multiple members have tested positive. His wife is sick, one of his sons tested positive, and even though he goes out every day to work, he suspects the virus came into his family through his son’s work as a cashier. “Your oxygen is a little low. OK? We’re going to have to keep you in the hospital for treatments, OK? But you’re going to be OK. Actually, for most of these patients, we can take care of it — you can take care of them medically. But I think a big issue is a lot of them are really scared.” And it’s not just that they’re scared. They’re lonely, too. Genevieve J. McCall is 96, and she shares with us that she hadn’t seen her daughter since the coronavirus took hold here. “I have not been able to see her or touch her for three months.” She didn’t come to the E.R. thinking she had Covid. She had symptoms of worsening heart failure. But as Dr. Bakshy talked to her, it became clear that she may also have been exposed. “Do you have any Covid contacts?” “OK. When was that?” “OK.” What they’re finding now at the hospitals is that people who are coming in for all kinds of what seem to be just their regular illnesses may, in fact, have Covid, too. Or at least been exposed to it. Tell me about your experience with coronavirus. You look good right now, but you’re breathing with some extra help. “We had a little party for my 8-year-old. Lives with me. Granddaughter. Just a birthday cake.” This is Rosa V. Hernandez. Like many people, she had really tried to be careful, but she let her guard down and she got sick and was very close to having to have a breathing tube yesterday. “People are not taking it seriously. They’re like, oh my God, I’ve got to party hearty. I got to go to bars, I’ve got to go to the beach, I’ve got to go eat out. Really? Like you’ve never done it before? Please, please, please take it serious.” The fear is that nobody really knows what the trajectory is. You can have models, but models only can do so much. It really, really depends on human behavior. Whether they stay home more. Whether they wear masks. And then there could just be mysteries that we don’t even understand about how this virus passes. And those numbers for now? They just keep rising.
Many conservative Texans do not share that view, including some of the state’s top leaders. On Tuesday, Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick declared himself tired of Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the nation’s top infectious disease doctor. “I don’t need his advice anymore,” Mr. Patrick said.
That sentiment was echoed outside a popular, newly opened hamburger restaurant in Wolfforth, just outside Lubbock, where even Mr. Abbott, a Republican, came under harsh criticism. “It seems like he’s been influenced by Fauci and the left,” Mark Stewart said.
But in the biggest cities in Texas, Governor Abbott’s directives don’t go far enough.
Some Texans are worried about a political event on the horizon: The executive committee of the state’s Republican Party voted on Thursday to go ahead with an in-person convention in Houston next week. In response, the Texas Medical Association said it would withdraw from the event as an advertiser.
“With or without masks, an indoor gathering of thousands of people from all around the state in a city with tens of thousands of active COVID-19 cases poses a significant health risk,” the organization’s president, Dr. Diana L. Fite, said in a statement on Friday.
Even Mr. Patrick said that holding an in-person convention in Houston was not a good idea, citing the risks of exposing people to Covid-19. But he added that he respected the vote of the committee. “I will be there,” he said in a statement in Friday.
Early numbers had shown that Black and Latino people were being harmed by the coronavirus at higher rates, but new federal data — made available after The New York Times sued the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention — reveals a clearer and more complete picture: Black and Latino people have been disproportionately affected by the coronavirus in a widespread manner that spans the country, throughout hundreds of counties in urban, suburban and rural areas, and across all age groups.
As the Iranian government battles a new wave of the virus, the authorities have, for first time since the pandemic began, ordered citizens to cover their faces in public.
The new rules took effect on Sunday.
A day earlier, President Hassan Rouhani urged businesses to refuse service to customers not wearing masks. And he said any government employee who showed up at work without one would be sent home and marked down as absent for the day.
In Tehran, the capital, municipal officials said the police, security forces and public transportation authorities would crack down on people violating the mask rule.
On Sunday, Iran marked its highest number of deaths, 163 people, from the virus in a single day since the pandemic started, according to the health ministry. Eighteen of the country’s 31 provinces are on a state of high alert for Covid-19, with nine declared as red zones, a spokeswoman for the ministry said.
A doctor overseeing pandemic patients at Tehran’s designated hospital for the disease said all the beds there were full.
But it remains to be seen if Iranians will adhere to the new rules.
Iran briefly imposed a lockdown during its annual New Year holiday period in early April and opened the country for business in early May. Since then, the majority of Iranians have resumed ordinary life — and then some.
While large gatherings such as weddings and funerals were still considered prohibited, a lavish Cinderella-themed wedding in the Lavasan hills near Tehran drew the ire of local officials. There were said to be 120 actors and 65 employees of the wedding hall re-enacting the fairy tale.
The health ministry said the groom had been arrested.
Officials in India canceled a planned reopening of the Taj Mahal this week, dealing a setback to hopes that welcoming visitors back to monuments would boost local tourism until international flights resume. India’s coronavirus infections started to rapidly rise several weeks ago when the government began lifting a nationwide lockdown imposed in March, and some cities have already reinstated tough rules to keep their caseloads down. India has reported about 700,000 confirmed infections and nearly 20,000 deaths as of Monday.
In rewarding Tokyo’s first female governor, Yuriko Koike, with a second term on Sunday, voters appeared to be endorsing her highly visible leadership during the pandemic. The sprawling metropolis has avoided the kind of death toll seen in other big cities. But a recent resurgence in cases in Tokyo has made clear that her challenge is far from over. Even as Ms. Koike, 67, cruised to victory on Sunday, with exit polls by the Japanese news media showing her winning 60 percent of the vote, Tokyo reported 111 new infections, its fourth straight day over 100.
Croatia’s ruling party came first in a general election on Sunday despite criticism over the country’s recent handling of the pandemic. Prime Minister Andrej Plenkovic’s center-right party, the Croatian Democratic Union, had its best showing in more than a decade.
A military plane carrying Canadian troops to Latvia as part of a NATO mission turned around midflight after the military learned that someone who might have come in contact with the passengers tested had positive for the virus. About 70 passengers and aircrew members were on board the flight Thursday, the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation reported.
In an open letter to the W.H.O. to be published next week, 239 scientists in 32 countries are urging the agency to recognize that the virus can infect people through tiny aerosolized particles, not just larger respiratory droplets expelled by infected people in coughs and sneezes.
A six-gene segment of the human genome that increases the risk of severe illness from the coronavirus was inherited from Neanderthals, according to a new study. The variant is common in Bangladesh, and may explain why Covid-19 patients of Bangladeshi descent are dying at a high rate in Britain. Only 8 percent of Europeans carry it, and it is almost completely absent in Africa.
The virus has infected more than 20,971,500 people and has been detected in nearly every country.
Voters endorse Tokyo governor’s handling of the pandemic by re-electing her.
A large-scale study in Britain will look at lasting effects on those who survive Covid-19.
Some survivors of Covid-19 have a long road to recovery even after discharged from the hospital, and the illness can leave long-lasting effects that are just beginning to be recognized and understood. It is still too early to know the trajectory for these patients, but scientists are beginning research that could predict those effects, and have an impact on how doctors treat the illness.
In Britain, the National Institute for Health Research, the University of Leicester and university hospitals in the city of Leicester have started a study of about 10,000 patients, which the university says makes it the largest of its kind in the world.
“As we continue our fight against this global pandemic, we are learning more and more about the impact the disease can have not only on immediate health, but longer-term physical and mental health too,” Matt Hancock, the health secretary said, in a statement on Sunday.
Free outdoor movies, an Italian tradition, may be few and far between this summer.
Since the dawn of cinema, Italy’s torrid summers have made outdoor movie showings under the stars a favorite entertainment choice of the season.
The reason? These nonprofit organizations screen films for free, even as Italy’s fabled film industry is reeling with many theaters closed because of the virus.
“The distributors told us that if we show them for free, they can’t give us films,” said Luca Sansone of the Laboratorio di Quartiere Giambellino Lorenteggio. The shows free films in a Milanese low-income neighborhood “where people don’t go to the movies because it costs too much,” he said.
Those in the business say that the pandemic dealt such a blow that it put the survival of Italy’s film industry at risk, and that giving unfettered free access to films would only make matters worse.
“We lost more than 30 million tickets and more than 200 million euros in takings, just in box office receipts,” said Mario Lorini, president of an association of cinema owners.
Cinemas were given the green light to reopen on June 15, but only 540 have done so. New safety and social distancing guidelines limit such indoor spaces to 200 people, and many cinema owners say they cannot break even under such rules.
In a town divided, one side can drink while the other remains dry.
How much more cautious is Wales than England when it comes to lockdown? Try buying a drink in Llanymynech, which straddles the English-Welsh border.
For a small village, there is an impressive selection of pubs, three in all, but choose wisely if you want a pint: Only two of them — those on the English side of the border — can serve customers.
England allowed restaurants, cafes and bars to reopen on Saturday after more than 100 days of lockdown. That was good news for fully two-thirds of the pubs in Llanymynech.
But the Welsh government has delayed pub openings until July 13 — and even then is allowing drinking only in gardens or other outdoor spaces.
The rules are different because the Welsh government in Cardiff has power over issues like health, education and public administration. And like Scotland, Wales has generally taken a more cautious approach to virus controls than England has, keeping travel restrictions in place, for example, and waiting longer to open nonessential shops.
Wales plans to reopen the hospitality trade more slowly, partly in light of criticism from some scientists that England is taking an unnecessary risk by opening pubs, restaurants and many other businesses at the same time — and on a Saturday, when people tend to drink more.
‘Farming never stops’: Migrant workers in the U.S. fear the virus but toil on.
China’s grip on the medical-supply industry grows more indomitable.
Alarmed at China’s stranglehold over supplies of masks, gowns, test kits and other essential tools for tackling the coronavirus, countries around the world have set up their own factories to cope with both this pandemic and future ones.
Before the pandemic, China was already exporting more respirators, surgical masks, medical goggles and protective garments than the rest of the world combined, the Peterson Institute for International Economics estimated.
Beijing’s coronavirus response has only added to that dominance. It increased mask production nearly 12-fold in February alone. It can now make 150 tons per day of the specialized fabric used for masks, said Bob McIlvaine, who runs a research and consulting firm in Northfield, Ill. That is 15 times the output of U.S. companies even after they ramped up production this spring.
American companies have been reluctant to make big investments in fabric manufacturing because they worry that demand for masks will be temporary. Yet officials across the country are increasingly calling for the wearing of face coverings in public.
The global economy has slowed, but green energy powers on.
Two hours by boat from the seaside town of Lowestoft on the east coast of England, over 100 giant windmills loom more than 500 feet above the sea. High atop the new towers, technicians in red-and-black protective suits have been working to hook them up to the British power system.
Britain has been under various stages of lockdown since March. But work on this wind farm, called East Anglia One, has charged ahead. Contractors rented holiday cabins and reached agreements with hotels near Lowestoft, the operations base, so that they could house some of the offshore workers there and keep them isolated. Workers were taken out by boats to the wind farm for 12-hour day and night shifts.
Producers of clean energy are pushing hard to get their projects up and running; they want to make money on their investments as soon as possible. And while the virus has reduced demand for electricity overall — the oil and gas industry in particular has been rocked by plummeting prices — renewable power tends to win out over polluting energy sources because of low costs and favorable regulatory rules.
The green energy industry suffered major setbacks during the financial crisis of 2008 and 2009. But analysts say that businesses have consolidated since then, and the industry has continued to bring down costs. The turbines at East Anglia One are 15 times as powerful as those installed in the first offshore wind farms almost 30 years ago, and so they produce much more revenue per unit.
Reporting was contributed by Pam Belluck, Nicholas Bogel-Burroughs, Nellie Bowles, Keith Bradsher, Chris Cameron, Stephen Castle, Damien Cave, Emily Cochrane, Farnaz Fassihi, Jacey Fortin, Robert Gebeloff, J. David Goodman, Maggie Haberman, Rebecca Halleck, Hikari Hida, Makiko Inoue, Annie Karni, K.K. Rebecca Lai, Iliana Magra, Sapna Maheshwari, Apoorva Mandavilli, Donald G. McNeil, Richard A. Oppel Jr., Bryan Pietsch, Roni Caryn Rabin, Stanley Reed, Motoko Rich, Rick Rojas, Kai Schultz, Mitch Smith, Lucy Tompkins, Tracey Tully, Hisako Ueno, Daniel Victor, Elizabeth Williamson, Will Wright and Carl Zimmer.