A midcentury-modern house in Brentwood, a 1910 home outside Chicago and a 28-acre seasonal camp on Mount Desert Island.
The exterior of this house is familiar to many as that of “The Golden Girls,” the NBC sitcom that ran from 1985 through 1992, about four women sharing a Miami ranch house.
The actual property is more exotic. Custom designed in 1955 by a Honolulu architecture firm for a lawyer and his wife, the house, in the Brentwood neighborhood, was inspired by Hawaiian and Japanese midcentury buildings. Beyond the unassuming facade, the interior has large, flowing spaces divided by shoji screens, and it opens at the back into a giant lanai.
It was the owners’ enthusiasm for tropical plants that drew the attention of location scouts because the landscaping evoked Miami, said Rachelle Rosten, the listing agent, adding that the couple received a “modest, one-time fee.” After the first season, the exterior was reproduced on a Hollywood lot.
The house is about 17 miles northwest of downtown, two miles southwest of the UCLA campus and a mile and a half south of the Getty Center. Following the recent deaths of the owners, it is being sold by a trust.
Indoors: The entrance hall leads to a large, vaulted living room with built-in cabinetry and a pale-brick fireplace wrapped by a travertine hearth. The carpeting that covered the floor for the last 65 years has been removed, revealing pristine oak boards. The rear wall is entirely glass, with sliding doors that open to the covered patio.
Shoji screens on one side of the living room can be closed to partition off a dining area that also has direct outdoor access. The adjacent, eat-in kitchen includes the original avocado-and-turquoise cabinets with laminate countertops. The flooring is linoleum, and there is access through sliding-glass doors in the breakfast area to a patio.
A hallway to the left of the front door as you enter takes you to the bedroom wing. The paneled walls are covered in grasscloth (a couple of extra rolls come with the house, as do the original blueprints). The principal bedroom has oak floors, extensive built-ins and shoji screens that filter light from sliding-glass doors on two exposures. The en suite bathroom has terrazzo floors, walls and vanity tops, and includes a walk-in shower, separate tub and double sinks.
Two additional bedrooms have hardwood floors, and a fourth bedroom is carpeted; all have access to outdoor space. The guest bedrooms share a terrazzo-lined bathroom with a tub, and a bathroom with a ceramic-tile floor and a walk-in shower. There is also a half bathroom, off the foyer, with a terrazzo vanity top.
Outdoor space: The rear patio has a concrete floor and skylights and stretches much of the width of the house. The patio off the kitchen is enclosed for privacy, and a slim porch extends from the front bedrooms. Parking is in an attached two-car garage.
Kenilworth, a tiny, affluent suburb (population: 2,500; median household income: $212,750), is 15 miles north of downtown Chicago. It was founded by Joseph Sears in 1889 as a planned community, with street names taken (like the name of the village itself) from the novels of Sir Walter Scott, and with houses arranged on diagonals for maximum sunlight.
This property was built for Sears’s son, Barry, early in the 20th century. In 2008, it was completely overhauled, with new mechanical, electrical and plumbing systems; a designer kitchen; fresh bathrooms; replacement windows; and a large rear addition.
The location puts it within easy walking distance of a sandy beach on Lake Michigan, kindergarten-through-12th-grade education (including the highly regarded New Trier High School), the commuter train station (travel time to the Chicago Loop is about an hour) and the businesses along Green Bay Road.
Indoors: A 30-foot-long central hallway with stained mahogany paneling cuts across the main floor, creating a sightline to the glass double doors at the opposite end. To the left of the entrance is a living room with white-painted trim and a fireplace whose marble mantel was sourced from an old Chicago pharmacy. French doors on either side lead into a sunroom.
Across the hall is a powder room with a marble-topped vanity, an office and, beyond that, a dining room with white-painted millwork and whimsical yellow wallpaper. A sculptural Victorian chandelier hangs from the ceiling.
The dining room connects to the eat-in kitchen and the adjacent butler’s pantry. The kitchen was designed by Christopher Peacock, with custom cabinets topped in marble and limestone, spherical pendant lights and a walk-in pantry. It steps down into a family room with a fireplace surrounded by Arts-and-Crafts-style, celadon-colored tile and a study nook.
Among the four second-floor bedrooms is a master suite at the rear that measures close to 1,000 square feet and includes a fireplace, private balcony, two walk-in closets, a dressing room and a laundry room. The master bathroom has a separated pair of vanities topped in stone, a stand-alone tub and a walk-in shower.
A second bedroom suite on this level contains extensive built-ins and a new bathroom accented with marble and mosaic tile. The remaining two bedrooms share a new bathroom that is similarly appointed.
The final two bedrooms and a playroom are on the third floor, along with a new bathroom with a shower. There is also a finished lower level with a 46-foot-long recreation room, an exercise room, a laundry room, a workshop and several storage rooms.
Outdoor space: The house is surrounded by lawns, maples, evergreens and flowering trees. In back is a large, L-shaped stone patio with several levels. The detached garage can hold three cars on the ground floor and has a studio apartment with a full bathroom upstairs.
Walter Lippmann, the Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist who popularized the term “Cold War” and advised presidents on free speech and foreign affairs, built this rustic oceanfront complex on Mount Desert Island in 1940, as a family retreat. It is privately sited on the southwestern part of the island. Two miles from the town of Tremont, it is convenient to a lobster pound, a public library, a post office and the many delights of Acadia National Park, which blankets most of the island. The town of Bar Harbor is about 19 miles northeast, on the other side.
Indoors: The camp, which sits at the end of a quarter-mile-long drive, includes a weathered-wood main house and three cabins strung out along the shoreline. The principal building is centered on a great room with a vaulted, beamed ceiling hung with bubble-shaped pendant lights and a fireplace with a stone chimney. The large, eat-in kitchen is furnished with basic appliances and open shelves, and has a pantry and a view of the ocean. The building’s south end contains two connecting bedrooms, each with an en suite bathroom. At the north end are two bedrooms that share a bathroom with a claw-foot tub.
The first cabin, called Binger, includes two bedrooms with whitewashed walls and a combined bathroom and kitchenette. Nearby is the Honeymoon Cottage (a legacy of the camp’s rental history), which has a single bedroom and bathroom. Both cabins are entered through covered porches.
Some yards away is the Cabin on the Point. It has two bedrooms with en suite bathrooms, a living area with a fireplace, a kitchenette and a fenced garden area in back.
Outdoor space: The camp has more than 2,500 feet of private ocean-beach frontage and the remains of a tennis court. There is also a boathouse and a shed used for parking.
