Dr. Smoliga’s calculations show that when adjusted for body mass, the world’s most competitive hot dog eaters could outeat a grizzly bear or a coyote, as measured by the amount of food per unit of time. Bears can eat the equivalent of about eight hot dogs per minute, compared with Mr. Chestnut’s ability to eat 7.5 per minute, but the bears don’t continue at this pace for more than six minutes, Dr. Smoliga said. What Mr. Chestnut and Ms. Sudo have over these animals, he said, is speed.
The extent to which these traits are innate or can be improved with training is not entirely clear, but a majority of elite competitive eaters who have competed in the Nathan’s contest have improved over time. “Nobody gets worse,” Dr. Metz said.
A stretchy stomach doesn’t worry the 34-year-old Ms. Sudo, who said she trains by eating large-volume foods like soups, whole heads of broccoli and “enough kale to kill a horse.” Before this year’s competition, she split a meal of 90 hot dogs with her boyfriend, Nick Wehry, who is also a competitive eater. (He ate 39.5 hot dogs, nine fewer than she did, to place third at this year’s contest.) The couple also work out in the gym almost daily. “I’ve always done better when I go into a contest leaner and more fit,” Ms. Sudo said.
In the early days of the Nathan’s competition, the winner was usually an obese man, Dr. Smoliga said. But as records have fallen, winners have become more slender. 
Despite using the same hot dogs and buns for 40 years, the Nathan’s contest has seen performance among elite competitors rise by about 700 percent. “No other sport comes close to that when records are measured in a 100-plus year span,” Dr. Smoliga said.
Although the meteoric rise in the hot dog record is remarkable, the pattern it follows is not, Dr. Joyner said. As an event becomes better known, “people start to train for it because there’s some kind of incentive, like fame or money,” he said. The competition pool becomes deeper, and new records are set.
If Dr. Smoliga’s prediction of 83 hot dogs in 10 minutes seems like a stretch, consider this: In Dr. Metz’s 2007 study, the speed eater had downed 36 hot dogs before the researchers terminated the simulated contest, worried that he might perforate his stomach. Thirteen years later, Mr. Chestnut ate more than two times as many hot dogs, which suggests that we probably won’t know the actual human limit until we reach it.