She was best-known for the 1964 album “Poor Little Rich Girl.” She died of Covid-19.
Dulce Nunes seemed poised to become a movie star, with her face plastered on the covers of national magazines and a high-profile marriage to one of Brazilian cinema’s leading men. She had made several films in her early 20s and found a place in the society pages thanks to her storybook marriage. The public eagerly awaited her next movie.
Then she disappointed them, taking a detour into singing and releasing a trio of albums in the 1960s that capitalized on the surging popularity of bossa nova.
She died of Covid-19 on June 4 in a Rio de Janeiro hospital, her cousin Sergio Bressane said. She was 90.
A year later, Ms. Nunes released her first solo record, “Dulce,” featuring compositions by up-and-coming bossa nova composers, including Mr. Jobim. In 1967, she came out with her only other solo recording, “Writers’ Samba,” in which she sang her own settings of contemporary Brazilian poetry.
That same year she married Egberto Gismonti, her ex-husband’s nephew, who became a successful musician in his own right. The couple divorced in 1976, but Ms. Nunes continued to sing on Mr. Gismonti’s records into the early 1990s.
Dulce Pinto Bressane was born on June 11, 1929, in Rio de Janeiro to Fernando Bressane, a merchant, and Euridyce de Oliveira Pinto, a painter. She grew up in an unconventional family, in which the women worked, smoked and associated with the city’s bohemian set.
Ms. Nunes was expelled from a prestigious Roman Catholic school in Rio for bad behavior, and she began acting while still in her teens. She would complain about how all the male leads tended to be older men, but then married one of them: the actor, composer, pianist and notorious lady’s man Bené Nunes, in 1956. The couple separated in 1963 but remained close until his death in 1997.
Ms. Nunes’ first movie, “Woman From Afar,” came out in 1949, and in 1950 she appeared in two more films, “Morning Star” and “My Wife’s Fiancé.” Her last role was in “The ABC of Love,” in 1967.
She is survived by her sisters, Heloisa Bressane Neno Rosa and Amélia Bressane Pontes.
Ms. Nunes began working as an interior designer in the early 1990s, spending her final years in Rio’s beachside Ipanema district.