Every month, streaming services in Australia add a new batch of movies and TV shows to its library. Here are our picks for July.
The long-running docu-series “Unsolved Mysteries” debuted in 1987 and was canceled — for the first time — ten years later. Since then, the show’s been revived multiple times in multiple formats, as TV audiences have continued to clamor for authoritative-sounding reports on ghosts, UFOs, shadowy conspiracies and cold cases. Unlike its predecessors, the latest version lacks a host. It does features similar stories, rendered in a style that’s less punchy and more somber, similar to the modern true-crime documentaries already popular on Netflix.
Anyone who grew up reading “The Baby-Sitters Club” series of young adult novels should be happy to hear that the new Netflix adaptation stays true to the books. The TV version is mostly episodic, telling short, tween-appropriate stories about a diverse group of middle-school classmates with strong personalities, who overcome their differences to run a child-care business in suburban Connecticut. This is not some edgy reimagining; it’s a bright, earnest, upbeat show about good kids.
You don’t need to be a fan of the elaborately attired Puerto Rican astrologer Walter Mercado to enjoy the biographical documentary “Mucho Mucho Amor.” Before Mercado died late last year, a team of filmmakers enticed the flamboyant television personality to tell his story, all about how a love of theater and a few lucky breaks led to him becoming one of the most popular celebrities on Spanish-language TV for nearly 40 years. This doc doesn’t just cover the facts of its subject’s life; it also gets into how meaningful it was to see such a warmly positive, gender fluid character in the Latinx pop culture mainstream.
The summer blockbuster movie season has been shut down due to COVID-19, but “The Old Guard” could help ease some of the feelings of withdrawal. Written by the veteran comic book creator Greg Rucka — and based on his 2017 Image Comics series — “The Old Guard” is an explosive science-fiction adventure, starring Charlize Theron as one of a select team of immortals who for centuries have hired themselves out as mercenaries. The picture was directed by Gina Prince-Bythewood, who’s best-known for the sensitive and moving dramas “Love & Basketball” and “Beyond the Lights,” and who ought to have a unique take on the macho action genre.
Katherine Langford plays the Arthurian “Lady of the Lake” in “Cursed,” an action-packed fantasy series that reframes the sword-and-sorcery legend from the perspective of the sorceress Nimue. Based on a young adult novel by the show’s producer Tom Wheeler (whose creative partner in both the book and the TV series is the comic book artist Frank Miller), “Cursed” has the look and heft of series like “Game of Thrones.” But it’s less grim in its depiction of this heavily stratified society, challenged by a woman who’s often underestimated by the powers that be.
The 2018 movie adaptation of Beth Reekles’ young adult novel “The Kissing Booth” (written when the author was still a teenager) overcame some savage reviews to become one of Netflix’s most buzzed-about romantic comedies. The sequel, “The Kissing Booth 2,” is also based on a Reekles book, written roughly a decade later. The story picks up where its predecessor left off, with Elle Evans (Joey King) trying to keep a long-distance relationship going with the college-bound Noah Flynn (Jacob Elordi). Complications ensue, as Noah befriends a female classmate while Elle becomes attracted to a new boy in school.
“Berlin Syndrome” (July 1), “Deadwind” Season 2 (July 1), “Grease” (July 1), “Pitch Perfect” (July 1), “Say I Do” (July 1), “Top End Wedding” (July 1), “Warrior Nun” (July 2), “Cable Girls” Final Season: Part 2 (July 3), “Desperados” (July 3), “Ju-On: Origins” (July 3), “Southern Survival” (July 3), “Japan Sinks: 2020” (July 9), “The Protector” Season 4 (July 9), “The Claudia Kishi Club” (July 10), “O Crush Perfeito” (July 10), “The Twelve” (July 10), “The Business of Drugs” (July 14), “Urzila Carlson: Overqualified Loser” (July 14), “Fatal Affair” (July 16), “How to Sell Drugs Online (Fast)” Season 2 (July 21), “Jack Whitehall: I’m Only Joking” (July 21), “Fear City: New York vs. the Mafia” (July 22), “Norsemen” Season 3 (July 22), “Good Girls” Season 3 (July 26), “Last Chance U: Laney” (July 28), “The Hater” (July 29), “The Speed Cubers” (July 29), “The Umbrella Academy” Season 2 (July 31).
The second season of the character-driven cat-and-mouse thriller “Hanna” moves beyond the narrative confines of the 2011 movie that inspired it. Now out on her own — after losing the only father she’s ever known — Hanna (Esme Creed-Miles) uncovers more information about a secret organization that molds girls and young women like her into deadly super soldiers. As with season one, “Hanna” season two is loaded with stylish action sequences. But its story remains centered on a heroine with a complicated past, belatedly discovering her own humanity.
Even if the 2020 movie schedule hadn’t been curtailed, “Vivarium” would still be one of this year’s most captivating horror films. Surreal and satirical, the movie follows an above-it-all young couple named Gemma and Tom — played by Imogen Poots and Jesse Eisenberg — who go house-hunting in suburbia and end up trapped in a generic, maze-like subdivision. Soon, some mysterious overlords force Gemma and Tom to raise an obnoxiously demanding and unlovable child, as the film develops into a nightmarish exaggeration of marriage and parenthood.
The comic book artist and filmmaker Marjane Satrapi (best known for her memoir “Persepolis”) tries something different with her latest movie, a biopic starring Rosamund Pike as the Nobel Prize-winning chemist and physicist Marie Curie. Based on a Lauren Redniss graphic novel, and adapted to the screen by the writer Jack Thorne, “Radioactive” covers the basic facts of Curie’s life including her relationship with her husband and partner Pierre Curie (Sam Riley). But it also takes a big-picture perspective, showing how Curie’s influence rippled through the world in ways both beautiful and destructive.
“The Weekend” (July 15), “Absentia” Season 3 (July 17), “Jim Gaffigan: The Pale Tourist” (July 24).
The five-part true-crime series “Outcry” covers the case of Greg Kelley, a former Texas high school football player whose promising career was cut short when he was convicted of sexually assaulting a four-year-old boy. The charge is heinous, but the series posits that the prosecution may have been hasty. The documentarian Pat Kondelis explores what happened after some people in the community started rallying on Kelley’s behalf, and considers whether the nature of the crime itself made it more difficult to get a definitive answer about what happened.
Well-received at the Sundance Film Festival when it debuted earlier this year, the supernatural horror film “Relic” stars Emily Mortimer and Bella Heathcote as a mother and daughter who become concerned when the aging matriarch of their family, Edna — played by Robyn Nevin — begins to show signs of dementia. When the younger women arrive at Edna’s dark, creaky old house to lend a hand, they wonder if what’s really bothering grandma is something supernatural. The first-time feature filmmaker Natalie Erika James builds tension through quiet scenes of everyday life, made more ominous by the circumstances.
Based on a Katori Hall stage play, the provocative drama “P-Valley” is set among the staff and clientele of a small town strip club, located deep in the American south. The emphasis here is less on cheap thrills than on complicated characters — male and female — who each have rich pasts informing their reasons for coming to this place. Each of the first season’s directors is a woman, and while sex and desire are certainly elements of this show, they inform a much larger story.
With “The Trip to Greece,” Steve Coogan and Rob Brydon continue one of the most delightful film series in recent memory: a mostly improvised travelogue in which the two comic actors play exaggerated versions of themselves. As the title implies, in this chapter the boys tour the Greek isles, following the path of Homer’s “Odyssey” while stopping to eat at the finest restaurants. As always, the two also try to outdo each other with both their celebrity impressions and their wry comments about ancient culture.
“Dead Pixels” Season 1 (July 1), “Brooklyn” (July 2), “The Illusionist” (July 2), “Apocalypto” (July 3), “Military Wives” (July 3), “Killing Time” Season 1” (July 6), “Sing Street” (July 7), “Olivia Newton-John: Hopelessly Devoted to You” (July 8), “The Edge of Seventeen” (July 9), “Aniara” (July 10), “Bates Motel” Seasons 1-5 (July 10), “Flea-bitten!” Season 1 (July 10), “12 Years a Slave” (July 13), “The Returned” Season 1 (July 16), “The Piano” (July 17), “Valley Girl” (July 17), “Love & Mercy” (July 19), “Devils Dust” (July 22), “Wonderland” Seasons 1-3 (July 23), “Spin City” Seasons 1-6 (July 24), “Zomboat” Season 1 (July 24), “Hearts and Bones” (July 26), “The Bling Ring” (July 27), “Paul Hollywood Eats Japan” (July 31).