Hurricane Douglas is headed for Hawaii and Hurricane Hanna made landfall in Texas on Saturday. Gonzalo was downgraded to a tropical depression, forecasters said.
Officials in Hawaii on Saturday prepared for the arrival of Douglas, a hurricane that was downgraded to a Category 2 but still packed maximum sustained winds of 90 miles per hour.
Hurricane watches were in effect for the counties that include the islands of Hawaii, Kahoolawe, Lanai, Maui, Molokai and Oahu, said Dennis Feltgen, a meteorologist and spokesman for the National Hurricane Center.
Thirteen shelters will open Sunday in Honolulu, including the Hawaii Convention Center, which can hold 1,600 people, with social distancing, Honolulu’s mayor, Kirk Caldwell, said at a news conference on Saturday.
Officials have warned that space at the shelters could be constricted because of social distancing policies. Gov. David Ige of Hawaii said the authorities would monitor the shelters’ capacity and open more if necessary.
The American Red Cross had about 300 volunteers to help run the shelters, and those volunteers will be given personal protective equipment. It has been a challenge to recruit volunteers because of the coronavirus pandemic, said Maria Lutz, the director of regional services for the Hawaii Red Cross.
In Honolulu, city workers were being asked to volunteer to help in the shelters, the mayor said.
As of Saturday evening, the storm was 280 miles east of Hilo and moving west-northwest at 18 m.p.h.
In a statement on Saturday night, the hurricane center emphasized that residents not focus on the exact forecast track or intensity of Douglas.
Mr. Ige on Thursday issued a pre-landfall emergency proclamation that authorized state funds for quick disaster relief.
Douglas was one of three storms in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans that forecasters were tracking.
Hanna, a tropical storm that formed on Thursday and became the first hurricane of the 2020 Atlantic hurricane season, made landfall on Padre Island, Texas, about 15 miles north of Port Mansfield at around 5 p.m. local time on Saturday, with maximum sustained winds of 90 m.p.h., the center said.
Landfall is an important marker of the storm’s progression but does not describe when it meets the land. Rather, it refers to when the calm center of the storm — or its “eye” — crosses the shoreline.
Officials expected Hanna to produce as much as 12 inches of rain, with some isolated totals of 18 inches through Sunday night in South Texas and into Mexico. The heavy rain could cause life-threatening flash flooding, rapid rises in small streams and some river flooding.
Lesser rainfall totals were expected along the upper Texas and Louisiana coasts.
Hanna may also spawn tornadoes, the center said, noting that they could form over parts of the lower to middle Texas coastal plain.
The National Weather Service in Corpus Christi, on the Gulf Coast, said on Saturday that the area was under a flash flood watch and that five to 10 inches of rain could fall, with 15 inches possible in some places.
On Thursday, Gov. Greg Abbott of Texas placed numerous resources on standby in anticipation of the storm’s arrival. By Friday, he began urging residents in the path of Hanna to heed warnings and guidance from local officials.
And on Saturday afternoon, Gonzalo was downgraded to a tropical depression after becoming a tropical storm on Wednesday, according to the center. A tropical storm warning for Trinidad and Tobago was discontinued Saturday.
Gonzalo had maximum sustained winds of about 35 m.p.h., the center said. It was expected to weaken and dissipate by Sunday night or Monday, Mr. Feltgen said.
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration predicted an above-normal Atlantic hurricane season, with as many as 19 named storms — of which six to 10 could become hurricanes. Three to six of those could develop into Category 3, 4 or 5 hurricanes, it said.
Hurricane seasons produce 12 named storms on average, with six becoming hurricanes and three of those six developing into major hurricanes.
Marie Fazio and Christina Morales contributed reporting.