California’s governor announced a sweeping rollback of the state’s reopening and Los Angeles and San Diego school districts will be online-only in the fall. Dr. Anthony Fauci returned to the White House.
‘We have a long road ahead,’ Florida’s governor warns.
Between two hot spots, Oregon now sees a rise in new cases. ‘We are not an island,’ Gov. Kate Brown says.
Florida’s governor gave a measured assessment of his state’s battle with the virus on Monday, saying that the case numbers were still high but that there were signs of stabilization.
Deaths in Florida are trending upward and are at their highest seven-day average level of the pandemic. Florida added more cases on Sunday than any state had recorded — 15,300 — and on Monday it reported more than 12,600 additional cases, its second-highest total recorded for a single day.
Even as the governor appeared to be at pains not to sound too upbeat, health experts in the state painted a much more dire picture.
Carlos Migoya, the chief executive of Jackson Health Systems, which runs Jackson Memorial, one of the hardest-hit hospitals from the coronavirus, said 200 people were hospitalized three weeks ago. Now, there are more than 400 patients, 100 of them in intensive care.
The hospital is facing shortages in medical staff, personal protective gear and the reagents used to test for the virus.
Mr. Migoya said that the hospital was now seeing older patients come in. “That means that the younger people have been contaminating the older people,” he said.
Despite the surge in cases, Governor DeSantis remains opposed to a statewide mask mandate. “It’s also important to listen and follow the guidance that is put out by local officials,” he said.
The state has been trying to bring the positivity rate of people who are tested for the virus below 10 percent. The Florida Department of Health said that as of July 11, the rate statewide was 11.25 percent. But the mayor of Miami, Carlos A. Gimenez, said the rate in Miami-Dade now exceeded 25 percent.
As the virus surges in Florida, more big-name Republicans are taking a wait-and-see approach to the Republican National Convention, or deciding to skip it altogether. The G.O.P., which moved the convention to Jacksonville from Charlotte, N.C., after balking at health precautions there, now finds itself locked into a state with a far bigger virus problem, and planning an event whose attendance is waning as the pandemic escalates.
Representatives Mario Diaz-Balart and Francis Rooney of Florida have no plans to attend. Even Marco Rubio, Florida’s senior senator, has not committed to attending.
The coronavirus struck Oregon early, with cases emerging in February. But unlike two of its neighboring states, Washington and California, Oregon was not quickly overwhelmed by the pandemic.
The state has recorded more than 12,000 infections, far fewer than most of its neighbors. But as the state reopens after an early lockdown, cases are spiking.
The state set a record on Thursday with 389 new infections.
Oregon’s governor says geography helps explain the problem.
In rural parts of the state — where the increase has been most drastic — outbreaks have been spurred by large gatherings at churches, food-processing facilities, funerals and graduation parties.
Recent gatherings to celebrate the Fourth of July have added to challenge, officials said.
Los Angeles Apparel, which was one of the first clothing retailers to help produce much-needed masks when they were in short supply, was ordered closed on July 10 by the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health after more than 300 confirmed infections and four deaths among its garment workers.
KFC, the fried chicken chain, closed dining rooms in all 40 of its corporate-owned restaurants in Florida on Monday as virus cases in the state continued to skyrocket. The company encouraged franchisees operating stores in Florida and other virus “hot spot states” such as Arizona, California and Texas to follow suit.
Tennessee recorded more than 2,500 new cases Monday for a single-day record. In Washington State, more than 1,080 cases were announced, also a record.
Kansas officials announced more than 880 new cases on Monday, the highest single-day total in that state. Because Kansas’s health department updates statewide only data three times weekly, the most infrequent reporting schedule in the country, its daily totals vary widely.
The United States health departments track the virus’s spread with a distinctly American patchwork: a reporting system in which some test results arrive via smooth data feeds but others come by phone, email, physical mail or even fax machines.
Wall Street was turbulent, with stocks reversing an early gain that had briefly lifted the S&P 500 back into positive territory for the year. The index was nearly 1 percent lower by the end of the day, after earlier having climbed more than 1.5 percent. The unsteady trading came as the number of virus cases continued to rise, and California moved to close more businesses.
Amnesty International has called for an inquiry into the British government after Britain recorded one of the largest numbers of coronavirus-related deaths among health care workers, according to a report published by the organization on Monday. More than 3,000 health workers around the world have died after contracting the virus, Amnesty International said. Of those, 540 have been in Britain, which was second only to Russia, where 545 health workers have died. The figure is 507 in the United States.
Reporting was contributed by Sarah Almukhtar, Brooks Barnes, Pam Belluck, Emma Bubola, Keith Bradsher, Chris Buckley, Troy Closson, Kate Conger, Michael Cooper, Jill Cowan, Manny Fernandez, Sheri Fink, Kimiko de Freytas-Tamura, Vanessa Friedman, Hailey Fuchs, Dana Goldstein, Maggie Haberman, Mohammed Hadi, Anemona Hartocollis, Hikari Hida, Shawn Hubler, Makiko Inoue, Natalie Kitroeff, Sarah Kliff, Tiffany May, Patricia Mazzei, Raphael Minder, Zach Montague, David Montgomery, Aimee Ortiz, Kate Phillips, Motoko Rich, Katie Rogers, Rick Rojas, Dana Rubinstein, Margot Sanger-Katz, Eliza Shapiro, Michael D. Shear, Mitch Smith, Sheryl Gay Stolberg, Eileen Sullivan, Mariel Wamsley, Noah Weiland and Mihir Zaveri.