Forecasters predicted three to six inches of rain on the main islands, possibly contributing to flash flooding and landslides.
Hurricane Douglas moved north of Hawaii early on Monday, sparing the islands the direct hit that forecasters had feared.
The hurricane pelted some areas with winds of 90 miles per hour and torrential rains as it passed by Oahu on Sunday, the National Hurricane Center reported. A hurricane warning was canceled early on Monday for the western islands of Kauai and Niihau, and forecasters expected the storm to pass north of the islands.
The hurricane was moving rapidly away from Kauai, but it will remain a hurricane until it passes west of the island, the hurricane center said. Maximum sustained winds neared 90 m.p.h. early on Monday, and heavy surf and rainfall were expected to pound the main islands, the center said.
But the force of the storm was forecast to weaken during the next 48 hours.
“We consider ourselves fortunate that Hurricane Douglas veered away from our islands at the last minute, but we remain vigilant as always during hurricane season because all it takes is one storm to cause devastating damage and impacts for our residents,” Luke P. Meyers, the administrator of the Hawaii Emergency Management Agency, said.
While other storms have caused damage to the islands, only two in modern history have made landfall, according to the center: In 1992, Hurricane Iniki hit Kauai as a Category 4 storm, killing six people and causing about $3 billion in damage. In 1959, Hurricane Dot caused about $5.5 million in damage.
Though the islands avoided a direct hit, the combination of high water levels, storm surge and large breaking waves could raise water levels by as much as two feet above normal tides near the center of the storm, the center warned.
Forecasters predicted three to six inches of rain on the main Hawaiian islands, possibly contributing to flash flooding and landslides.
Maui County had asked residents to shelter in place or move to an emergency shelter immediately if they lacked a safe place to weather the storm. Much of the county has already been through the brunt of the storm with minimal damage, said Mayor Michael Victorino of Maui County.
Tourism has been severely affected by both the storm and the coronavirus pandemic, Mr. Victorino said. On any given day, the county received about 8,000 visitors. Over the last few days, there have been fewer than 50 visitors per day, which has made the job of emergency management much easier.
Upon entering the state, all travelers have a mandatory 14-day self-quarantine. Maui’s visitors are sheltering in place at hotels, Mr. Victorino said. If it becomes dangerous, local shelters can separate those who are self-quarantining or who have the coronavirus.
Thirteen shelters opened on Sunday in Honolulu, including the Hawaii Convention Center, which can hold 1,600 people, with social distancing, Honolulu’s mayor, Kirk Caldwell, said at a news conference on Saturday.
Officials have warned that space at the shelters may be constricted because of social distancing policies. Gov. David Ige of Hawaii said the authorities would monitor capacity at the shelters and open more if necessary.
In Maui County, which has about 167,000 residents, fewer than 30 people have gone to a shelter, Mr. Victorino said.
In a statement on Sunday morning, the hurricane center emphasized that residents should not focus on the exact forecast track or intensity of Douglas.
Marie Fazio, Daniel Victor and Christine Hauser contributed reporting.