Thousands of New Yorkers left the city and headed to the suburbs during the pandemic, and real estate there hasn’t been the same since.
They bought the house right away for $1.575 million, and moved in late last month. Mr. Hymes had been reluctant to leave the city, but now they’re both relieved they bought when they did, as competition in the suburban commuter markets has grown fierce.
The well-documented exodus from the city over the past few months is upending housing market dynamics in close-in suburbs in Long Island, Fairfield County, Conn., Westchester County and northern New Jersey.
Courtney and Rob Silverstein began looking for a house on Long Island even before New York’s shutdown, as they began hearing about the virus’s impact in Asia and Europe. Then living in Long Island City with their infant son, the couple went to Rockville Centre in February for a Saturday open house at a three-bedroom, three-bath colonial. They returned Sunday for a second look.
For years, values in the so-called back-country areas — characterized by expansive homes on multiple-acre lots — have dropped off sharply, as buyer preferences shifted to in-town locations and more-manageable yard sizes. Inventory piled up. But with more buyers now looking for large outdoor spaces and swimming pools to help them ride out the pandemic, the back country is feeling the love again.
While move-in ready homes are still most in demand, buyers are no longer turning up their noses at properties that need work. Limited inventory and shifting priorities have changed that.
The market for single-family rentals continues to be red hot in coastal Fairfield County (as well as Litchfield County to the north). Many homeowners who have somewhere else to go are putting their primary homes up for rent and collecting unprecedented sums. The inventory of summer rentals rose dramatically as owners decided to test the waters to see how much they could get, said Melodye Colucci, an agent with Coldwell Banker Residential Brokerage in Stamford.
The rush to get into a house is causing many deals to be driven more by emotion than the usual business-minded pragmatism at the higher end, agents say.
