Troubling resurgences have hit places around the world that were seen as models in the virus fight. In the U.S., known cases surpassed four million.
Follow our live updates of coronavirus cases and deaths globally.
After Spain’s strict lockdown ended, the national government put regional governments in charge of reopening. That led to a patchwork of rules and regulations that varied widely in strictness and enforcement, much as they have in states across the U.S. While the most serious outbreaks have been in northeastern Spain, only two regions — Madrid and the Canary Islands — have not reimposed requirements to wear face masks outdoors.
As the coronavirus rages across the Southern United States, skyrocketing case counts in Texas and Florida have drawn the most national attention, but the virus is also surging in the three states between them along the Gulf Coast: Alabama, Louisiana and Mississippi.
Across the country, more than 69,900 coronavirus cases were announced on Thursday, the third-most of any day in the pandemic.
Louisiana has surpassed New York for the most identified cases per capita, though testing was scarce when cases peaked in New York this spring. And in Mississippi, deaths are increasing at one of the highest rates in the nation.
“We’re certainly not where we want to be in Louisiana,” Gov. John Bel Edwards said at a news conference Thursday, noting that the state had surpassed 100,000 total cases.
Mr. Edwards said many hospitals in his state had halted nonemergency surgery to save room for rising numbers of Covid-19 patients.
Many hospitals in smaller cities and rural areas have filled their intensive care wards and must transfer patients to bigger cities, said Susan Hassig, associate professor of epidemiology at the Tulane University School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine.
There have been infections in the region since the early stages of the pandemic, Dr. Hassig said, but many went unrecognized, furthering the spread of the virus. “Some of it has always been there — we just weren’t finding it,” she said.
And preventive measures to curb the spread of the virus are often ignored. Dr. Hassig noted that at least 30 Mississippi state legislators had tested positive in recent weeks, including many who were still not wearing masks while continuing to hold public events. Practices like that have helped the virus make its way to areas that were initially unaffected, she said, and higher hospitalizations and death rates have followed.
The Gulf Coast states are not alone in setting new case records. California recorded new highs in both deaths and total number of cases on Wednesday, and Missouri, North Dakota and West Virginia recorded their highest daily case numbers, according to a New York Times database. On Thursday, the nation passed four million reported cases since the pandemic began.
Deaths in Alabama, Mississippi and Louisiana have so far largely been among older people, but more young people in the region are becoming infected now, Dr. Hassig said, and otherwise healthy younger people are dying from it as well.
Mortality rates have been higher among Black and Hispanic residents, she said, in part because they are, on average, less likely to have jobs they can perform from home and more likely to have underlying health issues than their white neighbors.
President Trump announced that because of the growing number of coronavirus cases in Florida, he was canceling the Republican National Convention, which had been planned for August in Jacksonville.
This afternoon my political team came to me and laid out our plans for the convention in Jacksonville, Fla. It’s a place I love. I love that state. The pageantry, the signs, the excitement were really, really top of the line. But I looked at my team and I said, “The timing for this event is not right. It’s just not right with what’s happened recently — the flare-up in Florida. To have a big convention, it’s not the right time.” It’s really something that for me, I have to protect the American people. That’s what I’ve always done. That’s what I always will do. That’s what I’m about.
President Trump on Thursday said he is canceling the portion of the Republican National Convention that was to be held in Jacksonville, Fla., at the end of August, just weeks after he forced party officials to move it there because North Carolina could not guarantee him the crowds he wanted.
“It’s time to cancel the Jacksonville, Fla.,” portion of the event that begins on Aug. 24, Mr. Trump said at a White House briefing.
Cases have been rising at a steep rate in Florida, and in Jacksonville in particular. The state is crucial to Mr. Trump’s re-election efforts, but even he could not ignore the virus’s spread.
Mr. Trump, who has begun to change his tone on the pandemic (which he continues to call the “China virus”) in the past week — urging the use of masks and other protective measures that he had previously downplayed — said he did not plan to scrap the entire event.
Mr. Trump had insisted on moving ahead until Thursday, even after some Republican Senators said that they planned to skip the event. He claimed that officials had tried to tell him they could make it work. 
He had forced the Republican National Committee to walk away from Charlotte, N.C., other than the first night, because the state’s Gov. Roy Cooper, a Democrat, would not guarantee him that he could gather large crowds given social distancing.
Mr. Trump made the announcement on a day when Florida reported 173 deaths, a single-day record for the state.
Farther south, in the Miami area, some local leaders have grown so alarmed that they urged people to consider social distancing — and possibly wearing masks — in their own homes.
The number of people known to have been infected with the virus in the United States passed four million on Thursday, another grim milestone in a pandemic full of them, according to a New York Times database.
More than 143,000 people have died of the virus in the United States, and experts say that the trend in hospitalizations and deaths often lags weeks behind the trend in cases. Even so, according to the Covid Tracking Project, the number of people hospitalized in the country on Thursday approached the high of nearly 60,000 on April 15, when the outbreak was largely concentrated in New York.
To curb the rise in new infections and deaths from the coronavirus in Washington, the state’s governor and health secretary announced Thursday renewed restrictions on gatherings at restaurants, bars, weddings, funerals and other businesses.
Mr. Inslee, a Democrat, and the state’s secretary of health, John Wiesman, also announced masks will be required “in all common spaces,” like elevators, hallways, university housing and hotels, effective July 25.
Currently, masks are required in public spaces when people cannot main social distance.
The new restrictions were announced after the state reported a steady rise in new infections. By the end of last month, the seven-day average of new infections in the state was 538, according to a New York Times database. By Wednesday, that number was 920.
Starting July 30, indoor dining at restaurants and bars will be allowed only for “members of the same household,” according to the statement from Mr. Inslee’s office. Others can dine outdoors or place to-go orders.
Restaurants must also close “gaming and social areas,” the statement said. And indoor service at bars will be prohibited.
Occupancy at indoor movie theaters, currently at 50 percent, will be reduced to 25 percent.
Starting Aug. 6, the size of wedding ceremonies will be limited to either 30 people, or 20 percent of the facility’s indoor occupancy, whichever is smaller. Wedding receptions, though, will be prohibited.
The number of people allowed at gyms, fitness studios, indoor pools and tennis facilities will also reduced, starting July 30.
The current moratorium on evictions, Mr. Inslee said, will be extended until Oct. 15. Details on that will be released shortly, he said.
After four months without any international visitors, Costa Rica is reopening its borders to tourists, but U.S. citizens aren’t welcome just yet.
Five flights a week will be allowed in from the European Union, Britain and Canada starting Aug. 1, Gustavo Segura, the country’s tourism minister, announced Thursday. Tourists will have to fill out an online travel health form, provide proof of a negative coronavirus test taken within the previous 48 hours and buy insurance that would cover medical and quarantine costs.
The announcement came minutes after the health minister reported the country’s biggest daily increase in coronavirus cases. More than 13,000 people have been infected in Costa Rica, and 81 have died. There were 768 new cases and 10 deaths on Thursday alone.
“The decisions we’re announcing today are drops of hope, drops of hope for the more than 600,000 people who directly or indirectly depend on tourism,” Mr. Segura said during the government’s daily virus briefing.
Costa Rica’s economy was already faltering before the pandemic hit. The country started the year with a 12.4 percent unemployment rate and its highest budget deficit in decades. Now, after two strict lockdowns, border closures and a patchwork of restrictions across the country, the unemployment rate stands at 20.1 percent, and an estimated 45 percent of the country’s 19,000 restaurants have shut down.
The surge of cases could be slowed if the world’s poorest people receive a temporary basic income, enabling them to stay at home, according to a United Nations report released on Thursday. It would cost at least $199 billion a month to provide fixed-term basic income to 2.7 billion people in 132 developing countries, the report said.
South Korea said on Friday that it will begin allowing baseball and soccer teams to start allowing a limited number of fans back into stadiums as soon as Sunday. Under the rules, only 10 percent of the seats would be made available for any given game.
In Israel, cases have risen to new heights, with more than 2,000 new daily infections reported on Wednesday. The Knesset, the Israeli Parliament, passed a law early Thursday that expands the government’s powers in imposing virus restrictions and lessens parliamentary oversight of them. The legislation, which was ratified in a 48-35 vote, was criticized by opposition lawmakers: “Tonight, Israel’s government gave up on its most important partner in dealing with the coronavirus crisis — the Knesset,” Yair Lapid, the head of the opposition, wrote on Twitter.
New cases are on the rise in Romania, which on Wednesday reported over 1,000 — the first time the country passed that daily milestone since the pandemic began. And on Thursday, that number rose further, to 1,112 new cases and 25 deaths, bringing the country’s total case count to 41,275 with 2,126 deaths.
China’s ruling Communist Party has expelled an outspoken and prominent property tycoon who criticized the country’s authoritarian leader, Xi Jinping, over the nation’s coronavirus response, paving the way for his criminal prosecution.
The moves against Mr. Ren, 69, appeared designed to send a chill over the country’s entrepreneurs and other business leaders and demonstrate the party’s resolve to use him as an example to show that no one was above its demands of unflinching political loyalty.
He was accused of “smearing the party and country’s image, distorting the party and the military’s history, being disloyal and dishonest with the party” and of resisting the party’s investigation into him — phrasing that suggests he has refused to admit any wrongdoing.
Mr. Ren, a veteran party member and former chairman of Huayuan Properties, a real estate development company, was detained in March after criticizing Mr. Xi’s response to the coronavirus outbreak. He is likely to face criminal charges in China’s opaque and often- unforgiving legal system.
Under Mr. Xi, who rose to power in 2012, the Chinese authorities have investigated or detained scores of lawyers, journalists and scholars who have challenged the party line, often on spurious charges. The crackdown has intensified in recent months, as the party has come under intense criticism for its handling of the coronavirus, its imposition of new national security laws in Hong Kong and the ongoing crackdown on Muslims in the western region of Xinjiang.
The Republican draft of an aid proposal reflects a retreat by the White House on tax cuts, testing and schools.
The draft summary, which was obtained by The Times, reflects a significant retreat by the White House after days of infighting among Republicans. It does not include a payroll tax cut, a favorite idea of Mr. Trump’s, which administration officials backed away from amid tepid support from Republicans in Congress. It includes $16 billion in funds for new testing that the administration had opposed, and conditions only a portion of education funding on schools reopening.
The White House and Senate Republicans neared agreement on Thursday on a proposal for the next round of virus relief.
“We’re just having a conversation with the leader, hopefully we’ll be able to resolve this,” Mark Meadows, the White House Chief of staff, told reporters as he entered Mr. McConnell’s office Thursday morning.
A Washington Nationals star is pulled from baseball’s season opener after testing positive.
Hours before the Yankees and the Washington Nationals were to begin the opening game of the delayed Major League Baseball season on Thursday night, the sport got a stark reminder of the precariousness of playing amid a pandemic: Juan Soto, the 21-year-old Nationals star, tested positive for the virus and was held out of the lineup.
Soto must record two negative tests at least 24 hours apart before he can return. He was asymptomatic, Nationals General Manager Mike Rizzo told reporters, and all the other Washington players were available to take the field on Thursday.
Nationals Manager Dave Martinez said that those in closest contact with Soto were tested on Thursday morning and would be again on Friday.
The game between the Yankees and the Nationals, the reigning World Series champions, was the first of two scheduled for Thursday, as M.L.B. began an abbreviated season of 60 games almost four months late. The Yankees won, 4-1, as the game was also abbreviated, ending in the top of the sixth because of rain.
President Trump said on Thursday that he would throw out the ceremonial first pitch at Yankee Stadium on Aug. 15, which would be the first time during his presidency that he has participated in the M.L.B. ritual. A person in baseball familiar with the situation confirmed that the president had been invited to throw out the first pitch but said that a date had not been worked out.
The announcement came days after the Nationals said that Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the infectious disease expert who has raised concerns about the administration's handling of the virus, would throw out the first pitch at Thursday’s game.
A prominent Yankee also missed the opener because of the virus. Star relief pitcher Aroldis Chapman tested positive two weeks ago.
M.L.B. has put in place extensive health and safety protocols, including barring fans from the games for now, and has had relatively few cases during summer workouts. But the true test will come as teams begin traveling, particularly into hot spots such as Florida, Georgia and Texas.
Labs across the United States are facing backlogs in coronavirus testing, leaving anxious patients and their doctors waiting days and sometimes weeks for results, thanks in part to a shortage of tiny pieces of tapered plastic.
Thousands of New Yorkers have had to wait a week or more for results, and at some clinics the median wait time is nine days. Officials have been unable to adequately expand the capacity of state and city government laboratories to test rapidly at a time when they are asking more people to get tested to guard against another large outbreak.
Companies that produce the pipette tips needed for processing test results are slammed with orders. And they are not the only laboratory items in short supply. Dwindling stocks of machines, containers and chemicals needed to extract or amplify the virus’s genetic material have clogged almost every point along the testing workflow.
Another study finds that the drug hydroxychloroquine didn’t help Covid-19 patients.
Another study showing that a malaria drug that was heavily promoted — and even taken — by Mr. Trump did not improve the conditions of patients with Covid-19 was published Thursday in The New England Journal of Medicine.
The study of more than 500 people found that taking the malaria drug hydroxychloroquine — with or without an antibiotic, azithromycin — did not lead to better outcomes for virus patients.
The findings bolstered previous work showing that the drugs are not effective in treating the disease. The Food and Drug Administration revoked its emergency authorization of hydroxychloroquine for use in Covid-19 patients, and has warned that it can cause a host of serious side effects.
More than 500 people in the study with confirmed Covid-19 were assigned to three groups, spread across 55 hospitals in Brazil. All received standard treatment, but one group received hydroxychloroquine, one received hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin, and one group received neither drug. The study concluded that the patients in the first two groups did not have better clinical outcomes than the group that did not receive either drug.
It also found that patients in the two groups that were given hydroxychloroquine more frequently experienced a heart arrhythmia and had elevated levels of liver enzymes, two potentially harmful side effects of the drug. The clinical trial focused on patients who were hospitalized but were not yet severely ill with Covid-19.
Cases and hospitalizations appear to level off in hard-hit Houston, while other parts of Texas still reel.
City and hospital officials in Houston, which has been hammered by the virus, have seen new cases and hospitalizations appear to level off and even dipped slightly.
Dr. Esmaeil Porsa, chief executive of Harris Health System, said the organization’s two public hospitals in the Houston area had 24 fewer Covid-19 patients on Wednesday than they had a few days earlier.
The city’s largest medical complex, the Texas Medical Center, also reported a slight decrease.
In Ohio, where cases have been climbing sharply, the governor said that large clusters of cases were being caused by gatherings like pool parties and funerals. Fifty-three cases in Henry County were linked to an event at a local winery, he said. He also pointed to out-of-state travel, citing the example of two women who took a road trip to Texas. One of them began to feel sick on the drive back, he said, but still reported to work at a nursing home afterward; now there are 30 cases there.
The private school in suburban Maryland attended by Mr. Trump’s son will not fully reopen in September out of virus concerns, despite the president’s demand that all students be brought back to U.S. classrooms in the fall. At a briefing on Wednesday, Mr. Trump expressed no unease over his son Barron, 14, or his school-aged grandchildren returning to class. “I am comfortable with that,” he said.
As case numbers rise in Kansas, the Republican-led state Board of Education voted against an executive order from Gov. Laura Kelly, a Democrat, that would have delayed school reopenings until Sept. 8. The vote left individual school boards free to decide when to reopen. Classes begin as soon as Aug. 10.
After more than three months of declines, the number of people filing new claims for state unemployment benefits in the United States rose last week. The Labor Department reported Thursday another 1.4 million new state applications. The spike comes just days before an extra $600-a-week jobless benefit is set to expire.
A New York City island went from tourist magnet to an emergency garden.
This was supposed to be the busiest summer yet for Governors Island. After 15 years of careful redevelopment, the island off the southern tip of Manhattan had blossomed into a day-trip destination.
Instead, against the backdrop of the pandemic, the island is producing fresh fruits and vegetables for a city in which one in four residents lack adequate food.
At the island’s one-acre teaching garden one recent weekday, seasonal workers, who during a normal summer might be wrangling visitors and students, were packing pints of berries, tying beets into bunches and cooling down several hundred pounds of just-picked greens. All it of was headed to emergency food distributions in the Bronx, Harlem and central and eastern Brooklyn.
“We were so preoccupied in past seasons by the work of engaging with these young people that we never gave much thought to producing food,” said Shawn Connell, who manages the garden, on the island’s southeastern shore, on behalf of the environmental organization GrowNYC.
Most of what they grew was eaten by students, Mr. Connell, 37, said. Some was left to wither and die to show the life cycle of a plant.
“We knew in past seasons we’d been able to grow 10,000 pounds of food, and we thought, You know, that’s a good number to shoot for,” he said. “We’re certainly on track to produce more than that — twice that,” he added.
Belgium’s prime minister issued broad new mask-wearing requirements on Thursday, including for pedestrians outdoors, and warned of even stricter measures if infections continued to rise in the country.
The school attended by Mr. Trump’s son will not fully reopen in September out of concern about the virus, despite the president’s demand that all students be brought back to American classrooms in the fall.
In Kansas, the roles in a partisan battle over reopening are flipped.
A number of states have seen partisan wrangling among state and local officials over how fast and how much to reopen schools and businesses and what measures to mandate in fighting the virus. Usually, the fight has involved a reopening-minded Republican governor taking on Democratic mayors and county leaders who want more restrictive policies.
But in Kansas, it’s the other way around: A Democratic governor, Laura Kelly, has tried to slow down reopenings and tighten restrictions as case numbers rise only to face stiff resistance from Republicans in lower offices.
On Wednesday, the state Board of Education, which has a Republican majority, voted against accepting Ms. Kelly’s executive order delaying school reopenings until Sept. 8. The vote left individual school boards free to decide when to reopen; classes can begin as soon as Aug. 10.
Ann Mah, a Democratic member of the board who voted in favor of the governor’s order, said she had initially preferred leaving the decision to local school boards, but changed her mind after hearing from worried parents, teachers and superintendents who thought it would be unsafe to reopen now and who said they needed more time to prepare for online instruction.
“It was just overwhelming that they wanted a delay,” she said.
Republican members of the board did not immediately respond to requests for comment.
In late May, after getting heavy criticism from the Republican-controlled state Legislature, Ms. Kelly abandoned a phased reopening plan and instead dropped all statewide orders. Lawmakers had passed a bill to limit her authority and allow individual counties more leeway, but the governor vetoed the measure.Barron, 14, has spent the last three years at St. Andrews. At a briefing on Wednesday, Mr. Trump expressed no unease over Barron or his school-aged grandchildren returning to class. “I am comfortable with that,” he said.
‘Untrue and unacceptable’: Officials at the W.H.O. reject reported criticism from Pompeo.
The director of the World Health Organization rejected reported claims by Secretary of State Mike Pompeo that China had undue influence over the organization.
World Health Organization officials on Thursday roundly rejected reported claims by Secretary of State Mike Pompeo that China had undue influence over the body.
“The comments are untrue and unacceptable, and without any foundation, for that matter,” Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the W.H.O.’s director general, said at a news conference in Geneva.
In an interview with Bloomberg Television on Wednesday, Iain Duncan Smith, a Conservative member of Parliament, confirmed a report that the American secretary of state had made disparaging remarks about the W.H.O. Mr. Pompeo said the organization had been “bought” by China, according to The Times of London, which first reported the comments.
The Trump administration has been critical of the W.H.O.’s handling of the pandemic, and it has notified the United Nations it plans to withdraw from the health organization. The United States is the W.H.O.’s largest donor.
Speaking at the news conference Thursday, the organization’s technical lead for the pandemic response, Dr. Maria Van Kerkhove, said that as an American, she felt obligated to speak out on Dr. Tedros’s behalf.
“I have never been more proud to be W.H.O.,” she said.
A convent in Michigan has lost 13 sisters to the virus.
In New York, disputes fester over the blame for virus-related deaths at nursing homes.
For workers who juggle jobs, the pandemic has exposed holes in the U.S. safety net.
Having multiple jobs has become business as usual for millions of Americans. But many cobbled-together employment arrangements, which enabled people to get by when the jobless rate skimmed along at record lows, collapsed after the pandemic froze large sectors of the economy.
People who rely on paychecks from different employers are already more likely to have shifting schedules and unpredictable weekly paychecks, low hourly wages and the absence of benefits like sick days and health insurance. And when hard times hit, they are excluded from regular state unemployment benefits.
The latest government unemployment figures will be released Thursday. For 17 straight weeks, there have been more than one million new jobless claims, and this morning’s tally is expected to extend that streak. The question is whether the number of claims will grow as lockdown restrictions have been put back in place to stop the virus’s spread.
When economic shutdowns began rolling through the country, Congress focused on the existing unemployment insurance system as the primary vehicle for assistance. Lawmakers moved quickly to fill in some of the holes and created the Pandemic Unemployment Assistance program, a temporary benefit for the ranks of freelancers and part-timers, as well as contract, self-employed and gig workers, who are ineligible for normal state benefits.
The emergency federal program, which expires at the end of the year, provided a lifeline for millions of people, but it has struggled with a slow rollout and complicated rules, as well as overburdened administrators and computers. Organized fraud has further bedeviled the process.
In most states, regular state benefits replace less than half of lost wages, and the Pandemic Unemployment Assistance benefit is half of that average state benefit. What’s more, there are at least 20 million people unemployed but only five million job openings.
China issues new guidelines on meat imports.
China’s National Health Commission issued new safety guidelines on Thursday for the country’s meat processors, citing coronavirus outbreaks at plants in the United States, Germany and Britain, and the high risks of transmission in enclosed, crowded processing plants.
All imported meat must be certified as having passed nucleic acid tests that check for the virus before it is processed in the country, according to the guidelines. Environmental samples must be collected daily at facilities in medium- and high-risk regions and weekly in low-risk areas.
China recently halted imports from a range of overseas suppliers because of virus concerns, including Tyson in the U.S., Tönnies in Germany and three Ecuadorean seafood companies. A worker at a seafood processing plant in the northeastern city of Dalian tested positive for the virus on Wednesday, Chinese state media reported.
China’s health authorities recorded 22 new confirmed cases on Thursday, including 18 cases in the northwestern region of Xinjiang.
A U.N. report calls for a temporary basic wage for the world’s poorest people.
The surge of coronavirus cases could be slowed if the world’s poorest people receive a temporary basic income, enabling them to stay at home, according to a United Nations report released on Thursday.
Two cafeterias used by White House staff members were closed, and contact tracing was conducted, after an employee tested positive for the coronavirus, a Trump administration official said on Wednesday.
The cafeterias are in the Eisenhower Executive Office Building and the New Executive Office Building, which are part of the White House complex and are next to the West Wing.
It was not immediately clear whether the employee was a cafeteria worker, and the White House did not say what kind of symptoms the person showed.
The White House notified employees about measures in an email and said that there was no need for them to self-quarantine, according to the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity because the person was not authorized to speak publicly about the situation.
In May, a military aide who had contact with President Trump tested positive for the virus, as did Katie Miller, the press secretary for Vice President Mike Pence.
A mask mandate turns Texas Republicans against their once beloved governor.
Texas Republicans have long sparred with one another, with feisty internal disputes over gun rights, bathroom bills and other culture-war issues. But since the spring, as the coronavirus began to take hold across the state, it has been an all-out battle of red versus red.
This month, Republican groups in eight counties censured the governor, a Republican, after he issued a statewide mask order, saying that it infringed on their rights, a stunning rebuke for a politician who until now has been the most popular Republican in the state. This also made Greg Abbott the first Republican governor of Texas in modern times to be officially reprimanded by a group of Republican county leaders.
As Texas has become one of the largest coronavirus hot spots in the country, Mr. Abbott has struggled to find the best approach to control it. Some Republicans have urged him to go faster in reopening businesses, and have pushed him to keep them open despite the recent increase in cases in the state. At the same time, many public health officials and Democratic leaders have pushed him to do more to stop the rising tide of infections, hospitalizations and deaths from the virus across the state.
After cases related to bars began to spike, Mr. Abbott ordered them closed in late June. For weeks, he said the government should not mandate mask-wearing, but then he reversed course before the Fourth of July weekend and put in place an order for most Texans to wear face coverings in public.
Congressional lawmakers and the White House are negotiating a roughly $1 trillion relief package that would include extending some benefits for unemployed workers.
More than 6,000 people have died of the virus in nursing homes and other long-term facilities across the state. That death toll surpasses the number of fatalities in several states, and the governor has faced heated attacks from Republicans in Washington and elsewhere over his response to the crisis. The tension and pain surrounding the issue bled into the debate over a related bill that was passed on Thursday by the Legislature.
Reporting was contributed by Peter Baker, Nicholas Bogel-Burroughs, Julia Calderone, Emily Cochrane, Patricia Cohen, Keith Collins, Matthew Conlen, Michael Cooper, Julia Echikson, Nicholas Fandos, Manny Fernandez, Luis Ferré-Sadurní, Gillian Friedman, Lazaro Gamio, Kit Gillet, Michael Gold, Joseph Goldstein, Matthew Goldstein, J. David Goodman, Maggie Haberman, Christine Hauser, Josh Keller, Juliana Kim, Tyler Kepner, Iliana Magra, Sapna Maheshwari, Patricia Mazzei, Giulia McDonnell Nieto del Rio, Jesse McKinley, Sarah Mervosh, Raphael Minder, Azi Paybarah, Katie Rogers, Eileen Sullivan, Jim Tankersley, Katie Thomas, Lucy Tompkins, Alexander Villegas, Daniel Victor, Neil Vigdor, James Wagner, David Waldstein, Allyson Waller, Katherine J. Wu, Elaine Yu and Jeanna Smialek.