The sport is grappling with the wisdom of continuing the season after the coronavirus infiltrated the Marlins’ roster. But many players remain committed to playing.
Jeff Katz stopped by the Hall of Fame on Tuesday in Cooperstown, N.Y., where he served three terms as mayor. It was strange, he thought, to see no plaques in the gallery for the 2020 class, headlined by Derek Jeter. The plaques were always in place on the Tuesday after induction ceremonies.
This summer there was no celebration, no throng of 80,000 fans in lawn chairs on a grassy hill saluting the defining Yankee of a generation. The coronavirus pandemic pushed back the ceremony, scheduled for last Sunday, until 2021.
Instead of giving a valedictory for his former career on Sunday, Jeter was confronting a crisis in his new one as chief executive of the Miami Marlins. The team played in Philadelphia that day after learning four players had tested positive for the coronavirus.
By Tuesday, the Marlins’ outbreak had swelled to 17 positives — including 15 players — and Major League Baseball shut the team down until Monday at the earliest. The Phillies were shut down until Saturday.
Jeter has released two statements, making sure in both to praise the team for staging a smooth summer camp in Miami before experiencing unspecified “challenges” on the road. The Marlins are stuck in their Philadelphia hotel, receiving care in isolation, as their front office scrambles to sign free agents to fill a depleted roster.
The Marlins’ debacle caused M.L.B. to revise its schedule on the fly, pairing the Yankees and the Baltimore Orioles for two games on Wednesday and Thursday while sidelining the teams they would have played, the Phillies and the Marlins. Baseball can do that? Just magically create two games while deleting others? In this strangest of seasons, yes.
It is natural to wonder if the whole effort is worth it, if M.L.B. should follow Cooperstown’s lead and simply call the whole thing off. Players and managers have been candid about their fears. Some decided weeks ago to not participate in this season.
They are real people — with health issues, loved ones and anxieties — and some of them say their employers are putting them at risk by staging games in 30 ballparks across the country, a two-month dash to a lucrative and expanded, 16-team postseason.
The ordeal of Eduardo Rodriguez, the Boston Red Sox left-hander, is a harrowing reminder of the virus’ power. Rodriguez has been dealing with a complication of Covid-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus: myocarditis, or inflammation of the heart muscle. He is 27 years old and said that the virus made him feel 100.
And yet Rodriguez does not want to opt out.
As baseball grapples with the value of holding its season amid this early outbreak within its ranks, it is worth listening to players, like Rodriguez, who want to keep playing. Players have the option of skipping this year, and more than a dozen have chosen to do so. They should be lauded for the courage it takes to acknowledge their vulnerability and stay safe.
And while some may have felt pressure to play despite their fears about the virus, the vast majority of players have committed to this season. One veteran, Nick Markakis, reversed his decision to sit out the season and announced on Wednesday he was returning to the Atlanta Braves.
This is their job, and they can only do it for a small fraction of their lives.
By now, it is clear that the union’s insistence on full, prorated salaries — even without fans in the stands — was worth the fight it caused with the owners this summer. Additional hazard pay would have been reasonable, too.