The cartoon, which showed Gov. Laura Kelly wearing a Star of David mask as people are loaded into a cattle car, was posted Friday on the Facebook page of a newspaper owned by a Republican county chairman.
A Republican county chairman in Kansas has apologized for posting a cartoon on his newspaper’s Facebook page that invoked the Holocaust to criticize the governor’s order requiring Kansans to wear masks to prevent the spread of the coronavirus.
The cartoon, which was removed from the Facebook page of The Anderson County Review on Sunday, showed the state’s Democratic governor, Laura Kelly, wearing a mask emblazoned with the Star of David against a backdrop of people being loaded onto a cattle car.
“Lockdown Laura says: Put on your mask … and step onto the cattle car,” read a caption on the cartoon, which was posted on Friday, the day an order by Ms. Kelly went into effect requiring Kansans to wear masks in public spaces and in places where social distancing is not possible.
The Anderson County Review is owned by Dane Hicks, the chairman of the Anderson County Republican Party. Mr. Hicks initially defended the cartoon, which he said he had made himself and planned to publish in the newspaper on Tuesday.
In a Facebook post on Sunday, however, Mr. Hicks said he had removed the cartoon and offered an apology.
In a statement on Saturday, Ms. Kelly said the cartoon should be taken down.
The Kansas Democratic Party also denounced the cartoon.
The Kansas Republican Party and its chairman did not respond on Saturday to messages seeking comment.
Masks have become, for some, a divisive cultural flash point, despite evidence that they are a simple and effective way to help prevent the transmission of the virus. Particularly on the right, the decision not to wear a mask has become a rebellion against what some regard as an incursion on personal liberty.
In May, an emergency proclamation in Stillwater, Okla., requiring face coverings led to so much verbal abuse in its first three hours — and a threat involving a gun — that officials swiftly amended it. Masks there became encouraged, not required.
The Anderson County Review’s cartoon was posted as the pandemic continued to rage in many parts of the country, with cases trending upward in 39 states, including Kansas, and regularly reaching new single-day records.
Nationwide, more than 53,000 new daily cases were reported in the United States on Friday, according to a New York Times database. That figure exceeded all previous daily counts aside from the 55,595 new cases on Thursday, the first time the number passed 50,000.
In Kansas, the number of cases has increased over the last two weeks. At least 15,919 cases and 277 deaths have been recorded statewide, according to the Kansas Department of Health and Environment.
The Anderson County Review calls itself Kansas’ eighth oldest continuously publishing newspaper, serving the communities of Anderson County since 1865. Published weekly, it has a circulation of 2,117, according to the Kansas Press Association.