Ms. Duckworth, an Illinois senator who is Thai-American and lost both legs fighting in Iraq, has been the target of two nights of attacks from the Fox News host; some were amplified by President Trump.
Senator Tammy Duckworth of Illinois, a Thai-American Democrat who lost both of her legs fighting in the Iraq war and is now a potential vice-presidential nominee, was targeted with nativist smears for the second night in a row on Tuesday by Fox News’s Tucker Carlson.
Mr. Carlson, whose broadsides have been amplified on Twitter by President Trump, attacked Ms. Duckworth in his monologue for suggesting during a Sunday interview on CNN’s “State of the Union” that it was worth discussing the value of removing monuments of George Washington, the nation’s slave-owning first president.
On Tuesday night Mr. Carlson labeled both Ms. Duckworth, who was born in Thailand to a Thai mother of Chinese descent and a white American veteran father, and the Somali-born Representative Ilhan Omar of Minnesota, “vandals” who hate the United States because they have called attention to its historical racism and inequities.
“And when vandals like Tammy Duckworth and Ilhan Omar tell us that we’re not allowed to question their patriotism, even as they scream about how horrible America is, we have every right to laugh in their faces, and we should,” Mr. Carlson said.
Ms. Duckworth’s ancestors served in the military as far back as the American Revolution, a fact that is supported by genealogical records and that she pointed out in a tweet responding to the Trump campaign, which had echoed Mr. Carlson’s attacks in a statement.
And VoteVets, the liberal veterans organization that has pushed for Mr. Biden to choose Ms. Duckworth as his running mate, on Wednesday morning posted a video calling Ms. Duckworth “tough as hell” and accusing Mr. Trump of being scared to run against her.
Mr. Carlson’s comments in recent months have drawn growing criticism even as his ratings have remained strong — the best on his network in June. Advertisers, under pressure to disassociate themselves from his show, have fled to other Fox News programming.
Nativist attacks on Democratic women of color in Congress are hardly new for Mr. Carlson and Mr. Trump. Ms. Omar was one of four Democratic women who were the target of “send her back” chants at a Trump rally in North Carolina nearly a year ago. She is also, along with Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York, featured in scores of Republican television ads and political mailers as examples of what the party’s candidates are fighting against.
Former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., who is weighing adding Ms. Duckworth to his presidential ticket, defended her during an online fund-raising event with her Tuesday night.
