Politics|Trump Is Selling White Grievance. The Suburbs Aren’t Buying It.
Trump Is Selling White Grievance. The Suburbs Aren’t Buying It.
As the president casts himself as a bulwark against “angry mobs,” there are signs that he is alienating voters in bedroom communities who view him as a deeply flawed messenger on issues of race.
CORNELIUS, N.C. — On a humid Wednesday morning in this leafy lakeside suburb of Charlotte, American flags fluttered from porches along Main Street, traffic was slow, and the occasional resident ambled out for a walk.
There was only one visible sign of the anger and anxiety that have coursed through this community and so many others across the nation in recent weeks: “Racist,” read the faded black graffiti at the base of a Confederate memorial, the kind of statue President Trump has vowed to preserve amid a national discussion of racism in America.
Down the street, as she loaded groceries into her car, Elizabeth Stewart vented her frustrations about Mr. Trump’s incendiary approach.
From North Carolina to Pennsylvania to Arizona, interviews this week with more than two dozen suburban voters in critical swing states revealed abhorrence for Mr. Trump’s growing efforts to fuel white resentment with inflammatory rhetoric on race and cultural heritage. The discomfort was palpable even among voters who also dislike the recent toppling of Confederate statues or who say they agree with some of Mr. Trump’s policies.
As the president increasingly stakes his candidacy on a message of “law and order,” casting himself as a bulwark against “angry mobs” and “thugs,’’ there are signs that he is especially alienating voters in bedroom communities who approach the debate over racial justice with a far more nuanced perspective than the president does.
It’s a tumultuous time in the country, and attitudes are fluid. A Monmouth University poll released this week found that Republicans — who still overwhelmingly support the president — were less than half as likely to express sympathy for the demonstrators’ anger as they had been four weeks earlier, when the protest movement was first gaining steam. And some strategists warn that there is political risk for Democrats if swing voters begin to perceive them as radical.
But among most Americans, the poll found, support for protesters continued to run high — and so did concern over Mr. Trump’s rhetoric, sentiment that was reflected on the ground in swing state suburbs like Cornelius — traditionally a conservative-leaning area — and along the Main Line outside Philadelphia.
Ms. Scilovati, 54, said she would support “Daffy Duck” rather than the president in this year’s election.
While Mr. Trump won suburban areas overall by four percentage points in 2016, according to exit polls, white college-educated suburban women have rapidly moved away from his Republican Party, and they helped deliver the House of Representatives to the Democrats in 2018. And now, as some polling shows Mr. Trump facing competitive races even in deep-red states, he cannot afford to lose all of those voters again.
In the Monmouth poll, among white Americans with college degrees, only 13 percent said that Mr. Trump’s response to the protesters had improved the situation. Seventy-six percent of these college-educated white Americans said that he had made things worse.
In interview after interview this week, suburbanites who have been open to voting for either party in recent years described Mr. Trump as a polarizing and deeply flawed messenger on the most searing issue of the day.
The killing of Mr. Floyd, a Black man who died after a white police officer knelt on his neck, sparked a nationwide outcry this summer over police brutality and racism. But in recent weeks, Mr. Trump has made playing on white fears an explicit part of his campaign pitch in a way no other major presidential campaign has approached in at least a generation.
Taken together, it is an approach that is out of step with corporate America, a number of Republican officials, military leaders and the majority, polls show, of American voters, though there are partisan divisions around views on racial injustice.
At the Harris Teeter supermarket here in Cornelius, Marisa Pascucci, 45, was another voter who had changed her mind since 2016. She did not vote for either presidential candidate that year. Now a self-described “recovering Republican,” she intends to come off the sidelines to vote for Mr. Biden, she said.
She held that view even as she also expressed discomfort with the destruction of Confederate statues. They may belong in museums where they can be “put in context, not up on a pedestal,” she said, but should not be destroyed.
In North Carolina, a rare competitive battleground state in the South, the controversies surrounding Confederate symbols, and Mr. Trump’s views on those issues, are especially fraught. In a state that is home to the Research Triangle in the Raleigh area, a museum in Charlotte dedicated to championing the “New South” and an influx of newcomers in recent years, many residents recoil at Mr. Trump’s defense of those symbols.
In a recent survey of North Carolina by The New York Times and Siena College, 51 percent of registered voters in the Charlotte suburbs disapproved of Mr. Trump’s handling of recent protests, compared with 44 percent who approved.
Johanna Godlewski, 35, an occupational therapist from Radnor, Pa., said she was uncomfortable with removing statues that commemorate heroes of the Confederacy or others who perpetuated racism.
“That’s a little different, because I still believe it’s a part of history,” she said.
But she also said she believed that Mr. Trump was stoking intolerance and that he is a racist — “The way he speaks about women so roughly, I can see him saying the same thing racially,” she said.
Ms. Godlewski voted for Mrs. Clinton and is undecided this year. But she said she would be unlikely to support the president because her husband is a police officer, and she fears he would confront more protests if Mr. Trump is re-elected — a direct rebuke to Mr. Trump’s claim that he is the candidate who can bring order.
The Trump campaign, for its part, is working to cast the Democratic Party as filled with extremists who support unfettered property destruction, violent protests and defunding of the police (Mr. Biden, the presumptive Democratic nominee, has objected to all of that). The campaign is working to play on the concerns of voters who believe some acts of protest have gone too far.
In a statement, a Trump campaign spokesman, Tim Murtaugh, defended the president’s record on race, noting his work on criminal justice reform and saying that his economic policies had benefited people of color.
“The president’s unifying message at Mount Rushmore made clear that he is proud of America as having done more to advance individual liberties for all people than any nation in the history of the world,” he said.
Certainly, some suburban voters remain ardent Trump defenders, standing by his response to the unrest.
They described Mr. Trump in familiar terms: They dislike his social media presence but continue to trust him on the economy despite the unemployment crisis amid the pandemic. They say that the news media and the Democrats have not given him a fair shake. Some cheered his language about protesters and want to see him embrace a tougher line.
Some white Trump supporters also said they saw racism as an intractable problem, and chose to focus on other aspects of Mr. Trump’s record, saying that he was doing the best job possible under difficult circumstances.
But in the supermarket parking lot near the Confederate monument in Cornelius, Shaneika Guy couldn’t overlook the statue — or Mr. Trump’s painful approach, in her view, to race.
“I want it to come down, I feel like it’s racism,” she said of the monument. Ms. Guy, 34, has not yet decided whether she will vote for Mr. Biden, but she will not support Mr. Trump.
“I don’t think he’s very compassionate about either race, even his own,” she said.
Giovanni Russonello contributed reporting from New York. Jon Hurdle contributed reporting from Radnor, Pa., Hank Stephenson contributed from Oro Valley, Ariz., and Dave Umhoefer from Milwaukee.