Mr. Harrison raised nearly $14 million as he tries to unseat Lindsey Graham in South Carolina, and Ms. McGrath, who is challenging Mitch McConnell in Kentucky, brought in $17.4 million.
Democratic challengers in several key Senate races collected enormous hauls of cash in the second quarter of the year, the latest sign of the party’s increasing strength as it tries to take control of the chamber in November’s elections.
In South Carolina, Jaime Harrison, a Democrat who is trying to unseat Senator Lindsey Graham, raised more than $13.9 million in the quarter, his campaign announced on Tuesday. That total was almost double what Mr. Harrison raised in the first quarter of the year, when he outraised Mr. Graham.
And in Kentucky, Amy McGrath, who is running against Senator Mitch McConnell, raised $17.4 million in the quarter, a spokeswoman said on Tuesday.
Mr. Graham, Mr. McConnell and several other Republicans in important races have not yet revealed their fund-raising for the full second quarter, which went from April through June.
The totals for Mr. Harrison and Ms. McGrath were particularly impressive, but fund-raising numbers announced by other Democratic challengers so far this month have also been strong. And they come as Republican incumbents are being imperiled by President Trump’s declining standing with voters.
Democratic donors are not directing their money only to the most competitive Senate races, either. The South Carolina seat, for example, is not generally viewed as one of those that is most likely to flip. But Mr. Graham’s evolution into a vocal ally of Mr. Trump has turned him into a front-and-center target for Democrats.
The Senate race in Kentucky has also been a magnet for Democratic cash, though Mr. McConnell, the majority leader, is favored to win re-election. Ms. McGrath won a competitive primary last month, and her campaign did not say how much cash it had on hand at the end of the quarter. As of June 3, Ms. McGrath had $19.3 million on hand, roughly $4 million more than Mr. McConnell, according to filings with the Federal Election Commission.
In Maine, Sara Gideon, who is seeking to defeat Senator Susan Collins, announced last week that she had raised more than $9 million in the most recent quarter. Ms. Collins is seen as one of the most vulnerable Republican incumbents.
From April 1 to June 24, which covers most of the quarter, Ms. Gideon raised $8.1 million, far more than Ms. Collins, who raised $3 million during that time, according to campaign finance filings. At the end of that period, Ms. Gideon had about $5.5 million on hand, compared with $5 million for Ms. Collins.
In other closely watched races, Gov. Steve Bullock of Montana, a Democrat who is trying to unseat Senator Steve Daines, raised $7.7 million in the second quarter, his campaign said. That was more than Mr. Bullock raised in the entirety of his campaign for the Democratic presidential nomination, which he ended in December.
Cal Cunningham, a Democrat who is challenging Senator Thom Tillis, Republican of North Carolina, brought in $7.4 million in the quarter, his campaign said. Jon Ossoff, a Democrat running against Senator David Perdue, Republican of Georgia, raised more than $3.45 million, according to his campaign.
Republicans sought to minimize that fund-raising energy. “Democrats will need to spend every penny to defend records that are disqualifying in the eyes of mainstream voters who will decide the outcome in key Senate races,” Jesse Hunt, a spokesman for the National Republican Senatorial Committee, said Tuesday.
The most endangered incumbent Democrat, Senator Doug Jones of Alabama, has not yet disclosed his fund-raising for the most recent quarter. Mr. Jones had $8.3 million in cash on hand at the beginning of April.
One of the Republicans seeking to challenge him, Tommy Tuberville, the former Auburn University football coach who has been endorsed by Mr. Trump, raised roughly $670,000 from April 1 to June 24, according to a filing with the Federal Election Commission.
That was about 50 percent more than what Jeff Sessions — the former senator and attorney general who is Mr. Tuberville’s opponent in the Republican primary runoff, set for July 14 — raised in that same period as he fought to recapture what was once his seat.