Book Review|Isabel Wilkerson Loves Books. That Doesn’t Mean She Treats Them Gently.
I have years of catching up to do. I am especially looking forward to reading “The Sympathizer,” by Viet Thanh Nguyen, “Washington Black,” by Esi Edugyan, and “The Vanishing Half,” by Brit Bennett.
I am working my way through Proust because it seems that there is the notion that every writer ought to and because I have been a Francophile since my first French class in third grade.
Back in the 1930s, a Harvard-trained African-American anthropologist, Allison Davis, and his equally refined wife, Elizabeth, risked their lives to study life under Jim Crow in a remote section of Mississippi. They had to sublimate their educated demeanor and act as subordinates even to the Northern white couple, Burleigh and Mary Gardner, whom they were teamed with as fellow anthropologists for the project, lest they disrupt the caste system they were studying and invite danger to themselves. After years of dedicated fieldwork, Allison Davis and the Gardners produced a book in 1941 called “Deep South: A Social Anthropological Study of Caste and Class,” perhaps the earliest study of caste in America from both sides of the divide. It’s a book that got overshadowed upon publication and still warrants more recognition for its groundbreaking view into life as it was in the feudal South.
I am always struck by how fresh and unflinching the writing of that era is, that, in the midst of depression and Jim Crow and war, they wrote with a fearless straightforwardness and emotional truthtelling that could have been written today.
My books are not only dear to me, they are central to my research and to the act of writing. Many of them are not only dog-eared, but often double-cornered-dog-eared, the margins marked up with my own commentary. So being able to locate a book is crucial, but my books are only organized loosely by subject area. I have so many books on a range of overlapping subjects, too many books for any one room, too many books for the overflowing shelves, that, especially in the thick of writing, hardly any room in my house is without a pile of books on whatever flat surface happens to be available. This means that I am frequently on the hunt through multiple rooms for a book I need, and am grateful for the internal compass that seems always to save me. There have been times where I have had to read a book a day for research, and this internal compass seems to somehow remember the general vicinity of whatever book I’m looking for and wherever it has last been seen.
“Blindness,” by José Saramago, one of my favorites in the world. From the moment I first read it years ago while on a trip to Portugal, I have loved it for its unsentimentally pure and raw comprehension of human nature. It’s a prophecy and a parable about the range of human reactions when an unnamed city in an unnamed country is suddenly afflicted with a mysterious contagion of blindness. He chooses to leave the characters unnamed as well and thus hurls us into the isolating anonymity of the social disorder that ensues. With the turn of each alarming or endearing page, I thought to myself, this is exactly what humans would do. He holds a light to the bleak underside of human frailties that get people into trouble as they relate to one another, and he writes with a seeming wish to believe that, despite evidence at times to the contrary, while humans will do whatever it takes to survive, they are, in the end, essentially good.
If forced to name a single one, it would have to be Baldwin’s “The Fire Next Time.” He captured our present before it had even happened.
Years ago, I was in the earliest stages of what would become “The Warmth of Other Suns,” still putting my thoughts into language, and teaching at Princeton for a semester. One day, I was chatting with a group of faculty members about the unnamed, embryonic book I was working on. Soon afterward, one of them handed me a copy of “Caste and Class in a Southern Town,” by John Dollard, and said it might be of some help to me. It was the first I had heard of Dollard or seen the word “caste” applied to America. It felt both dissonant and intriguingly appropriate. I realized then that what I was hearing in the interviews I was conducting with people who had fled the Jim Crow South was, in fact, the testimony of survivors of a caste system here in our own country. It set me on a course of researching everything I could about caste, and I have been using the word ever since.
Richard Wright, James Baldwin and Zora Neale Hurston, to sit between them and to referee, over her favorite oysters and cornmeal dumplings and sweet potato pone.