Confronted by illnesses that most scientists overlook, these families had to work out their own approaches to find treatments.
Monica Coenraads had a terrible feeling something was wrong with her 14-month-old baby, Chelsea. She had not learned to walk. She had one word, duck, and then lost it.
During a family vacation to Barbados more than 20 years ago, Chelsea cried the whole time. She bit her parents so hard they bled. She was only happy in the hotel room with the shades drawn.
What happened upended Ms. Coenraads’s life.
Chelsea, it turned out, had a rare genetic disease, Rett Syndrome. It’s one of about 7,000 rare or orphan diseases — defined in the U.S. as an illness that affects fewer than 200,000 people nationwide — with more such diseases being identified every day. Ninety-five percent of them have no known therapies. They are overlooked by most scientists, and some illnesses may be untreatable, even if they are understood. And what research there was has largely been halted as labs closed in response to coronavirus fears.
Ms. Coenraads, 57, who lives in Trumbull, Conn., has encouraged research into Rett Syndrome where there had been none, providing hope for her daughter and the small number of people who live with the disease, and showing one way that a determined person can succeed against such odds.
When frantic parents of children with other rare disorders ask how she did it and what they can do, Ms. Coenraads recognizes the fear in their voices.
What follows are the stories of Ms. Coenraads and three people who have succeeded in promoting research on uncommon diseases, but in very different ways.
Ms. Coenraads is not extraordinarily wealthy and had no science background when she started searching for help for Chelsea, who is now 23. She ran a small Italian restaurant in Stamford, Conn., but sold it when she was pregnant with Chelsea, intending to be a full-time mother for a year or two.
She was, and then some.
The Coenraads had never heard of Rett Syndrome when they received that diagnosis for Chelsea, at age 2. It is a neurological disorder caused by a mutated gene on the X chromosome that destroys a child’s abilities to walk, talk, eat and even breathe easily. There was no treatment, no cure. And because it is so rare — it affects only 1 in 10,000 girls and almost no boys — it seemed destined to languish as a research curiosity, not something companies would pursue.
Ms. Coenraads refused to accept that situation.
“I just had to believe there was hope, and if we could get the right people involved with sufficient funding, we could move therapeutics forward,” she said.
Ms. Coenraads knew she needed money to attract scientists, so she started the Rett Syndrome Research Trust in 2007. It has since raised $70 million, nearly all from private donations and galas with silent and live auctions — “typical nonprofit fund-raising,” Ms. Coenraads said.
But money was not enough.
“I wasn’t going to sit back and assume research was happening and things would work out,” she said. She wanted to figure out the bottlenecks and what would be needed to move the work forward.
She began by looking for scientists who knew about Rett and calling them.
Even after a breakthrough, academics usually are not able to initiate the sort of clinical studies that are needed to show a research discovery can help patients.
Once she had gathered enough academic research, she was able to “hit the ground running,” she said, contacting companies and telling them what they wanted to hear: Yes, there was a mouse model of the disease. Yes, there were so-called natural history studies that illustrate what to expect if the disease was not treated.
She interested one company, Avexis, in starting a gene therapy trial. Then Avexis was bought by Novartis, which has said it hopes to do the trial after more preliminary work.
The coronavirus has presented new challenges for her care. Because she’s at such high risk, caregivers cannot enter the Coenraads’ home. Ms. Coenraads’s husband, Pieter, who owns a store that sells uniforms and medical scrubs, has to go to work every day so Ms. Coenraads is now on her own to care for Chelsea.
She helps her daughter stretch every day and exercise on a treadmill, using a device that supports her and holds her upright.
Most seeking a cure for a rare genetic disease hope to recruit scientists and companies to do the work. But one determined couple took another route. They went back to school and became scientists themselves.
The journey of Sonia Vallabh, 36, and her husband, Eric Minikel, began in December 2011. She was living in Cambridge, Mass, and had just graduated from Harvard Law School. Her mother died the year before, at age 52, from a genetic prion disease, a degenerative and uniformly fatal brain illness caused by misfolded prion proteins.
Some of the mutations that cause genetic prion diseases are very rare. Symptoms begin subtly, progressing from clumsiness to an inability to walk and developing slurred speech that eventually inhibits talking. Late stages often result in dementia.
Knowing there was a 50-50 chance, Dr. Vallabh took a genetic test that gave her the bad news that she was going to develop genetic prion disease, and probably around the same age as her mother.
Dr. Vallabh had just started work at a small consulting company, and her husband, now 36, had recently gotten a degree in urban planning from M.I.T. The couple decided they had to learn more. They knew there was no treatment or cure for genetic prion diseases. Was there any promising research?
They realized they didn’t understand enough about the science to ask the right questions.
She started night classes in molecular biology, biochemistry, cell biology and genetics at the Harvard Extension School and audited courses at M.I.T.
Then she decided she needed to see how things were done in a lab. So she got a job as a research technician at Massachusetts General Hospital, quitting her day job as a lawyer. Her husband soon followed, quitting his urban-planning job and starting a position there in bioinformatics.
Soon they decided they had to study prion diseases, so they enrolled as Ph.D. students at Harvard. After receiving their degrees, they were hired at the Broad Institute in Cambridge with a laser focus on finding a treatment that might work in Dr. Vallabh’s lifetime.
They decided their best bet was molecules that can block the production of prion proteins called antisense oligonucleotides. Drugs based on the molecules work in other genetic disorders; they enter the brain by being injected into the spinal fluid, and appear to be safe.
In October 2014, the couple met with Ionis, a small biotechnology firm, to see if the company would develop a prion antisense oligonucleotide.
Dr. Vallabh learned from the meeting that the rules are different for rare diseases. For common diseases, companies do the preliminary work. But with rare diseases, “the burden shifts,” she said.
It is not enough to have data supporting an idea for an effective treatment. Dr. Vallabh and Dr. Minikel had to develop a test to show the drug was working. They had to do studies showing the treatment changed the disease’s course in animals. They had to sign up more than 200 people willing to participate in research or clinical trials. And they had to meet with the Food and Drug Administration.
“We took on a lot,” Dr. Vallabh said.
But in 2018, Ionis agreed to work toward a clinical trial.
A preparatory step was to recruit and study people who have the gene but do not yet have symptoms and others without the gene. The aim was to see if those with the gene have subtle markers of disease progression. That study began in 2017, but recruitment was suspended in March because of coronavirus.
But is it really feasible for others to take the path Dr. Vallabh and Dr. Minikel took?
It is almost, but not quite, unheard-of for people with a rare disease mutation to do their own research, Dr. Vallabh said.
People like her, “are rare, but not an n of 1,” she adds.
Neena Nizar, 42, grew up in Dubai knowing something was wrong with her, but unable to find out what. One doctor after another proposed an incorrect diagnosis. She was told she had rickets, then that she had polio. She had a series of useless surgeries.
She eventually learned the diagnosis: Jansen’s metaphyseal chondrodysplasia, a genetic disease so rare only about 30 cases have been reported since it was first described in 1970. 
Today, Dr. Nizar has a Ph.D. in educational leadership and lives in Elkhorn, Neb., a suburb of Omaha, where she is married and has two boys, now 11 and 9. Her search for a diagnosis began when she realized her sons, as they were growing up, shared her affliction.
She also contacted more than 50 geneticists.
The doctor sent Dr. Nizar’s DNA for genetic testing. She had chondrodysplasia, and by then, the boys’ bones were already badly bent.
“I knew we had to get the kids treatment,” she said.
Dr. Harald Jueppner, a pediatric nephrologist at Massachusetts General, was the researcher who first identified the mutation that caused the condition. Dr. Nizar learned that he had been studying the mutated gene, called a PTH/PTHrP receptor, for 20 years out of scientific interest. But he had never seen a patient. She told him he could now see three — herself and her two sons.
Dr. Nizar stayed in constant contact with Dr. Jueppner and Dr. Gardella prodding them to not lose sight of the work.
In 2017, Dr. Nizar set up a foundation to support research. But she was not in a good position to fund raise. “We only had eight patients, and I couldn’t go to GoFundMe. My family and friends are tired of giving me money,” she said.
The F.D.A. told her and the researchers at Massachusetts General what preclinical data would be required before testing in patients would be allowed.
At the time, Dr. Jueppner estimated that the data might be available in a year or two. But the coronavirus changed all that. The lab shut down on March 20 and is slowly reopening, he said.
If the research does proceed and if all goes well, Dr. Nizar said, she will be faced with a new set of problems.
“How can we make it in the absence of a pharmaceutical company?” she asks. Her tiny foundation certainly cannot manufacture the drug, and no one even holds patent rights.
“No matter how good your science is, you or your scientists can only take it so far,” Dr. Nizar said.
Matt Wilsey knew a lot about what it takes for a company to succeed. The 42-year-old tech entrepreneur and investor had a wide array of friends in California’s Silicon Valley. But he never thought he’d have to use his business savvy to try to save his own child.
In 2017 he also invited patients from around the world to come to Palo Alto for a conference, and 21 families attended. He hopes to repeat the conferences every few years for the growing number of identified NGLY1 patients, now up to 70.
The scientific team finally figured out that the mutated gene controls the way other genes function. Now they hope to develop a treatment — gene therapy, or anything else that works.
To move along whatever treatment looks promising, Mr. Wilsey and Dr. Bertozzi formed a company, Grace Science, LLC.
Mr. Wilsey realizes he has advantages others do not. He and his wife have the luxury of being able to work full time on their project. He has wealthy friends and relatives who donated generously to their foundation.
And they can afford intensive therapy for Grace, who is now 10 years old. Mr. Wilsey said Grace’s doctors told him his daughter probably is at the level of an 18 month old. But he thinks she understands more than that. She can’t talk, but he thinks she can communicate with her hands and eyes.
Mr. Wilsey knows the disease seems to accelerate once children hit puberty, with an increase in seizures and greater risk of aspiration and choking, as well as more sleep disturbances. Children die, although he tries not to think about that.
