For nearly two decades, she chronicled communities on the edge of society in elegant photographs that drew comparisons to the work of Jacob Riis.
From her apartment on East 10th Street in Manhattan, Margaret Morton had a front row view of the homeless encampments that engulfed Tompkins Square Park in the late 1980s. As she walked to work at Cooper Union, where she was a professor, she began to photograph these improvised structures, showing the ways people were moved to make themselves at home even when they had so little.
Ms. Morton died on June 27 at her home. She was 71. Her sister, Judith Orsine, confirmed the death and said Ms. Morton was being treated for a form of leukemia.
A slight woman who her gallerist, Jay Deutsch, said in her youth resembled the singer Emmylou Harris, Ms. Morton scrambled through open manholes, shinnied under fences and made her way to the edges of the city — and society — to her subjects’ habitats.
In 1995, Amtrak, which owned the tunnel, sealed off the entrances and threatened to evict the Mole People, whose numbers had grown as homeless camps in the park above were razed. Ms. Morton, Bernard and the city’s Coalition for the Homeless rallied to find alternative housing through federal subsidies.
Yet housing officials initially claimed Mr. Camacho and others were not “housing ready,” as Nina Bernstein reported in The New York Times — a charge that infuriated Ms. Morton, who brandished her book about the tunnel dwellers to administrators as she argued on their behalf.
Margaret Willis was born on Oct. 16, 1948, in Akron, Ohio. Her mother, Ruth (McFarland) Willis, was an elementary-school teacher; her father, William Arthur Willis, taught high school industrial arts. She graduated from Kent State University in 1970, in a ceremony that Ms. Orsine, her sister and only immediate survivor, recalled was overseen by government tanks.
In 1977, she received an M.F.A. from the Yale University School of Art, after which she taught graphic design there. In 1980 she moved to New York City and began teaching at Cooper Union; she had become a full-time faculty member by 1985. A tenured professor, she taught graphic design and photography and was also the director of the school’s off-campus programs.
Ms. Morton’s work was neither cloying nor gruesome. In meticulously composed images, she showed the pride and even joy her subjects found in making their homesteads, the deeply human need to nest and embellish regardless of circumstance.
Ms. Morton’s other books include “The Tunnel: The Underground Homeless of New York City” (1995) and “Fragile Dwelling” (2000). Her “Glass House” (2004) documented the lives and rituals of a group of teenage squatters living in an abandoned glass factory on the Lower East Side.
In 2004, 10 years after the police evicted the teenagers, Ms. Morton wrote in The Times of how they had fared since. Four had died, another was living in a forest in Maui, one was studying public law. The building itself had become housing for people with H.I.V.
“Her pictures are even stranger and more distant than some of the 19th-century photographers,” said the author and essayist Luc Sante, who teaches Ms. Morton’s work in his class “Cities in Photography” at Bard College.
Noting how the worlds she chronicled have been “swept away by the tide of history,” Mr. Sante said his students were always stunned by “the idea of the squat, the idea that the Lower East Side had just been abandoned.
When Mr. Camacho, the onetime tunnel resident, died in 1999 at 54, his long-homeless state was a hurdle to a proper burial. After the article by Ms. Bernstein about his plight appeared in The Times, donations — of money and a plot in a cemetery in Valhalla, N.Y. — flooded in.
Ms. Morton and others organized a funeral at the Ascension Church on the Upper West Side. Ms. Morton delivered the eulogy, recalling her old friend as a gentle person who asked for nothing and took pride in the small domestic rituals of his tunnel life — sweeping his tiny plywood porch, making his bed, bathing using his coffee-can shower.
