Travel|Boeing’s 737 Max is Being Readied for a Comeback. What Travelers Need to Know.
The plane has been grounded since March 2019 after two deadly crashes, but could fly again by the end of the year. Answers to questions about the process.
Last week, Boeing completed test flights of its troubled 737 Max airplane to demonstrate that it can fly safely with new flight control software. The Max was grounded in March 2019 after a pair of fatal crashes — in Indonesia and Ethiopia — that killed 346 people.
Boeing’s chief executive, David Calhoun, flew on the plane in February. Stephen M. Dickson, the head of the F.A.A. and a longtime Delta pilot, told a Senate committee that he would fly the Max himself and must be satisfied that he would put his family aboard before he would lift the grounding order.
Boeing has recommended to the F.A.A. that pilots undergo training on flight simulators combined with computer-based training “before returning the MAX safely to service.” This training could be similar to the intense annual checks every airline pilot undergoes regardless of what aircraft they fly. It could take several days per pilot on a tablet, coupled with simulation of the new flight control system on a full-motion flight simulator. The details of the training have not been announced. Many pilots who fly the Max have trained on flight simulators every three months since the plane was grounded to maintain their knowledge of how it flies.
Internationally, dozens of airlines are slated to take delivery of the Max over the coming years. In North America, Air Canada, WestJet and Aeroméxico fly the aircraft and have orders for more. Ryanair, the European low-cost carrier, will eventually fly more than 100 Max aircraft.
The Max is the latest generation of Boeing’s 737, which was designed to fly medium-range flights like New York to Austin or San Francisco to Chicago. No U.S. airlines fly the plane trans-Atlantic, though some European carriers have.
The Max is about 17 percent more fuel-efficient than its older Boeing 737 siblings. The fuel savings are huge for cash-strapped airlines. Airlines want to deploy the jets as soon as they can, even during this period of depressed travel demand.
Rebook? Yes. Refund? No. U.S. carriers have not yet announced policies related to the return of service of the Max. However, in a statement this week to The New York Times, a United Airlines spokeswoman said that the company “will be transparent — and communicate in advance — with our customers who are booked to fly on a Max aircraft, will rebook those who do not want to fly on a Max at no charge.” Expect other airlines to follow United’s lead.
