Toyin Ojih Odutola, known for her figurative portraits and vibrant use of color, shares a new artwork.
In this new series, The Artists, an installment of which will publish every day this week and regularly thereafter, T will highlight a recent or little-shown work by a Black artist, along with a few words from that artist, putting the work into context. Today, we’re looking at a piece by Toyin Ojih Odutola, who is known for her figurative portraits and vibrant use of color.
Based in: Brooklyn, N.Y.
When and where did you make this work? I was very fortunate to create a makeshift studio in my apartment to work on smaller drawings during quarantine in New York, around April and May.
Can you describe what’s going on in it? As I look at it now, I still don’t know. I think it’s too close. All I can express is how I was feeling when I made it: a need to draw something calm, contained and steady. After recently completing [the site-specific installation] “A Countervailing Theory,” which involved researching the Jos Plateau region of Nigeria, I captured the rock formations famously known there in a framed portrait within the drawing. The work was made using colored pencil and graphite, with the Jos Plateau rocks drawn recto verso of the Dura-Lar film sheet, illustrating a distance in the frontal view with a reveal in the back. As if to say, “This place that consumed me for over a year, which I have yet to visit, is still in my mind, holding court in a special way.” I normally don’t like to leave works simply untitled, so it’s called “Untitled (Jos)” (2020).
What inspired you to make this work? Anxiety and uncertainty while being in quarantine as the maelstrom of the coronavirus was taking over. Also, having to contend with a world once known and the expectations attached to it coming to an end. This feeling of being in the midst of history-making all around us and not knowing where everything is heading, like yearning for a place you’ve never been to — needing to see that in some form, somehow.
What’s the work of art in any medium that changed your life? It depends on the project I’m working on. Influences are diverse, they come and go. If I’m being honest, anything challenging staid perceptions of the world — or my own ideas — through a visual language that is engaging and questioning you as a viewer always draws me in. I’m constantly learning and unlearning ways of application and seeing, encountering new forms, fumbling in my attempts to understand. Regardless of medium, it’s exciting to come across works of art that can help you expand what is possible.