In April, when reality set in for the advertising executive Joseph Gordon — that his family’s spring and summer vacation plans were canceled, that his two kids’ camps would likely be canceled, too — he cast about for an escape. After a lot of research, Mr. Gordon, 40, of downtown Manhattan, located two 19-foot Yamaha jet boats (which cost $30,000 and more) for sale at Patsy’s Bay Marina in Stony Point, N.Y.
He asked to reserve the blue one. When he called a few hours later to switch to the red one, it had already been sold.
Lindsey Murray, 33, of Navarre, Fla., heard about dwindling boat inventory from a local fishing store (some of her husband’s fishing gear was on three months’ back order there) and scrambled last month to buy a nearly $50,000 18-foot Robalo fishing boat, one of only a few options left in their price range.
“When we picked up our boat, there was literally nothing left on the lot,” said Ms. Murray, who considers the purchase “a good trade” for her canceled trip to New York, canceled two-week road trip around the United States, and her two sons’ canceled $2,000-per-month sleep-away camp. Much to the delight of her sons, she is keeping the boat in her backyard, both because the marinas are full (and a spot starts at $300 a month) and because the water is closer to her house than any available storage units.
Kelly’s Port, a boat dealership in Osage Beach, Mo., is down to less than five percent of its usual inventory. The 44-year-old company, whose average sale is $100,000, has since broken every record “dude, by the hour or by the day or the weekend or any way you want to count it, from sales to gas to service to stowage,” said Ryan Kelly, a partner.
Boat dealers say they are surprised at the number of first-time buyers going for yachts — usually a purchase one works one’s way up to. Often the buyers are people who have chartered yachts in the past and are having trouble doing so during the pandemic, said Mr. Denison, whose company was started by his grandparents in 1948.
In May, Amanda Tress, 34, of Belleair, Fla., bought her first boat: a 38-foot Tiara 38 LS (a yacht, though she doesn’t like to use that word). About a week later, she got pulled over by the water police for driving too fast. She has no regrets.
For James Woodruff, 53, of Truckee, Calif., a boat seems like a good solution for staging mass entertainment. Mr. Woodruff, who runs an events company — “everything in our world has been canceled,” he said — bought a 21-foot Yamaha 212S this month in part to research a professional pivot. He’s trying to organize drive-up concerts on Lake Tahoe, maybe with the main act performing on a barge.
“Boats are sexier than sitting in your car,” he said.
Mr. Woodruff drove eight hours to pick up his boat in Idaho, the only place he could find it, then struggled to secure a boat inspection time available before mid-July. The silver lining is that the boat rush has allowed him to rent out his 15,500-square-foot warehouse for boat storage.
“It’s going berserk with boats here,” he said.