U.S.|A Navy Veteran Had a Question for the Feds in Portland. They Beat Him in Response.
A Navy Veteran Had a Question for the Feds in Portland. They Beat Him in Response.
The veteran said he wanted to ask the officers whether they felt their actions violated the Constitution. Video shows them tear-gassing him and smashing his hand with baton blows.
Christopher J. David had largely ignored the protests in downtown Portland, Ore., but when he saw videos of unidentified federal agents grabbing protesters off the street and throwing them into rented minivans, he felt compelled to act.
Mr. David, a Navy veteran, said that federal agents’ use of violent tactics against protesters, without the support of the mayor, the governor or local law enforcement, was a violation of the oaths that agents take to support, uphold and defend the Constitution.
Instead of getting an answer, Mr. David was beaten with a baton by one federal officer as another doused him with pepper spray, according to video footage of the encounter. After he walked away from the confrontation, Mr. David was taken to a nearby hospital, where a specialist said his right hand was broken and would require surgery to install pins, screws and plates. He declined pain medication.
Protesters have been in the streets of Portland for more than 50 consecutive days, in response to the killing of George Floyd by the police in Minneapolis. The arrival of federal officers in the city has re-energized the demonstrations, which continued on Sunday night, with tear gas once again deployed by U.S. agents.
Mr. David, a graduate of the U.S. Naval Academy and a former varsity wrestler who has lived in Portland since 2006, said he had attended only one protest before — a march for women’s rights in Washington, D.C., in 1989. As a 53-year-old man with health concerns, he said that the risk of the coronavirus was reason enough to stay away from downtown Portland.
With his mind made up, Mr. David grabbed a backpack with some essential items — migraine medicine, nicotine gum, his wallet and ID cards — and took a bus downtown, arriving near the Mark O. Hatfield U.S. Courthouse about 8:15 p.m.
The courthouse has become a focus of protesters, as well as the federal Homeland Security agents who have been dispatched to protect it. But the response by those agents in Portland has prompted a backlash over whether the officers are exceeding their arrest authority and violating the rights of protesters by detaining demonstrators in the area around the federal courthouse.
On Mr. David’s backpack were patches commemorating his time as an officer in the Navy’s Civil Engineering Corps, serving with the construction battalions — the famed Seabees.
By 10:45 p.m., Mr. David was just about to leave to return home, he said, when some protesters began removing fencing around the courthouse and federal officers emerged. He made his way to a clutch of federal agents.
A video shot by Zane Sparling, a reporter with The Portland Tribune, captured what happened next. Officers in camouflage and gas masks beat Mr. David with batons and blasted pepper spray at his face. The shaky cellphone video shows him briefly shoving away the hand of the officer with the spray-can before turning around, walking away and defiantly throwing up the middle fingers of both hands. He turned and faced the officers again, raising his middle fingers even higher — though a strike from a baton had just shattered his dominant right hand.
Internet users quickly called him “Captain Portland” for barely flinching at the blows. Noting how at 6 feet 2 inches tall he towered over the officers, some people compared him to the “Game of Thrones” character known as the Mountain. On Twitter, he went from having a handful of followers before the encounter to more than 60,000 on Monday.
Sergio Olmos, Mike Baker and Zolan Kanno-Youngs contributed reporting.