The message, dated Thursday, was prepared by the agency for Chad F. Wolf, the acting secretary of homeland security, as he arrived in Portland to view the scene in person, according to a copy of the memo obtained by The New York Times. It listed federal buildings in the city and issues officers faced in protecting them.
The tactical agents deployed by homeland security include officials from a group known as BORTAC, the Border Patrol’s equivalent of a SWAT team, a highly trained group that normally is tasked with investigating drug smuggling organizations, as opposed to protesters in cities.
Alexei Woltornist, a spokesman for the Department of Homeland Security, said on Sunday that the missions of the federal agents in Portland “aligned with their appropriate training” and that officers received “additional training for their deployment in the city” to assist the Federal Protective Service.
“Today we show the country and the world that the city of Portland, even as much as we fight among ourselves, will come together to stand up for our constitutional rights,” Ms. Hardesty said on Friday.
While officials from the Department of Homeland Security have described the stepped-up involvement of federal officers as part of an effort to oppose lawlessness in the city, state and local leaders contended that the federal officers themselves may be violating the law.
Along with street medics, protesters also have the support of a snack van that offers free Gatorade and instant noodles, and a makeshift kitchen called Riot Ribs that cooks bratwursts and Beyond Meat sausage. Someone on Saturday had set up a stand selling T-shirts promoting racial equity and handwashing.
Protests around the federal courthouse — tagged with messages such as “Stop Using Violence on Us” and “History Has Its Eye on You” — have drawn the ire of federal leaders. Mr. Wolf got a tour there this week and shared images of himself in front of graffitied walls.
Gov. Kate Brown said in an interview that she believed that the protests were starting to ease before the federal officers waded into the scene. She said that she had asked Mr. Wolf to keep federal agents off the streets but that he rejected the suggestion.
Mayor Wheeler said he got the same response. But he said he believed that the unified local response could change the federal tactics and keep federal officers off the streets.
Sergio Olmos reported from Portland and Mike Baker from Seattle. Neil MacFarquhar contributed reporting.