The league’s football teams had been scheduled to participate in some of the most highly anticipated nonconference games of the 2020 season.
The Big Ten Conference’s fall sports teams will play only within the league, a decision that will affect football, men’s and women’s cross country, field hockey, men’s and women’s soccer, and women’s volleyball — assuming public health officials advise playing at all amid the coronavirus pandemic.
Big Ten officials began to coalesce around the strategy over the past month, and although Warren declined to speculate about how other influential Power Five leagues, like the Atlantic Coast and Southeastern Conferences, would respond to the decision, he said he expected to brief other college sports leaders on Friday.
The decision by the Big Ten, one of the so-called Power Five conferences, will reverberate throughout football. The league’s teams were scheduled to play some of the most anticipated nonconference games of the season, including Ohio State at Oregon on Sept. 12, and Michigan at Washington on Sept. 5. The move will prompt other conferences to rethink their schedules and consider their approaches to a season that executives have increasingly acknowledged will be like none other in the sport’s history.
Last month, the Atlantic Coast Conference commissioner, John Swofford, said if Power Five schools exclusively played conference games, the A.C.C. would aid Notre Dame, which is not in a conference for football, with participating in the league’s games. The A.C.C. also announced on Thursday that it would delay all of its Olympic sports competitions until at least Sept. 1.
Still, Gary Barta, the athletic director at Iowa, said on Thursday that the university fully supported the conference’s decision.
“While many uncertainties still exist, today’s decision will provide the greatest amount of flexibility as we move forward,” he said in a statement.
All ongoing summer sports activities would remain voluntary, the conference said. Athletes who opt out of the upcoming season because of coronavirus concerns will still receive their scholarships for the year.
The conference’s decision followed a handful of collegiate athletic cuts made as schools faced budget concerns heightened by the pandemic. Dartmouth dropped five teams on Thursday, and Stanford cut 11 sports the day before.