The tragic history of “I can’t breathe.” Why you can have a kid or a job right now, not both. How Brooklyn Drill went global. Farewell, Carl Reiner. And more.
Welcome to the weekend. If you are an American, you are most likely having a quieter July Fourth celebration than last year. If you’re in Britain, you might finally be able to have a pint at the pub. Whatever you are doing, take care and make some time for some fantastic journalism.
In the Covid-19 economy, you can have a kid or a job. You can’t have both.
The struggles of working parents are not an emotional concern. They are not burned out. They are being crushed by an economy that has declared them inessential, the food blogger Deb Perelman writes.
Symptomless transmission makes the coronavirus far harder to fight. But health officials dismissed the risk for months, pushing misleading and contradictory claims in the face of mounting evidence. Dr. Camilla Rothe, above, and her colleagues were among the first to warn about asymptomatic transmission.
The former attorney general is fighting for his political life in Alabama’s Senate race, in the shadow of a president who still despises him.
Largely outside of the limelight, athletes like Maya Moore, who helped win the freedom of Jonathan Irons in a questionable conviction, have led the charge for social change. Above, Ms. Moore, in mask, exulted as Mr. Irons celebrated his release from prison.
A hyper-local strain of hip-hop that started in Chicago was tweaked by bedroom producers in the United Kingdom before taking over Brooklyn. Now it’s the soundtrack to a summer of unrest. The latest episode of Diary of a Song breaks down “Big Drip,” one of drill’s defining anthems.
Mr. Reiner, who died at 98, was a gifted comic actor, but he spent most of his career slightly out of the spotlight — writing, directing and letting others get the laughs. Above, Mr. Reiner in 2002.
Another young leader is taken. Afghans ask: How many more?
Fatima “Natasha” Khalil, 24, was a human rights worker shaped by two decades of struggle. She joins a painfully long list of young Afghans who died trying to help their country. Above, a photo of Ms. Khalil on her grave.
Durek Verrett, friend of Gwyneth Paltrow and consort of the Princess of Norway, wants to bring spiritual healing to the masses.
John T. Edge, above, the director of the Southern Foodways Alliance, is being urged to step down after longstanding concerns about his leadership.
For more great reads, follow me, @kalyTsoto, on Twitter.