Steve Searles, former wildlife officer for the town of Mammoth Lakes, Calif.
Steve Searles, known as the ‘bear whisperer’ of Mammoth Lakes, Calif., quit his post after the coronavirus epidemic led to cuts in the town’s budget.
Steve Searles, former wildlife officer for the town of Mammoth Lakes, Calif.Credit...

That takes boots on the pine needles or some firecrackers. But Steve Searles, one of the most well-known ursid wranglers, the “bear whisperer” of Mammoth Lakes, Calif., is out of the job, yet another of wildlife conservation’s coronavirus victims.
In this mountain town in California’s Eastern Sierra, Mr. Searles’s gravelly timbre was usually all the bears needed to straighten up. The ponytailed former surfer and construction worker, who appeared in an Animal Planet television show that carried his nickname, worked as the wildlife specialist for the town of Mammoth Lakes for decades. He had no training in biology or animal behavior, but used nonlethal tactics to help some bears change their ways, inspiring or training other communities to try similar approaches.
As the coronavirus pandemic wears on, Mammoth Lakes, like municipalities nationwide, has faced budget shortfalls and started looking for cuts. Mr. Searles was recently asked to work six months, through the busy summer bear season, instead of year-round, cutting his salary in half. So he turned in his badge and uniform and resigned last week.
Claw marks etched in a tree trunk in Mammoth Lakes, Calif.
A California black bear climbed a tree after grabbing a bag of garbage from a campsite at Pine City at Lake Mary in Mammoth Lakes.
Mr. Searles chatted with a police officer about a bear that had been struck by a car and killed the night before.
Around the world, the pandemic has thrown a wrench into the managed balance between wildlife and humanity. In parts of Africa, reduced budget to pay park rangers may be driving an increase in poaching. In South Carolina, the National Wild Turkey Federation experienced a “near catastrophic loss of revenue” and laid off more than 50 employees.
At the same time, more people are heading outdoors, hopeful that the virus won’t spread in the fresh air.  In places like Mammoth Lakes, that raises concern about how the bears may respond.
Al Davis, the town’s police chief, said budget cuts were across the board. But he said his officers would be able to handle black bear calls.
Mammoth Lakes draws a few million visitors each year for outdoor activities like skiing, hiking, biking and fishing.
Despite the pandemic, Mr. Searles and the town’s police chief, Al Davis, said the area had been “packed” with visitors in recent weeks.
A visitor to the Pine City campground.
John Hechtel, a retired wildlife biologist for Alaska’s Department of Fish and Game, said he believes there were some benefits to Mr. Searles’s methods.
“If the residents are happy and they think he’s doing a good job and they feel like having him there addresses the issue, that’s a good thing,” said Mr. Hechtel, who spent more than 30 years studying bears.
Mr. Hechtel said it wouldn’t be practical for state wildlife agencies to emulate Mr. Searles’s tactics on a broader scale. Bears that habitually break into homes and cars in search of food aren’t likely to change, he said, no matter how much you yell. Mr. Hechtel “likes bears as much as anyone on the planet,” he said, but some repeat offenders do need to be euthanized.
Bystanders scuffled with a hiker who struck a camp attendant after the hiker was asked to keep his distance from a bear walking through the campsite.
Bears turn up at the local golf course and other areas, but generally know to keep their distance from humans.
An oversized version of the bumper sticker that Mr. Searles designed.
Last week, a young black bear tore the screen off Christian Pondella’s window in Mammoth Lakes and poked his head inside. The bear was no stranger. It had made it as far as Mr. Pondella’s living room once.
“Shoo. Go away,” Mr. Pondella and his son shouted at the bear, as caught in an Instagram video.
Responding to the incident was one of Mr. Searles’s last calls. The last four digits of his cellphone spell BEAR.
“We called him because we know he’s who you call,” Mr. Pondella said.
Mr. Searles told the family to make more noise next time and invest in some firecrackers, and try to make the bear know the house means trouble. Mr. Pondella said he might get a dog, too.
Mr. Searles said he’s shed a few tears and fielded a lot of phone calls in the last week. He said he won’t respond to bear calls without the badge and authority behind it. He’s not sure what the future holds, but like the bears of Mammoth Lakes, doesn’t want to stray too far.
