In a laboratory in New York City, researchers coaxed a key piece of the coronavirus — its infamous outer “spike” — to mutate so that it became invisible to disease-fighting antibodies, according to a new study that has not yet been published in a scientific journal.
Many vaccines against the coronavirus, as well as several treatments, take aim at its spike protein, the virus’s most potent weapon — and its Achilles’ heel. Without its spikes, the pathogen can’t get into human cells.
Therapies based on this potent protein could stop infections in their tracks. Some promising vaccines, for example, prompt the body to make spike-specific antibodies that might vanquish the virus. And many companies in the race to find coronavirus treatments are making synthetic versions of these molecules, called monoclonal antibodies, to mimic this process en masse.
But all viruses are moving targets. When they replicate, their genetic material doesn’t copy itself perfectly, and mistakes are common. Although most of these mutations are inconsequential, they occasionally lead to noticeable changes in the viruses’ appearance — some of which may disguise them from the immune system. Cavalries of antibodies trained to recognize one version of spike might be totally discombobulated by another, leaving the person vulnerable to disease.
To study these key mutations, a team led by Rockefeller University virologists Theodora Hatziioannou and Paul Bieniasz created synthetic, fast-mutating viruses that carried the coronavirus spike. They then flooded the faux pathogens with different types of monoclonal antibodies known to glom onto the spike, and added healthy cells for the viruses to infect.
When exposed to the deluge of antibodies in the lab, a small proportion of viruses with modified spike proteins eluded the onslaught. Some even managed to replicate inside cells.
“These are the mutations that are potentially problematic,” Dr. Bieniasz said.
Some of these very same spike mutations are already circulating at very low levels among people, according to genetic sequences of the novel coronavirus collected from around the world. But this isn’t necessarily reason for concern, experts said. In most cases, the changes were found in less than 0.1 percent of the coronavirus sequences known so far. That still leaves “more than 99.9 percent of the sequenced viruses susceptible” to the antibodies tested in the study, said Nathan D. Grubaugh, a virologist at Yale University who was not involved in the study.
The study also suggests that coronaviruses with these anomalous spikes are no more prevalent than those with other genetic backgrounds, said Christopher Barnes, a structural biologist who is collaborating with the study team on new work. And real coronaviruses carry proofreading machinery that makes their replication process less error-prone.
In theory, concerning spike mutations could become more common if the coronavirus experiences pressures akin to the team’s synthetic virus in the lab — if hordes of people used the same monoclonal antibody therapy, for instance, then passed resistant pathogens to others. But even in that highly unlikely scenario, the virus could be thwarted with a combination of antibodies.
The coronavirus’s spike has an intricate architecture, full of nooks and crannies that different antibodies, each with its own preferred spot, can stick to. Mixing different types of antibodies together could form a phalanx around the virus from several angles at once.
That exact scenario played out when the researchers repeated their experiments, this time dosing the virus with two types of monoclonal antibodies instead of one. Some zeroed in on the part of the spike that directly contacts human cells, while others shackled a different piece of the protein. The virus could not fend off both assailants at once.
