WARSAW — President Andrzej Duda of Poland was narrowly elected to a second term after the votes were counted on Monday following the country’s closest presidential election since the end of communist rule in 1989, clearing a potential obstacle for the conservative nationalist government.
Mr. Duda and the governing party have fought to control the courts and media, while stoking fear of gay people, the European Union and foreigners. For many in the opposition, the race was not only a contest between competing visions for Poland, but a last chance to save institutions that form the bedrock of a healthy democracy.
While the tight vote underscored the extent to which the deep divisions in Poland have only intensified after five years governed by the Law and Justice party, there was no suggestion the government would now change course.
Mr. Duda’s promise to protect “traditional families” resonated with older voters and churchgoers, especially in the eastern half of the country, helping him fend off a fierce challenge from Rafal Trzaskowski, the liberal mayor of Warsaw.
The opposition was fueled by support from young people around the country, securing a majority of votes from people under 50, and turnout was among the highest since the country turned away from communism.
Poland’s major cities, from Gdansk in the north to Krakow in the south, were bastions of resistance, but the governing party rallied its faithful in rural communities, many left behind in the rapid transition from communism to capitalism.
Mr. Trzaskowski conceded defeat Monday afternoon after the country’s electoral commission said that with 100 percent of the actual vote counted, Mr. Duda had secured 51.03 percent of the vote. Mr. Trzaskowski won 48.97 percent. The turnout was 68.18 percent.
While Mr. Duda struck a conciliatory tone in remarks to supporters on Sunday, Justice Minister Zbigniew Ziobro said on Monday that Mr. Duda would continue to advance the government’s agenda, which he described as “pro-family policies,” a focus on social issues and “a more just redistribution” of wealth.
Writing on Twitter, Mr. Trzaskowski thanked the roughly 10 million people who voted for him, but conceded the contest. It was a bitter defeat for opponents of the government.
The Warsaw mayor was not even a candidate when the election was postponed in May because of the coronavirus, but he mounted a serious challenge against an incumbent president who had the backing of state television and important church leaders.
With the next parliamentary elections not scheduled until 2023, Mr. Duda’s re-election ensured that the governing party, which also controls the Parliament, will be able to continue to reshape the nation in ways that critics contend undermine open political debate and the rule of law, and put it at odds with the European Union, which has accused Poland of damaging democratic values and institutions.
Mr. Duda, however, dismissed concerns about Poland’s illiberal drift as an invention of foreign interests. He attacked Mr. Trzaskowski over his support for L.G.B.T. rights — a powerful argument in a staunchly Catholic country, particularly outside its cosmopolitan cities.
Thomas Boserup, an independent election observer from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, said the voting and counting process was carried out well and all the coronavirus precautions were observed. But he said that there were threats reported against journalists and politicians.
Independent news outlets faced escalating attacks during the campaign, with the governing party claiming that Germany and other outside powers were trying to meddle in Poland’s affairs.
While Mr. Trzaskowski and Mr. Duda represented very different visions for Poland, they have remarkably similar backgrounds. Both were born in 1972 and raised by families considered part of the country’s intelligentsia, and both were academics before entering politics as ministers in the European Union.
While the Polish president has limited authority, the office comes with veto power, which Mr. Trzaskowski vowed to use to provide a counterweight to Law and Justice.
Still, the precautions taken at polling stations — including social-distancing requirements — were a reminder of the lingering threat. And with Law and Justice drawing much of its support from older voters, the party redoubled its efforts to ensure that fear of the virus would not limit turnout.
An alert from the Government Security Center, which normally sends out text messages warning of bad weather, was delivered to Polish mobile phones on Saturday reminding people of the elections. “People over the age of 60+, pregnant women and disabled people are entitled to vote at the polling stations without waiting in line,” the alert noted.
In the end, it was older voters that gave Mr. Duda the edge he needed.
