A national teachers’ union said teachers might strike as a “last resort” if they didn’t feel safe. Pilgrims to Mecca are finding a reconfigured hajj.
As Trump called on states to reopen, a federal report urged 21 ‘red zone’ states to impose more restrictions.
Democrats push to extend a $600 weekly jobless benefit that Republicans want to reduce.
A national teachers’ union says its members can strike to ensure schools reopen safely.
Baseball’s new schedule is upended by more cases among the Marlins.
Pilots want FedEx to suspend Hong Kong operations, citing ‘difficult’ quarantine requirements.
The virus spreads to cities throughout Vietnam, where the pandemic had been under control.
Federal health officials have warned of dangers.
Dr. Immanuel has drawn scrutiny for a series of religious sermons posted on her YouTube channel, in which she linked medical conditions to sex with demons and witches, as well as making references to alien DNA.
When a reporter mentioned Dr. Immanuel’s background to the president, including comments attributed to her that “doctors make medicine using DNA from aliens,” Mr. Trump responded, “I know nothing about her,” and abruptly ended the briefing moments later.
The federal government prepares regular reports on the response to the coronavirus. The following report, dated July 26, was distributed to states by the Trump administration’s coronavirus task force.
The U.S. monthly jobs report coming Friday looms over the stimulus talks amid a stalemate.
Top Democrats indicated they would be unwilling to accept anything less than an extension of the current $600 weekly unemployment insurance benefits, Mark Meadows, the White House chief of staff, told reporters after a private meeting on Tuesday, a demand that is all but certain to be rejected by the majority of Senate Republicans.
Democrats also said they viewed another infusion of relief for state and local governments as a significant priority, Mr. Meadows said.
In the meeting on Capitol Hill, Speaker Nancy Pelosi of California and Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the minority leader, “indicated they weren’t willing to negotiate down on the unemployment benefit,” Mr. Meadows said.
That demand is all but certain to be rejected by the majority of Senate Republicans, many of whom do not want to approve any additional aid beyond what is already provided through traditional unemployment benefits.
The Republican $1 trillion proposal would not extend the benefit and would instead maintain a flat $200 extra per week above regular unemployment benefits. That amount would ultimately be replaced with a new system of calculating federal aid that would cap benefits at about 70 percent of a worker’s prior income.
Additional funding for state and local governments was also raised, but the top Democrats did not explicitly say that the nearly $1 trillion allocated in the Democratic opening offer was a red line, Mr. Meadows said.
“Just the beginning of the talks,” Steven Mnuchin, the Treasury secretary, said as he left the office Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Republican leader, late Tuesday afternoon.
Both enhanced unemployment insurance benefits and state and local funding form some of the largest policy gulfs between Republicans and Democrats, who are beginning an intense round of negotiations over another coronavirus relief package to shore up the economy.
While Democrats have been publicly united behind the $3 trillion stimulus proposal the House approved in May, Republicans are in near open revolt over their own $1 trillion proposal, which top lawmakers unveiled on Monday.
While “united in disagreement,” as Senator John Kennedy, Republican of Louisiana, put it, several Republicans have said they would not support a full extension of the unemployment insurance benefit, arguing that it discourages workers from returning to their jobs.
Republicans are also at odds with the White House over President Trump’s insistence that the next bill include $1.75 billion for the construction of a new F.B.I. headquarters in downtown Washington.
Mr. McConnell, under fire for embracing an obsession of Mr. Trump’s, said he favored dropping the F.B.I. provision from his party’s emergency pandemic aid proposal, along with other provisions unrelated to the virus.
He did not say whether that applied to more than $1 billion for military projects included in the plan for projects that Mr. Trump defunded earlier this year to pay for a wall on the southern border, his signature 2016 campaign promise.
The second-largest teachers’ union in the United States announced on Tuesday that it would support its 1.7 million members if they chose to strike in districts and states that moved to reopen classrooms without adequate health and safety measures.
On Monday, Senate Republicans introduced a stimulus package that fell far short of what Democrats and organized labor have proposed. The measure would provide $70 billion for K-12 education but condition two-thirds of that money on schools’ reopening at least partially in person, a priority for Mr. Trump, who sees it as critical to reviving the nation’s economy by allowing parents to work.
Hong Kong began testing all airline workers who were previously exempt from mandatory coronavirus tests this month, prompting United Airlines and American Airlines to suspend flights to the city. A FedEx pilot who had arrived from the United States and visited a popular restaurant tested positive on July 11.
“Pilots who test positive for Covid-19 face compulsory admission and treatment in government-selected public hospitals, with as many as five patients to a room with one shared bathroom,” the union said in a statement.
“Not only do these situations pose unacceptable risks to our pilots’ safety and well-being, but they also create added stress and distraction for flight operations,” it added.
Hong Kong has had the same quarantining and hospitalization requirements for its own residents who test positive or were in close contact with a confirmed case.
The semiautonomous Chinese territory is fighting its biggest surge in coronavirus infections yet, with more than 100 new cases reported in each of the past seven days. Health officials believe that people who had been exempt from mandatory quarantine rules — including airline workers, seafarers and business executives — were behind the spike in cases.
Hong Kong previously allowed such exemptions to help boost the economy, but it planned to tighten testing and quarantine arrangements for air and sea crew members starting on Wednesday.
Reports about Hong Kong’s quarantine facilities have varied. Some camps have been compared to a “cozy university dorm” with brand-new Ikea furniture, but others have complained about unsanitary and moldy environments.
Separately, a 76-year-old woman who was initially hospitalized due to shortness of breath from heart failure died on Wednesday, a hospital spokesman said, bringing the death toll from the virus in Hong Kong to 24. She had been admitted to a hospital cubicle that had confirmed Covid-19 cases, and she was later identified as a close contact and subsequently tested positive.
After a weekend outbreak ended a 100-day streak with no reported local transmissions of the coronavirus in Vietnam, officials said on Wednesday that the virus had popped up across the country, with cases discovered in Hanoi, Ho Chi Minh City and two provinces in central Vietnam.
Over the past few days, the Vietnamese health authorities have also confirmed clusters of cases at hospitals in Danang, a central city that is a tourism and trade center. At least 30 cases have been detected there, according to Reuters, and the government shut down flights in and out of the city on Tuesday.
Vietnam was lauded for its early and decisive approach to the pandemic, which emerged in China, its northern neighbor. International flights were suspended and schools were closed. Residents wore face masks. A one-party state well equipped to track the local populace focused on comprehensive contact tracing. With fewer than 450 cases of the virus confirmed, Vietnam has not reported a single death from Covid-19.
After a 57-year-old man in Danang was confirmed to have tested positive for the virus over the weekend, despite having no history of travel outside the city, the Vietnamese government locked down quickly and unveiled plans to evacuate up to 80,000 domestic tourists, who had traveled to Danang as a sense of normalcy returned to the country.
A front-line doctor in Baltimore died of the enemy he was battling against.
A Baltimore physician who spent 15 years as chief of the critical care unit at a Baltimore hospital died there of the coronavirus about a month after becoming a patient.
About 20 of Dr. Joseph Costa’s co-workers at Mercy Medical Center surrounded him in his final moments on Saturday while his husband held him, The Baltimore Sun reported. Dr. Costa, 56, had worked at Mercy for 23 years.
His husband, David Hart, told The Washington Post that when the pandemic hit, he begged Dr. Costa, who had a rare autoimmune disorder, not to go to work, but that Dr. Costa insisted on working alongside his staff.
At least 820 health care workers in the United States have died of the coronavirus, according to a tally compiled by Kaiser Health News and The Guardian.
Data released by the United Nations World Tourism Organization on Tuesday showed that leisure travel fell by 98 percent during the first five months of the year, compared with 2019. The group said that, globally, 300 million fewer people traveled, representing a loss of $320 billion for the tourism industry.
Joran van der Sloot of the Netherlands, who is in prison in Peru for killing Stephany Flores, 21, and who is the prime suspect in the 2005 disappearance of Natalee Holloway, has Covid-19, Dutch news outlets report. The prison has four inmates and seven workers with confirmed infections, according to a Peruvian rights group.
Dubai’s flagship airline, Emirates, says it will provide all passengers with free insurance covering medical expenses up to 150,000 euros (about $175,000), and €100 daily for a 14-day quarantine period, should a passenger be found to have the virus within 31 days of traveling on one of its flights. Should a passenger die from Covid-19, the airline will provide €1,500 toward funeral costs. To qualify, customers must book a ticket before the end of October.
A surge in U.S. prisons is hitting inmates and officers alike.
The mayor of Honolulu asked Hawaii’s governor on Tuesday to shut down bars on the island of Oahu for three weeks so that health officials and liquor control officers could develop a stronger enforcement plans to slow the spread of the virus. Kirk Caldwell, the city and county mayor, said he was concerned about bars becoming sources of the virus’ spread after a number of patrons and employees were infected.
Gov. Jay Inslee of Washington announced Tuesday that he was extending indefinitely a statewide pause to counties in various stages of reopening, according to The Associated Press. It’s the second time this month that he has extended the pause, and it comes days after he tightened restrictions on indoor activities.
New York will require travelers from Puerto Rico, Washington, D.C., and 34 states to quarantine themselves for 14 days, Mr. Cuomo said Tuesday. The new states added to the list are Illinois, Kentucky and Minnesota. Failure to do so could result in fines up to $10,000.
Connecticut and New Jersey also said travelers from those 36 places were subject to a 14-day quarantine, though compliance is voluntary in New Jersey. In Connecticut, travelers can avoid quarantine if they show documentation that they tested negative within 72 hours of arrival. Otherwise, violators are subject to a $1,000 fine. Many states have added traveler restrictions.
Germany, an early model for containing the virus, is confronting a surge. Its top health experts urge masks.
Reporting was contributed by Geneva Abdul, Davey Alba, Ian Austen, Julia Calderone, Kenneth Chang, Cooper, Michael Crowley, Sheera Frenkel, Dana Goldstein, Andrew E. Kramer, Tyler Kepner, Raphael Minder, Claire Moses, Amanda Rosa, Edgar Sandoval, Anna Schaverien, Kaly Soto, Eleanor Stanford, Eileen Sullivan, Lucy Tompkins, Daniel Victor, Neil Vigdor, James Wagner, Vivian Yee, Elaine Yu and Mihir Zaveri.