She was the first woman hired to command the cockpit for a major American airline on scheduled flights and the first woman to achieve the airline rank of captain.
Emily Howell Warner, a pilot who was credited with breaking a tropospheric glass ceiling in the 1970s as the first woman hired to command the flight deck of a commercial airliner in the United States, died on July 3 in a nursing home in Littleton, Colo. She was 80.
The cause was complications of Alzheimer’s disease and an injury from a fall two days earlier, her brother Dennis Hanrahan said.
Industry and professional organizations have hailed Ms. Warner as a trailblazer in the cockpit: as the first woman to be hired permanently to take the pilot’s seat on a major American airline; as the first woman to achieve the rank of captain on such an airline; as the commander of the first all-women commercial crew; and as the first female member of the Air Line Pilots Association.
After graduating from high school in 1957 and with college unaffordable, she thought she might become a flight attendant, then known as a stewardess. Never having been on a plane, she boarded a regional flight to assess the job firsthand.
When she asked to be invited into the cockpit of the plane, a DC-3, on an empty return trip to Denver, she was mesmerized by the battery of controls and gauges on the instrument panel and by the breathtaking vista through the windshield.
To afford flight instruction at $12.75 an hour, she quit her $38-a-week department store job and got herself hired as the receptionist at the Clinton Aviation pilot school at Stapleton Airfield in Denver (later the now-closed Stapleton International Airport).
She earned her pilot’s license in a year and quickly piled up more than 7,000 hours of cockpit experience as a pilot and instructor, ferrying new Cessna aircraft from the factory in Wichita, Kan., providing airborne traffic reports, training others as the Federal Aviation Administration’s first female designated pilot examiner, and working as a flight instructor, manager and chief pilot for the aviation school.
By 1967, as a federal pilot examiner, Ms. Warner was assessing the competence of newly hired male pilots who had less flight experience than she did. She began applying for a pilot position with commercial airlines in the late 1960s but was repeatedly rejected. One of those airlines was Frontier, with which she had taken her first flight.
In 1973, she applied yet again to Frontier, and this time she managed to get an interview with Ed O’Neil, the vice president for flight operations. After auditioning her in a model cockpit that simulated a balky Convair 580, he hired her. She was 33.
Ms. Warner debuted as a full-time co-pilot in 1974. Two years later, she piloted a twin-engine turboprop De Havilland Canada DHC-6 Twin Otter, a rugged intercity commuter plane, commanding the cockpit as the first female captain of an American commercial airline.
She would later fly larger planes, like Convair 580s and Boeing 737s. She led the first all-female commercial flight crew in 1986.
Other women had ferried military aircraft during World War II and broken commercial aviation barriers even earlier. Most notable of them was Helen Richey, who in 1934 co-piloted passenger planes for Pennsylvania-based Central Airlines for about 10 months until she quit, hounded by male colleagues and frustrated that she had been duped into what turned out to be largely a publicity stunt for the airline.
Ms. Warner, however, had the distinction of being “the first permanent female pilot for a scheduled U.S. passenger airline,” as she is described by the Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum, which acquired her Frontier Airlines pilot’s uniform.
In the early days, it came as no surprise to Ms. Warner that the crews’ quarters at most airports had no restrooms for women — or that her male colleagues would greet her skeptically.
“Everyone was watching me, waiting for me to make a mistake,” she said.
An airline pilot is technically defined as either a first officer, more commonly called the co-pilot, wearing three stripes, or a captain, with four stripes, who commands an aircraft from the left-hand seat.
She was born Emily Joyce Hanrahan on Oct. 30, 1939, in Denver, a granddaughter of Irish immigrants and one of six children of Emily Violet (Boyd) Hanrahan, a mezzo soprano with the Denver opera and a homemaker, and John W. Hanrahan, a truck driver for Railway Express Agency.
She graduated from Holy Family High School in Denver (it later moved to Broomfield, Colo.), where an English teacher raised her sights by introducing her to “Wind, Sand and Stars” (1939), the memoir by the French author and pioneering aviator Antoine de Saint-Exupéry.
She took adult education business courses, worked for the May Department Stores Company and hoped to emulate a cousin who had become a flight attendant, only to discover that she was too young to apply. A co-worker suggested, though, that she should assess the job first, which she did on a quick round-trip to Gunnison, Colo., some 200 miles to the southwest, where the colleague’s daughter was attending college.
That was her first flight, in 1958, the one that would define her career.
In 1963, she married Stanley Howell, a nurse in the National Guard; they divorced in 1965. Their son, Stanley Jr., whom she raised as a single mother, died of heart failure in 2001 following complications of diabetes.
In 1976, she married Julius Warner, a real estate developer who was a founder of Ouray Ranch, a private community near Granby, Colo., where the couple lived. He died in 2012.
In addition to her brother Dennis, her survivors include her twin sister, Eileen Spillane, who became a flight nurse; two other brothers, Patrick and Richard Hanrahan; and stepchildren.
Ms. Warner’s flying career spanned more than four decades.
When she landed in Las Vegas from Denver on her trailblazing flight for Frontier Airlines in 1973, she received a red, white and blue bouquet sent by Turi Wideroe of Scandinavian Airlines System, who is credited as the first female airline captain in the West, becoming one in 1969.
Ms. Warner went on to fly for Frontier, Continental and United Parcel Service, commanding Boeing 737s and 727s until 1990, when she became a federal aviation safety inspector based in Denver. She retired in 2002 after logging some 21,000 flying hours.
She was inducted into the National Aviation Hall of Fame in Dayton, Ohio, in 2014. She wrote “Learning How to Fly an Airplane” (1979, with Jerry McGuire); was the subject of a book, “Weaving the Winds: Emily Howell Warner” (2003), by Ann Lewis Cooper; and was active in the Ninety-Nine’s International Organization of Women Pilots, a group founded by Amelia Earhart.
“Luck and timing” summed up her success, she said, particularly in what had been an impenetrable male bastion. She always remembered that harrowing flight simulator audition that Ed O’Neil of Frontier Airlines granted her in 1973, which she aced.
