The Upshot|Is the Five-Day Office Week Over?
The pandemic has shown employees and employers alike that there’s value in working from home — at least, some of the time.
According to a new survey by Morning Consult, 47 percent of those working remotely say that once it’s safe to return to work, their ideal arrangement would be to continue working from home one to four days a week. Forty percent would work from home every day, and just 14 percent would return to the office every day.
In the Survey of Business Uncertainty — by the Atlanta Fed, Stanford and the University of Chicago — employers predicted that post-pandemic, 27 percent of their full-time employees would continue working from home, most for a few days a week. Other surveys of firms have shown that they expect at least 40 percent of employees to keep working remotely.
Across organizations, work was most effective when employees were home one or two days a week, found research by Humu, a tech company run by Google’s former chief of human resources.
Some past experiments in remote work in the United States, like at Best Buy and Yahoo, were ended because managers decided remote workers weren’t accountable enough and missed out on in-person collaboration.
In the Morning Consult survey, conducted June 16 to 20 with a representative sample of 1,066 Americans who said their jobs could be done remotely, nearly two-thirds said they’d enjoyed working from home, and just 20 percent said they had not (the rest said they didn’t know or had no opinion). Three-quarters are happy with how their companies have handled the transition; just 9 percent are not. Fifty-nine percent would be more likely to apply to a job that offered remote work.
Of the 87 percent who want to keep working from home some number of days a week, even after it’s safe to return to the office, the most favored choice across all demographic groups is working remotely one to four days a week. People 18 to 44 are slightly more likely to want this arrangement, as are people with college degrees and higher incomes. Women are slightly more likely than men to say they want to work from home every day.
The past few months suggest that some of the assumptions about the trade-offs of working away from the office aren’t always true.
The productivity piece was demonstrated in an experiment by Mr. Bloom at Stanford, in which call center employees at a Chinese travel agency were randomly assigned to work from home or not. Those who worked remotely had a 13 percent increase in performance, and higher work satisfaction.
In the Morning Consult survey, 49 percent of respondents said they were more productive working from home — even with distractions related to the pandemic — compared with 32 percent who said they weren’t (19 percent didn’t know).
Forty-four percent of respondents in the new survey said the quality of their work had improved while working remotely during the pandemic, compared with 27 percent who said it hadn’t and 29 percent who didn’t know.
Aaron Levie, the chief executive of Box, which makes cloud collaboration software for businesses, said remote work had increased both productivity and innovation at his company. Instead of generating ideas with small groups in conference rooms or when people happen to run into one another, he said, the company is having conversations with larger and more diverse groups on Slack.
Some downsides of remote work persist. Most people miss the social connections at work, the survey found. In Mr. Bloom’s study of the Chinese travel firm, half of the remote workers wanted to return to the office when the experiment ended. Their reasons were loneliness, stigma and penalties in terms of being promoted. These and other reasons are why Box and other firms want workers to eventually return in some capacity.
