350 pp. Blackstone. $24.99.
It’s the summer of 2016, and Amanda has taken her newborn son and fled her married life in Queens for her hometown of Deerling, Ohio — a town “divided into four quadrants: the farmlands, the trailer parks and a residential jumble bisected by train tracks” — where she reconnects with her estranged best friend, who never left.  Recalling Carrie’s labor at 18, for which she was in attendance, Amanda thinks of how her friend was predictably heroic and also of how she briefly wondered if Carrie might have been exaggerating her pain, for effect. Back then, they were the type of best friends we’ve come to know well in a certain type of fiction: devoted and almost overlapping selves whose bond is not without its precariousness.
At first Amanda’s homecoming seems like a reaction to the particular traumas of early motherhood. The women fall into steady, if wary, rhythm with each other, their reunion setting the stage for the unfurling of a long-kept secret that’s made all the more dramatic by the intense and often thrilling complexity of this relationship. Meanwhile, the impending arrival of Amanda’s well-intentioned but inattentive husband, Gabe, threatens to rupture their renewed intimacy; and Nina, a young woman of color in a Midwestern town covered in Trump signs, begins to explore the attractions and inherent dangers of politics.
Often, in great fiction, the characters’ responses and interactions can prove more interesting than the plot itself. “Everything Here Is Under Control” — the Y.A. author’s adult debut — is filled with compelling characters, but the first half of the novel fails to elevate them over the events they partake in. There is a thinness to the first 100 or so pages that arises from the book’s desire to continue to withhold a Major Secret; as a result, this part feels flatter and less engaging than the second half, which is so full of texture and authentic human ambivalence that it more fully serves the characters that Adrian has so deftly drawn.
165 pp. Melville House. Paper, $17.99.
Despite her illness, the mother thinks quite a bit about her body’s heft and shape — and so does her daughter. Close to the end of the novel, the narrator flies home (where exactly either of them lives is left ambiguous) to help pack up her big house so she can move into a smaller one. The two share a chaste meal and then store-bought cupcakes, an indulgence that brings the narrator to tears.
The narrator lives with her lover, and has a good-enough job that she doesn’t mention often. She buys groceries and fetches cigarettes for her neighbor, who is slowly dying. She is muddling through life in much the same way most of us do, which is to say informed by a past she can’t quite make sense of, without models that feel appealing, bumbling but sometimes able to acknowledge, and even be grateful for, small moments of grace. Throughout, Braverman spins images that pull that perfect trick of making the familiar feel fresh and new. The author has a particular gift for rendering theoretical abstractions, not only as thoughts and feelings, but as materialized objects. The idea of death, for instance, “moves on its mouse feet, on its palmetto wings, around the room,” and at another point “skitters around the room along the floorboards, flits up near the battered crown molding of the ceiling, kept company by the smoke.” If the book lacks a particularly strong engine beyond the power of the language, the reader hardly notices. It’s so exciting, feeling the sharpness of the world through the perspective of this woman. It’s a thrill to see that language can still be made to help us feel the rush of life anew.
Near the end of this debut novel, Lottie Levinson shares a glass of wine with her teenage stepdaughter as they sit with the young man who is waiting for her eldest daughter to come downstairs for a date. In the bathroom are parts of the experiment Lottie, a biologist, has had to bring home from the lab, since her musician husband got a call for a last-minute gig. The scene ends, perhaps unsurprisingly, with an accident involving Lottie’s chemicals and her youngest son. As she’s being questioned at the hospital, Lottie feels that particular mix of shame and sorrow that comes from being a woman who wants to be a good mom but also more than that.
Lottie’s research also opens the novel; though she is “one of the most productive people in her department,” perhaps unsurprisingly given that it is 1984 and she is a woman, she never gets a promotion. Instead, her work is “savagely” critiqued, her grant proposals denied. The word “artifact” is mentioned often early in the novel, as part of a paper Lottie — who earned her Ph.D. after the failure of her first marriage, to her high school sweetheart — is submitting to journals for publication. In the context of her research, an “artifact” is a particular result of the preparative or investigative part of a scientific procedure — i.e., an unnatural one. But of course, artifacts can also be objects of historical or cultural significance. There is something of both definitions in this novel, which offers a broad swath of Lottie’s life: from her 1950s Michigan upbringing to her complex and loving blended family in upstate New York. She is a woman in science, a sometimes-single working mother. She experiences many of the traumas both large and small that go with each. As an adolescent she wonders if there might be something wrong with her, “more like a boy than a girl, or more like a man than a boy. Maybe there weren’t even that many men like her. Maybe she was a freak.” In context, this sentiment has to do with sex — something Lottie often delights in, but then is made to feel shameful over. But this feeling of not ever being what the world wants of her will haunt Lottie for the rest of her life. The book’s events are sometimes shockingly violent and sometimes painfully mundane, and in that way it feels, more than anything, like an artifact of so many women’s lives.