Economy|An Extra $600 a Week Kept Many Jobless Workers Afloat. Now What Will They Do?
A supplement to unemployment benefits is at an end, and Congress is deadlocked over new aid. For some, that means hunger, evictions or bankruptcies.
June came and went, and the reopening was pushed to August. Now August is near, the business is still shuttered and the weekly benefit booster has run out.
“When the $600 is gone, we’re going to totally have to rethink our lives because we don’t have a way to pay the mortgage,” Ms. Gard said. Without it, her weekly benefits from the state total $300. Her mortgage is $1,700 a month.
Ms. Gard is one of roughly 30 million Americans who are getting unemployment payments — a staggering figure that reflects one of the country’s most calamitous economic events.
The Gards recognize that they and their two children are luckier than many families. Already nearly 11 percent of Americans say they live in households where there is not enough to eat, according to a recent survey by the Census Bureau. More than a quarter have missed a rent or mortgage payment and doubt they will make the next one. Forty percent of adults have delayed getting medical care.
Ms. Gard’s husband, Matt, has kept his hospital maintenance job, and her employer of 15 years continues to pay its portion of the cost of her medical insurance.
But she has to come up with her part — $350 a month — while dealing with several other bills. “I am our family’s major breadwinner,” said Ms. Gard, 39, who had just gotten a raise that lifted her annual salary to $80,000.
They also have some savings — a comfort when more than 40 percent of American households lack cash to cover an unexpected $400 expense. That cushion was crucial last week when the Gards’ air-conditioning system suddenly died. The repair gobbled up what would have been a few months’ worth of mortgage payments.
Without further information on when she might be rehired, Ms. Gard has started updating her résumé, and reaching out to recruiters and contacts on LinkedIn.
Then her school district announced that all teaching would be online in the fall. Her mother, 71, used to pitch in to care for her children, 2 and 5, but Ms. Gard worries about the health risk, so child care is another issue.
Normally, individual states run their own unemployment programs, setting different benefit levels and eligibility rules. On average, benefits replace about 45 percent of a worker’s weekly paycheck. Freelance, self-employed and part-time workers, who didn’t qualify for state benefits but received funds through the federal Pandemic Unemployment Assistance program, tended to get a much smaller fraction of their previous earnings.
Ms. Zaiger, 52, will still get $521 a week in regular state jobless benefits in addition to a share of her ex-husband’s military pension. She also has savings and a fiancé who is working and splits some bills.
“I’ve been crunching the numbers and prioritizing and I’ll be fine,” she said.
She qualifies for unemployment benefits for only one of her jobs, a part-time gig conducting surveys for the Las Vegas Convention and Visitors Authority. That comes to $96 a week. With that and a small monthly disability check, she has enough to cover her $815 in monthly rent, but not much else.
A single mother with a 9-year-old son, Ms. Mallery lives just across the Nevada border in Arizona and has been looking for work. But with the tourism industry struggling, there isn’t much available.
With the extra unemployment benefits running out and little hope of finding steady work, Ms. Mallery is applying for subsidized housing, even though she hates to leave her townhouse, which has three bedrooms and a yard where her son can play.
That smaller sum would more than replace what Ms. Mallery earned from her three jobs before the pandemic. Other workers, though, would be left without enough to cover the essentials.
In Chicago, more than 1,700 miles away from Ms. Mallery’s home, Grey Parker has been trying to map out a budget for the next few months.
As coronavirus lockdowns shut down one live event after another, Mr. Parker was furloughed. His wife’s part-time work cleaning houses dried up as well.
Without the extra weekly benefits, Mr. Parker will receive $350 a week. He contacted his utility company to set up a deferred payment plan and arranged to start receiving food from local food banks.
He also worries about his health. Mr. Parker, 50, has a vascular disease called thrombosis, a blood-clotting disorder that puts him in a high-risk group for complications if he were to contract Covid-19. Even with the $600 supplement, he didn’t have enough money for the $240 monthly cost of continuing his health insurance.
Without insurance, though, the cost of the daily medication he takes to prevent blood clots rose from $10 a month to $500 — far more than he could afford. In the first few weeks of his furlough, he rationed his medication, taking only half the amount he needed, which gave him a frightening series of symptoms: bruising, dizziness and an increased risk of stroke. He recently qualified for emergency assistance from the pharmaceutical company Bristol Myers Squibb, which will provide a 90-day supply. After that, Mr. Parker is unsure of what to do — maybe ask for donations through GoFundMe.
This week, just after the final jobless benefit supplements were sent out, Mr. Parker learned that his company was extending the furlough through September. He hopes to return to work, but doubts that the live-event industry will be back in the fall. Even if it is, he said, his medical condition will make him think twice about returning to work before a vaccine is available.
