Improvement of roads and rails has accelerated, but the crisis has strained budgets, muddling prospects for the projects and the real estate developments that count on them.
Sylvia Lamb, the assistant chief engineering officer for the Bay Area Rapid Transit system, started poring over the numbers in January. She and her colleagues were looking for answers to one key question: If the coronavirus hit California, what would that do to repairs and operations?
“We started to look at all the data, to the work getting done, and there were a lot of ‘what ifs,’” she said.
By March, when the pandemic had hit in full force, and ridership was rapidly declining, Ms. Lamb and her team already had a clear idea of which projects they could jump on to speed up maintenance and repairs. And by suspending transit service at 9 p.m., four hours earlier than usual, “we could almost double the wrench time,” she said.
For example, work sped up on a project for a tech company in Seattle, said Patricia J. Loveall, an executive vice president at the real estate firm Kidder Mathews.
In Pittsburgh, for example, city officials have been working to improve options for cyclists and pedestrians, including expanding bike lanes and walkways, said Patrick J. Sentner, an executive vice president for CBRE, the commercial real estate firm. But whether the city can sustain those efforts will depend on the revenue picture for infrastructure supporting development.
Industrial spaces such as warehouses for e-commerce may emerge as the winners of the pandemic-induced changes, said Ms. Loveall, who is based in Seattle, home to the tech giant Amazon. The ability of many people to work from home has increased the opportunities for e-commerce, she said.
But those commercial warehouse projects cannot succeed if the infrastructure around them is not maintained, because they rely on well-maintained highways with easy access for trucks to move their goods.
Some markets are already adapting. In San Francisco, BART officials are combining system operation and infrastructure maintenance with work on so-called transit-oriented developments, which are commercial real estate projects built along mass transit lines to try to address severe housing shortages in parts of the nation.
