As the pandemic curbs in-person voter registration, a growing number of doctors and nurses are registering their patients to vote.
BOSTON — The sign is easy to miss in the waiting room of the emergency department at Massachusetts General Hospital, next to the reception desk and a hand sanitizer pump. “Register to vote here,” it says, above an iPad attached to a lectern.
Now, despite a pandemic — or perhaps because of it — his project is spreading across the country. Since May, more than 3,000 health care providers have requested kits to register their own patients to vote, including at flagship hospitals across the country in Pennsylvania, Kansas and Arizona.
Nearly 1.2 million people in the U.S. sought jobless benefits last week, the lowest number during the pandemic.
“There is an enormous voice that says, ‘Not our job,’” said Dr. Harrison Alter, the founding executive director of the Andrew Levitt Center for Social Emergency Medicine, which helped popularize a new medical field called “social emergency medicine” that trains doctors to tackle social conditions that make patients sick.
In medical school they called it “noncompliance.” She was not taking her insulin as instructed. But Dr. Martin realized after talking with her that she had been rationing insulin because she had lost her health insurance.
Dr. Martin installed TurboVote software on a few iPads and affixed them to lecterns that he bought online. He also put up posters with QR codes that patients can scan with cellphones, automatically bringing up a website where they can register to vote.
Massachusetts General Hospital took on the look of a military camp, with a tent for the homeless people who awaited their results. In April, at the peak of surge, Dr. Martin noticed that most of the sickest people were low-income Spanish speakers — essential workers who could not shelter in place.
She said some were pushing to include voter registration information on hospital discharge documents.
So far, this month about 500 people have registered to vote using the QR code on VotER posters and badges worn by health care providers, about twice as many as had registered during the previous three months. And Dr. Martin has received so many orders that he is not sure how his small team of volunteers will fill them all.
