The legislation extends control over platforms like Facebook, Twitter and YouTube. Critics worry it will be used to stifle dissent and criticism of the government.
These offices would be responsible for responding to the demands of the government and individuals to block or remove content hosted on their platforms that is deemed offensive. They would have 48 hours to comply and could be fined more than $700,000 if they fail to respond.
The new law, which is expected to go into effect Oct. 1, also requires the social media companies to store user data inside Turkey, raising privacy concerns.
President Recep Tayyip Erdogan and his governing A.K.P. party, having already taken control over most of the nation’s traditional media outlets, were behind the legislation, arguing that it was needed to protect citizens from cybercrime and slander. Critics, however, say it is part of a broader effort to control the flow of information in the country and stifle dissent.
The attempts to gain control over social media in Turkey highlight the paradox the platforms present in the digital age.
They have been used to spread disinformation in Western democracies, including by hostile foreign powers bent on sowing chaos and influencing elections. Efforts by social media platforms to police the content they host have repeatedly fallen short, and governments have yet to devise successful strategies to regulate content without unwittingly infringing on free speech.
But they have also proved to be an increasingly essential tool for debate and dialogue in repressive and autocratic nations, one of the last arenas where opposition figures can connect with the public, and citizens can attempt to hold politicians to account.
More than 90 percent of Turkey’s conventional media is now controlled by conglomerates close to the government. Hundreds of reporters have been jailed or fled the country out of fear and Mr. Erdogan has made himself so omnipresent on TV and radio that his voice can drown out all others. The internet is now, for many, the last open public forum.
In passing the bill, supporters acknowledged that it would allow the government to exert more authority in the digital realm.
In 2016, months before an attempted coup, Turkey moved even more aggressively to censor content on the internet, as the number of people prosecuted for insulting Mr. Erdogan in posts on social media skyrocketed. At the same time, internet trolls loyal to the government used social media platforms to attack critics and journalists.
Last summer, Turkey gave its media regulatory authority sweeping control over streaming services, including entertainment sites like Netflix.
Netflix, which is the most prominent streaming service in Turkey, has already run into difficulties with Turkish censors and has had to edit content of its Turkish-produced programs, removing cigarettes and blurring suggestive gestures.
Last week, Netflix canceled its fourth Turkish production a day before filming was scheduled to begin, after the Turkish media regulatory authority refused permission for filming. Ece Yorenc, the screenplay writer, said the authority had refused to grant permission for the series “If Only” because of a gay character in the series. Netflix chose to cancel the entire series rather than change the content, she said.
The issue of social media content took a personal turn more recently, when Mr. Erdogan’s newborn grandson — the fourth child of his daughter, Esra Albayrak, and Berat Albayrak, who is also the finance minister — was insulted on various social media platforms.
“Those spaces where lies, defamation, attack to personal rights, character assassinations are running wild, should be put in order,” Mr. Erdogan told party officials in a televised speech on July 1.
But criticism of the law was swift, filling the very sites the government was seeking to control.
Even without the new bill, Turkey blocked access to more than 400,000 websites by the end of 2019, according to Mr. Akdeniz, whose organization, the Freedom of Expression Association, compiles an annual report on internet access in the country.
According to his analysis, last year more than 130,000 web addresses were blocked; 40,000 posts on Twitter taken down; 10,000 YouTube videos removed; and 6,200 Facebook posts scrubbed from the site.
The new bill will give the government even greater freedom to remove content of independent news outlets which are the almost the only source of unbiased local news coverage in Turkish. For many in Turkey, social media is also the last forum where they can publicly express grievances on topics raging from violence against women to political corruption.
Quinn McKew, executive director of Article 19, an advocacy group for an open internet and free expression, said that the law placed companies in a difficult position.
Twitter and Facebook declined to comment on the bill. According to Twitter’s transparency report for the first half of 2019, Turkey had the highest number of content removal request, with more than 6,000.
Raymond Zhong, Adam Satariano and Carlotta Gall contributed reporting.