Theater|Cultural Life Is Back in Europe. In the U.K., They Talk of Collapse.
For weeks, Britain’s star artists have begged the government to rescue the arts sector. Will it listen?
LONDON — Last Monday, Adrian Vinken, the chief executive of the Theater Royal in Plymouth, England, steeled himself, then loaded up Zoom.
Around 240 of the theater’s staff members were waiting online, he recalled in a telephone interview. Those included “people who’d worked for us 30 years and given us everything,” he said, as well as young workers who had only recently nabbed a job at the three-stage venue, one of the Britain’s largest outside London.
Mr. Vinken then told the employees that almost a third of their jobs were at risk, and many would soon be laid off. With the theater closed because of the coronavirus pandemic, it had lost more than 90 percent of its income.
“It hurt like hell,” Mr. Vinken said.
For weeks, prominent British actors — including Phoebe Waller-Bridge and Judi Dench — had been warning the government that the country’s cultural venues were at risk of collapse unless it threw them a lifeline.
On Thursday, it seemed like help might come. That evening, Oliver Dowden, Britain’s culture secretary, announced a road map to reopen performing arts venues. The plan set out five stages, eventually including indoor shows with limited audiences, then, later, larger crowds. But disappointment soon set in when Mr. Dowden gave no target dates, or commitments of financial assistance.
Within moments of the announcement, it was being mocked on social media. “It was an entirely pointless exercise,” Mr. Vinken said.
On the continent, museums have been open for weeks (in some cases, months), orchestras are performing again and theaters are announcing their coming seasons, albeit in venues with social distancing.
In France, Germany, Italy or Belgium, where the arts are heavily subsidized by the state, performing companies and museums can survive with reduced ticket sales. But in Britain, where government funding is much lower and organizations rely on commercial income, most are unprepared for a future in which they can only admit a fraction of their usual audience.
As in many European countries, workers in Britain’s culture sector are covered by economy-wide job protection programs. But, so far, the government here has yet to announce a specific rescue package for the arts. In May, President Emmanuel Macron of France announced that all cultural workers who lost their jobs or couldn’t find work would be covered by a national unemployment plan until August 2021. In June, Germany’s culture minister, Monika Grütters, announced a 1 billion euro fund to get the country’s culture sector back up and running, on top of generous support already provided by Germany’s regions.
For months, Britain’s cultural stars — from the conductor Simon Rattle to the organizers of the Glastonbury music festival — have been arguing and, at times, almost begging for action from the government.
Acting in a coordinated media campaign, actors and theaters have called for the government’s job retention program, in which it pays about 80 percent of furloughed workers’ wages, to be extended until venues can reopen without social distancing. As a backup, they are calling for a huge government loan program to help them stage work in half-empty halls.
A spokeswoman for Britain’s culture ministry said, “We are working with the sector to get it fully back up and running as soon as possible.” She declined to answer a list of questions.
In contrast, a play Ms. Mitchell was going to direct at the National Theater in London in October — “Outline. Transit. Kudos.,” based on novels by Rachel Cusk — has been canceled. She was uncertain about the future of a planned opera at the Royal Opera House, she said. Both venues were expecting to lay off staff members, she added.
In interviews with the leaders of more than a dozen British arts organizations for this article, all said the government had reacted well at the beginning of the pandemic by offering the furlough program.
Arts Council England, a major funding body, also reacted quickly, many administrators said. In March, it announced it would award 160 million pounds (about $200 million) in emergency grants to keep venues afloat until the fall. Another body, the Heritage Lottery Fund, had announced £50 million, about $62 million, to help others, including museums.
