Many home fireworks are dangerous for kids and even illegal.
Florida beaches might be closed and the baseball season might be almost four months late but the one American pastime we can all count on is explosives.
Many community fireworks celebrations have been canceled to reduce the spread of the coronavirus in large gatherings. Those events still scheduled will likely be more sparsely attended. But consumer firework sales have been booming over the past few weeks and families are hungry for ways to celebrate at home, so there’s no doubt this weekend will be bright and loud and many dogs will be shaking under beds.
In some cities, fireworks have been lighting up the skies for weeks: In the month of June, New York City’s 311 system received more than 28,000 firework-related complaints, compared with just 121 in June of last year. That’s about a 230-fold increase.
But before you set off your own backyard extravaganza this weekend, keep in mind that home fireworks are actually quite dangerous for kids. According to the Consumer Product Safety Commission, in 2019, an estimated 2,700 children under the age of 15 were treated in U.S. emergency rooms for firework injuries — mostly around the Fourth of July weekend — with 1,100 of those happening among kids under 5.
Some firework injuries can be extremely serious. “There are a lot of burns and severe injuries to the hands and face including, like, fingers being blown off,” Dr. Hoffman said.
Sparklers were the No. 1 cause of firework-related injuries in 2019, and half of those injuries were in kids under 5. Sparklers can reach temperatures of up to 2000 degrees Fahrenheit, which is hot enough to melt glass and some metals, and they can stay hot for a long time, Dr. Dowd said.
Bottle rockets, or firecracker tubes attached to wooden guide sticks, also can cause serious injuries, especially to the eyes. “You cannot always tell the path that those are going to take,” Dr. Dowd said. If a bottle rocket hits a child in the eye, she noted, it’s likely that they will sustain permanent vision loss.
Light fireworks one at a time and don’t lean over them as you do. Everyone, ideally, should be at least 500 feet away from fireworks when they go off.
Never relight fireworks that don’t explode.
Douse spent fireworks in water before throwing them away. This is also true for sparklers. Don’t just throw the spent wires on the ground, where little ones could pick them up or step on them and get burned.
Don’t wear loose clothing or open-toed shoes when working with fireworks.
Keep a fire extinguisher and a hose or bucket of water nearby.
Dr. Hoffman recounted a Fourth of July in 1999 when he was standing on his front porch and he watched a firecracker land in his neighbor’s shrubs. His neighbor was out of town. A fire immediately started and Dr. Hoffman ran over with his garden hose, put it out and called 911. If he hadn’t seen the fire and responded quickly, “his house would have burned down,” he said.
In 2018, fireworks were responsible for nearly 20,000 fires, causing five fire-related deaths and $105 million in property damage, according to the National Fire Protection Association.
If you’ve just got to make something go boom this weekend, be sure to also buy legal fireworks, said Gina Duchossois, an injury prevention expert with the Injury Prevention Program at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia. Legal fireworks are only allowed to contain up to 50 milligrams of explosives, or about half the size of an aspirin. Illegal fireworks can contain as much explosive power as one-quarter of a stick of dynamite.
Here’s how to tell the difference: Legal fireworks always include the manufacturer’s name, instructions for use and warning information on their labels. They are usually sold in retail stores. Illegal fireworks, which lack those details, are often sold out of cars or vans in vacant parking lots.
According to the American Pyrotechnic Association, cherry bombs, M-80s, M-100s, and silver salutes are all illegal. They were federally banned in 1966, and it is a felony to possess or manufacture them. (They are usually made and sold clandestinely by amateurs.) But the legality of other fireworks varies by state and some fireworks are illegal for consumers to buy, but not for licensed professionals. For more information, check out their directory of state-specific laws, and remember, too, that local laws can be more strict than state laws, so be sure to check what’s allowed in your city or town.
Keep in mind legal explosives pose risks, too. “There really is no firework, including sparklers, that is completely safe, even if it’s labeled that way,” Dr. Dowd said.
Melinda Wenner Moyer is a science and health writer and an author of a forthcoming book on raising kind kids.