More than four months after his last public performance, the Grammy-winning artist Bill Charlap played at a storied Pennsylvania club, a glimpse into what may be the new normal for musicians.
On Saturday, four months and 10 days since his last public performance, the Grammy-winning jazz pianist Bill Charlap came out to play.
It was the torrid start of a July heat wave, and though he knew the club where he was headed to in the Pennsylvania hamlet of Delaware Water Gap would not be air-conditioned as a precaution against viral transmission, he packed a dark blue Zegna suit into the back seat of his Nissan Rogue.
But in these times, to perform at all will require substantial adaptations, ones that keep the audience sparse and distant and possibly alter that alchemic connection between artist and listener that the best shows create.
Charlap, 53, is the son of two professional musicians — the theater and film composer Moose Charlap and the standards singer Sandy Stewart — and has been playing professionally since he was a student at the High School of the Performing Arts in Manhattan. For more than 20 years, he has led one of the top trios in jazz, and he has collaborated with likes of Diana Krall and Tony Bennett (on their 2018 duet recording “Our Love is Here to Stay”). Like so many performers, Charlap had no idea when he sounded the last notes on March 8 at a jazz festival in Laramie, Wyo., that he was about to endure the indignity of extended, forced idleness.
On June 19, large parts of Pennsylvania moved into the “green phase” of reopening, allowing indoor dining, bar service and live music. The inn’s owners “started discussing, sometimes arguing, about how we could reopen,” said Denny Carrig, who bought the inn 15 years ago with his sister, Mary, and Mr. Mancuso.
The partners hashed out an opening protocol, including mandatory masks while moving through the club, widely spaced tables, temperature checks on entry and only natural ventilation, supplied by open windows and fans. The changes would bring capacity down by 75 percent, to a maximum of two dozen, but it was a start. Mr. Mancuso began calling musicians. Seven of the first 10 he reached said no thanks, including Mr. Charlap.
“I don’t think it’s safe,” the pianist remembered saying. “I don’t feel right about it. I don’t want to endanger anybody else.” But he agreed to give it more thought, because he’d had a long and special relationship with the unlikely jazz enclave.
“I started playing the Deer Head in the early ’90s,” Mr. Charlap said. “I took a bus up from Manhattan to play with Steve Gilmore,” a bassist. That first night, Mr. Gilmore’s colleague, the star jazz saxophonist Phil Woods, traveled down the hill from his nearby home and sat in. “I think I was getting an audition,” Mr. Charlap recalled. Within weeks, he joined the Phil Woods Quintet, one of the top jazz groups of its day, and spent 15 years touring the world and making eight records, helping to cement his status in the top echelons of jazz.
“There’s nothing quite like the Deer Head,” Charlap added. “It’s been a spot for pure music for such a long time. The feeling there is a good, warm, honest feeling and a personal connection, which is my favorite thing about playing anyway. And that’s what we’ve been deprived of right now.” He booked the date.
Modest and low-key off the bandstand, at the piano he is voluble and intense. For the next hour, the pianist moved through an erudite selection of jazz and American Songbook standards, composers that ranged from Bix Beiderbecke to Bill Evans, with masterful technique and a stylistic range that encompassed rollicking stride piano, bebop virtuosity and harmonically opulent modernism.
Mr. Charlap winked goodbye to his audience with “After You’ve Gone,” a bittersweet love song from 1918, another time of pandemic. Then he put his glasses back on — the mask and humidity had made them fog over — and walked out onto the porch of the inn. He went to a room upstairs to put on a dry shirt and waited by himself for the next set.
Mr. Charlap’s next scheduled performance is a livestream from the Village Vanguard on September 11. There won’t be an audience.