The church said it was subject to more severe limits than casinos and restaurants.
The court considered a similar objection from a California church in May, and it rejected it by the same 5-to-4 vote. But Justice Alito, who dissented in the earlier case, said the new one was more troubling in light of the differing treatment of casinos and churches.
In a second dissent, Justice Neil M. Gorsuch said the case was simple.
In his own dissent, Justice Brett M. Kavanaugh agreed that the case was straightforward.
In addition to the chief justice, the justices in the majority were Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen G. Breyer, Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan.
The church, which said it sought to conduct services with 90 people present — with appropriate social distancing — included a photograph of a large, closely packed and unmasked crowd in Las Vegas in its Supreme Court brief. It said that discriminating against churches violated the First Amendment.
“Public attendance is prohibited for all musical performances, live entertainment, concerts, competitions, sporting events and any events with live performances,” the brief by state officials said.
Judge Richard F. Boulware II, of the United States District Court for the District of Nevada, rejected the church’s challenge, noting that the state had imposed similar or more stringent restrictions on concerts, sporting events and musical performances.
“Whether a church is more like a casino or more like a concert or lecture hall for purposes of assessing risk of Covid-19 transmission is precisely the sort of ‘dynamic and fact-intensive’ decision-making ‘subject to reasonable disagreement’ that the court should refrain from engaging in,” Judge Boulware wrote, quoting from a concurring opinion issued by Chief Justice Roberts in May in the case concerning the California church.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in San Francisco, also cited the Supreme Court’s order in the California case in denying the Nevada church’s request for an injunction while its appeal moved forward.
In his concurring opinion in the California case, Chief Justice Roberts said state officials must have flexibility to make judgments about public health.
“Although California’s guidelines place restrictions on places of worship, those restrictions appear consistent with the free exercise clause of the First Amendment,” he wrote at the time.
Justices Thomas, Alito, Gorsuch and Kavanaugh noted dissents in the California case.
