President Trump warned of an “election disaster” with mail-in voting, but cited no evidence of fraud. Joe Biden has postponed his planned announcement of a running mate.
This briefing has ended. Follow our latest coverage of the Biden vs. Trump 2020 election.
A Trump visit to the Tampa airport becomes a campaign rally with low turnout.
Mr. Trump was asked about the matter during a round table on the coronavirus and hurricane response in Tampa, Fla. A reporter asked the president whether he regularly reads his daily intelligence briefing, which notified him of the suspected bounties in February.
“I read it all the time. I see it all the time. It was never brought to my attention,” Mr. Trump replied, repeating his assertion that he was not told about the intelligence. “I think it’s another Russia hoax. They’ve been giving me the Russia hoax — shifty Schiff, all these characters — from the day I got here,” he said, using his nickname for the top Democrat on the House Intelligence Committee, Representative Adam Schiff of California.
Mr. Trump has not disputed that the intelligence appeared in his daily briefing, which — despite his claims on Friday — he is said to read infrequently. Officials say Mr. Trump absorbs most classified information through verbal briefings, but the White House has said that his C.I.A. briefer chose not to raise it with him.
Mr. Trump, always loath to criticize Russia and its president, Vladimir V. Putin, then quickly raised an area of hoped-for cooperation with the Kremlin. “We’re working with Russia right now on a nonproliferation agreement — nuclear nonproliferation, and if we get something like that it’d be great,” he said.
Mr. Trump repeated his past assertions that intelligence officials doubted whether Russia really did pay bounties to Taliban-affiliated fighters. But the C.I.A. has assessed with medium confidence that the payments were made, and the U.S. government is still investigating the matter. National Security Agency analysts had lower confidence in the assessment.
Mr. Trump approvingly cited unnamed “people” who he said believe that the bounties were never paid. “It was never brought to my attention and — because it didn’t reach the level, there were a lot of people — including Democrats — that said, it never took place,” he said.
Earlier Friday, Mr. Trump held a sparsely attended pseudo-rally on a blazing airport tarmac in Florida, appearing with local sheriffs as he denounced “radical socialist Marxist anarchists” and attacked Mr. Biden’s mental competence.
Separately, members of Mr. Engel’s committee said on Friday they were “extremely alarmed” by assertions that the American ambassador in Brazil had signaled to Brazilian officials they could help get Mr. Trump re-elected by changing their trade policies. Reports in the Brazilian news media said the ambassador, Todd Chapman, made it clear that Mr. Trump’s electoral chances in Iowa, a potential swing state, could be boosted if Brazil lifted its ethanol tariffs.
In a letter to the ambassador, Todd Chapman, Mr. Engel said that such discussions could be a violation of the Hatch Act, a 1939 law that bars federal officials from engaging in certain partisan activities.
In an interview Friday, Mr. Stewart said that some of his past writing on the topic had been misinterpreted, including in recent legal documents that used his research to sensationalize the risk of lost votes. “It’s not a basket of votes being hidden or mailed in from Siberia or name-your-fantasy story,” he said.
“The great risk of an increase in mail ballots in 2020 may not befall individual voters as much as it affects any postelection controversy over whether the election was ‘rigged’ or legitimate,” the paper concluded.
