He joined Ted Turner to create the Cable News Network and oversaw its growth before being fired. Afterward he was critical of how CNN had changed.
Reese Schonfeld, who founded the Cable News Network with Ted Turner in the early 1980s before developing another major cable channel, the Food Network, a decade later, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan. He was 88.
His daughter Juliette Schonfeld Reverand said the cause was complications of Alzheimer’s disease.
Mr. Schonfeld adopted the word “randomonium,” first used by the rocker Frank Zappa in 1980, to describe CNN’s fluid mix of content. He hired on-air personalities like the former CBS News correspondent Daniel Schorr and the war reporter Peter Arnett, and brought from radio what became the long-running political debate show “Crossfire,” originally a match between the liberal columnist Tom Braden and the conservative commentator Pat Buchanan.
He also took programming risks. In 1980, CNN broadcast an edited presidential debate between President Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan that spliced in answers from the independent candidate John Anderson, who had been excluded from the debate by the League of Women Voters because of his low national poll numbers.
“If I had been working for anyone else, given the Nielsen ratings, I would’ve expected a moment of congratulations, shared glory, but Ted Turner did not like to share glory,” Mr. Schonfeld wrote in a memoir, “Me and Ted Against the World: The Unauthorized Story of the Founding of CNN” (2001).
By his account the two men clashed over Mr. Schonfeld’s decision not to retain a nighttime talk show host, Sandi Freeman, a decision that Mr. Turner reversed. Mr. Turner complained that Mr. Schonfeld was too demanding of the on-air talent. Mr. Turner also disliked Mr. Schonfeld’s choice of Mr. Braden and Mr. Buchanan for “Crossfire,” according to the memoir.
Maurice Wolfe Schonfeld was born on Nov. 5, 1931, in Newark to Philip and Sarah (Wolfe) Schonfeld. His father was a partner in a glass and mirror company; his mother was a homemaker, secretary and bookkeeper.
Mr. Schonfeld left the Food Network in 1995, though he remained on its board. He sold his stake in the company in 1999 for $10 million to $20 million, according to Mr. Salkin, who added that Mr. Schonfeld later regretted that decision, feeling he had sold too soon.
“Turned out to be perhaps the most foolish move I ever made,” he told Mr. Salkin.
Mr. Schonfeld was later involved in various business ventures and investments but none involving television.
In addition to his daughter Juliette, he is survived by his wife; two other daughters, Ellen Schonfeld and Ida Schonfeld; three sons, Alex, Orrin and William; a brother, Norman; 12 grandchildren; and one great-grandson. His previous marriage to Karen Lamberti ended in divorce.
He also wrote a blog for the HuffPost in which he commented, often negatively, on CNN’s ratings, errors and leadership. In 2010, for example, he excoriated the network’s plan to pair Eliot Spitzer, the disgraced former Democratic governor of New York, with the conservative columnist Kathleen Parker in “Parker Spitzer,” a debate and discussion show.
“To be blunt, I can’t think of a worse idea,” he wrote, calling the program a wan imitation of the early “Crossfire.” The program would not last a year, even as the renamed “In the Arena” without Ms. Parker.
The Spitzer-Parker hiring reminded him of his experience with “Crossfire” 30 years earlier, when Mr. Turner initially refused to schedule it.
