The fight over limits on church attendance divides the justices.
I was mildly surprised that this case got to the Supreme Court; another church case reached the court in May, with a similar outcome. In that case, as in the Nevada case, Chief Justice John Roberts refused to go along with the four dissenters.
What did astonish me was the ferocity of the main dissenting opinion, written by Justice Alito and joined by Justices Thomas and Kavanaugh. They appear oblivious to the facts on the ground, particularly the well-documented role of religious services in spreading the virus. (Reflecting the nationwide pattern, a small church in New Haven, Conn., where I live, was identified this month as the likely source of an unexpected uptick in Covid-19 cases.) People who are sitting — and breathing — together for a prolonged period in an enclosed space might as well put out a welcome mat for the coronavirus. We knew that back in May. It is even more evident now. Thus the growing prevalence of official orders limiting people who can come together in that fashion to a certain number or a certain percentage of the venue’s capacity.
Nevada’s governor, Steve Sisolak, a Democrat, took several approaches in an order he issued as part of the state’s Phase 2 reopening in May. Spectators remain barred at live entertainment events. The order raised to 50 from 10 the number of people who can gather indoors at most places, including movie theaters, lecture spaces, museums, trade schools and yes, churches. (Churches have no limit on the number of people who can gather outside, assuming proper social distancing, an exception not offered to other venues.) Restaurants and theme parks are capped at 50 percent of capacity, as are the state’s casinos. Since casinos can be very big, the number of people inside can easily run into the hundreds.
Calvary Chapel had been holding its services online, but said it could not continue to do so because of its belief that the Bible requires in-person worship. “If a body of believers fails to hold in-person gatherings, Calvary Chapel views it as ceasing to be a church in the biblical sense,” according to the emergency appeal that Alliance Defending Freedom filed in the Supreme Court after two lower courts rejected the church’s arguments.
One mystery is why the church, which said it was willing to cut its 90-minute service in half, couldn’t add a second service to make room for the 90 people it needed to accommodate. The deeper mystery is why the church went to the Supreme Court at all, given the court’s recent rejection of a similar claim. One reason might be that crusades don’t take no for an answer. But the reason here was casinos.
Other secular entities and activities similar in nature to church services have been subject to similar or more restrictive limitations on their operations. The court notes that church services consist of activities, such as sermons and corporate worship, that are comparable in terms of large numbers of people gathering for an extended period of time to lectures, museums, movie theaters, specified trade/technical schools, nightclubs and concerts. All of these latter activities are also subject to the 50-person cap or remain banned altogether.
In other words, it’s casinos that Nevada singles out for special treatment, not religion.
The contorted effort to shoehorn this dispute into standard free-speech doctrine was only a prelude to a further charge: that Governor Sisolak “has favored certain speakers over others.” It seems that the governor supported and even took part in a protest after the killing of George Floyd by the Minneapolis police, a protest that drew more than 50 people and yet was allowed to take place. “Respecting some First Amendment rights is not a shield for violating others,” Justice Alito wrote. In other words, the governor of Nevada is not only anti-religious but a hypocrite as well.
I think it matters because rhetoric like Justice Alito’s, by design or not, inevitably places the Supreme Court where it least belongs and where it is least qualified to be, at the center of a national debate over how best to protect the American public from a deadly pandemic. It’s beyond dispute that public health has become politicized to a degree that would have been unimaginable just six months ago. Does the court really want to become a part of that politicization by opening its doors to a battle not its own? That even a minority of justices would seize this moment to advance their religious agenda, especially given that agenda’s nearly unqualified success in recent years, is deeply unsettling.
This time, the chief justice remained silent; the only voices were those of the dissenters. Chief Justice Roberts is second to no one on the court in pursuing his goal to afford religion an ever greater place of privilege in American life. It’s just that he’s not willing to sacrifice the court to achieve it.