TikTok, which despite being owned by the Chinese internet giant ByteDance has its eye on the U.S. market, went even further than its American rivals. The video app said late Monday it would withdraw from stores in Hong Kong and make it inoperable to users there within a few days. The company has said that managers outside China call the shots on key aspects of its business, including rules about data.
Based on the law, the Hong Kong authorities can dictate the way people around the world talk about the city’s contested politics. A Facebook employee could potentially be arrested in Hong Kong if the company failed to hand over user data on someone based in the United States whom Chinese authorities deemed a threat to national security.
Though U.S. internet companies still earn billions of dollars in Chinese ad revenue, a decision to go along with the Hong Kong rules would risk the ire of Washington, where there has been bipartisan condemnation of the security law. New restrictions on American businesses could also trigger retaliation.
Google’s experience over the past year shows the fraught position of the largest U.S. internet companies. As the Hong Kong police struggled to contain protests across the city in 2019, they turned to internet companies for help. Overall data requests and orders from police to remove content more than doubled in the second half of 2019 from the first half to over 7,000 requests, according to a pro-democracy lawmaker, Charles Mok.
The police asked Google to take down a number of posts, including a confidential police manual that had leaked online, a YouTube video from the hacking group Anonymous supporting the protests, and links to a website that let the public look up personal details about police officers, according to a company report.
The new law could punish the company with fines, equipment seizures and arrests if it again declines such requests. It also would allow the police to potentially seize equipment from companies that host such content.
Individuals, as well, have taken to self-censorship. Many have taken down posts, removed “likes” for some pro-democracy pages and even deleted accounts on platforms like Twitter, according to activists. Fears that WhatsApp would hand over data also drove people to switch to downloading a rival encrypted chat app, Signal. WhatsApp, though, had no recent data requests from Hong Kong police, according to a person familiar with the matter.
Companies, meanwhile, have the option of shifting data away from Hong Kong. Lento Yip, chairman of the Hong Kong Internet Service Providers Association, said he noticed more businesses relocating servers out of the city in June, though he wasn’t certain about their motivations.
“From a business aspect, some websites or content providers might just move to other places. It doesn’t cost much and it’s pretty easy,” he said.
For companies like Amazon and Google, which have large data centers in Hong Kong, such a move would be neither cheap nor easy. And their other options are equally complicated. Moving all employees out of the city would insulate firms from arrests, but it may not be feasible.
There are potential technical maneuvers that companies could use to guard against the law, said Edmon Chung, a member of the board of directors of the Internet Society of Hong Kong, a nonprofit dedicated to the open development of the internet.
The rules stipulate that tech companies may avoid requests to take down data if the technology necessary to comply with some rules is “not reasonably available,” which Mr. Chung said opened up the possibility of using encryption, storing content in multiple places and other methods of avoiding scrutiny.
