The controversy over inadequate protective equipment has come to embody what critics describe as a haphazard federal effort to protect the 1.5 million Americans who live in nursing homes.
Expired surgical masks. Isolation gowns that resemble oversize trash bags. Extra-small gloves that are all but useless for the typical health worker’s hands.
Some nursing homes have received masks with brittle elastic bands that snap when stretched. None of the shipments have included N95 respirators, the virus-filtering face masks that are the single most important bulwark against infection.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency began shipping the masks, gowns and gloves this spring to 15,000 nonprofit nursing care facilities whose limited finances have made it difficult to buy protective equipment on the open market. The first cache of shipments was completed in mid-June, and the second round will wrap up by early August.
In a statement, FEMA said it had addressed the complaints about the first shipment of goods and had asked the private contractor that is providing the supplies to replace the tarp-like gowns with models more familiar to medical personnel. The agency said, however, that the original gowns sent out meet federal and industry standards.
FEMA subsequently acknowledged in an email that the contractor has been sending out a small number of the older gown models.
The controversy over inadequate and low-quality protective equipment has come to embody what public health experts and nursing home executives describe as a halting and haphazard federal effort to protect the 1.5 million Americans who live in nursing homes and long-term care facilities.
More than 40 percent of all coronavirus deaths in the United States have been tied to nursing homes, according to a New York Times analysis, which found that the virus had infected 316,000 people at 14,000 facilities as of July 15. The virus has been particularly lethal to those in their 60s and older, more so for those in poor health, and it can rapidly spread through buildings where residents live in close quarters and workers move from room to room.
“The federal response to protect one of the most vulnerable populations in the country has been a dismal failure,” said Tamara Konetzka, a health economist at the University of Chicago who has been studying the pandemic’s outsize impact on nursing home residents.
The Trump administration’s largely hands-off approach to personal protective equipment, or P.P.E., has forced states, cities and big hospital chains to compete for limited supplies, leaving nursing homes at a disadvantage as prices have soared.
The recent spike in caseloads across the South and the West has reinvigorated calls for President Trump to use his authority and compel domestic manufacturers to produce desperately needed gear.
The crisis is likely to intensify as the virus gains a foothold in nursing homes across the Sun Belt. Infections at long-term care centers in hot-spot states have jumped by 18 percent since late June, according to an analysis by Kaiser Family Foundation. Florida recorded a 51 percent rise, and Texas saw its cases climb by 47 percent.
The federal government has not said whether it plans to provide nursing homes with additional personal protective equipment in the months ahead.
The Centers for Medicaid and Medicare, which oversees nursing homes, earlier this month said it would supply every adult care facility in the country with rapid, point-of-care test kits but the rollout is expected to take months. In the meantime, the vast majority of nursing homes in the United States are unequipped to regularly screen their employees and residents for the coronavirus.
Without widespread testing, health experts say medical-grade gowns, single-use gloves and respirator masks are among the few tools that can protect nursing home residents from devastating outbreaks that often begin with asymptomatic staff members who unknowingly introduce the virus from the surrounding community.
In a call with nursing home providers last month, Col. Brian Kuhn, director of operations at the Defense Logistics Agency, blamed Federal Resources Supply Company, the private contractor that is providing the goods, and the Department of Health and Human Services, which officials said sent out some of the expired and cloth masks as part of a different initiative.
The contract calls for the provision of 1.2 million pairs of protective eyewear, 13 million medical gowns and 66 million pairs of nitrile gloves.
“They just kind of carte blanche shipped them all out,” Col. Kuhn said, according to a recording of the call posted online. He said that the masks made from underwear fabric were not intended to be used by staff members — only by nursing home visitors — and that the expired respirator masks should never been distributed. “It was one of those things, I’ll be honest, that just slipped through the cracks,” he said.
In response to the complaints, FEMA directed the Federal Resources Supply Company to produce an instructional video explaining how the gowns should be donned and doffed. The contents of each shipment are determined by the number of employees at each care center.
Federal Resources, which is based in Stevensville, Md., did not respond to questions sent by email.
In interviews, nursing home executives and employees that have received their second shipments say the contents are an improvement over the first batch but that many problems remain.
Nursing homes in New Hampshire have received face masks with flimsy paper ear loops instead of elastic bands. In Arizona, some facilities have been sent gloves that are either all large sizes or all extra small.
Even nursing homes expressing gratitude for the supplies say they are often mismatched to their needs, while others say the amounts are paltry given how quickly nursing home employees churn through single-use protective gear as they tend to dozens of patients a day.
Virginia Mennonite Retirement Community, a 120-bed nursing home in Harrisonburg, received its second shipment two weeks ago. It contained a mix of gowns — several hundred of the standard and highly coveted isolation gowns and a similar amount of the problematic gowns.
“I’m not sure how we would even use those,” said Jan Emswiler, a nurse educator who trains employees on the proper use of protective gear. She was especially confounded by a packing slip claiming the boxes contained 3,500 pairs of gloves. There were only 1,000 pairs, she said.
As for the gowns without arm holes, Ms. Emswiler said they had been placed in a storage closet.
“I hope we never have to use them,” she said.