The story of how the company got there isn’t a particularly satisfying morality tale. It didn’t start with a visionary founder’s decision, a Silicon Valley memo or a culture of promoting Black executives. It is, instead, a recognizable story of stops and starts, internal tensions, corporate competition, social media and personal connections, including to a man known as Hollywood’s “Black Godfather” — all eased by the company’s huge budget for content. But this is a moment when Hollywood, perhaps even more than other media industries, is reckoning with homogeneous leadership — strikingly depicted in “a photo tour through the Leadership/Management pages of the major studios and those of their corporate parents,” published by the iconoclastic newsletter The Ankler. Netflix’s stories offer a glimpse of how the industry is and isn’t changing.
And Netflix isn’t alone in its connection to the moment. HBO’s 2019 series “Watchmen,” a complex treatment of racism in America, has been much discussed in recent months, though the company started its new service HBO Max with more emphasis on mass appeal than cultural relevance. And at Viacom, which has struggled to compete with larger streaming players, I’m told, BET+ has been a bright spot with series including “Ruthless” from the director Tyler Perry.
When Netflix got into original material in 2013, the company didn’t have a particular focus on Black content. But the company also didn’t have to worry about advertisers or weeknight prime-time slots, and its credo was “something for everyone.” The first signal that the service had an opportunity with Black audiences came mostly from the service’s second hit original series, “Orange Is the New Black,” (“House of Cards” was its first) whose breakout characters included the actresses Laverne Cox and Uzo Aduba. The show prompted a wave of discussion at Netflix about how a diverse cast could succeed widely in the United States and globally, and connect, in particular, on social media, where Black voices on Twitter often shape the cultural conversation.
In the summer of 2015, Black employees at Netflix produced a memo and PowerPoint presentation to make the case that the company was missing an opportunity with Black audiences. They argued in the documents, which I obtained, that Netflix risked missing a boom defined by “Empire” at Fox and “Black-ish” and “How to Get Away With Murder” on ABC. At the time, the memo estimated, only about two million Black households were subscribing to Netflix — 5 percent of its total subscribers. It said that Black households were a $1.4 billion revenue opportunity and that few of Netflix’s top 100 shows, popular across other groups, were resonating with Black audiences. The memo cited “the (lack of) depth in our Black content catalog,” and said Netflix was spending more money on programming for British people and anime fans than for Black Americans.
They made their arguments to Mr. Sarandos and his team in a conference room full of executives in the second half of 2015, two people who were there said. Crucially, they showed statistics suggesting that licensed Black content was, in the company’s terminology, “efficient,” meaning that it was driving above-average viewership for every dollar spent. (“Scandal” and “The Boondocks” were particularly efficient, while “The Bernie Mac Show” didn’t clear the bar, according to the analysis.) And they raised the question of whether Netflix’s algorithms, in organizing content by race rather than genre, were failing consumers. Mr. Sarandos welcomed the presentation, people present at the time said, though he didn’t take any direct action. One current senior executive said it was taken seriously and influenced buyers across the company.
The Black executives who were buying content during Netflix’s first wave of original programming are all gone now. Some didn’t get promotions. Some were hired away by competitors, and some were burned out by an internal culture officially focused on encouraging freedom and responsibility but whose unsentimental firings and blunt feedback carried their own forms of bias and subjectivity. (The company added the principle of “inclusion” to its legendary culture manifesto in 2017.) Among the departures: Ms. Duncan was recently named president of Disney’s Freeform, Devin Griffin is running Viacom’s BET+ and Layne Eskridge is a creative executive at Apple.
Still, the service continued to carve out a lane: The 2015 documentary “What Happened, Miss Simone?” was nominated for an Oscar, and a Black superhero show, “Luke Cage,” ran for two seasons and developed a cult following. Dee Rees’s 2017 film, “Mudbound,” was nominated for four Oscars. Some of its biggest deals went to Black comics, including Kevin Hart and Chris Rock, as well as Dave Chappelle, who became a pillar of the platform. The company began emphasizing the idea that everyone should be able to see themselves on the screen.
Since 2018, Mr. Sarandos has hired a more diverse group of executives at high levels, including the former ABC Entertainment president Channing Dungey and the former Disney production leader Tendo Nagenda. The company also has giant deals with Shonda Rhimes and Kenya Barris, the best known Black showrunners in the country, and a production deal with the Obamas. One of this summer’s biggest releases, with a budget around $40 million, was Spike Lee’s tale of Black veterans returning to Vietnam, “Da 5 Bloods.” Directors who come for meetings have been impressed by the diversity through the ranks.
The number of Black subscribers, a person at Netflix said, has caught up with American demographics since that 2015 analysis.
In the absence of a single clear explanation for the streaming giant’s accumulation of Black content, some Netflix creators pointed me to a 2019 documentary called “The Black Godfather.” It’s a portrait of the Black entertainment industry deal maker Clarence Avant, who played a central role in things as diverse as shaping Janet Jackson’s career to spiriting Sean Combs out of Los Angeles after the murder of the Notorious B.I.G.
But the movie, a Netflix original, includes a Netflix connection: Mr. Avant’s daughter, Nicole, is married to Mr. Sarandos. It’s a link that Mr. Sarandos has occasionally brought to bear internally. In 2018, two people familiar with the meeting said, he hosted a screening of the movie for Black employees, and told them, to a mix of cringes and sympathy, that he had some sense of what it is to be the only person of your race in a room — because that is his experience every Thanksgiving. He added that it was not the same as being the only Black person in a room of white people.
