A former college football coach defeated Jeff Sessions in a Republican runoff in Alabama, and Sara Gideon will challenge Susan Collins for the Senate in Maine. Key races also took place in Texas.
This briefing has ended. Follow the latest Biden vs Trump 2020 live elections briefing here.
Trump’s support lifts Tuberville to victory.
Gideon, with enormous war chest, will challenge Susan Collins in Maine.
M.J. Hegar won a Democratic runoff for the Senate in Texas.
Ronny Jackson, the former White House doctor, wins his House primary in Texas.

Trump turns a White House speech into a Biden attack session.
Ruth Bader Ginsburg has been hospitalized with a fever and chills.
Jeff Sessions spent his final days on the campaign trail reiterating his support for President Trump’s agenda, reminding voters of his efforts to curb illegal immigration while attorney general and emphasizing how, as a senator, he had endorsed Mr. Trump’s presidential campaign at a time when few others in Washington would.
On Tuesday, Mr. Sessions lost the Alabama Senate Republican runoff election to Tommy Tuberville, a former Auburn University football coach whose platform was largely a blanket promise to support the president at all times.
The loss most likely marks the end of Mr. Sessions’s three-decade political career, which included four terms as a senator and less than two years as Mr. Trump’s attorney general.
Mr. Sessions was once among Alabama’s most popular politicians, a deeply conservative Republican in a deeply conservative state. But in a testament to the president’s immense pull among the state’s Republicans, much of that good will evaporated the moment that Mr. Sessions, as attorney general, recused himself from the investigation into Russia’s influence in the 2016 election, and ignited in Mr. Trump a rage that has never seemed to dim.
Sara Gideon, the speaker of the Maine House of Representatives, on Tuesday formally became the Democratic nominee to challenge Senator Susan Collins of Maine, wielding a formidable war chest in a race that could determine whether Republicans retain control of the Senate in November.
Ms. Gideon, backed by the Senate Democratic campaign arm and a number of outside political groups, had long been the favorite to challenge Ms. Collins, the sole remaining New England Republican in Congress. The nonpartisan Cook Political Report has rated the race a tossup, and the election has already become the most expensive in Maine history.
While Ms. Collins coasted to a fourth term in 2014 with 69 percent of the vote, her reputation for independence and bipartisanship has suffered under the Trump administration, and her approval ratings have plummeted at home. Though she has split with President Trump on a number of issues, she faced a significant backlash after supporting the $1.5 trillion tax-cut package in 2017 and voting to confirm Brett M. Kavanaugh to the Supreme Court in 2018.
Millions of dollars have flooded the race and the airwaves in Maine, with Ms. Gideon raising $23 million from both voters in Maine and national Democratic donors eager to flip the seat and secure control of the Senate.
Having defeated two progressives — Betsy Sweet, a lobbyist, and Bre Kidman, a lawyer — Ms. Gideon is set to receive another windfall: at least $3.5 million raised by a crowdfunding campaign during and after the confirmation of Justice Kavanaugh.
Back in December, the Senate Democrats’ campaign arm waded into the Texas primary, endorsing M.J. Hegar over a field of candidates. Now Ms. Hegar, a former Air Force helicopter pilot who narrowly lost a 2018 bid for the House, has beaten Royce West, a state legislator, and will face off against Senator John Cornyn.
Mr. Cornyn, a three-term incumbent who is the second-ranking Senate Republican, will be a heavy favorite in the general election. But Democrats are becoming more optimistic about Texas by the week, with Mr. Biden’s campaign announcing Tuesday that it is buying television airtime in the state. Still, Ms. Hegar would need a major increase in fund-raising to become competitive in November.
In Texas House races, Democratic voters were choosing a candidate in the primary runoff in the state’s 24th Congressional District, which covers suburbs between Dallas and Fort Worth. It’s a longtime Republican stronghold that Democrats think they can flip in November.
Candace Valenzuela, 36, an Afro-Latina former school board member, emerged as the victor over Kim Olson, 62, a white Air Force veteran.
Ms. Olson had advertised her 25 years of military experience and how she was part of the first generation of female fighter pilots. Ms. Valenzuela had emphasized her difficult childhood — her family was poor, and she was homeless for a time — and her personal connections to the community. If elected she would be the first Afro-Latina member of Congress.
Ms. Olson was initially seen as the heavy favorite, and she finished more than 10 percentage points ahead of Ms. Valenzuela in the first round of voting in March. But Ms. Valenzuela racked up prominent endorsements, including from Senators Elizabeth Warren, Kamala Harris and Cory Booker.
Ms. Valenzuela will now face the Republican nominee, Beth Van Duyne, for a House seat currently held by Kenny Marchant, a retiring Republican.
Another congressional runoff unfolded for Republicans in the 22nd District, which is expected to be competitive in November.
The district, which is in the Houston area and currently represented by the retiring Pete Olson, was home to a bitter race between Troy Nehls, the Fort Bend County sheriff, and Kathaleen Wall, a conservative activist. Mr. Nehls ended up winning handily.
Dr. Ronny L. Jackson, the former White House physician with no political experience who ran a campaign based on his close relationship with President Trump, won a Republican runoff election for a House seat in Texas on Tuesday night, effectively stamping his ticket to Congress next year.
Dr. Jackson’s victory in the 13th Congressional District over Josh Winegarner, a lobbyist who had the backing of the cattle industry he represented and the man he’s seeking to replace, was hailed by the Trump campaign as a triumph for the president who endorsed him and for the Trump re-election campaign that propped him up.
It was something of a comeback for Dr. Jackson, a retired Navy rear admiral who is now likely to represent one of the most conservative districts in the country. He left the West Wing in December after becoming Mr. Trump’s unlikely choice to lead the Department of Veterans Affairs, but he had to withdraw his name from consideration amid allegations related to his professional conduct.
After serving for 25 years in the military and moving home to Texas, Dr. Jackson hoped to leverage his Washington connections to win elected office and make a fresh start, running in a crowded Republican primary to replace Representative Mac Thornberry, who announced last fall he would not seek re-election after holding his seat for more than a quarter of a century.
Dr. Jackson made a series of novice mistakes that could have derailed any congressional campaign. But after Donald Trump Jr., the president’s son, and Kimberly Guilfoyle, his girlfriend and a top fund-raising official for the president’s re-election campaign, realized that Dr. Jackson’s campaign was in trouble, they asked senior members of Mr. Trump’s re-election campaign to step in. The campaign helped with logistical support that fueled Dr. Jackson’s improved fund-raising.
President Trump, struggling in his re-election race against his Democratic opponent, mounted a lengthy and often rambling attack on Tuesday against Joseph R. Biden Jr., while nodding to his predominantly white base of voters with a series of startling remarks about the Confederate flag, victims of police violence and a St. Louis couple who pointed guns at protesters peacefully marching by their house.
Mr. Trump added to his long record of racially inflammatory remarks during an interview with CBS News, in which he brushed off a question about Black people killed by police officers, saying that white people are killed in greater numbers.
 A federal study that examined lethal force used by the police between 2009 and 2012 found that a majority of victims were white, but the victims were disproportionately Black. Black people had a fatality rate at the hands of police officers that was 2.8 times higher than that of white people.
In a separate interview published on Tuesday with the conservative website Townhall.com, Mr. Trump falsely claimed that a white couple in St. Louis who confronted peaceful marchers outside their home with guns were on the verge of being beaten and having their home burned down.
The president’s remarks were the latest example of his refusal to acknowledge the racial discrimination that even many in his own party have said must be addressed. But Mr. Trump, who recently posted on Twitter a video of a supporter shouting “white power” and said he would oppose a bipartisan effort in Congress to remove Confederate names from military bases, has displayed no intention of trying to bridge the country’s racial divide.
On Tuesday evening, Mr. Trump turned a White House Rose Garden news conference about China’s crackdown on Hong Kong into a campaign-style screed against Mr. Biden, his Democratic rival.
Mr. Trump announced several measures aimed at punishing China, but soon veered into attacking Mr. Biden on a wide range of topics. He criticized Mr. Biden’s record on trade policy with China and assailed him for supporting the Paris Climate Agreement. Mr. Trump said Mr. Biden hadn’t done enough to maintain roads and falsely claimed that Mr. Biden wants to defund the military.
“Joe Biden and President Obama freely allowed China to pillage our factories, plunder our communities and steal our most precious secrets,” Mr. Trump alleged, using the backdrop of the White House to press his case for re-election.
After speaking about China for just a few minutes, Mr. Trump completely abandoned any pretense that his purpose was to announce a new policy. CNN and MSNBC both stopped carrying the president’s news conference live after it became clear that he intended to use it as a televised campaign event.
Mr. Trump’s long and rambling remarks were more like a 2020 Make America Great Again rally than the usual sober announcements made in the Rose Garden. In front of White House reporters who had assembled for the Hong Kong announcement, the president assailed Mr. Biden with false and misleading attacks.
“Where is Hunter?” the president asked, referring to a conspiracy theory pushed by the president’s allies about Hunter Biden, the former vice president’s son, and his involvement in a Ukrainian company called Burisma.
He attacked Mr. Biden’s environmental proposals and accused him of embracing the agenda of Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont.
The Biden campaign responded to Mr. Trump’s remarks in a statement, and sought to redirect attention to the speech Mr. Biden gave on the environment earlier in the day.
“Today’s statement that was ostensibly supposed to be about China, but there was one topic that President Trump couldn’t seem to get off his mind: Joe Biden, whose name the President invoked nearly 30 times,” said Kate Bedingfield, Mr. Biden’s deputy campaign manager.
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg was hospitalized on Tuesday for a possible infection, the Supreme Court announced, and will stay there for “a few days” to receive intravenous antibiotics.
The court said in a statement that Justice Ginsburg had experienced a fever and chills last night, underwent a procedure on Tuesday “to clean out a bile duct stent,” and was now resting comfortably.
Justice Ginsburg, 87, is the oldest member of the Supreme Court as well as the leader of its liberal wing, and her health is a matter of intense focus because of the possibility of an election-year vacancy that could fundamentally reshape the court. If she were to die or step down before the election, Mr. Trump would have an opportunity to nominate a third justice, setting up an extraordinary clash in the Senate.
When Justice Antonin Scalia died in February 2016, President Barack Obama nominated Judge Merrick Garland to replace him — and Senate Republicans took the unprecedented step of refusing to grant Judge Garland a hearing. The Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, argued at the time that because it was an election year, whoever won that November should nominate Justice Scalia’s replacement.
To Democrats’ fury, Mr. McConnell succeeded in keeping the seat open through the election, and Mr. Trump ultimately nominated Justice Neil Gorsuch. But Mr. McConnell has since said that if there were a Supreme Court vacancy this year, he would hold a vote on Mr. Trump’s nominee.
Justice Ginsburg has survived numerous serious health problems over the years, including pancreatic cancer and lung cancer. In May, she was hospitalized briefly for an infection caused by a gallstone.
Some Texas poll workers refuse to wear masks, causing others to leave their sites.
On Tuesday, some Republican poll workers in Collin County, one of the most populous counties in the state, refused to wear masks while working at the polls, Democrats said.
“I’d been worried about the voters,” said Cynthia Riley, 59, a Democrat who was working at a polling location at Clark High School. “I didn’t realize I needed to be worried about the person I’m standing next to on the other side of the plastic.” Ms. Riley said that Democratic county officials told her that all Democratic poll workers had to wear masks.
Ms. Riley left after 45 minutes, saying she did not feel safe.
Allison St. Claire, 60, said she had a similar experience as a poll worker at another site, the Islamic Association of Collin County. She stayed for a few hours before also deciding to leave after multiple other poll workers did not put on masks, even though there were masks and face shields provided by the county at the location.
Officials from the Collin County Republican Party did not respond to requests for comment.
Officials with the Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights Under Law, a voting rights group, said that they had heard “a smattering of reports” that election workers weren’t properly utilizing masks. But, they said, the governor’s mask exemption mandate scared many poll workers away.
“The big issue we’ve seen is poll workers saying, ‘We don’t want to work this election because the governor isn’t requiring masks at polling locations,’” said Anthony Gutierrez, the executive director of Common Cause Texas, another voting rights group.
In a speech, Biden announces a $2 trillion climate plan.
Mr. Biden on Tuesday announced a new plan to spend $2 trillion over four years to significantly escalate the use of clean energy in the transportation, electricity and building sectors.
In a speech in Wilmington, Del., Mr. Biden built on his plans, released last week, for reviving the economy in the wake of the coronavirus crisis, with a new focus on enhancing the nation’s infrastructure and emphasizing the importance of putting the United States on a path to significantly cut fossil fuel emissions.
The proposal is the second plank in Mr. Biden’s economic recovery plan. His team sees an opportunity to take direct aim at Mr. Trump, who has struggled to deliver on his pledges to finance major improvements to American infrastructure. Republicans are sure to criticize the proposal as an attack on jobs in the energy sector — but the plan will also test whether Mr. Biden has found a way to win over environmental activists and other progressives who have long been skeptical about the scope of his ambitions on climate.
Reporting was contributed by Maggie Astor, Alexander Burns, Emily Cochrane, Nick Corasaniti, Catie Edmondson, Reid J. Epstein, Lisa Friedman, Trip Gabriel, Katie Glueck, Maggie Haberman, Jon Hurdle, Patricia Mazzei, Thomas Kaplan, Jeremy W. Peters, Elaina Plott, Annie Karni, Charlie Savage and Michael D. Shear.