Opinion|Does Zuckerberg Understand How the Right to Free Speech Works?
Does Zuckerberg Understand How the Right to Free Speech Works?
Mr. Bensinger is a member of the editorial board.
It’s time for Mark Zuckerberg to really start listening.
Civil rights and good government groups and users have been shouting from the rooftops for years for real change at the world’s most powerful social media company. Facebook, they say, has helped enable misinformation about the coronavirus, elections, political repression — as well as incite actual violence. Critics have long warned about President Trump’s spread of misinformation on the platform, where hate groups like white supremacists have also found a cozy home.
Far too often Mr. Zuckerberg has chosen to allow posts spewing bigotry and lies to remain on Facebook in the name of free speech. Now, a thorough and damning audit of the company, two years in the making and solicited by Facebook, confirms those fears.
Particularly galling, they wrote, is Mr. Zuckerberg’s position on so-called political speech, which is allowed to remain on the site even when it is demonstrably false, misleading or sometimes dangerous. Mr. Trump’s warning to protesters in May that “when the looting starts, the shooting starts” can only be interpreted as a threat.
“After the company publicly left up the looting and shooting post, more than five political and merchandise ads have run on Facebook sending the same dangerous message that ‘looters’ and ‘antifa terrorists’ can or should be shot by armed citizens,” wrote the auditors, which include the civil rights advocate Laura Murphy and a team from the law firm Relman Colfax PLLC, led by a partner, Megan Cacace.
“The auditors do not believe that Facebook is sufficiently attuned to the depth of concern on the issue of polarization and the way that the algorithms used by Facebook inadvertently fuel extreme and polarizing content,” they wrote. Mr. Zuckerberg said leaving the post up is about protecting free speech (Twitter, at least, put a warning on the post).
But Mr. Zuckerberg is not enabling free speech, he’s just privileging some of it. “When it means that powerful politicians do not have to abide by the same rules that everyone else does, a hierarchy of speech is created that privileges certain voices over less powerful voices,” the report found.
That means posts by regular folks who are less likely to be believed and or widely read can be taken down with impunity. Mr. Zuckerberg should listen to his auditors. He should listen to his employees, some of whom walked off the job in protest last month.
He met on Tuesday with a group of civil rights organizations, such as the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, the Anti-Defamation League and Color of Change. But he didn’t listen.
Facebook’s auditors agreed. They found anti-Muslim speech rampant on the platform and that Facebook directed users to increasingly dangerous posts touting white nationalism. “Facebook has not yet publicly studied or acknowledged the particular ways anti-Muslim bigotry manifests on its platform,” they wrote.
Take voting rights, which Mr. Trump has attempted to chip away at in social media posts, including falsely claiming that mail-in ballots lead to increased fraud. While Twitter appended the posts with fact-checking information, Facebook left them up unchanged and unchallenged. “Facebook has been far too reluctant to adopt strong rules to limit misinformation and voter suppression,” according to the report. “With less than five months before a presidential election, it confounds the auditors as to why Facebook has failed to grasp the urgency.” Voters could be forgiven for believing the president, but Facebook has said it’s yet another free speech issue.
Mr. Zuckerberg is either ignoring how the right to free speech works, or he fundamentally misunderstands it. It’s time for him to listen to First Amendment experts: They would tell him that, as a private corporation, Facebook can remove or tag any post it likes.
Maybe then, as his auditors advise, he could finally clear the site of false information about voting, the 2020 census and the coronavirus pandemic.
He should listen when they tell him Facebook’s algorithms too often fail to catch hate speech or too often sweep up posts condemning it.
Sure, Facebook said on Tuesday that it would make changes based on the audit because, as its chief operating officer, Sheryl Sandberg, said, “it is the right thing to do.” But is Facebook really listening this time?