“Finish the Fight!” is a history of the American suffrage movement for middle-grade readers. The following excerpts have been edited and condensed.
The 19th Amendment is a cornerstone of gender equality in our country, yet many of us know very little about the way the right to vote was won. For a long time, the history of the suffrage movement has been told mainly as the story of a few famous white women, such as Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony. It’s true they were among the most important leaders of the movement in the 19th century.
But there were tons more women who helped make suffrage a reality: African-American women such as the writer and orator Frances Ellen Watkins Harper, the community organizer Juno Frankie Pierce and the journalists Josephine St. Pierre Ruffin, Elizabeth Piper Ensley and Ida B. Wells-Barnett, who championed both suffrage and civil rights; Native American women such as Susette La Flesche Tibbles and Zitkala-Sa; queer women like the poet Angelina Weld Grimké and the educator Mary Burrill; Latina women like Jovita Idár, who protected her family’s newspaper and the rights of Mexican-Americans; and Asian-American women like Mabel Ping-Hua Lee, who led thousands of marchers in a 1912 suffrage parade in New York. They all fought for the vote as part of a broader struggle for equality, but their stories aren’t nearly as well known as they should be.
Shirley Chisholm, who, in a tribute to the suffragists, wore white on the day in 1968 when she became the first African-American woman elected to Congress, reportedly said, “If they don’t give you a seat at the table, bring a folding chair.” We hope that this book helps set a place at the table for some of the many incredible women who played their part in the battle for suffrage and equal rights for women.
Mary had some extraordinary experiences. During her first year, she was invited to Washington by Blanche K. Bruce, one of the first African-American senators. He asked Mary to attend the inauguration of President James A. Garfield as his guest. It was during that trip that she met the great orator and activist Frederick Douglass. She would later follow in his footsteps, using her gift for language to speak up for the causes she believed in.
She also wrote a paper at Oberlin on the topic of suffrage, titled “Should an Amendment to the Constitution Allowing Women the Ballot Be Adopted?” Mary became one of the first Black women to earn a college degree in the United States, graduating with a bachelor’s in classics in 1884.
Later, after she earned a master’s degree, Mary embarked on a two-year tour of France, Switzerland, Italy and Germany, studying languages and writing in her diary in French and German.
While Mary traveled the world, the United States grew more unsteady. Lynching had become a form of domestic terrorism in the years after slavery. Over decades, thousands of Black men and women were brutally killed by white mobs, and their murderers were never prosecuted. The government rarely made arrests in these cases, which only allowed the number of lynchings to grow.
In 1895, Frederick died, and Mary became the first Black woman appointed to the District of Columbia Board of Education. She later raised funds and visited schools, encouraging them to celebrate Douglass Day, a precursor to Black History Month, in his honor.
By 1912, Mabel and her parents were living on Bayard Street in Chinatown, and they had made a name for themselves. Mabel’s father was a minister who led the First Chinese Baptist Church and was fluent in English. He was so active in the community that some referred to him as the neighborhood’s unofficial mayor.
Everyone also knew the daughter of the “mayor,” and they knew how smart she was. She attended Erasmus Hall High School in Brooklyn and had big plans to attend the women-only Barnard College, the sister school to the then all-male Columbia College. She hoped to return to China one day to open a school for girls.
Still, there was a limit to how much the community would stand behind her. And Mabel crossed the line when she got involved with the suffrage movement. The suffragists were considered radical — how dare they fight so steadfastly for equal rights? — but Mabel believed that voting was the key that would open every important door for women.
Charlotte Brooks, the author of “American Exodus: Second-Generation Chinese Americans in China, 1901-1949,” said that Mabel was part of a generation of young Chinese-Americans who traveled back and forth between China and the United States and saw the connections between the two struggles.
“Something a lot of people in the U.S. don’t realize is that Mabel’s activism grew out of China’s New Culture Movement, which included the idea that the suppression of women, and the poor treatment of women, were both holding China back and represented a kind of backwardness,” she explains.
Mabel eventually took over as the director of her father’s church, and she founded the Chinese Christian Center, a community center on Pell Street that offered English classes, health services, a kindergarten and job training. She became an example of what a woman can do when given the chance to learn and lead. As she wrote of China, “In the fierce struggle for existence among the nations, that nation is badly handicapped which leaves undeveloped one half of its intellectual and moral resources.” The same, of course, was true of the United States.
