After a Black executive board member described racism and classism in the leadership ranks of the College Democrats of America, the president of the organization resigned.
The president of the College Democrats of America resigned on Wednesday, and members of the executive board pledged not to run for re-election, after the board’s only Black member said he had experienced racism and classism from the organization’s leadership.
The Black board member, Matthew Nowling, who had been the group’s communications director, will serve as interim president until a new election is held.
They called, among other things, for the immediate resignation of the president, Mikaela Guido; commitments from every board member that they would not run for re-election or accept any future leadership position within the College Democrats; and amendments to the organization’s governing documents. The executive board discussed the situation late into Tuesday night and agreed to all of the demands.
Members said they saw this moment as the same sort of reckoning over racism that is taking place throughout the Democratic Party, and in society at large. Progressive groups have long spoken out against racism elsewhere, they said; now, college Democrats were rejecting it with equal force within their own ranks.
The revolt began when Mr. Nowling, 21, announced his resignation from the board on Saturday. The open letter was first published with the signatures of 17 federations, and within hours, that number had more than doubled.
The College Democrats, the official college student branch of the Democratic Party, is the main vehicle for young people — a crucial constituency for Democratic candidates — to get involved in the party’s work. Its members register voters, encourage political activism and often campaign or work for candidates.
Mr. Nowling, a student at Denison University in Ohio who was elected to the board last year and began his term in September, said other members had routinely ignored his suggestions, demeaned him and cast him as lazy and incompetent. These are “racist tropes that have been used against Black people for generations to prevent them from advancing in the workplace,” he said Sunday, during a virtual town hall meeting with C.D.A. members that was hastily arranged in response to his resignation.
Ms. Guido, a law student at the University of Florida, said that she had been unaware of Mr. Nowling’s allegations until he told her he was resigning, and that she had urged the offending board members to resign as soon as she found out.
Xochitl Hinojosa, a spokeswoman for the Democratic National Committee, said it was providing leadership guidance, training and other resources to the College Democrats as they decided how to proceed.
“We are a party of inclusion that’s fully committed to helping the next generation of Democrats carry the torch to help build a unified America,” Ms. Hinojosa said.
Beyond his own experience, Mr. Nowling said that structural issues — like the fact that C.D.A. members have to pay for their own travel to official events — often kept low-income students like him out of leadership positions and prevented rank-and-file members from attending the organization’s conventions.
Erica Kelly, a board member and head of the Virginia chapter of the College Democrats, said that because no one from her state could afford to go the national convention in New Orleans last year, it had no say in the party business or votes conducted there.
Several members and leaders said the town hall meeting arranged after Mr. Nowling’s resignation, far from soothing tensions, had underscored some of the very problems Mr. Nowling, Ms. Kelly and others described: The call was held using software that charged at least some participants a fee per minute.
Chloe Mieras, the membership director of the College Democrats of Ohio, said that it took her five or six tries to join because the system kept rejecting the code she had been given, and that she was charged a base fee for every attempted call in addition to the per-minute charge once she finally connected.
Ms. Guido said that it was the same software the executive board normally used for its own calls, and that she hadn’t realized anyone would be required to pay. Mr. Nowling said he believed the charges kicked in when the number of participants went over a certain threshold.
Ms. Mieras, 22, said that as soon as Mr. Nowling’s statement began to circulate widely on Saturday, a group chat among state federation leaders filled up with outrage on his behalf, and that the town hall did not substantively address their concerns.
Mr. Nowling said he had decided to resign in part because members who had demeaned him had also praised the Black Lives Matter movement and presented themselves as allies of Black people.
