Can the country’s low rate of coronavirus infections be attributed to culture? Genetics? Face masks? Or a combination of all three?
BANGKOK — No one knows exactly why Thailand has been spared.
Police officers in Bangkok patrolling a checkpoint on one of the city’s busiest streets after a nationwide curfew was put into effect.
Thais were quick to adopt wearing face masks early in the pandemic and maintain social distancing when using public transportation.
A nearly empty flight from Bangkok to Phuket, Thailand, on March 30.
Construction workers, a group largely made up of migrant workers, returned to their dormitories in Bangkok in April.
Thailand’s low rate of infection appears to be shared by other countries in the Mekong River basin. Vietnam has not recorded a single death and has logged about three months without a case of community transmission. Myanmar has confirmed 336 cases of the virus, Cambodia 166 and Laos just 19.
Yunnan, the southwestern Chinese province through which the Mekong flows before meandering to Southeast Asia, had fewer than 190 cases. None are active now.
“This is how the countries in the Mekong region greet each other as well,” Dr. Taweesin added.
The authorities spraying travelers with disinfectant in Phuket, a popular vacation spot, in March.
Disinfecting a market before it reopened in Bangkok, in May.
Drive-through testing at a hospital in Bangkok, in March.
Workers making cloth face masks at a factory owned by Wacoal, an underwear manufacturer, in Bangkok, in April.
It didn’t always look so upbeat. In January, Thailand confirmed the world’s first case of the coronavirus outside of China — in a tourist from Wuhan, the central Chinese city where the outbreak is believed to have begun.
Another wave of infections was set off by people arriving from Japan, Europe and the United States. A Thai boxing event turned into a super-spreader event. But after a lockdown was enforced in March, shuttering businesses and schools, domestic transmissions subsided. All of Thailand’s recent cases have been among people who arrived from overseas.
Dr. Wiput Phoolcharoen, a public health expert at Chulalongkorn University in Bangkok who is researching an outbreak of the coronavirus in Pattani in southern Thailand, noted that more than 90 percent of those who tested positive there were asymptomatic, much higher than normal.
“What we are studying now is the immune system,” he said.
Dr. Wiput said Thais and other people from this part of Southeast Asia were more susceptible to certain serious cases of dengue fever, a mosquito-borne virus, than those from other continents.
“If our immune systems against dengue are so bad, why can’t our immune system against Covid be better?” he asked.
Students at Sawasdee Wittaya Primary School learning about washing hands after schools reopened this month.
Registering to receive financial aid from the government in Bangkok, in May.
The closed Apple Store at Icon Siam, one of Thailand’s most upmarket and largest shopping malls, in March.
Homeless people lining up at a food distribution center in Bangkok, in April.
Though Thailand’s hospitals have not been overwhelmed by coronavirus patients, the country’s tourism-dependent economy has been battered.
In April, Thailand banned almost all incoming flights, amid the tightening lockdown. Holidaymakers stopped coming to Bangkok, once the world’s most visited city. The Thai tourism and sports ministry estimates that 60 percent of hospitality businesses could close by the end of the year.
The International Monetary Fund predicts the Thai economy will shrink by at least 6.5 percent this year. More than eight million Thais may lose their jobs or income in 2020, the World Bank has said, in a nation already cleaved by a yawning gap between rich and poor.
Thai households have some of the highest debt loads in Asia, and the most desperate have lined up at Buddhist temples for handouts of rice.
After a promised disbursement of emergency government funds was bogged down in bureaucracy, a woman swallowed rat poison outside of a government building. She survived, but suicides are up in Thailand.
Covid Thailand Aid, a charity set up in the wake of the pandemic, has been inundated by pleas from Thais with only a dollar or two left in their bank accounts, said Natalie Narkprasert, one of the group’s founders.
A park in Bangkok on May 3, after the city began easing restrictions.
Protective screens at street food stalls in Bangkok, in May.
Thai boxing gyms were allowed to re-open on June 1.
A salon after re-opening in Bangkok, in May.
“Now is when people want more help because it’s been so long and it’s not going to get better,” Ms. Natalie said.
A sense of normalcy has recently returned to Thailand. Schools have reopened with children wearing face masks and studying at spaced-out desks. And in early July, the first holiday weekend in months — Thai New Year festivities were canceled in April — prompted an uptick in domestic tourism.
Thailand has also allowed a trickle of foreigners back into the country. But with the new arrivals comes the risk of contagion.
This week, an Egyptian military pilot was confirmed to have tested positive for the coronavirus, after he breached quarantine and visited shopping centers in a Thai beach town. Some schools in the area are now closed again. Two activists who protested the government’s handling of the quarantine violation were arrested on Wednesday for contravening Thailand’s emergency decree.
Questions are also being raised about why migrant workers who were deported from Thailand arrived home and immediately tested positive for the disease, despite not being included in the official Thai count of coronavirus cases. Thailand’s testing rates remain relatively low.
A popular entertainment street, just before curfew, was closed down due to a localized coronavirus outbreak, in Patong, Phuket, in March.
