Whenever Oliver Stone makes movies about real people, he ends up in hot water. Whether the subject is Richard Nixon or Alexander the Great, there’s always some critic nit-picking about factual inaccuracies or perceived political agendas. Not this time. With “Chasing the Light,” the 73-year-old Oscar-winning director and screenwriter has finally found a historical figure he can portray with all the bias he desires: himself.
And yet, Stone’s 330-page memoir, covering his life and career up to his first milestone achievement — winning an Oscar for his 1986 Vietnam drama, “Platoon” — turns out to be a surprisingly sober and cleareyed portrait of a rabble-rouser as a young man. It’s sure to tick off some people, like the actor James Woods, who likely won’t be thrilled with the bit about his constant whining on the set of “Salvador.” But for the most part the Oliver Stone depicted in these pages — vulnerable, introspective, stubbornly tenacious and frequently heartbroken — may just be the most sympathetic character he’s ever written.
As one might suppose, some of the most riveting parts are set in Vietnam, where, in 1967, after dropping out of Yale, 21-year-old Stone volunteered for service in the war that would shape so much of his worldview (and provide the inspiration for “Platoon”).
His decision to end the memoir on Oscar night 1987 does feel a bit abrupt — there’s just so much more one wants to read about, from how Stone dealt with the backlash over his 1991 film “JFK,” to the controversy he stirred up with 1994’s “Natural Born Killers,” not to mention an explanation for that fawning 2017 Showtime interview series he did with Vladimir Putin (you know, the Russian strongman who’d just finished meddling in the U.S. presidential election). But, as the old showbiz saying goes, always leave them wanting more. And this book — “a story about cutting corners, improvising, hustling … about lying outrageously, gritting it out with sweat and tears … about growing up,” as he describes it in his introduction — neatly sets the stage for the possibility of that rarest of Stone productions: a sequel.