Opinion|‘That’s Ridiculous.’ How America’s Coronavirus Response Looks Abroad.
‘That’s Ridiculous.’ How America’s Coronavirus Response Looks Abroad.
From lockdowns to testing, we showed people around the world the facts and figures on how the U.S. has handled the pandemic.
From lockdowns to testing, we showed people from around the world the facts and figures on how America handled the virus. It wasn’t pretty.
All right. OK. “And I spoke with Angela Merkel today. I spoke with many of the leaders over the last four or five days. They all view us as the world leader, and they’re following us.” Hold on. [MUSIC PLAYING] Oh wow. Oh my God.  Oh, they have mass graves. Even Third World countries like Senegal, where I’m from, isn’t like this right now. Ugh. “Anybody that needs a test gets a test. They’re there, and the tests are beautiful.” “It’s a nightmare. First denied testing, twice denied E.R. admittance. Iowa man dies of COVID-19.” That just cannot be when a person wants to do a test and gets denied. [MUSIC PLAYING] In South Korea, either you can do drive-through test, or you can even do walk-through test, which looks like a phone booth, and you just go in. Germany, tests are for free. I think we tested, like, 350,000 people a week. I don’t think anyone in New Zealand was denied a test. If you had even the slightest symptoms, it was here’s a Covid-19 test. Please make sure you’re OK. “You know what? Staying at home leads to death also.” Whoa. You have this amount of person in a beach. I remember seeing those pictures and sitting in Germany and worrying about the world going down. It’s contagious. Come on, everybody. “Some young people who are still converging on the beaches of Florida for spring break. Now, the state governor, what does he say? He says he’s not going to shut down beaches amid the outbreak.”  France, Germany, U.K. — Bulgaria, Cyprus — Zimbabwe, Angola, Uganda — Luxembourg — Russia, Italy — Albania, Montenegro, India, Iran — Eritrea, Guinea-Bissau, Nepal. Ooh, OK, that’s a lot. So in Singapore, for example, we’ve got fines if we don’t follow the rules. Here in Jordan, you couldn’t leave your house. You couldn’t even leave, like — you couldn’t even walk downstairs to your neighbor. You weren’t allowed. I understand that they’re feeling worried about the small businesses that they’ve spent their lives building. I understand that. But you can rebuild that. You can’t give someone their life back. “Well, I think the economy is going to do very well. Now, that’s just my feeling.” Here in the United Kingdom, the government is paying up to 80% of the wages of people who can’t do their jobs. In Germany, you get 5,000 for three months. The Singapore government subsidized 75% of all the citizens’ wages. “If your adjusted gross income is $75,000 a year or less, you will get a full $1,200 check from the U.S. government.” Yeah, it’s just a one-time payment. When you have to pay your rent, your food, your medical cares, that’s not that big. On May 8, official figures on unemployment were released. Oh, that’s part of the graph. Jeez. I thought that was like the end of the page, like a border. Yeah. No way. Oh my God. Did I read that right? 20.5 million jobs? “The pandemic is also causing many to go hungry. Thousands have been forced to wait for hours in long lines at food banks all across the country.” No. Whoa. Whoa. What? It’s really shocking, a superpower like the U.S. being, at this point, like a Third World country. “So supposing we hit the body with a tremendous — whether it’s ultraviolet or just very powerful light. And I think you said that hasn’t been checked, but you’re going to test it. And then I said supposing you brought the light inside the body, which you can do, either through the skin.” Oh my God. It’s, it’s — [SIGHS] “And we have to get our country open, Jeff.” “Can you say, sir, what metrics you will use to make that decision?” “The metrics right here.” The metrics right here. Right here. We see the [BLEEP] that he says. We see the decisions he makes. And it’s funny, but when it comes to something as serious as this, it’s just — it’s not funny anymore. Are they mass graves? I’m sorry, America has mass graves? Oh my God. I’ve never seen this.  I’m covered in goosebumps right now. Same. OK, so by May 5, the United States has endured over 68,000 coronavirus deaths, more than 14 times the death of China. China, like densely populated China. It cannot be this. Really? “It’s over 100,000 now.” I really didn’t know. I feel so sorry for the people.
The United States leads the world in Covid-19 deaths, nearing 150,000 lost lives. The unemployment figures brought on by the pandemic are mind-boggling. The Trump administration’s slow and haphazard response has been widely criticized. But what does it look like to young people around the world, whose governments moved quickly and aggressively to contain the coronavirus?
We wanted to know, so we reached out to quite a few and showed them charts, facts, photos and videos illustrating the U.S. response. Spoiler: They were not impressed.
Many advanced economies, from Germany to Singapore, directly supplemented salaries to save jobs. Other nations with fewer resources started mass testing at the first sign of an outbreak. Many countries mandated universal lockdowns — and successfully flattened the curve. In some parts of Europe, you could be fined for straying too far from your home. And Vietnam, a nation of 95 million people, has not seen a single Covid-19 death.
This Opinion video is a follow-up to a popular video we produced last year, which asked young Europeans to respond to American policies such as health care and parental leave. Many comments suggested we produce a sequel. Well, here it is — the Covid-19 edition.
Brendan Miller (@brenkjm) is a filmmaker.
Adam Westbrook is a producer with Opinion Video.