The death toll in the Rio Grande Valley is forcing funeral directors to buy refrigerated trucks and bypass traditional services such as velorios.
ELSA, Texas — Johnny Salinas Jr., the owner of Salinas Funeral Home, typically handles five funerals a week. But on a recent day, with the coronavirus tearing through his community, he saw that many grieving families in a single day.
Mr. Salinas changed from a polo shirt into a crisp black suit and left his office for the chapel next door. The light blue coffin of his great-uncle, who died of Covid-19, sat at the front of the room, adorned with white flower arrangements and a wooden crucifix.
About one in 60 residents of Hidalgo County is known to have had the virus, and about one of every 2,000 people has died from the virus, a New York Times database shows. Hidalgo County now has one of the highest per capita death rates in the state.
Mr. Cortez has been a constant presence on Spanish and English TV and radio, urging people to wear masks, wash their hands and — most important, he says — keep distant from older and vulnerable relatives.
In desperation, Mr. Cortez last week instituted a voluntary stay-at-home order, hoping that it would send a message.
At his great-uncle’s velorio, Mr. Salinas, 30, had two roles at once: funeral director and mourning relative. Before family arrived, Mr. Salinas paced around the room, making sure it complied with hygiene guidelines.
Ever since Mr. Salinas was a teenager, he knew what work he wanted to do.
When Mr. Salinas was 16, he had his own brush with tragedy. He said he was driving his 15-year-old sister and another teenage friend when a dog suddenly appeared in front of the car. In the chaos, the car flipped, Mr. Salinas said. His sister was killed.
“Now she’s always here with me, not physically, but spiritually,” said Mr. Salinas, who keeps an oversize photo of his sister, Deborah Lynn Salinas, bearing the date of her death — Dec. 6, 2006 — in the funeral home.
“People tend to want to hug and cry on their loved ones,” Mr. Salinas said.
Not long after, he talked a family member out of placing a rosary in the hands of Francisco Tafolla Sr., the great-uncle whom Mr. Salinas grew up simply calling uncle, who died of the virus at 85.
White flower arrangements adorned a wall beside a large photo of Mr. Tafolla. Mr. Tafolla’s daughter, Gloria Tafolla Gomez, stood silently, nodding her head softly to the lyrics of “Un Dia a la Vez” — “One Day at a Time” — by the Tejano band Siggno.
Mr. Tafolla, who worked manual jobs in the gas industry, saved money to ensure that all of his 12 children went to college, Ms. Tafolla said. She became a nurse.
Family members still do not know how he got the virus. “He never left the house,” said Ms. Tafolla, who is 63 and is Mr. Salinas’s aunt. Even before the virus, Mr. Tafolla had been battling other medical issues, and recently had heart surgery, she said. Days after his first virus symptoms, he was gone.
At Ceballos Funeral Home in McAllen, people seeking funerals during the pandemic have to wait several days, sometimes a week, Ms. Ceballos said. She has seen young victims, too, she said.
“Nothing is like it used to be,” Ms. Ceballos said.
Mr. Salinas has been working around the clock, sleeping only a handful of hours a day. He owns two funeral home locations, one in Hidalgo County and a second in neighboring Cameron County. Smaller funeral homes have been referring grieving families to him when they have no more space.
Relatives rushed to the hospital parking lot, where a doctor explained that her mother, 61-year-old Sylvia N. Fuentes, had a better chance at beating the coronavirus in an intensive care unit than at home. They left feeling hopeful. The next day — Wednesday — her kidneys gave out and she died.
During a two-hour meeting with Mr. Salinas, Ms. Garcia and other family members picked out a burial outfit. Ms. Fuentes would be dressed in her favorite dress. She would wear her favorite hair brooch she wore on special occasions.
 They shared a tender look that, in some other year, might have turned into a group hug. Instead, they looked down and returned to Mr. Salinas’s office to complete paperwork.
For Mr. Salinas, long days have begun to blend, one into the next.
When a call came in on a recent afternoon, it was from inside the funeral home. The virus had hit close again. The cousin of a funeral home worker had died from Covid-19. His body waited in the nearby chapel. Mr. Salinas excused himself and disappeared down the hall.
