The largest study yet confirms that race, ethnicity, age and sex can raise a person’s chances of dying from Covid-19.
The researchers mined a trove of de-identified data that included health records from about 40 percent of England’s population, collected by the United Kingdom’s National Health Service. Of 17,278,392 adults tracked over three months, 10,926 reportedly died of Covid-19 or Covid-19-related complications.
Miami-Dade County, Fla., one of the largest school districts in the U.S., will reopen classrooms to students next month.
The virus death toll in the U.S. surpasses 200,000.
The F.D.A. is preparing stricter new guidelines for approving a coronavirus vaccine.
Dr. Goldacre’s team found that patients older than 80 were at least 20 times more likely to die from Covid-19 than those in their 50s, and hundreds of times more likely to die than those below the age of 40. The scale of this relationship was “jaw-dropping,” Dr. Goldacre said.
The data roughly mirror what has been observed around the world and are not necessarily surprising, said Avonne Connor, an epidemiologist at Johns Hopkins University who was not involved in the study. But seeing these patterns emerge in a staggeringly large data set “is astounding” and “adds another layer to depicting who is at risk” during this pandemic, Dr. Connor said.
Particularly compelling were the study’s findings on race and ethnicity, said Sharrelle Barber, an epidemiologist at Drexel University who was not involved in the study. Roughly 11 percent of the patients tracked by the analysis identified as nonwhite. The researchers found that these individuals — particularly Black and South Asian people — were at higher risk of dying from Covid-19 than white patients.
That trend persisted even after Dr. Goldacre and his colleagues made statistical adjustments to account for factors like age, sex and medical conditions, suggesting that other factors are playing a major role.
Regardless of the methodological drawbacks of this study, experts agree that “the causes of disparities, whether in Covid-19 or other aspects of health, are intricately linked to structural racism,” Dr. Mitchell said.
In the United States, Latino and African-American residents are three times as likely to become infected by the coronavirus as white residents, and nearly twice as likely to die.
Many of these individuals work as front-line employees, or are tasked with essential in-person jobs that prevent them from sheltering in place at home. Some live in multigenerational households that can compromise effective physical distancing. Others must cope with language barriers and implicit bias when they seek medical care.
