As a widow living alone, I needed company, even virtual. His parents needed relief.
I feel a twinge of delight. While my grandson Will, his younger brother and their parents scramble for quiet spaces to work in their home in Montpelier, Vt., I am a widow living alone in Rye, N.H. I need company, even if it is virtual, and they need relief.
I would also love to spend time with Will, an easygoing, quiet 12-year-old who is constantly in motion. Will also loves to hum. I once wrote a poem for him that concluded, “Everywhere he goes he brings his song.” Maybe that tune is an indication of something deeper running beneath the surface. I have no idea if Will would like to write poetry, but when I run the idea by him, he sounds enthused.
From our first hour together I feel something in me open. It comes as a surprise, and I’m not sure what it is exactly, but it feels akin to hope and joy. I think this threatening virus has shut me down just when life was coming back to me more fully.
I sit in my kitchen and that sense of calm and well-being washes over me. I think about Steve, my late husband, who was a beloved grandfather. He has been gone three years. An avid fly-fisherman (fly fishing is a sport we both loved), Steve taught all four grandchildren how to tie flies and how to fish. But how do I carry on alone? Will I be enough?
Keep it simple, I tell myself on my first day with Will.
“Soccer, ball, field, window, dark, boy.” Will plays soccer. A lot of soccer. As a matter of fact, up until now I have no idea what Will really likes to do or excels at other than soccer and fishing. My trips to Vermont are saved for good-weather travel and a packed spring and fall soccer schedule. Working with him in late winter, albeit courtesy of technology, is a rare treat.
His list comes straight from his life, a good beginning. We each write a little something, a story or a poem, my only instructions. In my story the boy stays inside, looks out the window, wishes the rain would hold off and watches the day grow dark. Will tells a story about a boy who loves to play soccer. The day threatens rain. The boy is eager to go out. He risks getting caught in a storm and heads to the local soccer field to practice on his own. Wind knocks the ball around and soon rain comes, but the boy keeps playing.
We decide to work daily and see how long Will stays engaged. Day two is glorious. Bird song. The orchard fisted with green buds. A blue sky that will hold on well into dusk. Will reports a similar spring day in Vermont.
“Let’s go outside,” I say.
“Now?” Will sounds surprised that we have the freedom to do that.
“Sure. Bring your phone. And your notebook and pencil.” We each head to our own backyards. Will’s yard slopes down toward Montpelier village and the Winooski River. While my land is just 10 feet above sea level, it has acres of fields and woods and a small orchard. Birds chatter in both settings.
Luckily, Will has had a teacher who knows that haiku is much less about syllabic count and more about creating space around images.
He writes another. Then he asks if he can write one about nighttime.
I ask him to read his haiku again. Slowly. His voice is slightly husky, soft. He slows down when he says the final line.
I forget what it is?
We have been working together for two weeks, every weekday morning. One day when I call at our usual 10 a.m., Will sounds tired. “Do you need some breakfast?” I ask. In fact, he has just woken up.
