First, the city of Washington took down a tribute to George Preston Marshall, the founder of its N.F.L. team, that was in front of the team’s old home, Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium. Then the team removed references to Marshall, who named his team the “Redskins,” from inside its stadium and at its training facility.
On Monday, under pressure from corporate sponsors, the team announced its most dramatic step, that it would drop its logo and “Redskins” from its name, an all but forced turnaround by team owner Daniel Snyder, who for decades said he would never change the name that had long been considered a racial slur.
“Today, we are announcing we will be retiring the Redskins name and logo upon completion of this review,’’ the team said in a statement.
The team has long been in the spotlight, in part because of its checkered racial past. Marshall was the last owner in the N.F.L. to sign a Black player, and only under pressure from the federal government. He named the team the Redskins, which he considered a nod to bravery.
But only in the past few weeks has there been movement to address his legacy by removing the monument and his name from team facilities. Monday’s decision came just 10 days after the franchise said it would review the 87-year-old team name under significant pressure from major corporate partners including FedEx, which had threatened to end its naming rights sponsorship of the team’s stadium.
Snyder’s shift from total resistance to grudging acceptance in just a few weeks has been remarkably swift in a league that often moves forward deliberately, if at all. But after the killing of George Floyd by police in Minneapolis in late May, much of the country has moved rapidly to confront historical representations of racist symbols.
His about-face comes after hundreds of universities and schools have in recent years abandoned team names and mascots with Native American imagery.
That Washington, among the N.F.L.’s most valuable franchises, was compelled to change its name likely adds pressure on the remaining professional teams with Native American mascots and logos to re-evaluate their names and monikers. The Kansas City Chiefs of the N.F.L., the Chicago Blackhawks of the N.H.L. and the Atlanta Braves and the Cleveland Indians of Major League Baseball have long resisted changing their names and logos, though the Indians dropped the mascot Chief Wahoo last year and recently said they would review the team name.
The Washington team’s most immediate task is changing its official branding, but it is unclear how the team will address fans who continue to wear headdresses, war paint, and other stereotypical imagery to games, and if it will replace its fight song, “Hail to the Redskins,” which contains references to “braves on the warpath” and is played after touchdowns at home games. The team may get to delay making those decisions if fans are not allowed to attend games this season because of the coronavirus.
Snyder’s move to drop his team’s name could pave the way for his effort to build a stadium inside the city, a potential relocation from its current site in a Washington, D.C. suburb. Lawmakers in the city had said they would not support his goal of building within the District unless he renamed the team.
Now that the team has let go of its current name, it will have to find a replacement, a process that requires navigating trademarks and the league’s many licensing deals with partners and which can often take years. Teams use their name, logos and colors to forge a new identity, a process that can include speaking with sponsors, fans and other constituents.
