Trenton Charlson’s puzzle asks us to line up properly, please.
Note: The Times is working on an issue with downloadable puzzle pdfs. We will make them available here.
SUNDAY PUZZLE — I’m glad you’re here, whether for help or not, because this is one of those particular puzzles that hides some of its treasure. Trenton Charlson is that type of constructor: We’ve seen quite a bit of him unthemed, on Fridays and Saturdays, although he’s hit for the cycle and done a few weekday theme puzzles. This is his second Sunday grid, at the advanced age of 24.
Mr. Charlson is a ranked Scrabble competitor, and those familiar with his puzzles know to look for jazzy and quirky entries. While he did use every letter in this grid, I think his theme is what really shines today.
That said, there’s some rich and funny fill; I got joyfully stumped by some of the smallest bits. The pun clue for EST is marvelous, as is the clue for SOS; “de-squeaked” made me think of dog toys, not friction that can be OILED away.
18A: Maybe this one’s easy once you get 2D, but I thought it very clever — on a smartphone, you tap an ICON to summon an app, which grabs more information about where you are and what you’re doing than a plain old wiretap ever could. Progress!
2D: I know Mr. Charlson, I should expect this, but ACQUIESCE is still a hard word to deduce with those hidden C’s.
8D: Quality trivia — I’d have guessed galore came from French, probably, and certainly not IRISH. It’s an unusual adjective in that it comes after its noun — there are puns galore today.
15D: Last seen in the Times puzzle in 1981, VOLCANIC ASH is an interesting phenomenon — minerals churned out of the Earth’s crust that can enrich soil so intensively that people will risk living near a volcano for harvests. Notice that INDONESIA is “living” fairly close to the base of this clue! When Krakatau, the enormous Indonesian volcano, erupted in 1883, the noise created was heard everywhere in the world, and the ash plume rose 50 miles into the atmosphere, darkening a vast area for days and lowering the temperature of the planet for five years.
65D: There are examples of this plant all over the word, and apparently you can harvest some kinds of SUMAC in the United States to get a puckery spice that makes a component of za’atar (a word that hasn’t been in a Times puzzle yet but has a very Trenton Charlson vibe). If you’re allergic to poison ivy I’d be careful about foraging for this, but za’atar is really delicious and instantly recognizable if you like Middle Eastern food.
I consider this one to be a bit of a slow burner, and it’s also esoteric, in that solvers who don’t check in here or know their wordplay will have less appreciation for the difficulty of its construction.
There are seven theme entries today, each marked by a four- or five-letter run of circled letters. Each one has a clue that works as is if you solve backward, but something’s kinda quirky. Let’s start at the example at 89A, “What you might do after the movie previews are finally over?”, which solves to BEGIN WATCHING, with circles around each of the first five letters in the entry. OK, Mr. Charlson, this is true, and your point?
Next, let’s look at 33A, “Emcee during a power outage?”. This entry might set a few bells off: HOST IN THE DARK. Perhaps you think of Peter Sellers, and realize that everything in this puzzle is carefully planned.
This is an acceptable theme, and there are probably solvers that will move on with their day knowing nothing more about it. There’s a tiny, subtle revealer at 47D: “Kind of order for the circled letters in this puzzle.” The answer is ABC, and hints at the great twist behind the rearrangements: every set of circled letters has been anagrammed to a word whose letters all appear in alphabetical order.
This should be where all the wordsmiths unscrew their monocles, and mutter “well played, Mr. Charlson.” You see, there aren’t that many abecedarian words in the English language (fewer than 900, of all lengths). Once you’ve eliminated the shortest examples and narrowed the rest down to words that can be reordered to make other words, you’ve got a very small sample indeed.
22A is the only theme entry that works as a term in both permutations. The way it appears in the grid evokes Superman; the reordered alternative is a unit of measurement. For some reason, this was the last theme entry to fall for me, and I thought this corner of the puzzle was very difficult.
48A refers to “top guns” and is a play on a legal term.
67A is enabling a bad act and what you might do to avoid immediately incriminating yourself.
106A, which is both silly and hard, is under pasta.
120A refers to a water worshiper and a trustworthy natural event.
I’m proud of how this grid turned out, with answers like ACQUIESCE, ALCHEMIST, VOLCANIC ASH, ALEC BALDWIN and I’M IN LOVE among the longer fill, and nothing that feels like a major compromise. I also think it’s nice that the puzzle ended up being pangrammatic, especially given its theme.
I wasn’t sure whether or not to include a revealer — ALPHABETICAL ORDER lacks subtlety, and takes up lots of space — so I began constructing the puzzle without one. However, close to the end of the process, I noticed I fortuitously had EASY on the bottom row and could make a minor change elsewhere to include ABC (at 47-Down). I clued EASY as [____ as 47-Down (Like the theme of this puzzle?)], though I guess Will preferred using just ABC as the revealer, to complement the title (which, happily, is the one I submitted).
Speaking of the clues, I’m glad that most of my original clues for the theme answers made the cut, especially those for ABET AROUND THE BUSH and BELOW MACARONI. My original clue for OCEAN DEIST mentioned Poseidon (though perhaps a devout follower of Ægir was among the test solvers, and objected to my favoritism toward Greek mythology?).
Until next time, happy solving!
