Wunderkinds, even those who deservedly stick around a long time, don’t seem to age normally. Zadie Smith’s presence will always carry a significant memory of the 24-year-old who published “White Teeth” to international acclaim. But, being subject to the space-time continuum, Smith is in her mid-40s now, and has the temperament and perspective of someone who could be (a compliment, in this case) 105.
It’s never a boom time for wisdom — almost by definition; if it were more common, it wouldn’t be valued so highly — but this is an especially arid era for it. We’re in the Age of Certainty, at least in the bellowing of its various constituents.  But “polemic” is too generous a word for the dominant cultural tone.
All of which makes Smith feel especially out of time. In the very brief foreword to her first book of essays, “Changing My Mind,” she wrote: “Ideological inconsistency is, for me, practically an article of faith.” That faith doesn’t seem to have wavered in the 10 years since that book was published. “Intimations,” her slender new collection (less than 100 pages) of ultra-timely essays (several written in the past few momentous months), showcases her trademark levelheadedness.
Smith’s gifts as a novelist animate her essays. Writing about the neighborhood nail place where she regularly goes for stress relief, we get a portrait of her masseur, Ben, who teases her for always reading during their sessions and who asks where her hair “comes from.” (“Jamaica and England — via Africa,” she tells him. Ben replies: “Ho ho ho! Interesting mix!”) As the essay closes, Smith watches Ben from afar, the optimistic face she’s used to seeing changed into “a stern portrait of calculation and concern,” worried, Smith assumes, about the constant heavy traffic needed for the place to pay the rent.
In an essay called “Suffering Like Mel Gibson” (its title is a play on a popular meme), she writes provocatively of Christ on the cross, looking at those crucified beside him and wondering “whether his agonies, when all was said and done, were relatively speaking in fact better than those of the thieves and beggars to his left and right whose sufferings long predated their present crucifixions and who had no hope (unlike Christ) of an improved post-cross situation.” This thought comes in a passage addressing the word of this century so far, “privilege,” which she does with her usual many-sidedness: She notes her own advantages; parses the stubbornness of inequality; and outlines the explanatory (and experiential) limitations of privilege, including its ultimate inability to shield anyone from suffering, sometimes to the point of suicide. In Zadie Smith’s universe — meaning, for my money, the one we’re all living in — complexity is king.
Interested in what she once called “coalition across difference,” Smith has some opinions that she defines as commonplace but that she must know are now hotly debated.
She resists, for instance, the idea of “hate crime” as a desirable distinction, calling it “an elevation of importance in what strikes me as the wrong direction,” lending an undeserved power to the bigotry that inspires the term.
