Lauren Beukes’s fifth novel is a smartly written thriller that opens with a satisfying bang: a parent and child on the run after escaping a government compound where the young teenager has been quarantined and forced to undergo a seemingly endless series of tests. The parent is Cole. The kid goes through most of the novel under the alias of Mila. From that you could fairly assume that it’s a father and daughter on the lam, but Beukes — whose novel “The Shining Girls” dealt with a time-traveling serial killer — is all about turning assumptions and expectations upside down. Cole is actually Nicole, and Mila, her 13-year-old hostage to fortune, is actually Miles, one of the few males left after Manfall has taken 99 percent of those carrying the Y chromosome. This is because of a pandemic — yes, that again — known as the human culgoa virus, or H.C.V.
The flap copy on my advance edition declares that “Afterland” is a “high-concept feminist thriller that Lauren Beukes fans have been waiting for.” It is a thriller, I grant you that, and feminist in the sense that most of the men have been erased by a flu virus that develops into prostate cancer, but Beukes is too wise and story-oriented to wham away at ideas that have been thoroughly explored, sometimes at tedious length, on cable news and social media. She lets her tale do the talking, and the results are quite splendid.
This is your basic neo-noir, coast-to-coast chase novel, and Beukes, who is from South Africa, sees America with the fresh eyes of an outsider. 
Reprohibition offers Beukes the chance to incorporate all sorts of interesting (and often amusing) possibilities into her fiction, although it would be wrong to call any of them social commentary. The manless world Beukes imagines is seen from the corner of the eye and enriches the story without taking it over. Bogus baby bumps are in vogue; strip clubs feature women with cosmetic beard stubble and fake phalluses; there is a thriving black market in semen, which is referred to as “white gold.” Flattening the curve may sound good, but women still want to get pregnant even though their infant boys may die. As, I suppose, people still want to crowd beaches and amusement parks even though they understand they may be spreading the coronavirus, or catching it and taking it home to the grandparents.
If it were just the no-faces of the Department of Men after Cole and Mila, this might be a standard science fiction novel instead of the standout that it is. Beukes ups the ante by making it personal. Cole and Mila are also being hunted by Cole’s sister, Billie (as in much current fiction, all the major female characters in “Afterland” seem to have macho names). Wilhelmina Brady is the book’s most memorable character: self-involved, self-pitying, self-deluding and relentless. She isn’t just determined to get Miles and pass him on to a rich woman for mucho megabucks; she’s hurt and angry at her sister for not understanding that what Billie wants is best, even if it means Miles will be separated from his mom and find himself the prisoner of someone far worse than the Department of Men.
Along the way — one jump ahead of Billie and her accompanying gun-thugettes until the very end — Cole and Mila fall in with the Sisters of All Sorrows, a bunch of wannabe nuns who feel sure that if they apologize enough, the men will come back. They reminded me of the Guilty Remnant in Tom Perrotta’s “The Leftovers,” only without the cigarettes.
Miles, on the edge of puberty and able to pass as a girl with the right clothes and a little makeup, becomes enraptured with the Sisters and runs away from Cole at a crucial moment, hoping to meet the sect’s leader, Mother Inferior (no one can say Beukes lacks a sense of humor). It’s typical teen rebellion, but under the circumstances all too apt to be deadly.
Will readers want a pandemic novel at this fraught moment in American life? Maybe they will. Make that probably. Because our current situation looks pretty good compared with a world where young boys have been declared a natural resource and sperm bootlegging means imprisonment. There’s an interlude between Parts 1 and 2 of the story I could have done without because it stops the action cold with a lot of geeky science hoo-ha, but one paragraph does add some needed perspective (and hope) to where we are now. According to Beukes, AIDS killed 39 million globally, and the Spanish flu may have taken out 50 million. Covid-19 hasn’t brought us even close to the manpocalypse of which Beukes writes with such verve and mordant wit. How can you not fall in love with a book where the P.P.E.-wearing scientists tasked with discovering a vaccine are called plague-o-nauts and there’s a government bureau dealing with PMdFs, or Previously Male-dominated Fields?
A few years ago, my son and I wrote a novel called “Sleeping Beauties,” which examined the other side of the situation Beukes envisions. In ours, all the women fall asleep and grow fairy-tale cocoons, leaving the men to carry on. It doesn’t turn out well. Things are better in Beukes’s story; even with 99 percent of the men gone, society staggers on, complete with government, nightlife, shopping — and a booming trade in fake baby bumps. Think of a world where Donald Trump and Ted Cruz have gone to their reward, but Ruth Bader Ginsburg keeps on trucking. That doesn’t sound so bad, does it?