Book Review|What’s Wrong With Men in America?
What’s Wrong With Men in America?
Two new story collections reckon with how masculinity not only affects men themselves, but reverberates throughout the world, fundamentally altering the workings of humanity — often for the worse.
Michael Nye’s second collection, “Until We Have Faces,” is a sturdily Midwestern affair, a heartbreaking look at lives fueled by sadness and rage, set in a part of the country people so often leave but never seem to arrive. “You can’t just be angry at the world all the time,” a young woman tells her boyfriend in the titular story. When he asks why, she goes silent. The answer is right in front of him.
This is a collection about loneliness, and its connection to labor. Across nine stories, Nye introduces us to individuals who are defined and often repulsed by their jobs in a way that feels uniquely American. There are high school best friends (one white, one black) whose professional basketball careers take decidedly different trajectories; a young couple who take profile pictures for lovelorn Tinder users, perhaps only to turn the lens away from themselves; a grieving comic book store owner and a guy trying to make ends meet as a sidewalk mascot for a Halloween store. At worst, employment is an all-consuming struggle to attain and maintain. At best — for those who beat the odds and find success — it devolves into a numbing distraction from personal disappointment.
Even Nye’s eerie and disquieting forays into genre, “The Sins of Man” and “The Good Shepherd,” are circumscribed by the protagonists’ mundane finances. Kane is a veteran who now operates delivery drones for an Amazon-like monopoly targeted by domestic terrorists, and Pruitt’s family chicken farm pivots to dog meat after a bird flu epidemic. “People who never have to work again like Dan Marino and Deion Sanders are an elaborate lie,” says a retired N.F.L. player, who is now a failed real estate agent with telltale symptoms of C.T.E. “An illusion that the league takes care of its own and that all its ex-players don’t, in fact, suffer from debilitating pain and injury that leaves most guys dead before they’re 60.” He’s talking about professional sports, but isn’t he also talking about his country?
These are mostly narratives of straight men, and though women are ever-present, only “The Photograph” centers entirely on one. It’s perhaps the collection’s only hollow moment, acting more as an authorial indictment of New York City than an exploration of its protagonist’s personal trauma.
But it’s a brief stumble in an otherwise haunting and delicate collection. These are characters who wish for little more than to be seen, and in the most tragic of cases, they can’t even tell they already are. They’re caught in the middle — of a pandemic, of a recession, a domestic uprising, a country. And though plenty can call a Midwestern city their hometown, “Until We Have Faces” is the tender, aching work of one who calls it home.
Caleb’s answer is ultimately ambivalent. His explanation of frat culture is rife with qualifiers and defensiveness, as though he’s trying to mask an unpleasant truth. Yes, fraternities offer young men camaraderie and support during their first years of independence, but they’re also incubators for the kind of performed masculinity that leads to violence, sexual misconduct and existential anguish. The consequences outweigh the benefits. Caleb and most of his brothers seem to know that in this kind of American campus culture, it doesn’t matter how “nice” you are.
Nugent plunges us directly into the alternately repellent and lonely ecosystem of Delta Zeta Chi with “God,” a riveting and often hilarious crash course on coed life. He skips the watered-down pregame and flips us right over an icy keg with this opening line: “We called her God because she wrote a poem about how Caleb Newton ejaculated prematurely the night she slept with him, and because she shared the poem with her friends.” In “Fraternity,” the college experience consists of four years of fumbling awakenings, both intellectual and sexual, in an environment where everyone struggles with the plague of masculinity, even the men. In “Basics,” one brother worries he may have raped a girl, and calls his mother to confess. “If the university expelled all the guys who did what you did,” she says with a reassuring laugh, “they would lose a lot of money.” In “Hell,” current members seek out ways to enhance their initiation rituals from a troubled former brother and “house legend,” who offers horrific and prescient insights into the damaging effects of their traditions. In “Safe Spaces,” the sole story with a female protagonist, a homeless drug dealer finds temporary refuge in the unlikeliest of places: a dirty frat house sofa. In a fantastical horror-comedy, “Ollie the Owl,” the chapter’s sex-toy-wearing mascot comes to life and goes absolutely haywire.
But the collection reaches its high point in “Cassiopeia,” which follows an introspective and sexually uncertain freshman who likes the idea of fraternities for all the reasons that frequently make reading “Fraternity” so uncomfortable. Upon observing a sign calling for the death of the Greek system, he naïvely ponders how “nice” it is to see that a purportedly progressive environment could harbor an institution so reviled. Later, while awkwardly hooking up with a brother introduced in “God,” the freshman reflects more on the appeal of such a space: “I forgot who I was, and what I stood for, and I would have done anything he asked me to do.” Fraternities may be collegiate America’s biggest shame, but “Fraternity” is a revelation.