Crosswords & Games|For Whose Sake?
Royce Ferguson sets up our weekend stacks.
SATURDAY PUZZLE — This puzzle punished my hubris and gave me a workout — I made a couple of wrong assumptions in those triple stacks — talk about pell-mell behavior — and got stymied. This is Royce Ferguson’s second puzzle for The Times, after an inventive Sunday debut that had little tunnels hidden everywhere — remember that? Feels like a decade ago to me, but it’s actually been three months.
I really like Mr. Ferguson’s dry puns, namely his clues for OWEN and PETE, and some unexpected elements in his straight clues. Eight spans is a lot; four are debuts and four are repeats, including both of the entries I flubbed. Most of the names and places are par for the weekend course or easier, although I needed some crosses for ALTAI (mixed up with “Atlas” for no good reason) and TESS.
16A: I think the crosses for the three spans at the top of this grid are quite tough; you’ll notice that Mr. Ferguson calls several of them out, and I agree with his overall assessment. I was able to figure out this entry’s upstairs and downstairs neighbors, but the expression that I always use in this case is “from the get-go,” and I just couldn’t put together ALL ALONG THE LINE, hitting huge snags at AGNI (I wanted “Kali”) and ENES (a bit of common fill that’s hardly ever clued this way). The clue for OLE is adorable.
38A: This is new and seemed awkward to me, but it’s common when you search — TIEWRAP seems interchangeable with zip tie or cable tie.
41A: I clucked! Technically, if you’ve successfully BROODED, you’ve been “on eggshells,” in their protective entirety, one hopes.
61A: Why did this clue catch my eye when I sat down with this puzzle? I’ll never know, but I know I wrote in pen, “Too good to pass up.” Not a single letter in common with the correct answer, ONCE IN A LIFETIME, which has been enabling constructors since 1954. It’s funny, too, because there has been a little voice in my head lately warbling lines from this song at all hours, so it should have been on the tip of my tongue.
4D: The two spans running down make up half the span debuts today (the other two are at 17- and 62-across). This one’s an oxymoron, I think — TALKS IN A WHISPER — so it could have a jokey clue, but darned if I can think of one. Smarter heads will come up with one, I’ll bet.
9D: ST VITUS makes its first appearance since 1976; is “Saint Vitus’ dance” familiar to everyone? I can’t place why I know about it.
On the first iteration of this puzzle, I received feedback that the editorial team liked the top half, but not the bottom. Sadly, this meant redoing the entire puzzle, as any three of the eight interlocking 15-letter entries lock in a good chunk of the remaining five.
These low word count, unusual grid designs seem to often get mixed reviews. I personally enjoy them from a solver’s perspective, as I find the odds of a rough cross decrease — the less desirable bits of crossword glue holding these grids together tend to cross the long spanners that are (hopefully!) known to most.
In this case, I’m not proud of ARY, ILEA or ENES — but happy with the crosses on all three. AGNI and ST VITUS are tough, but I think both are fair and worth knowing.
This was my first puzzle to be accepted by The Times, in the middle of last year. Looking back, I would have swapped RIPA for RIPE (and TESS for TESH) to reduce the proper name count in the north east, and I would have insisted that at least one of the long 15s was an obviously modern phrase or term. And, being picky, the fact that IN A appears twice in the spanners is also a bit of a detractor.
That all said, I enjoyed making it in the wonderful company of Yvo and Marzena, and am quite pleased with how it came out. Hope everyone enjoys!