The attorney general echoed many of the president’s inaccurate claims on nationwide protests, police shootings and the coronavirus.
Attorney General William P. Barr, in a contentious congressional hearing on Tuesday, defended President Trump and the Justice Department on a variety of matters. Here is a fact-check.
When factoring in population size, Black Americans are killed by the police at more than twice the rate as white Americans, according to the database. Research has also shown that in the United States, on average, the probability of being shot by a police officer for someone who is Black and unarmed is higher than for someone who is white and armed.
Nationwide, the number of police shootings has remained steady since independent researchers began tracking them — declining in major cities, but increasing in suburbs and rural areas.
When Representative Cedric L. Richmond, Democrat of Louisiana, took issue with Mr. Barr’s presentation of the data, Mr. Barr responded, “You have to adjust it by, you know, the race of the criminal.” But some research has shown that even when controlling for the demographics of those arrested, there are still racial disparities in the use of police force.
He is correct that about 88.9 percent of Black murder victims were killed by Black perpetrators in 2018. But left unsaid was the fact that murder victims and their perpetrators are overwhelmingly of the same race or ethnicity: 80.7 percent of white murder victims were killed by white perpetrators, and 68.4 percent of Latino murder victims by other Latinos.
“The ‘Black on Black’ crime narrative as an explanation for police excessive use of force disregards the structural and historical issues that formed these neighborhoods, as well as the social and economic factors that currently sustain them,” the commission wrote.
Mr. Trump cited several inaccurate statistics to make a similar version of this argument on Twitter during his 2016 presidential campaign.
Videos show that federal agents, who arrived in the city on July 4, have responded aggressively and sometimes with disproportionate force through the use of tear gas, flash bangs and pepper balls. In some cases, they attacked protesters when there was no apparent threat, including the case of a Navy veteran whose hands were smashed by officers.
This is misleading. The United States Park Police has said it did not use chloroacetophenone, or CN, gas, one of the most common types of tear gas. But it did use “smoke canisters and pepper balls” — and specifically products made by the PepperBall company — on protesters in Lafayette Square that day.
The C.D.C. defines the term “tear gas” as riot control agents made of chemical compounds that “temporarily make people unable to function by causing irritation to the eyes, mouth, throat, lungs and skin” — symptoms that protesters and reporters described experiencing in Lafayette Square.
Mr. Barr’s denial was also disputed by an Army National Guard officer who was present during the protests and who also testified to Congress on Tuesday.
A 2014 Justice Department assessment of the police response to the protests in Ferguson, Mo., similarly observed that PepperBalls “would likely cause a burning sensation” if the content touches the skin. Last year, Mr. Trump signed a law banning the export of certain munitions to Hong Kong police. That list included both tear gas and pepper balls.
This lacks evidence. Election officials and experts have widely rejected this idea as nearly impossible, noting that ballots are printed on very specific stock and often have specific tracking systems like bar codes.
