Good morning. Virus deaths surged over the weekend. The White House is trying to undercut Fauci. And some innovative people are moving activities outdoors.
Five are open-sided circus tents that the university is buying, and another four are semi-permanent structures that workers are building in an open field near dorms, Kevin Kirby, Rice’s vice president for administration, told me. Students and professors will decorate the spaces with murals and video projections.
Several towns have held meetings outdoors, including Southwick, Mass., which spaced out folding chairs in a parking lot.
At a Baptist church in Westerville, Ohio, the pastor recently climbed into a scissor lift and conducted a drive-in service while he was 25 feet off the ground, Time magazine reports. And San Diego County has lifted some restrictions on outdoor religious services.
Many cities have loosened restrictions on outdoor dining. In New York, restaurants — like Melba’s, in Harlem — have responded creatively, building new outdoors spaces that “have temporarily transformed the city,” the Times restaurant critic Pete Wells writes.
Southside Johnny and the Asbury Jukes, a staple of summer at the Jersey Shore, put on a drive-in concert this weekend while thousands of fans listened from their cars.
Do you know of other companies or communities taking smart steps to move activities outdoors? Tell us about it.
The latest sign of how far the U.S. has fallen behind other countries in combating the virus: The N.H.L. announced that it would hold all of its remaining games this year in two Canadian cities. The U.S. isn’t safe enough.
The 24 hockey teams with the best records — 18 of which are U.S.-based — will travel to Toronto or Edmonton for a two-month tournament (without fans), starting Aug. 1. Las Vegas had been a leading candidate to serve as a host city until the recent virus surge across the Sun Belt.
College football, at risk: A growing number of teams have suspended summer workout programs. But many universities are still holding out hope they can play this fall, because, as John Branch writes, football is a major source of revenue for them.
Florida announced more than 15,000 new cases on Sunday, the highest single-day total in any state.
President Trump’s advisers undercut the nation’s top infectious disease expert, Dr. Anthony Fauci, over the weekend, anonymously providing news outlets with statements he had made early in the outbreak. Like many experts, Fauci initially underplayed the risks, but in recent months he has consistently urged Trump to take the virus more seriously.
China and Iran, two top rivals of the U.S., are forging a strategic alliance. The partnership would expand China’s presence in Iran’s telecommunications and other industries, and would supply China with discounted Iranian oil for the next 25 years. The agreement also calls for military cooperation.
Seven years ago, Camden, N.J., dismantled and then rebuilt its police force. In doing so, the city tried to take a lighter approach to minor offenses and defuse tense encounters. And it seems to have worked, for the most part.
While some problems persist, both excessive-force complaints and crime have plummeted in the city, where over 90 percent of residents are Black or Latino. In recent weeks, dozens of other departments around the country have reached out to Camden to ask for advice.
A fire and explosion aboard the U.S.S. Bonhomme Richard injured at least 21 people at a base in San Diego.
Fracking companies in the U.S. are shutting down because of the decreased demand for energy during the pandemic. One risk: Abandoned wells may leak planet-warming pollutants, experts say.
The philanthropic group founded by George Soros is investing $150 million in grants to Black-led racial justice groups, as well as $70 million in local grants supporting criminal justice reform.
The first federal inmate in 17 years is set to be put to death today, barring a last-minute stay. The Trump administration announced last year it would a bring back the federal death penalty after a long de facto moratorium.
Emboldened by Trump’s attacks on journalists, autocratic governments around the world are cracking down on independent news sites, the Times’s media columnist, Ben Smith, writes.
The N.F.L.’s Washington Redskins plan to announce today that they will change their name, abandoning a slur that Native American groups have long protested. The team is not expected to reveal a new name yet, The Washington Post reported.
Lives Lived: Kelly Preston — known for her roles as a hardhearted fiancée in “Jerry Maguire” and as the wife of the Mafia boss John Gotti — died on Sunday at 57.
IDEA OF THE DAY: Too much trust in tech?
Roger McNamee co-founded one of Silicon Valley’s most successful venture-capital firms and was an important early investor in Facebook. But he has soured on Big Tech, arguing that it now promotes hate speech, undermines democracy and profits at society’s expense.
McNamee was recently reading a Times article about Barack Obama’s role in Joe Biden’s campaign and was disappointed to learn that Obama had urged Biden to consult two of Silicon Valley’s top figures, Eric Schmidt (Google’s former chief executive) and Reid Hoffman (LinkedIn’s founder).
Technology can and should be a huge contributor to the American economy, but today its culture and business models produce consistently suboptimal outcomes for society. The best analogies are the chemicals industry prior to the Clean Air Act and the pharmaceuticals industry before the Pure Food and Drug Act. Tech companies are profitable because they are not responsible for the harm they cause.
When the chef and cookbook author David Tanis set out to create a black bean burger, he wanted one that embraced the taste of cooked beans rather than trying to mimic the look and texture of meat.
Think of the result as a particularly tasty version of refried beans. He recommends serving it with a fried egg on top and seasoning it heartily with cumin, scallions and green chile.
“Utopia Avenue,” by the British master of intricate literary puzzles, tells the story of the birth, rise and demise of a British rock band in the 1960s.
Mitchell is best know for the novel “Cloud Atlas.” He also had a short story in The Times Magazine’s special coronavirus fiction issue and appears on the latest episode of the Book Review podcast.
See the subway as you never have before, through the lens of the M.T.A.’s recently retired official photographer.
You can watch all of the recent presentations for Paris haute couture in one place.
Here’s today’s Mini Crossword, and a clue: What the Kansas scenes in “The Wizard of Oz” were filmed in (five letters).
P.S. Dr. Robert Lustig — an endocrinologist with a much-watched online lecture on the health risks of added sugar — joins Tara Parker-Pope today at 1 p.m. Eastern for an online event about how to improve your eating habits.
Today’s episode of “The Daily” is about the fallout from Hong Kong’s new security law. And the latest Book Review podcast includes Maria Konnikova talking about becoming a poker champ.
Subscribers help us report stories from around the world. Please consider subscribing today.
