The bridge became a flash point on March 7, 1965, as protesters, led by Mr. Lewis and other civil rights leaders, were stopped and beaten by state troopers as they marched to Alabama’s capital.
The death of Representative John Lewis on Friday has renewed interest in a campaign to rename the Edmund Pettus Bridge in Selma, Ala., the site of a turning point in the fight for civil rights.
Named after a former Confederate general and Ku Klux Klan leader, the bridge became the focus of national attention on March 7, 1965, when Alabama state troopers beat demonstrators who were marching for Black voting rights in what became known as Bloody Sunday.
Mr. Lewis, who was then the chairman of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, helped lead the march and sustained a cracked skull after a state trooper beat him to the ground with a nightstick. Mr. Lewis returned to Selma every year to commemorate the anniversary of the march, whose destination was the state capital in Montgomery.
An online petition created last month to rename the Edmund Pettus Bridge after Mr. Lewis has garnered over 400,000 signatures, including that of the director Ava DuVernay, whose Oscar-nominated film “Selma” recreated the Bloody Sunday confrontation.
“One of the most American things to do is to petition your fellow citizens to get change,” Michael Starr Hopkins, who started the petition, said in an interview on Saturday.
The effort to rename the bridge is being driven not only by the death of Mr. Lewis, a Georgia Democrat, but also by the protests against racism and police brutality that have followed the death of George Floyd in police custody in Minneapolis in May. Those protests have rekindled a debate over statues and other monuments celebrating the Confederacy.
The effort to rename the bridge for Mr. Lewis has run into opposition from some people in Selma, including some who participated in the Bloody Sunday march. They say the bridge, under its current name, has become a potent symbol of the struggle for civil rights and voting rights.
Alan Reese, a grandson of the Rev. Dr. Frederick D. Reese, a civil rights activist, said many Selma residents, including foot soldiers from the movement who are still living, would not consider a name change unless it were inclusive. Dr. Reese, who died in 2018, was a member of the Dallas County Voters League, one of the local groups that organized the 1965 voting rights marches in Selma.
“All the things my grandfather did — was born in Selma, raised in Selma, worked in Selma — I don’t feel like his name should go on the bridge, because I understand it was a collective of people to make that situation happen,” said Mr. Reese, the chief executive of a foundation bearing his grandfather’s name.
The bridge, which crosses the Alabama River, was dedicated in 1940 and named for Pettus, a lawyer and United States senator who was also a decorated Confederate general and a leader of the Alabama Ku Klux Klan. In 2015, a resolution to rename the bridge was defeated in the Alabama House of Representatives.
Representative Terri Sewell, Democrat of Alabama, said in a statement that although she understood the desire to honor Mr. Lewis’s legacy, a decision to rename the bridge should be made locally in Selma.
“As a daughter of Selma, I understand the complexities surrounding the renaming of the bridge, and while I personally can think of no better name than that of John Lewis, I ultimately believe the Selma community should decide who it is named after,” Ms. Sewell said.
In a statement in which he addressed the loss of Mr. Lewis, his longtime friend and colleague, Representative James Clyburn called for the bridge to be named after Mr. Lewis.
