Though the audio suggests otherwise, Mr. Stone said he did not use a slur in referring to his interviewer, who is Black. He also contended that the word was not offensive.
Roger Stone, the political operative who was spared a prison sentence this month by his friend President Trump, denied on Sunday that he had uttered a racial slur on a radio show the night before, calling the accusation a “smear” while also contending the word was not offensive.
During a live interview on “The Mo’Kelly Show” on Saturday night, the host, Morris W. O’Kelly, who is Black, questioned the role that Mr. Stone’s relationship and proximity to the president played in the commutation of his sentence.
Mr. Stone, who was speaking by phone, responded by muttering words that sounded like “arguing with this Negro”; the beginning of his sentence was hard to hear. It sounded as if Mr. Stone was not speaking directly into the phone, but rather to himself or to someone in the room with him.
“I did not — you’re out of your mind,” Mr. Stone told the host.
On Sunday, in a statement sent by text message to The New York Times, Mr. Stone at various points appeared to acknowledge the slur had been used, blamed technical difficulties on the show’s part, denied he said the word and then argued it was not offensive.
Saying he supported affirmative action and opposed the war on drugs, Mr. Stone wrote that he was not racist and that the episode was “a smear designed to boost” Mr. O’Kelly’s ratings.
The word was commonly used to refer to Black Americans through part of the 1960s, but for decades it has been considered offensive. Mr. Stone cited the championing of the term by the sociologist and N.A.A.C.P. co-founder W.E.B. DuBois, and the continued use of the word by the United Negro College Fund.
Mr. DuBois died in 1963. The charity retains its name but has rebranded itself as U.N.C.F. to de-emphasize the word.
Asked to respond to Mr. Stone’s statement on Sunday, Mr. O’Kelly said there had been no technical issues, and that the audio was clear.
On July 10, days before Mr. Stone was set to report to prison, Mr. Trump commuted Mr. Stone’s sentence. Mr. Stone had been sentenced to a 40-month term for seven felony crimes relating to obstruction of a congressional investigation into Mr. Trump’s 2016 campaign and possible ties to Russia.
“The Mo’Kelly Show” is broadcast on Saturday and Sunday nights on KFI-AM (640) in Los Angeles and on iHeartRadio. The interview on Saturday was the second time Mr. O’Kelly had spoken with Mr. Stone.
