President Trump made it official: The U.S. is pulling out of the World Health Organization. President Jair Bolsonaro of Brazil has tested positive. Hong Kong faces a “third wave” of infections.
As the U.S. passes 3 million virus cases, Fauci cautions against the ‘false narrative’ of a falling death rate.
The Trump administration sends formal notification that the U.S. will withdraw from the W.H.O. next year.
Brazil’s president, a skeptic of coronavirus precautions, tests positive.
Sweden took its own path. Now it is paying the price.
The fight over a drug that President Trump promoted enters a new round.
Hong Kong, a model of virus prevention, confronts a ‘third wave’ of infections.
Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the nation’s top infectious disease expert, cautioned on Tuesday that it was a “false narrative to take comfort in a lower rate of death,” which President Trump, top White House officials and several governors have stressed in recent days.
Dr. Fauci’s comments came at an event Tuesday with Senator Doug Jones, Democrat of Alabama, as the United States surpassed three million cases on Tuesday, and some states that had hoped to be getting back to normal by now have instead been forced to reinstate restrictions and issue mandatory mask orders.
Dr. Deborah L. Birx, the Trump administration’s coronavirus response coordinator, conceded that officials had been surprised by its recent spread, especially among young people.
The rate of new cases was rising quickly as the nation hit the three million mark, according to a New York Times database. Half a million new cases have been reported since June 26. Cases have risen in 37 states over the past two weeks, and this week the nation has been averaging roughly 50,000 new cases a day — double what it did in mid-June. And though President Trump dismissed the severity of the outbreak over the weekend, falsely claiming that “99 percent” of cases were “totally harmless,” leading health officials remain concerned.
On Tuesday, more than 54,000 cases were announced in the United States, according to the Times database. And at least six states — Texas, California, Hawaii, Missouri, Montana and Oklahoma — set single-day records for new cases; Texas recorded more than 9,200 cases. At least three — Arizona, Mississippi and Texas — reported their highest daily death totals of the pandemic.
People under 40 have made up a significant portion of new cases recorded in states with recent outbreaks, a sign of how the virus has spread in bars, restaurants and offices that have reopened.
The virus has infected more than 20,086,400 people and has been detected in nearly every country.
The Trump administration has formally notified the United Nations that the United States is withdrawing from the World Health Organization, officials said Tuesday, cutting off one of the organization’s biggest sources of aid amid a pandemic that has infected more than 11.6 million people, killed more than a half a million, and upended life around the world.
“The United States’ notice of withdrawal, effective July 6, 2021, has been submitted to the U.N. secretary general, who is the depository for the W.H.O.,” said a senior administration official.
By law, the United States must give the organization a year’s notice if it intends to withdraw, and meet all the current financial obligations in the current year.
Mr. Trump, whose response to the pandemic has drawn criticism, first announced that he planned to halt funding to the W.H.O. in April, claiming that the organization had made a series of mistakes as it battled the coronavirus.
His move to withdraw drew immediate criticism. Senator Lamar Alexander of Tennessee, a Republican who is the chairman of the Senate’s health committee, said that he disagreed with the president’s decision.
Mr. Trump turned on the W.H.O., the world’s premier global health organization, this spring, accusing it of doing too little to warn the world of the outbreak. In fact, the agency issued its first alarm on Jan. 4, just five days after the local health department of Wuhan, China, announced 27 cases of an unusual pneumonia at a local seafood market, and followed up with a detailed report the next day.
Experts acknowledged that the W.H.O. has made some missteps during the pandemic, but said that it has largely done well given the constraints under which it operates. The agency is coordinating clinical trials of treatments, as well as efforts to manufacture and equitably distribute the vaccine worldwide.
After hundreds of experts called for the W.H.O. to review its guidance, the agency acknowledged on Tuesday that airborne transmission of the virus may be significant in indoor spaces and said it planned to release updated recommendations in a few days.
Two W.H.O. scientists will travel to China this weekend to begin preparations for a larger investigation into the virus’s origin. The two, an epidemiologist and an animal-health specialist, will start in Wuhan, where the outbreak began late last year, and will collaborate with experts from the Chinese ministries of science, technology and health. Their purpose is to lay the groundwork for a later investigative expedition.
President Jair Bolsonaro of Brazil has repeatedly dismissed the danger posed by the coronavirus. On Tuesday, he disclosed that he had the virus.
The most savvy kid in my school the west side here at is you are pretty cool see that I have you double pull. So what have we got here to presents with best faith reserve you know sub in here. Now, here’s a thought you take a budget up with it. You deposit cheap with the policy of the policy you lose pool boy stuff will improve decision will see another job back. I don’t see no positive mass. Does Austin Thomas keep him as. Here’s a view I put a guy drugstore lacuna. Tommy Lee Jones you want put fourth as a satellite as.
President Jair Bolsonaro of Brazil, who has repeatedly dismissed the danger posed by the virus, disclosed Tuesday that he has the virus, a development that turbocharged the debate over his cavalier handling of a pandemic that has killed more than 65,000 Brazilians.
Speaking to journalists shortly after noon on Tuesday, the president, 65, said he was tested after experiencing fatigue, muscle pain and a fever.
Mr. Bolsonaro said he was feeling well on Tuesday, which he credited to having taken hydroxychloroquine, an anti-malaria pill repeatedly promoted by Mr. Trump that has not been proven as a treatment for Covid-19 patients.
“I’m fine, I’m very well,” Mr. Bolsonaro said, standing a few feet away from journalists.
Mr. Bolsonaro has come under criticism for his handling of the pandemic, even as Brazil’s caseload and death toll ballooned in recent months. Brazil’s 1.6 million diagnosed cases make it the second hardest-hit country, trailing only the United States.
Though several of his aides have tested positive in recent months, the president has often eschewed precautions such as wearing a mask and practicing social distancing. Most recently, he attended a luncheon hosted on Saturday by the American ambassador in Brazil to celebrate the Fourth of July holiday.
A photo taken during the lunch and posted on Twitter by Foreign Minister Ernesto Araújo shows the president sitting next to the American ambassador, Todd Chapman, giving a thumbs-up sign at a table decorated with an American flag design. The American embassy said on Tuesday that Mr. Chapman had tested negative, but would remain in isolation.
Mr. Bolsonaro is one of a number of world leaders who have contracted the virus.
Prime Minister Boris Johnson of Britain, who was also criticized for seeming to dismiss the risks of the virus early on, tested positive in March and spent three nights in intensive care. President Juan Orlando Hernández of Honduras was released from the hospital on Thursday after spending more than two weeks being treated for Covid-19 and related pneumonia.
In a rare rebuke last month, a federal judge admonished Mr. Bolsonaro for failing to wear a mask in public spaces in the capital, Brasília.
What would happen in a pandemic if a government allowed life to carry on largely unhindered?
As the world looked on, Sweden conducted what amounted to an unorthodox, open-air experiment testing just that proposition.
Not only have thousands more people died in Sweden than in neighboring countries that imposed lockdowns, but its economy has fared little better.
The results of Sweden’s experience are relevant well beyond Europe.
In the United States, where the virus is spreading with alarming speed, many states have — at President Trump’s urging — avoided lockdowns or lifted them early. In Britain, Prime Minister Boris Johnson reopened pubs and restaurants last weekend.
Implicit in these approaches is the assumption that governments must balance saving lives against protecting the economy.
But Sweden’s grim result — more death, and nearly equal economic damage — suggests that the supposed choice between lives and paychecks is a false one: A failure to impose social distancing can cost lives and jobs at the same time.
Sweden put stock in the sensibility of its people as it largely avoided imposing government prohibitions, allowing restaurants, gyms, shops, playgrounds and most schools to stay open.
More than three months later, the virus has been blamed for 5,420 deaths there. Per million people, Sweden has suffered 40 percent more deaths than the United States, 12 times more than Norway, seven times more than Finland and six times more than Denmark.
A team of doctors has asked the Food and Drug Administration to reverse its decision revoking an emergency waiver that had allowed government distribution of the malaria drug hydroxychloroquine as a Covid-19 treatment, the latest twist in a highly politicized debate over whether the drug promoted by President Trump is useful in fighting the disease caused by the coronavirus.
In revoking the waiver last month, the F.D.A. said studies had found the drug was “unlikely to be effective” in treating Covid-19 and could carry risks.
But doctors at the Henry Ford Hospital in Detroit last week reported the results of a study finding that 13 percent of hospitalized patients who were treated with hydroxychloroquine had died, compared with 26.4 percent of those who were not treated.
The study was retrospective and established only association, not causality. But Mr. Trump and his allies have been promoting the research on Twitter.
On Tuesday, the Detroit doctors asked the F.D.A. to issue a new emergency waiver, which would enable the government to again distribute the drug from the national stockpile as a treatment for Covid-19 patients.
“We owe it to our patients and our communities to do everything we can to provide safe, effective, affordable treatments,” he said.
Five senior Republicans said this week that they did not plan to attend the Republican National Convention next month in Jacksonville, Fla., where President Trump will formally receive the party’s nomination. Among them are two of the party’s elder statesmen, Charles E. Grassley of Iowa and Lamar Alexander of Tennessee. Three others are moderates who have clashed with Mr. Trump during his first term, including Senator Mitt Romney of Utah, the party’s 2012 presidential nominee.
Officials in Arizona on Tuesday announced more than 3,500 new cases and a single-day record for the number of deaths, more than 90. More than 50 of those deaths were in Maricopa County, which includes Phoenix. Twenty were reported in Pima County, which includes Tucson. Relatively few deaths were reported in Arizona over the holiday weekend, which may have contributed to Tuesday’s spike.
Officials in Montana announced more than 70 new cases on Tuesday, a single-day record in that state. More than 50 of those cases were in Yellowstone County, which includes Billings.
Gov. Tate Reeves of Mississippi, a Republican, said his virus test came back negative. He was screened after his exposure last week to a member of the state’s legislature who tested positive. At least eight Mississippi legislators have tested positive for the virus, Dr. Thomas Dobbs, the state health officer, said Tuesday during a news conference.
Nearly 350 public health organizations and agencies released a letter Tuesday to Alex M. Azar II, the health and human services secretary, urging him to champion the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and other public health agencies amid “increasing reports of resistance” to their recommendations for fighting the virus.
Ohio’s governor, a Republican, ordered residents to wear masks in public in seven counties where case numbers are growing significantly, including the ones that contain Columbus, Cincinnati and Cleveland. “This is aimed specifically at the seven counties where we are the most concerned,” he said.
All four of the large U.S. airlines have agreed to terms for loans from the federal government under the March stimulus bill, the Treasury Department said Tuesday. Delta Air Lines, United Airlines and Southwest Airlines signed letters of intent under that law, known as the CARES Act, Treasury said. Last week, the department announced that American Airlines had agreed to a five-year, $4.75 billion loan.
A Hong Kong restaurant in May. Tables were separated by foam boards to reduce the likelihood of infection.
Hong Kong has entered what one health official described as “a third wave” of coronavirus infections, a setback for a city where the Covid-19 death toll remains in the single digits and many social-distancing restrictions were relaxed in April.
The health authorities reported 14 new cases on Tuesday, a spike after months in which few or no new daily infections were detected. Of the 14, five were brought in by residents who were subject to a mandatory two-week quarantine.
But nine were locally transmitted, and the authorities said they had been unable to trace the infection pattern in five of those cases. That raises the prospect that the virus is circulating silently, after months in which community transmission appeared to have been at a standstill.
Hong Kong, a semiautonomous Chinese territory, closed its borders to nonresidents in March and mandated quarantine for returning residents after experiencing a second wave of infections imported from Europe and the United States. Its robust contact-tracing system helped the authorities contain the local outbreak this winter, and the city was among those that won praise from international health experts in the pandemic’s early days.
In April, health officials began to ease social-distancing rules and gradually allow schools, gyms and movie theaters to reopen. Since then, most reported cases of the virus in Hong Kong have been imported. As of Wednesday, the city of more than seven million people had 1,299 confirmed infections and seven deaths.
But the authorities have said that gaps began to appear in their maps of local clusters around the time that the rules were eased.
Dr. Chuang told reporters that the latest patients had come into contact with many people in public places before they tested positive, making it impossible to trace all their contacts.
“We cannot solely rely on this method to break transmission chains,” she said.
On Tuesday, Sophia Chan, the city’s health minister, suspended residents’ visits to nursing homes and said she would contemplate reinstating restrictive social-distancing measures. A few high schools and universities, including the Hong Kong Academy of Performing Arts, also said that they would suspend classes.
But otherwise, most businesses and offices stayed open, and the city’s subways and buses teemed with commuters.
More than 10 million high school students across China on Tuesday began taking a four-day university entrance exam that had been delayed for a month by the pandemic. Masks are mandatory, along with daily temperature checks over the previous two weeks. Some cities have required students taking the exam, known as the gaokao, to show the results of nucleic acid tests.
Thousands of protesters marched outside Serbia’s Parliament building on Tuesday, railing against the planned reintroduction of a lockdown this weekend. The protest came after President Aleksandar Vucic announced a curfew that he said would “probably” last from Friday night through Monday morning. Gatherings of more than five people will also not be allowed.
The virus death toll in India surpassed 20,000 on Tuesday, and with more than 719,500 confirmed cases, the country has overtaken Russia to become the third hardest-hit, after the United States and Brazil. The country’s public health system is severely strained, and experts believe it may reach a breaking point as Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s government continues to ease a nationwide lockdown.
Melbourne, Australia’s second-biggest city, will be locked down for six weeks after a record number of daily cases, officials said on Tuesday. The state of Victoria reported 191 new cases on Tuesday, an “unsustainably” high number, said Daniel Andrews, the state’s premier. Most were in Melbourne, a city of 4.9 million people and the capital of Victoria. Starting late Wednesday night, residents will be allowed to leave their homes only for essential work, shopping and exercise.
Prime Minister Boris Johnson of Britain drew furious reactions from health care professionals and opposition lawmakers after he suggested that “too many care homes didn’t really follow the procedures in the way that they could have,” while pleading for better organization and support for the sector. His comments came as virus deaths of nursing home residents in England and Wales approached 20,000; the figure is expected to rise much higher.
A rule requiring everyone in Toronto to wear face masks or coverings within enclosed public spaces until at least late September took effect on Tuesday. The city is Canada’s largest and has about 15,000 confirmed infections. Masks or face coverings have been mandatory on its public transit network since July 2.
Not for sale: In Paris, haute couture seamstresses make masks for front-line workers.
The Tissuni collective, a group of high-fashion seamstresses, has been making free masks for essential workers.
There are disposable masks bought in bulk. There are D.I.Y. masks, and designer masks, sold for $10 or $100.
Then there are masks made by a collective of the world’s most elite couturières: the seamstresses of Chanel, Dior and Saint Laurent, among others, who spent lockdown making more than 3,000 of them. But these masks are not for sale, and the people wearing them are not influencers or celebrities. They are the Paris’s nurses, bakers and firefighters — a distinction that is important to the masks’ makers.
Their collective, called Tissuni (a portmanteau of the French words for “united fabric”), was founded in March by Marie Beatrice Boyer, a Chanel seamstress, who had heard from a midwife friend that a hospital in Grenoble was using fabric coverings to preserve its surgical masks.
Ms. Boyer, 36, enlisted a few fellow Chanel seamstresses, and they began developing prototypes. On March 18, the day after Paris’s lockdown began, Ms. Boyer bought the Tissuni domain name.
Since then, the collective has grown to more than 100 members, according to Ms. Boyer. Many are haute couture seamstresses. They made their masks from personal fabric supplies, and when those were depleted, used old curtains, pillowcases and clothes.
They donated the masks to hospital workers, but also to members of law enforcement and cashiers, delivery people and taxi drivers.
Travel restrictions on Americans erode their passport privilege.
Five American travelers who set out for an island getaway in Sardinia were turned away last week after their private jet landed on the Mediterranean island. In Canada, two Americans were fined for flouting the border ban with their northern neighbor. And in Mexico, governors are pleading with the central government to introduce tighter restrictions on travelers from the United States to prevent an influx of potentially disease-carrying visitors.
While virus travel restrictions may vary from country to country, much of the world is united in one aspect of their current response: Travelers from America are not welcome.
An American passport was long seen as a golden ticket to travel visa-free in much of the world, save for a few notable exceptions. Now that former symbol of power and exceptionalism is becoming stigmatized as the United States continues to break records of new cases.
While restrictions have been centered on travelers coming from U.S., rather than on all American citizens, the cachet of the American passport has nevertheless been dented. Last week, the American passport suffered a stinging blow when the European Union formalized a plan to restart travel from certain countries, and visitors from America were conspicuously absent from the list.
The U.S. passport had long provided its holders with an outsize sense of freedom that was the envy of others. The restrictions that Americans now face are “something that much of the rest of the world knows very well,” said Dimitry Kochenov, a co-creator of The Quality of Nationality Index, which explores the benefits accorded to citizens of different countries.
As cases rise, some Florida hospitals are running out of intensive care beds.
As cases surge in Florida, more than 40 hospitals in counties across the state reported having no more beds available in their adult intensive care units, according to the state’s health care administration website.
Gov. Ron DeSantis, a Republican who pushed to reopen the state swiftly, announced Tuesday that he was taking steps to augment hospital capacity. The state has reported at least 213,786 cases, according to a Times database, and at least 3,840 people there have died. The average number of new cases in Florida each day has doubled since late June. On Tuesday, the state added more than 7,300 new cases.
Mr. DeSantis said the state would help create another nursing home for people with the virus and would send 100 health care workers, mostly nurses, to Miami-Dade County’s public hospital network, Jackson Health System. Some patients seeking medical care for other problems were testing positive, he said, putting a strain on space and staffing as hospitals were forced to isolate them.
“We have abundant capacity, but I think that having some of the personnel support will be very very important,” the governor said.
Miami-Dade County has been hit particularly hard. Its mayor, Carlos A. Gimenez, said that the county’s positivity rate had risen above 20 percent, more than double what it was two weeks ago. And nearly 80 percent of its I.C.U. beds are filled with virus patients, the county reported.
Mr. Gimenez has sent conflicting messages in recent days about some of the steps he was taking to curb the spread in the Miami area. After announcing on Monday that he would close gyms and restaurants, except for takeout and delivery, he later amended his decision and said that he would allow outdoor dining at tables with no more than four people. On Tuesday, he added that he had reached a compromise to allow gyms to stay open as long as people wear masks.
Out-of-work Britons fill farm jobs vacant because of travel restrictions.
Fruit picking in Britain is traditionally done by seasonal workers from Eastern Europe. Over all, 70,000 to 90,000 seasonal workers are needed to pick all the fruit and vegetables that grow in the country.
Because of travel restrictions to curb the spread of the virus, many of those workers haven’t been able to make the trip, have been delayed or have chosen not to come. By the time the pandemic hit Europe, most of the crops had been planted.
Farmers say they have been pleasantly surprised by the amount of interest in these jobs, but the placement of workers has its challenges. Four-fifths of the people who initially expressed interest drop out before moving to the next stage, according to HOPS Labour Solutions. Some realized that manual labor was not for them, or their furlough ended, or the contracts offered by farms were too long.
Still, many are enjoying the work.
“It’s been really fun, but it’s been tiring and hard work,” said Ella Chandler, 19, a cricket player whose season was cut short. On a recent day, she said, she picked almost 556 pounds of strawberries.
New York City will allow over 3,000 child care centers to open next week.
New York City’s Board of Health approved guidelines on Tuesday that will allow more than 3,000 child care centers to open next week with new limits.
The rules will allow no more than 15 children in a room, require children and workers to wear face coverings, limit the sharing of toys and allow for frequent disinfection.
At full capacity, 3,000 child care centers can accommodate 150,000 children.
The lack of child care options remains one of the biggest obstacles to a wider reopening of New York City, which just eased more restrictions after entering Phase 3 on Monday.
After public schools closed in March, the city opened centers for the children of essential workers. But child care has been limited during the pandemic.
It is still unclear what city schools will look like when they reopen in the fall, but it’s unlikely that children will be in school five days per week. Instead, there are likely to be staggered schedules mixed with remote learning.
Dr. Oxiris Barbot, the city’s health commissioner, said that child-care centers will have to meet all state regulations, including daily health screenings and safety plans that include signage for social distancing.
During the virtual meeting, teachers and child care center owners complained about how short notice they were given of the changes. They asked questions about the safety of children and staff and questioned how they would pay to put all of the protocols in place.
Health officials said they planned virtual seminars for providers in the next few days.
The board vote rescinds a previous resolution closing child care centers. After the vote, each center would have to develop a safety plan and affirm they meet state guidelines before opening. The city’s Bureau of Child Care will provide technical assistance to centers that want to open and will also conduct inspections to ensure compliance with the guidelines.
New York’s governor said the state will require travelers from Delaware, Kansas and Oklahoma to quarantine for 14 days, bringing the list of such states to 19. The governors of New Jersey and Connecticut said they would also instruct travelers from those 19 states to quarantine.
Nurses who traveled from across the United States to work in New York City hospitals saw the horrors of the virus up close. Now that many of them have returned home to states in the South and the West, they’re facing a new challenge: persuading friends and family to take it seriously.
New York City is mired in its worst economic slump since the financial crisis of the 1970s, when it nearly went bankrupt. The losses have been particularly significant among people of color: About one in four of the city’s Asian, Black and Hispanic workers were unemployed last month, compared with about one of every nine white workers, the city comptroller’s office said.
At least five Republican senators will skip their party’s convention.
As coronavirus infections surge, five senior Republicans have said this week that they do not plan to attend the Republican National Convention next month in Jacksonville, Fla., where President Trump will formally receive the party’s nomination.
Among them are two of the party’s elder statesman: Charles E. Grassley of Iowa and Lamar Alexander of Tennessee and three moderates who have clashed with Mr. Trump during his first term, including Senator Mitt Romney of Utah, the party’s 2012 presidential nominee. Other lawmakers have indicated they may follow suit for health or other reasons.
Republicans have already significantly scaled back the convention because of the pandemic and moved major convention events, like Mr. Trump’s nomination acceptance, to Jacksonville. Florida is now experiencing one of the worst virus outbreaks in the country.
Representatives for Mr. Romney and Lisa Murkowski of Alaska did not cite a reason for their decisions, but both senators have been among Mr. Trump’s most vocal Republican critics. Mr. Romney was the only Republican to vote to remove Mr. Trump from office during his impeachment trial.
And an aide for Susan Collins of Maine said she had never planned to attend the convention, as has been her practice in the years when she is up for re-election.
Other Republicans in the House and Senate have indicated they may skip the occasion, as well, but have not made up their minds. Top party leaders, like Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky and Representative Kevin McCarthy of California, are still expected to attend.
The W.H.O. acknowledges airborne transmission may be important indoors.
During a news briefing on Tuesday, W.H.O. officials said there was emerging evidence that the coronavirus can be transmitted by air.
After hundreds of experts called for the W.H.O. to review its guidance on the possibility of airborne transmission of the virus, the agency acknowledged on Tuesday that airborne transmission may be important in indoor spaces and said it planned to release updated recommendations in a few days.
Agency scientists said at a news briefing that W.H.O. expert committees are reviewing evidence on transmission. But the possibility of airborne transmission in public settings, especially in “crowded, closed, poorly ventilated settings, cannot be ruled out,” said Dr. Benedetta Allegranzi, who leads the committee on infection prevention and control.
Staff members fielded several questions about transmission of the virus by air, prompted by a widely publicized open letter from 239 experts calling on the agency to review its guidance. Many of the letter’s signatories have collaborated with the W.H.O. and served on its committees.
W.H.O. scientists said that for the past few weeks, the committee has been discussing new evidence on all the ways in which the virus spreads, including by tiny droplets or aerosols.
Agency scientists also offered an explanation for the agency’s seemingly slow pace on revising its recommendations. On average, the scientists review 500 new papers a day, many of which turn out to be of dubious quality. As such, said Dr. Soumya Swaminathan, the W.H.O.’s chief scientist, they have to review the quality of each paper before including it in their analysis.
W.H.O. scientists are headed to China to begin an investigation into how the pandemic began.
Two scientists from the World Health Organization will travel to China this weekend to begin preparations for a larger investigation into the origin of the coronavirus.
The epidemiologist and animal-health specialist will start in Wuhan, where the outbreak began late last year, and will collaborate with experts from the Chinese ministries of science, technology and health. Their purpose is to lay the groundwork for a later investigative expedition.
An international team of scientists has used genetic analysis to trace the likely origin of the novel coronavirus to horseshoe bats; the virus may have spread to humans with help of an intermediate species.
While the Chinese government has faced criticism for its response to the outbreak, Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the W.H.O.’s director-general, noted that Chinese researchers have also begun to investigate its source. “We should not consider as if there has been no movement or no activity until now,” he said.
A presidential election shaped by pandemic may be the most litigious in history.
A barrage of lawsuits and court rulings is starting to shape how the country will vote in the November elections against the backdrop of the virus, Michael Wines reports.
The election is already one of the most divisive in recent history, and it is on track to become the most litigious, as courts weigh policies for voting during a pandemic, voting rights and even who is responsible for paying the return postage used on absentee ballots.
Voting by mail is the prime battleground, with 34 states and the District of Columbia allowing excuse-free absentee voting, most likely ensuring that November’s election in those places will be conducted largely by mail if the pandemic persists.
Many of the remaining states loosened mail-balloting rules for primaries, and some have moved to do so for November as well. But Republicans — led vocally by Mr. Trump — have insisted, without evidence, that loosening absentee ballot rules invites widespread fraud.
Justin Levitt, an election scholar and associate dean at Loyola Law School in Los Angeles, is tracking nearly 130 pandemic-related election lawsuits. The firm of Marc Elias, a lawyer who frequently represents the Democratic Party, is pursuing more than 35 voting rights cases, a number he calls an order of magnitude greater than in the past. And the Republican National Committee, which pledged this spring to spend at least $20 million fighting attempts to loosen voting rules, boasts of filing or intervening in 19 suits to date.
Threatened with a new lockdown, angry Serbians take to the streets.
Thousands of protesters marched outside Serbia’s Parliament building on Tuesday, railing against the reintroduction of a lockdown set to begin this weekend.
A crowd of people held up signs and some tried stormed the building in Belgrade, videos from the news outlet Balkan Insight showed. Even after the police used tear gas, the protesters refused to disperse, Balkan Insight reporters said.
The protest came after President Aleksandar Vucic announced a curfew that will “probably” last from Friday night through Monday morning. Gatherings of more than five people will also not be allowed.
The immediate scope of the lockdown was not clear.
The president said he “would like” for it to apply to the entire country. He also said it was possible that the rules would not be put into effect if the country’s numbers turn around significantly in the next couple of days.
Mr. Vucic cited several cities with serious outbreaks, but singled out the capital as being in “critical” condition, with its hospitals full.
Serbia reported its highest daily death toll on Tuesday, with 13 people dying overnight, and 299 new cases. The total case count for the country is about 16,000.
The country reopened in May, and it even held parliamentary elections in late June. But since then, with cases rising, it put the brakes on sporting events and large gatherings. A state of emergency was declared in Belgrade last week, and masks are now required indoors there.
The U.S. won’t allow international students whose classes move online to stay in the country.
Immigration authorities announced Monday that they would discontinue exceptions to visa requirements that are currently allowing international students studying at American universities to attend all of their classes online.
As a result of the change in policy, foreign students whose college campuses will not reopen for the fall semester will be required to return to their home countries, as their visas will no longer be considered valid.
More than a million international students were issued visas to study in the United States last year. This spring, as the pandemic prompted most American college campuses to close, some universities, including Ivy League schools, rushed students onto planes to their home countries.
Some students tried to hang on to their educations by couch surfing in the homes of peers and relying on donated food and grants to keep up with their tuition payments, and many lost their on-campus jobs. International students were not eligible for federal aid funds tied to the pandemic.
Early in the outbreak, American immigration authorities announced they would make exceptions to the requirements of international student visas, allowing the students to take classes online rather than in person — a change that is now being partially reversed. The news that international students must now attend at least some of their classes in person in order to hold onto their legal immigration status will likely, for many, end the prospects of completing their educational goals.
Since the pandemic began, Canadians have parsed Prime Minister Justin Trudeau’s every move, from his beard and hair length to his juggling of child-care duties while running the country.
So it did not go unnoticed when Mr. Trudeau announced on Monday that he would not be attending a meeting in Washington this week with Mr. Trump and President Andrés Manuel López Obrador of Mexico to celebrate the start of a seminal new trade deal between the three countries.
That Mr. Trudeau would choose not to fly to Washington to celebrate what many consider one of his most important accomplishments to date was striking. He cited scheduling conflicts as his reason for not attending the meeting, set to begin on Wednesday.
But political analysts saw something else at work: the prime minister has become the country’s model for following medical guidelines on virus prevention — including wearing a mask and avoiding travel — which have become contentious in other countries.
“I don’t think Trudeau has any interest in being drawn into American debates on mask-wearing and appropriate health precautions during an epidemic,” said Roland Paris, a professor of international affairs at the University of Ottawa, and a former foreign policy adviser to Mr. Trudeau.
While Mr. Trump has continually underplayed the severity of the virus, and even mocked people for wearing masks, Mr. Trudeau became the first G7 leader to self-isolate after his wife came down with flulike symptoms and later tested positive for Covid-19 in March.
Not everyone agreed about the wisdom of Mr. Trudeau staying away. Mr. Trump “may take this as a slight,” said John Higginbotham, a senior fellow at Carleton University in Ottawa.
Boris Johnson criticizes crisis management in Britain’s nursing homes, and is criticized in return.
Prime Minister Boris Johnson of Britain drew furious reactions from health care professionals and opposition lawmakers after he suggested on Monday that “too many care homes didn’t really follow the procedures in the way that they could have,” while pleading for better organization and support for the sector.
A spokesman later said that the hasty comments weren’t intended to blame those working in nursing homes. They came as total coronavirus deaths of nursing home residents in England and Wales approached 20,000, with the figure expected to become much higher.
The pandemic has struck nursing homes hard in various European countries, including France, Italy and Spain, and Britain hasn’t been exempt. Although the British authorities have argued that they threw “a protective ring” around nursing homes and gave the first instructions in February, staff members have repeatedly said that they felt abandoned compared with hospital workers.
More than half of nursing homes in England have reported virus cases, and in facilities where the virus moved in, one in five patients was infected, according to official statistics.
As the British authorities ease confinement restrictions but continue to fear new waves of infections, they have announced that nursing home residents will be tested for the virus monthly, with staff members tested weekly.
Mr. Johnson’s government also pledged 600 million pounds, or $749 million, in support of the country’s nursing homes in May, in addition to £3.2 billion — $4 billion — to local governments for key public services like nursing-home facilities.
City halls in the U.S. find ways to reopen.
After months of waiting for a steep drop in cases that never came, many local governments have started reopening their buildings. But the business of assessing properties, paying fines and running America’s cities looks little like it did before the pandemic.
In Aurora, Ill., City Hall was set to open just three days a week, with the first hour each day set aside for older residents. In Detroit’s partly reopened municipal center, appointments were recommended, employees were being tested for the virus and workers were no longer accepting cash payments. And in Dayton, Ohio, where City Hall had been closed since March 18, it was set to reopen this week with hand-sanitizing stations and security guards performing temperature checks.
“The City of Dayton is encouraging customers to continue conducting business with the city remotely and electronically, as physical distancing standards are practiced at city facilities and many employees continue to work from home,” the statement said.
Delta, United and Southwest sign deal for Treasury loans.
The CARES Act set aside $25 billion in loans for passenger airlines. The Treasury Department earlier distributed another $25 billion to help the airlines pay workers through September.
Besides the big four airlines, Treasury has also agreed to lend to Alaska Airlines, JetBlue Airways, Frontier Airlines, Hawaiian Airlines, Sky West Airlines and Spirit Airlines.
Hundreds of public health groups urge Health Secretary Azar to shield the C.D.C. from politics.
That resistance has come not just from members of the public but from some local and state elected officials and from President Trump, who seldom wears a face covering despite the C.D.C.’s recommendation to do so and continues to minimize the threat of the virus.
The groups, including the American Public Health Association and the Association of State and Territorial Health Officials, asked Mr. Azar to push for “robust, sustained, and predictable funding” for the C.D.C. and other public health agencies.
But their emphasis was on protecting the C.D.C. from political interference, a mounting concern in recent months as the White House has largely relegated the agency to a behind-the-scenes role during the pandemic.
The agency, a division of the Department of Health and Human Services with 11,000 employees, cannot make policy. But it guides state and local public health systems and advises government leaders.
Mr. Azar, too, has had a diminished role in recent months, focusing largely on Operation Warp Speed, the Trump administration’s effort to quickly make coronavirus vaccines and treatments available to the American public.
India’s death toll passes 20,000, further straining the health system.
The virus death toll in India surpassed 20,000 on Tuesday, and, with more than 719,500 confirmed cases, the country has overtaken Russia to become the third hardest-hit, after the United States and Brazil.
Officials said India recorded 22,252 new cases and 467 deaths in the past 24 hours. The country is now averaging 450 deaths each day, double what it was seeing in the first week of June.
The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare said the average number of positive cases in New Delhi, India’s capital, had increased from 5,481 to 18,766 in about a month. The situation in New Delhi and Mumbai remains particularly dire, as state-run hospitals are overflowing with the sick.
India is one of many developing nations where leaders feel the economic situation means they have no choice but to prioritize reopening despite surging infections. But its public health system is severely strained, and experts believe it may reach a breaking point as Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s government continues to ease a nationwide lockdown.
Vasudev Venugopal, a health expert in the southern Indian city of Chennai, said the increasing number of cases was largely because of the infection’s spread in densely populated areas of major cities, with crowded marketplaces and almost no social distancing. India has nearly 720,000 cases in total, according to a New York Times database.
Correction: Because of an editing error, an earlier version of this item misattributed a distinction to the coronavirus outbreak in India. The country’s total number of confirmed cases is now the world’s third-largest, not its number of deaths.
Australia’s second-largest city will be locked down for six weeks amid surging cases.
A record number of daily coronavirus cases has forced Melbourne, Australia’s second-biggest city, to be locked down. Residents will be allowed to leave their homes only for essential work, shopping and exercise.
Melbourne, Australia’s second-biggest city, will be locked down for six weeks after a record number of daily coronavirus cases, officials said on Tuesday.
The state of Victoria reported 191 new cases on Tuesday, an “unsustainably” high number, said Daniel Andrews, the state’s premier. Most of the cases were in Melbourne, a city of 4.9 million people and the capital of Victoria.
Starting late Wednesday night, residents will be allowed to leave their homes only for essential work, shopping and exercise. Another regional area, Mitchell Shire, will also be locked down.
Australia has had a comparatively small outbreak, with fewer than 8,600 reported cases and only 106 deaths. But emerging hot spots in Melbourne in recent weeks have alarmed officials, who locked down 300,000 people in suburban neighborhoods last week. They also immediately quarantined 3,000 residents of public housing towers on Saturday after coronavirus infections were found in 12 households.
Other states have also reacted to the flare-up. New South Wales, Australia’s most populous state, will close its border with Victoria on Wednesday and send police and military officers to patrol crossings. South Australia, which shares a border with Victoria, said it would bar Victorian travelers at midnight Wednesday.
Returning citizens have also brought cases to New Zealand in recent weeks, and the country’s airline, Air New Zealand, temporarily froze ticket sales for three weeks on Tuesday. The move, requested by the government, will ensure the country has space to quarantine all travelers, the airline said in a statement. Like Australia, New Zealand has had a relatively small outbreak, with 1,536 reported cases and 22 deaths.
Is a safe cookout possible?
With the virus raging in many parts of the United States, new restrictions have left many wondering about the safety of a backyard barbecue or picnic. Here are some tips to help.
Reporting was contributed by Geneva Abdul, Manuela Andreoni, Peter Baker, Dan Bilefsky, Julia Calderone, Letícia Casado, Niraj Chokshi, Michael Cooper, Melina Delkic, Caitlin Dickerson, Nicholas Fandos, Manny Fernandez, Michael Gold, Peter S. Goodman, Abby Goodnough, Erica L. Green, Jenny Gross, Maggie Haberman, Mike Ives, Niki Kitsantonis, Isabella Kwai, Ernesto Londoño, Cao Li, Apoorva Mandavilli, Tiffany May, Jeff Mays, Giulia McDonnell Nieto del Rio, Patrick McGeehan, Sarah Mervosh, Claire Moses, Aimee Ortiz, Elian Peltier, Catherine Porter, Dagny Salas, Michael D. Shear, Mitch Smith, Megan Specia, Sheryl Gay Stolberg, Jessica Testa, Katie Thomas, David Waldstein, Noah Weiland, Michael Wines, Sameer Yasir and Karen Zraick.