Something that’s supposed to cover our mouths speaks volumes about how crazy some people have gotten.
That is a lot of hot, molten anxiety building up beneath our economy, society, schools and city streets — just waiting to blow the top off our country — because we have so failed at managing the coronavirus. We have 25 percent of all recorded infections in the world, and we’re only four percent of the world’s population. In the ultimate irony, Vietnam, which has a little less than one-third of our population but has reported only 416 cases and no deaths, is feeling sorry for us.
If, God forbid, America were buried under lava the way Pompeii was and future archaeologists were to come along and dig it out, I have no doubt that the artifact they’d dust off and hold up first to answer that huge question would be a simple item that costs pennies to make and is so easy to wear: the face mask.
There is nothing more demoralizing than this, nothing that set us back in the fight against Covid-19 further and faster. A society that can politicize something as simple as a face mask in a pandemic can politicize anything, can make anything a wedge issue — physics, gravity, rainfall, you name it. And a society that politicizes everything will never realize its full potential in good times or prevent the worst in bad times.
President Trump’s resistance to masks actually had nothing to do with ideology. It was just his primitive opposition to anything that would highlight the true health crisis we were in and that therefore might hurt his re-election.
But our future archaeologists would also be right to focus on face masks, because the early intense resistance by pro-Trump Republican leaders and faithful to wearing them was the distilled essence of how far off track today’s G.O.P. and its enabling media ecosystem have drifted. In that sense it was yet another stark reminder that we can’t be at our best as a country — as we need to be most in a pandemic — without a principled conservative party, grounded in science, not just cultural markers and mindless, kneejerk libertarianism.
But let’s give a small shout-out to Republican governors Larry Hogan of Maryland, Mike DeWine of Ohio, Eric Holcomb of Indiana and Kay Ivey of Alabama, who have been or become pro-mask. It is not only good for their states’ physical health but also the country’s political health.
