Music|You May Not Know These 15 Songs. But You’ve Heard Them.
You May Not Know These 15 Songs. But You’ve Heard Them.
Artists like Edwin Birdsong and Ballin’ Jack aren’t household names, but their music is instantly recognizable as the samples behind hit pop songs.
Songs by Them, the Lafayette Afro Rock Band, Edwin Birdsong and the Chi-Lites have been sampled on tracks by Beck, Public Enemy, Daft Punk and Beyoncé.
“Sampling Is (a) Creative or (b) Theft,” read a New York Times headline in 1997, summarizing a debate that has raged ever since songs started incorporating parts of other songs. The truth? It’s a little of both, and that’s what’s so fun about it.
The funk and disco musician Edwin Birdsong, who died in 2019, left a lasting legacy both on his own records and the next generation’s. Prince Paul got there first, melding Birdsong’s “Rapper Dapper Snapper” with a George Clinton groove to create De La Soul’s 1989 hit “Me, Myself, and I,” but it was Daft Punk’s “Harder, Better, Faster, Stronger” that sounded 20 years ahead of its time despite being built on a (quirky, wildly funky) 22-year-old framework.
It’s true, the break is great — the jumpy rhythm guitar, handclaps and “uh! hah!” exclamations that were seized on by the rapper Young M.C.’s producers, Matt Dike and Mike Ross. (Dike was also a force behind the Beastie Boys’ “Paul’s Boutique,” one of sampling’s artistic pinnacles.) But stick around for the rest of “Found a Child,” a horn-driven workout by the Seattle rock and soul band Ballin’ Jack that’s in the vein of early Chicago, Santana or Blood, Sweat and Tears.
Most of the production on Kanye West’s 2013 album “Yeezus” was harsh, electronic and futuristic (with the occasional nod to classic dancehall reggae). But with its loop of “Bound” by the Cleveland soul group the Ponderosa Twins Plus One, the LP’s final track, “Bound 2,” looked back to West’s “College Dropout” days of chopped-up samples and ahead to his mining of reissue labels like the Numero Group in the Wyoming era. If you know, you know.
It’s not exactly fair to call Andrea True a one-hit wonder. She may not have had a follow-up to rival “More, More, More,” a breathy, glittery disco number alluding to her work as an adult-film actress, but that song’s breakdown was off-kilter funky enough to power two hits: It’s also the backbone of “Steal My Sunshine,” a quintessentially ’90s track by the Canadian group Len. Marc Costanzo, half of that brother-sister duo, told The Guardian he chose the sample the morning after he heard Brendan Canning of Broken Social Scene put on “More, More, More” at a house party.
There’s one reason “Mask Off” stood out on rap radio and in Future’s vast catalog, and it’s this flute-heavy sample taken from the cast album for “Selma,” a musical dedicated to the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and written by the nightclub-singer-turned-minister Tommy Butler. Rosa Parks attended the show’s 1976 premiere in Detroit.
It started as a relatively rare Columbia single in 1965 and was heard on the jukebox at Kevin’s diner in “Moonlight,” the 2016 best picture winner. In between, in 1999, the producer Ayatollah repurposed multiple sections from Aretha Franklin’s gorgeous “One Step Ahead” to create the lead single from Mos Def’s “Black on Both Sides,” where the M.C. tells the story of his romantic pursuit of a woman whose backside he can see from the front.
