They studied for years to get full-time jobs. Now, they’re right back where they started.
Clockwise from top left, Katarina Delgado, Hannah Derleth, Hannah Todd and Matthew Feldman are joining the working world under unusual circumstances.
But last month, the room served as Ms. Todd’s office for her first day as a financial analyst at Medtronic, a Minnesota-based medical device company.
As offices remain closed across the country, Ms. Todd, who earned a degree in finance from Arizona State University this spring, is joining many other recent graduates in beginning her career from her childhood home.
Nearly four million people were set to graduate from postsecondary institutions in the 2019-20 academic year, according to the Education Department. Some have had job offers rescinded because of the pandemic, while others face a discouraging job market that only months earlier had looked quite promising.
Job postings on the online platform Indeed this month are down 25 percent from the same time last year, the company said. Employment opportunities listed on the platform were even fewer in May, when the difference compared with a year earlier was 39 percent.
But even before the pandemic hit, recent graduates often faced difficulty finding work — the youth unemployment rate, currently hovering around 25 percent, is historically double that of the nationwide rate.
In her new job, Ms. Derleth has worked from a desk she used to study at in middle school.
But the lack of face-to-face contact with her new colleagues has been less than ideal, Ms. Derleth said — she met her supervisor’s supervisor for only “30 seconds” when she went into the office to pick up a work computer. She has been working from a desk that used to be the site of middle school study sessions.
The flow of information over video calls on May 11, the day Ms. Derleth started her new job, was “like drinking from a fire hose, like any normal first day,” she said. The screen sharing and video lag, coupled with the inability to meet her new colleagues, were grueling. “It was one of the most difficult first days I’ve had,” said Ms. Derleth, who held various internships and part-time positions in college.
Katarina Delgado, a 22-year-old spring graduate from the University of Arizona’s business school, was set to move to Seattle last month for a position as a retail vendor manager at Amazon. Instead, she is splitting time between her father’s townhouse and her grandparents’ home, where her mother lives, in Las Vegas.
But notifications from Snapchat and Instagram of archived moments from her time in Seattle last year are difficult to stomach. “Having to constantly reminisce” about her internship, and the experiences now put on hold because of the coronavirus, has been challenging, Ms. Delgado said.
Ms. Todd at her home office set-up.
Ms. Todd, who had planned to move to Minneapolis, will be taking conference calls from a more rural setting, next to a window that overlooks fields, with cows nearby.
“There are actually hay bales outside my window,” she said. While she is disappointed to miss out on exploring Minneapolis’s museums and restaurants with friends, Ms. Todd said she was looking forward to breakfasts and midday dog walks with her father, who is also working from home.
Matthew Feldman, who graduated from Syracuse University in December before interning at Edelman, the public relations firm, in the spring, started his full-time communications job with the defense contractor Raytheon in June from the basement of his family’s home in Bellefonte, Pa. — the house where the family has lived since Mr. Feldman, 23, was in kindergarten.
He logs on to work from a couch or a bar top. The weak signal from the basement, strained by an entire household working remotely, made Mr. Feldman fearful that his orientation calls during his first week would drop.
Mr. Feldman’s father, an elementary school principal, and his mother, an elementary school teacher, had claimed the main floor of the home, where for the past few months his mother taught classes on Zoom. His younger brother, a rising junior at Georgia Tech, was also taking classes remotely.
“I would come downstairs to make coffee and there would be 15 kids on a Zoom call in one room, and my dad on a call in the other room,” Mr. Feldman said. But with the school year concluded, “we have a little more internet bandwidth,” he said.
At Ms. Delgado’s grandparents’ six-bedroom home, her grandmother cooks throughout the day, family members exclaim when they walk through the door, and Telemundo blares at a high volume for her grandparents, who are hard of hearing, Ms. Delgado said.
In spite of the distractions, living with her grandparents has provided unique opportunities for bonding and discussion. Ms. Delgado said she had been speaking with them about the Black Lives Matter movement.
Ms. Delgado with her grandmother.
Having Ms. Delgado, a first-generation college graduate, working remotely in the next room has been special for her family as well. “My grandma cries literally every other day because she’s so proud of me,” she said.
Jeffrey Arnett, a psychology professor at Clark University and the executive director of the Society for the Study of Emerging Adulthood, said even though it might seem perilous for the newly employed to be living at home with their parents, postgraduate life is often “uniquely unstable” — even in nonpandemic circumstances.
“They have high expectations once they get degrees that life is going to open up for them,” Professor Arnett said. He has dedicated his career to studying what he calls “emerging adulthood,” a phase of life for 18- to 29-year-olds during which they frequently stay in school longer and get married later than previous generations did.
While starting remotely may not affect recent graduates psychologically in the long term, it could have an impact on their careers if they don’t take steps to create personal connections, said Robert Hellmann, a career coach in New York.
Relationships are the key to success, Mr. Hellmann said, adding that people who build connections with their teams and with colleagues in other departments are better positioned for promotions — something Ms. Delgado said she was worried about falling behind on.
Mr. Hellmann suggested that new hires reach out to people around their organizations for 15-minute chats to introduce themselves and build relationships that would usually occur organically in an in-person setting.
“Human connection, even virtually, makes a difference,” Mr. Hellmann said.
Still-packed suitcases on the floor of Mr. Feldman’s childhood bedroom reveal thoughts “in the back of my head that I’ll be leaving home at some point” in the near future, he said. Though “maybe I’ll have to start putting clothes into my dresser,” he said.
The family has grown closer and found new joys during quarantine — they adopted a shiba inu puppy from a departing international student at nearby Penn State University, and they did a gourmet coffee tasting at home for Mother’s Day — but Mr. Feldman’s desires to be on his own again have prompted difficult conversations in the family about enjoying time with each other, yet yearning for independence and new experiences.
“You’re with people that love you, and a community you’re super familiar with,” he said of being at home. But after attending college out of state, studying abroad in Spain and living in various cities around the country for internships, Mr. Feldman said, he longs for the personal growth that comes from living in an unfamiliar place. He has considered working remotely from Brooklyn for a few months.
