The Treasury Department imposed sanctions on a powerful government entity that runs companies and farms in the Xinjiang region, where officials carry out the mass internment of Muslims.
WASHINGTON — The Trump administration announced sanctions Friday on a powerful government entity and two senior officials who have helped manage it, citing systemic human rights abuses against predominantly Muslim ethnic minorities in the Xinjiang region in China’s far northwest.
The sanctions, imposed by the Treasury Department’s Office of Foreign Assets Control, name the Xinjiang Production and Construction Corps, an economic and paramilitary organization that plays a central role in the development of the Xinjiang region, and two associated officials, Peng Jiarui and Sun Jinlong. The order is designed to prevent them from accessing American property and the financial system, as well as to ban any economic transactions between them and American companies and citizens.
The sanctions most likely will have little or no practical impact on Mr. Peng, the deputy party secretary and commander of the development group, and Mr. Sun, one of its former political commissars. It was not immediately clear what effect they would have on trade and international commerce done by the group, which oversees some state-run companies that export products such as tomato paste.
The group’s direct exports to the United States were worth $43 million in 2018, the most recent year for which detailed official data were available. Much more of its crops and other raw materials may end up processed by Chinese companies for exports that are not counted under the group’s numbers.
In particular, the group is a big cotton grower. Last year, it produced two million metric tons of cotton, about a third of China’s total production, according to official statistics. In 2018, its direct imports from the United States were worth $102 million.
Ties between the United States and China have been fraying as the Trump administration takes an increasingly hard line on China’s handling of the initial coronavirus outbreak, its growing repression in Hong Kong, its maritime claims and miliary expansionism in the South China Sea, its efforts to export 5G next-generation telecommunications equipment and its systemic abuses of largely Muslim ethnic minorities in Xinjiang.
The Chinese government has carried out a campaign of mass detentions in Xinjiang, placing one million or more members of the Uighur ethnic group and others into large internment camps that aim to indoctrinate the detainees with propaganda about the Communist Party and eradicate core parts of their Muslim and Uighur identities.
From 2018 onward, senior administration officials debated whether and how to punish China for the abuses.
On July 1, the administration warned businesses with supply chains that run through Xinjiang to consider the reputational, economic and legal risks of doing so.
The Associated Press reported on July 3 that agents of U.S. Customs and Border Protection in New York had seized 13 tons of hair weaves and other beauty products suspected of having been made by detainees in a Xinjiang internment camp. The products were worth an estimated $800,000. In May, the agency conducted a seizure of similar products that were being imported by companies in Georgia and Texas, to be sold to salons and individuals across the United States.
Chris Buckley contributed reporting from Sydney, Australia.