The St. Louis County prosecutor had reopened an investigation into Darren Wilson, who was previously cleared by a grand jury after fatally shooting Mr. Brown in 2014.
The killing of Mr. Brown led to intense protests in Ferguson, a suburb of St. Louis, where scenes of smashed windows, burning buildings and upset protesters choking in tear gas were seared into the minds of Americans. There were similar demonstrations in several cities this year after the police killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis, although many of the nationwide rallies featured no vandalism or violence.
Mr. Brown was 18 and a recent high school graduate when he got into a confrontation with Mr. Wilson on a quiet residential road. A struggle at Mr. Wilson’s police vehicle turned into a street pursuit that ended with Mr. Wilson fatally shooting Mr. Brown. Witnesses said Mr. Brown had his hands up when he was shot — sparking outrage and a protest rallying cry — but federal and local investigators said the evidence suggested otherwise.
Even without a criminal prosecution, Mr. Brown’s death brought attention to police killings of Black people. It also forced many police departments to consider new reforms, like making officers wear body cameras, and other changes in the criminal justice system, like ending cash bail. An investigation by the Justice Department found that law enforcement in Ferguson regularly violated the rights of Black people, leading to changes in laws, and how courts and cities operate.
Mr. Brown’s name — among those of other Black people killed by the police — was frequently shouted by protesters or etched onto cardboard signs during weeks of recent protests that rapidly extended across the country after Mr. Floyd was killed in May.
Those Black Lives Matter protests, which are continuing in places like Portland, Ore., may make up the largest protest movement in United States history; polls have indicated that between 15 million and 26 million people have taken part in the demonstrations. Four officers have been charged in Mr. Floyd’s death, including one, Derek Chauvin, who was charged with murder after a video showed his knee lodged against Mr. Floyd’s neck for more than eight minutes.
