Opinion|College Admissions: Let’s Cut the Stress!
College Admissions: Let’s Cut the Stress!
Last night I collapsed in a heap on my daughter’s bed and screamed, “I hate this whole college process!” My daughter, a high school senior, looked at me and said, “But Mom, this is not your college process.” Oh, but it is my college process.
Although colleges pretend they are dealing with a 17-year-old who is capable of making this decision on his or her own, that is simply not the case. My meltdown was preceded by my trying to print out our financial aid awards, which are sent only to the student.
The meltdown hit when I realized that one of the schools only admitted her for the spring semester (January), and for the fall semester she is admitted to its travel program, which costs $34,799! For one semester.
So what could make the process easier? How about mailing financial aid offers to the parents, who after all are the ones who will be paying for the school? Let us see them first so we can decide what the choices really are.
I’m surrounded by people who are top tier in academics, outstanding volunteers, skilled musicians and athletes, and leaders in extracurriculars at a highly competitive school. But many of us didn’t get into the schools we dreamed of. While growing up, there was an emphasis on being well-rounded individuals, but it seems colleges are becoming more selective in recruiting people with strengths in a certain area.
Then there’s the discussion of race. I’m an Asian-American, and we’ve become a huge overachieving force in education, yet many of us aren’t able to get into schools we would otherwise qualify for based on merit.
ZOE IMANSJAH, ARCADIA, CALIF.
As a parent who is one year out from my son’s college admissions process, I offer these insights. First, do not encourage the concept of a “first choice” school. My son applied to six schools, any of which he would have been happy to attend. When he got into three of the six, there was no angst about not getting into a “first choice,” just an evaluation of what would be the best fit for his goals.
Second, ditch the obsession with name-brand East Coast schools. I’m an Ivy grad living on the West Coast with a high-level academic position. I work with successful people who have attended an incredible gamut of universities. They are where they are because of passion and persistence, not where they went to school.
Finally, even if your kid is going to her or his dream school, there will be bumps. High school to college is a huge transition. Getting into the best or right school does not change the reality of finding yourself living with a group of strangers with less structure than ever before in your life.
Of all the stressful aspects of the college application process, the one causing the most anxiety for me as a parent was exposure to college consultants. I participated in free introductory seminars that left me with a niggling fear that I would be doing my son a disservice if I didn’t hire an expert to review his essay, devise a strategy and manage all aspects of his application.
Luckily, my son had the good sense not to succumb to the hype. He was determined to do it himself, with support from Khan Academy test prep, his school counselor, and friends and family who expressed faith in his ability. Now that he has been accepted to all of his top-choice schools, he can enjoy a sense of accomplishment and attend his dream school, an accomplishment that is all his own.
Alas, I am unable to say what works and what does not in the college admissions process because my fate is to wait. I applied to one school early decision (Stanford). I got deferred, so I had to wait for the final (negative) decision. Additionally, I was wait-listed from my next top three schools (U.C. Berkeley, Dartmouth, Cornell). The wait list (or a deferment) is rather like purgatory. You’re qualified enough to not be rejected, but not good enough to be accepted. So you wait, even though you’ve already been waiting for three-plus months.
And while you do so, you wonder what you could have done better to be admitted. Would higher grades or scores have helped? Should I have pushed my athletics and extracurriculars more? Was my essay too flat? I will never know. Nor can we do anything now, except send our spring grades and write an update letter to the admissions committee. So we wait.
It is ugly out there. Despite our best efforts to start the message of “where you go is not who you’ll be” very early (ninth grade), a motivated, high-achieving student will body-block you if you suggest restraint.
My daughter heard about a Postal Service subscription that allows you to view a photo online of each piece of mail that is going to be delivered to your house on that day. I am not making this up. She knew exactly how much the piece of mail from her top-choice school would weigh if a rejection and how much if an acceptance (thanks, College Confidential).
The morning she saw that she was going to receive a letter with the lower postage (not an acceptance) was miserable. She had already been accepted (by email thankyouverymuch) to three schools she is delighted about, but this was her dream school. So she arrives home to go to the mailbox and view the actual piece of mail only to find she was wait-listed! So now we wait some more.
PARADISE VALLEY, ARIZ.
As a parent of four college graduates, and as a high school educator for over three decades (17 years as head of school), I have a simple suggestion: Get rid of “early decision” and use only “early action.” The former requires a student to commit to attend in advance of admittance; the latter does not. For a senior in the fall, such a forced commitment is like a proposal of marriage; yet six months later, the senior might have fallen in love with another school. The only benefit from early decision over early action redounds to the college or university, looking to boost its “yield” (percentage of “admits” who attend). There is no benefit to the student, who deserves more freedom of choice in this major decision.
While I have read countless New York Times articles on the college admissions process, they did not prepare me for the results: five wait lists and 14 rejections, in addition to acceptance at my safety school.
With college admissions being a world of expensive consultants, prep courses for SATs and competition with students attending private schools, as a low-income student in an Alabama public high school, in many ways I didn’t have a shot at all. The Common Application itself was a foreign land to me and my classmates, although my 98th percentile test scores allowed me a place in the top handful of my class.
While I will be attending the University of Alabama in the fall, it still pains me to think of the life-changing possibilities had I been admitted to Northwestern or Georgetown.
I do not know how the admissions process could be remedied, but with legacy admissions and athletic preferences, this will only become an increasingly divisive issue.
I wish I had realized sooner that where you go to college is not nearly as important as what you do when you get there. I think a lot of us seniors worried that we’d end up at a safety school without considering the benefits. If I could get a do-over, I would have looked at more schools where I could have been a big fish in a small pond and taken more leadership opportunities, instead of only focusing on a school’s pedigree.
The writer will be in the class of 2022 at American University.
America’s college admissions process parallels one of the great problems of the country — too much unreliable information. Colleges, faced with low-value standardized tests, many more applicants than openings, and inflated grades, make up arbitrary criteria for discriminating among students. There simply is not enough data in a standard application — and the time allotted to reviewing it by an admissions officer — to make an honest, meritocratic decision.
Students, faced with a seemingly arbitrary admissions process whose criteria vary from year to year, attempt to do it all. Instead of excelling in one or two extracurriculars, or demonstrating significant competence in one field of knowledge, today’s students attempt to cover all bases. The result is an often soulless pursuit of trophies and, ultimately, a declining value in being randomly admitted to highly selective schools.
Perhaps that is, ultimately, the best preparation for life.
NEWTON CENTRE, MASS.
As a sophomore at Columbia, I vividly remember the existential dread of college admissions. A formidable proportion of my classmates are legacy students and/or from families in the top 1 percent. As a first-generation student, I am constantly amazed by the opportunities here, and I wish admissions committees would end legacy and financial preferences to allow more working-class families like mine to experience a life-changing education.
For our society to progress, we need to democratize education, not further incentivize pay-to-play agendas.
Having navigated this process as a parent and a professional application coach, I want to stress how critical it is to start early. Whether begun with excitement or dread, applying to college inevitably spins into overwhelming as deadlines near. After much touring and testing, September arrives and students find they’ve barely familiarized themselves with the ins and outs of the actual application.
I recommend using the summer to make friends with the Common Application, and to start drafting the personal essay and assembling the extracurricular information requested. By the time September arrives, families will feel a better sense of control because they’ve left nothing to the last minute.
So, for all those embarking on this journey, get a head start. It will mean a stronger application, anchored in a well-considered essay. It will also go a long way to preserving family harmony.
