On a dresser in Saheed Vassell’s bedroom, his Bibles and religious study books were stacked in order of size, a Bible about three inches thick on the bottom, a miniature Bible with tiny print, compact enough to stick in his pocket, on the top.
Next to the Bibles, filled with passages he had memorized, Mr. Vassell had assembled two rows of toy cars. He also collected dozens of Size 9 sneakers, in different colors to match the clothes he would change several times a day, as well as random items — a fishing pole, an antique clock, a welding mask, pieces of iron. His bed was as he left it, meticulously made with a blanket, depicting two dolphins, folded just so. He had arranged the pillows by color and fluffiness.
A need for order and a childlike innocence were evident in the bedroom of Mr. Vassell, a 34-year-old whose family said he began to lose his mind after a New York City police officer shot and killed his good friend in 2008. Mr. Vassell, who had endeared himself to nearly every shopkeeper, barber and passer-by in his Crown Heights, Brooklyn, neighborhood, met the same fate on Wednesday evening on the corner of Utica Avenue and Montgomery Street. His willowy frame took nine bullets from police pistols.
To his family and friends, he was a mentally ill man, struggling perhaps with post-traumatic syndrome or playfully acting out a game in his unhealthy mind, when he pointed a silver piece of metal at people and mimed pulling a trigger. To police officers who responded to 911 calls that evening, he appeared to be a dangerous man with a gun. The metal turned out to be a welding torch. Before his mental health deteriorated, Mr. Vassell had worked as a welder.
Saheed Vassell’s death is now part of a roster of fatal police shootings of mentally ill people, most of them black or Hispanic. His death has renewed calls from civil rights advocates and elected leaders to improve the city’s community policing program and its mental health services.
Mr. Vassell did not have a regular physician, his family said. The last time he had seen a doctor for his diagnosis of bipolar disorder was when he was hospitalized about two years earlier at Kings County Hospital Center, they said. He did not like taking his antipsychotic medications. Abilify agitated him; Risperdal made him drowsy, which he hated because he feared he would oversleep and miss 7:30 a.m. service at a nearby Catholic church.
Two days after their son’s death, Lorna and Eric Vassell sat side-by-side on a sofa in their living room, as family members and friends spilled into the various rooms of their apartment, redolent the rice and Jamaican stewed chicken bubbling on the kitchen stove. Tears stained Ms. Vassell’s face. Mr. Vassell sometimes closed his eyes as if resting, as if trying not to cry.
“He had a pair of eyes that would charm anyone,” Ms. Vassell, 58, said. She recalled how she had stood up in church a few days earlier to testify about her how well her son was doing lately. “I said, ‘Thank God, over two years, Saheed has not gone to the hospital,’” she said.
Eric Vassell, 63, said he has asked himself over and over what more he could have done to protect his mentally ill son. That day had seemed so normal, as normal as it could be for someone with bipolar disorder. “Why did they have to just kill him?” he asked.
Born in Jamaica, Saheed Vassell was 6 when he joined his family in Crown Heights, a community welcoming to West Indian immigrants. Around that time, the area was racked by racial tension between black and Hasidic Jewish residents. Riots erupted after his arrival, after a Lubavitcher driver struck and killed a black child and in retaliation a group of young black men fatally stabbed a rabbinical scholar.
 Crime was surging as Mr. Vassell entered his teenage years. Young men he knew were being shot by peers and, sometimes, by the police. His home was the only safe haven, a two-bedroom apartment cleverly divided with curtains to accommodate Mr. Vassell and four siblings.
He attended Wingate High School, where stabbings and shootings among teenagers periodically took place just outside. Like many of his peers, Mr. Vassell also had run-ins with the police. As a teenager, he was arrested in 1999 on charges of gang assault for allegedly taking part in a stabbing with two other youths, and later, in 2003, he was arrested on charges that he punched and bit a woman, the police said. It was unclear whether he was ever convicted on either charge. Mr. Vassell dropped out, trying to find his way as a custodian, a taxi driver and as a worker at a printing plant.
In between those jobs, he found time for romance, wooing Sherlan Smith when he first met her on the street not too far from his apartment. In those days, he smoked Kool cigarettes. “He saw me and he came to say hi, but the first thing he said to me was, like, ‘You’re so cool, you’re cool like cigarettes,’” said Ms. Smith, 37.
Mr. Vassell first told his parents he wanted to be an electrician and then set out to become a welder. He completed his certification at Apex Technical School in the city, and found work, making as much as $600 a week.
In August 2008, Mr. Vassell lost his closest friend, a steady presence in his life. Ortanzso Bovell had been like another brother to him since elementary school. Mr. Vassell and Mr. Bovell, known as Marlon, were only months apart in age. They lived in buildings 250 feet apart. They bonded as boys exploring the neighborhood and spending hours playing Nintendo games.
When Mr. Bovell was 25, he died after a police lieutenant shot him in the back as he fled in a car the police said was stolen. The lieutenant said his gun discharged as he fell, and the police ruled the shooting accidental. But last year, after a long legal battle, a jury found that the lieutenant had intentionally shot Mr. Bovell and awarded his family $2.5 million.
Mr. Bovell’s death was a blow to Mr. Vassell’s psyche, his family said. He began talking incessantly and muttering to himself. His family reached out to the authorities, and he was taken to a mental hospital and placed on a 72-hour hold, the first of multiple episodes and psychotic breaks that would lead to run-ins with the police and confrontations with his family. “After that, he was not the same person,” Ms. Vassell said.
Over the next 10 years, he was hospitalized several times and prescribed antipsychotic medications to treat bipolar disorder, which he often did not take, his parents said. The illness debilitated him. He couldn’t hold a job, and he became dependent on the family despite being among the oldest of their children. “We were taking care of him, doing everything for him,” his mother said.
On the street, he continued to have trouble with the authorities, receiving more than 120 summonses and being arrested at least 20 times, according to the police. Officers were called in several times to help emergency medical technicians take him to a psychiatric hospital.
Though Mr. Vassell would often take his son, Tyshawn, for long walks to try to impart life lessons, father and son often reversed roles. The 15-year-old son would buy his father a bacon, egg and cheese sandwich at Dunkin’ Donuts before he went to school.
Every Sunday, Mr. Vassell attended morning Mass at St. Matthew Roman Catholic Church. He would usually show up before 7:30 a.m. and would sometimes be seen at the 9 a.m. service. He would enter, cross himself and then walk the aisles of the church, bobbing his head and never stopping to sit in the pews.
It was part of the routine of a man who melted into the fabric of the neighborhood, as ubiquitous as street signs. People knew they were on Utica Avenue, a main drag of Crown Heights, if they saw Mr. Vassell. He would walk up and down the six-block stretch between Eastern Parkway and Empire Boulevard, reciting Scripture to himself. “He knew the Bible back to front,” a neighbor, Claudia Ellis, 61, said.
He would frequent a deli, ordering a $1 Budweiser can or a turkey sandwich with extra vinegar. He would ask customers to pay for him, and they almost always did.  He helped elderly people descend subway steps. Most afternoons, he would sweep up the hair at Kev’s Unique Barber Shop.
His mother and father said that until his death, they had no idea how great an impact their son had on the neighborhood.
“—— is on the street,” Ms. Vassell interjected.